@@@@@


doc= 49235


McAllister, Anne Hutchison (1892-1983), speech therapist and teacher, the daughter of Robert Dempster McAllister, apothecary, and his wife, Anne Hutchison Macnee, was born at Main Street, Biggar, on 29 November 1892. She graduated MA (1917) and BEd (1924) from Glasgow University, and after teaching in a Glasgow school studied phonetics in order to apply its script to the teaching of reading. She became a lecturer in phonetics at Stow College, Glasgow, in 1919, and later at the city's teacher training college at Jordanhill. After being invited by Matthew White, a paediatric surgeon, to investigate and treat the speech problems of children with cleft palates which White had repaired, Anne McAllister in 1929 established a speech clinic attached to Glasgow's Sick Children's Hospital, with helpers recruited from among psychologists, phoneticians, and teachers. By the early 1930s a practical training course had been established, supplemented by lectures on psychology, phonetics, and the anatomy and physiology of the speech organs. The course led to the foundation of the Glasgow School of Speech Therapy in 1935, of which McAllister was principal until her retirement in 1964. 
McAllister carried out research on the speech rhythms of over 21,000 Dunbartonshire schoolchildren and found that many were suffering from speech defects; she published her findings in 'Clinical Studies in Speech Therapy' (1937). Between 1935 and 1940 she broadcast courses on speech training to Scottish schools and in 1938 she published 'A Year's Course in Speech Training'; this was followed in 1941 by 'The Primary Teacher's Guide to Speech Training'. During the Second World War McAllister was recruited by John Gaylor, neurologist at the Killearn Hospital, to assist in studying the speech and language problems of servicemen who had suffered head injuries. This led her to start studying neuroanatomy and neurology in order to help her to understand different types of aphasia and dysarthria. 
During the course of her work McAllister had come into contact with many other speech therapists and in 1945, with the help of medical specialists and others, she played a key role in the establishment of the College of Speech Therapists, which organized the profession's training, examination, and registration. McAllister was one of the college's twelve founder fellows. She was appointed OBE in 1953. 
McAllister was at heart a teacher. Her therapy was a form of remedial education and her interests extended from speech therapy to physical disabilities and learning difficulties. She became national president of the Special Schools Association in 1961. McAllister was extremely shrewd and could be trenchant in her criticism of the indolent and sloppy, but was kindly, firm, and resourceful with her patients. She never married and with regard to spinsterhood she said, 'Once you get over the disgrace, it's the best life!' She died at her home, 31 Rowallan Gardens, Glasgow, on 5 April 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 49239


McGill, James (1744-1813), fur trader and politician in Canada, was born on 6 October 1744 in Stockwell Street, Glasgow, Lanarkshire, Scotland, the second child and eldest son of James McGill ('bap'. 1717, died 1784) and his wife, Margaret Gibson. His father, grandfather, and great-grandfather James Craig were all ironsmiths and members of the Incorporation of Hammermen, the guild controlling the craft. The father prospered, and young James was not apprenticed to his father's trade but after attending Glasgow grammar school matriculated at Glasgow University in 1756. To stay until graduation would have indicated an intention to enter one of the learned professions, but he opted for something more adventurous and emigrated around 1760, probably for the tobacco plantations of the Carolinas. The first definite news of him in North America comes from 1766, when he served as factor, or agent, in the Canadian fur trade for William Grant, travelling from Montreal by canoe to Mackinac, the trading post at the junction of lakes Superior, Michigan, and Huron. 
For the next nine years McGill engaged in the arduous life of an itinerant fur trader, often wintering in the frozen wilderness with native bands. He returned permanently to Montreal in 1775, just in time to experience the American occupation of the city, and was one of the signatories to the terms of surrender. But revolutionary fervour, even though expounded by Benjamin Franklin, failed to win Canadian support, and the Americans departed, leaving McGill determined never to suffer that indignity and financial loss again. On 2 December 1776 he married a French-Canadian widow, Marie-Charlotte Desrivieres, 'nee' Guillimin (died 1818), and that same year with the Irishman Isaac Todd established the fur and general merchandising company of Todd, McGill & Co. He continued in trade, less actively in his senior years, until his death, by which time he was reputed to be the richest man in Canada. 
McGill was named to the magistracy in 1776, and continued to serve conscientiously when he was elevated to justice of the peace in 1796. In 1792 he was elected to the first legislative assembly of Lower Canada as a member for Montreal West; he declined to stand in 1796 but was re-elected in 1800 and 1804. He was prominent in the assembly's business because he was fluently bilingual. In 1793 he became a member of the governor-general's executive council, and continued very actively until his death. The first 'Canada Militia Act' was proclaimed in 1777; ten years later another fur trader, Alexander Henry, wrote in a letter from Montreal: 'At my return here I found all our friends Militia Mad; James McGill is a Major and Isaac Todd a Captain' (Alex Henry to William Edgar, 22 Oct 1787, letters and accounts of the North West Company, 1763-1803, 81). McGill worked assiduously to prepare the local forces for any second American invasion. When the Anglo-American War began his rank was that of colonel commanding the Montreal garrison. As chairman of the Montreal committee of the executive council, he was also head of civil government in the city. In that capacity he quelled a local rebellion opposing mobilization. His military rank was raised to acting brigadier-general, and it was the forces he and his friends had readied that on 26 October 1813 defeated the American army attacking from the south. 
McGill died at his home on rue Notre Dame, Montreal, on 19 December 1813, a month after receiving the order to demobilize his troops; he was buried at Montreal protestant cemetery on 21 December. His will assigned the bulk of his fortune to his wife and her sons, but he bequeathed his farm, Burnside, and $10,000 for the founding of McGill College in Montreal 'for the purposes of education and the advancement of learning in this Province'. The college received a royal charter naming it a university on 31 March 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 49240


MacGillivray, (James) Pittendrigh (1856-1938), sculptor, was born at Port Elphinstone, Inverurie, Aberdeenshire, on 30 May 1856, the eldest son of a mason sculptor, William MacGillivray, and his wife, Margaret Pittendrigh. The family moved to Edinburgh in 1868, and in the following year, aged thirteen, MacGillivray was apprenticed to the sculptor William Brodie. On the expiry of his apprenticeship, in 1875, he moved to Glasgow, where he became an assistant to James Steel, for whom he carved the decorative sculpture on the Scotia Theatre (afterwards known as the Metropole). He then worked for John Mossman, whom he assisted on the Glasgow statues of Thomas Campbell (1877) and David Livingstone (1879). In 1882 he established an independent practice, and three years later received his first public commission, for a bronze portrait bust of General Gordon (Glasgow Art Gallery). 
While in Glasgow, MacGillivray worked as a painter as well as a sculptor, and it was for his proficiency in painting that he was elected a member of the Glasgow Arts Club in 1882. In the same year he initiated the Palette Club, of which he was the first president. During the 1880s he was closely associated with the group of painters known as the Glasgow Boys, and his was a leading role in the founding and editing of the 'Scottish Art Review', the magazine of the Glasgow school. On at least one commission -- the funerary monument to Alexander McCall (1888; Glasgow necropolis) -- he worked in collaboration with the architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh. 
From 1890 MacGillivray devoted most of his attention to sculpture, and received his first major commission -- a statue of Robert Burns for Irvine -- in 1893. In the same year, after a study tour to Brussels, he moved to Edinburgh, where he settled for the rest of his life. He designed his own house and studio, Ravelston Elms, which was built with the assistance of his friend and patron the fourth marquess of Bute. The most notable feature of the project, which was completed in 1896, was the adaptation of the studio for the production of large-scale sculpture. It incorporated an entrance of sufficient height and width to enable MacGillivray to wheel his monumental works out into the open to see what effect they would have outdoors. 
MacGillivray attained his greatest success in the late 1890s and the early years of the twentieth century. In this period he received at least twelve major commissions, including six statues for the facade of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. But by far the largest and most significant project was his national monument to William Gladstone (1904-13; Edinburgh), which incorporated a portrait statue 9 feet 6 inches high and eight life-size figures, each modelled from life by the sculptor. The emphasis that MacGillivray placed on technique and craftsmanship applied equally to his smaller works. He produced more than forty-five such pieces -- portrait, allegorical, and narrative -- in these years alone. Like his monumental works they are characterized by originality of composition and an appreciation of symbolism and decorative effect. A stylistic evolution towards increased emphasis on freedom of handling and surface texture in the manner of Rodin is clearly evident after his visit to Brussels in 1893. 
In 1903 MacGillivray travelled to Europe again, visiting Rome, Florence, and Brussels. On his return to Scotland he was commissioned by the Scottish education department to prepare a report on art schools and art teaching in Scotland and to offer recommendations for the improvement of facilities. Always outspoken, he unequivocally declared the existing schools unsatisfactory and insisted that priority be given to a sound practical training in craftsmanship. One result of his report was the founding of the Edinburgh College of Art, the scheme of which, as well as the first set of plans adopted by Edinburgh town council, were also his work. 
MacGillivray was a man of wide-ranging interests and talents. In 1914 he organized an exhibition of art in aid of Belgian relief. In 1920 he designed the official robes for members of the Royal Scottish Academy. He was a respected authority on the clans and their tartans and was created an honorary member of the Scottish Pipers' Society. He was an honorary fellow of the Royal Incorporation of Architects, Scotland, and an honorary member of the Aberdeen Artists' Society and of the Scottish Society of Photographic Art. 
Literature also claimed MacGillivray's attention. As well as papers on varying subjects and much occasional verse he published two volumes of poetry, 'Pro patria' (1915) and 'Bog Myrtle and Peat Reek' (1922). The latter, a volume of sixty-one poems, many in the north- and south-country dialects of the Scots tongue, was brought out in a form that reflects MacGillivray's fastidious nature. It was printed privately in a limited edition of 300 signed copies. For the title-page he drew and engraved a heraldic design of the Scottish thistle with a bordure of entwined thistle leaves. The same thistle motif was stamped in gold on the buckram binding. 
Like his prototypes of the cinquecento MacGillivray was almost universal in his range: sculptor, painter, architect, musician, orator, and philosopher. Always an ardent nationalist, he made issues of Scottish nationalism and home rule a major part of his writings and oratory. Nor was he afraid to challenge official bodies and institutions. In 'Anent the Scots Academy' (in 'Bog Myrtle and Peat Reek') he poured scorn on the Royal Scottish Academy. In 1917 he maligned the trustees of the National Gallery of Scotland for not spending a due portion of their acquisitions budget on sculpture. He publicly criticized the policy that no work by a member or associate of the Royal Scottish Academy could be accepted for the national collection until five years after the artist's death. Almost certainly his outspoken nature cost him a knighthood (Cammell, 108-9) and was a significant factor in his defeat in the election for rector of Edinburgh University in 1932 (NL Scot., MS 3901, fol. 231). 
In common with the other outstanding personality of nineteenth-century Scottish sculpture, Sir John Steell, MacGillivray refused to be drawn to London, instead electing to remain in the country of his birth to advance the establishment of a national school of sculpture. His efforts were recognized in 1921, when the office of sculptor royal for Scotland, which had been in abeyance since Steell's death thirty years earlier, was revived for MacGillivray. 
MacGillivray was elected associate of the Royal Scottish Academy in 1892 and member in 1901. An honorary degree of doctor of laws was conferred on him by Aberdeen University in 1909. His work was shown at the Royal Scottish Academy in 1872, 1874, 1875, and 1887, and in almost every year from 1891 to 1938. He exhibited at Paisley, Stirling, Dundee, and London, and at the Royal Glasgow Institute of the Fine Arts from 1875 to 1932, and again in 1938. He held solo artist exhibitions of his work at Glasgow in 1927 and at Edinburgh in 1930. Several pieces of his sculpture were shown at the exhibition of the work of the Glasgow Boys arranged by the Scottish Arts Council in 1971. His work was a point of focus in the National Galleries of Scotland exhibition 'Virtue and Vision: Sculpture and Scotland, 1540-1990' of 1991. 
Pittendrigh MacGillivray died at his home, Ravelston Elms, 41 Murrayfield Road, Edinburgh, on 29 April 1938, and was buried in Gogarburn parish churchyard. His wife, Frieda Rettig (Rohl), by birth Polish and of French-Huguenot origins, had predeceased him in 1910, and one of his daughters, Erinna, had died in 1917. He was survived by his other daughter, Erhna Mycale, who died unmarried in 1962. 


@@@@@


doc= 49242


McLaren, (William) Norman (1914-1987), film director, was born on 11 April 1914 at 21 Albert Place, Stirling, the youngest of three children of William McLaren, a master house painter, and his wife, Jeanie Cross Wilson Smith. Little is known about his early life and education. He studied art and interior design at the Glasgow School of Art (1933-6), but soon found his enthusiasm fired more by college film society screenings of work by Soviet directors V. Pudovkin and S. Eisenstein. He saw film as an exciting new artistic medium and the abstract films of the European avant-garde appealed to his interest in synaesthesia: even as a schoolboy some of his paintings had aspired to represent music visually. Like many artists he realized film was a way to make created images move. His student films, such as the delightful experimental documentary of a student ball, 'Camera Makes Whoopee' (1935), aroused attention, local newspapers proclaiming him 'the young genius of Glasgow School of Art' (Cutler). He also became, briefly, politicized, making 'Hell Unlimited' (1936) an anti-capitalist, anti-war film with Scottish sculptor Helen Biggar, and he worked as cameraman on a Spanish civil-war documentary. 
John Grierson, a seminal figure in British documentary film-making, and then head of the General Post Office film unit, spotted the young McLaren's talent at a Scottish Amateur Film Festival, and in 1937 he invited his fellow countryman to join him in London. Also at the unit -- then a focus for innovative film-making -- was Len Lye. Lye's work was a direct precursor to McLaren's own experiments in painting directly onto film, and he rekindled McLaren's interest in animation. He also experimented with drawing sound directly on film. McLaren later wrote that 'animation is not the art of moving drawings, but of the drawn movement: the key is not what one finds in a drawing, but what is created between the drawings linked in a series. (Solomon, 11)' After working on sponsored documentary films, in 1939 McLaren moved to the United States. On arrival in New York he obtained work through friends, painting murals in luxury private homes. He then made some short abstract films with support from the Guggenheim Foundation. In 1941 he was again given a job by Grierson, who was now in Canada heading the new national film board (NFB), a government initiative to help the Canadian war effort. McLaren made propaganda films, experimental in form but with general appeal. In 1943 McLaren was asked to organize an animation department at the NFB in Ottawa. After the war the NFB's remit changed and they made history, ethnic, creative, and experimental films. McLaren had found a perfect haven, allowing him almost total freedom and security to pursue his own artistic goals. 
For the next forty years Norman McLaren never ceased to experiment and to invent new techniques. He is most usually associated with the direct, or cameraless, method, which involved working directly onto the film stock, and for his many developments of that technique. But his interests were wide-ranging and this is reflected in the variety of his films, all of which aspired to achieve coherence of the visual rhythm with the rhythm of sound. Like a latter-day Leonardo, he considered science, art, technique, and style as one whole. He often developed techniques before finding a suitable film subject for them. Sometimes his experiments left him dissatisfied, but he would return to them years, even decades, later to successful effect. Process was important to him: he took from the surrealists a belief in the creative role of the unconscious. McLaren's closest collaborator at the NFB until the 1970s was Evelyn Lambart, who had a background in mathematics and science. Together they made 'Begone Dull Care' (1949), an exuberant abstract film that was accompanied by a jazz score by Oscar Peterson. It enthused Pablo Picasso, who commented, 'Finally, something new!' (Bendazzi, 116), and their vibrancy and appeal have endured. 
In 1949 McLaren went to China on a UNESCO mission to teach local artists visual communication for health education programmes. He was caught up in the civil war there and on his return to Canada he made 'Neighbours' (1952). This pixilated allegory of how humankind's territorial instincts lead to mutual destruction won an Oscar in 1953. McLaren's reply to a congratulatory telegram was typical: 'Thanks, but who is Oscar?' His stay in India that year, working on another government education project, saw the structure of his own films become influenced by Indian classical music -- gradually developing a simple theme and increasing in complexity and tempo. 
The late 1950s and early 1960s saw McLaren return to experiments with abstraction, particularly with geometric forms. A growing interest in how film could represent dance was manifest in the later 1960s. 'Pas de deux' (1967) began with a desire to see images multiply in a stroboscopic way and it revived E. J. Marey's technique of chronophotography to recreate the movement of two dancers; it was the first of a series of dance films. 
McLaren was an intensely private man, and when he was asked to introduce the 1960 Montreal film festival, shyness led him to animate himself on film instead -- also a demonstration of his sense of fun. He was generous with his knowledge and he duplicated technical notes on all of his films in response to enquiries from around the world about his methods. Some critics have questioned McLaren's status as an abstract artist, given the tendency to figuration and narrative suggestion in many of his films, but for others that tendency is precisely their appeal. The dance series often divided opinion. It is perhaps the earlier films that continue to have the strongest impact, but the body of his work as a whole is rich enough to sustain enduring interest. Although he retired in 1984 McLaren continued to experiment with film-making. He died, unmarried, in Montreal on 26 January 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 49243


McLean, Lex (1907-1975), comedian, was born on 30 April 1907 at 6 Rosebery Place, Clydebank, Dunbartonshire. He was the son of Donald (Daniel) Cameron ('c'.1871-1951), ironmoulder, and his second wife, Mary Howe McLean (1876-1948), greengrocer. After secondary education at Clydebank high school he began an apprenticeship at John Brown's shipyard when he was fourteen. He left in 1924 for his first professional appearance as a pianist in a theatre orchestra in Clydebank. Also an accomplished accordionist, saxophonist, and clarinettist, his versatility earned him bookings in local theatres and with seaside concert parties. In the late 1920s and early 1930s he toured Scotland with a group, the Meltonians, and became a foil for comics such as Jack Radcliffe and George West. He married Grace Isabella Dryburgh (1910-1980), a dancer, on 2 June 1939. There were no children from the marriage. 
In 1948 Lex McLean put together his own roadshow and went out as a solo comic. His reception justified the opinion he had always held of his ability. By 1950 he could command $80 for a week at the Glasgow Metropole and in 1955 exceeded all records with a nineteen-week summer season at the Aberdeen Tivoli. Similar success followed in Edinburgh and Dundee and he did not hesitate when asked to take over the prestigious summer shows at the Glasgow Pavilion. This was McLean's breakthrough. From the outset he was a smash hit and went on to fill the theatre twice nightly, six nights a week, between May and September for the next fifteen years. 
McLean was also the top box-office draw in Edinburgh, Dundee, and Aberdeen. He had a self-confidence, which to some bordered on arrogance, concerning his ability and knowledge of what audiences wanted on a night out. He thought it wrong and a betrayal to try to educate them as he said they came because 'they want to laugh and they go away feeling happy' (Somerville). His comedy was brash, boisterous, and bawdy and the targets were familiar: nagging wives, mothers-in-law, and work-shy husbands. From the first moment he burst on stage in one of his outrageous baggy suits, loosing volleys of one-liners and castigating unfortunate latecomers, the audiences were with him for the rest of the show. Undoubtedly McLean's material was nearer the bone than that of his predecessors but he stoutly denied accusations that he was 'blue' or suggestive. He was too clever to use bad language or be offensive but he knew how to deliver a 'double entendre' and challenge the audience to see something untoward in anything said or done on stage. 
A strong, well-balanced supporting cast was always a feature of a Lex McLean show. He chose the acts himself, insisted on high standards, and was not slow to dismiss those whom he considered unprofessional or not making sufficient impact. His famous exhortation was 'Keep it bright!' The tempo was never allowed to flag, with McLean working harder than anyone to keep the show moving along. Although his four television series between 1968 and 1972 were popular, his active, noisy style did not really suit the medium, with which he never seemed truly happy. 
Off-stage McLean was the opposite of his loud, extrovert stage character. Always soberly suited, his only concession to showmanship was a polka-dotted bow tie. He was a quiet, very private individual who lived with his wife in their large seafront house in Helensburgh, where his favourite relaxation was sailing his cabin cruiser on the Firth of Clyde. As well as control over the cast, McLean's contracts gave him a generous percentage of box-office takings and this undoubtedly made him the highest-earning performer in Scotland in the 1960s. Despite this he always gave the impression of being worried and unsure about the future, and from 1971 he was dogged by illness. Lex McLean died at his home, 2 Cumberland Avenue, Helensburgh, from pneumonia on 23 March 1975, and was cremated at Clydebank crematorium on 26 March. He was the outstanding Scottish comedian of his generation, and was content to remain in Scotland, seeing no advantage in giving up his pre-eminent position with absolute control over his career to work for someone else. 


@@@@@


doc= 49244


McNeill, (Florence) Marian (1885-1973), folklorist, was born on 26 March 1885 at Holm, Orkney, the third of four children of Daniel McNeill (1839-1918), a minister of the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife, Jessie Janet Dewar. She received her formal education in Orkney where among her schoolfriends she numbered the future poet and critic Edwin Muir. Marian McNeill graduated MA from Glasgow University in 1912. Before her graduation she travelled in Europe, working as an 'assistante anglaise' at the Lycee des Jeunes Filles, Marseilles (1910-11), and then at the Kottbus Hohere Madchenschule in Germany. 
On her return to Scotland in 1912, Marian McNeill was appointed organizer of the Scottish Federation of Women's Suffrage Societies, and in the following year became secretary of the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene, which had been founded in 1870 by Josephine Butler. After the First World War she returned abroad, working as a private teacher of English in Athens (1919-20), during which time she regularly attended social gatherings and poetry readings at the home of the famous Greek poet Angelos Sikelianos. She went back to Scotland to become a freelance journalist and writer. Her first book 'Iona: a History of the Island' was published in 1920 and enjoyed considerable popularity, reaching a seventh edition in 1991. 
During the 1920s and 1930s Marian McNeill came into regular contact with many leading figures of the Scottish literary renaissance. In 1932 she founded the Clan McNeill Association of Scotland. She also involved herself closely with the politics of Scottish self-government, becoming vice-president of the Scottish National Party. Journalistic contributions to a host of publications including 'The Scotsman', the 'Glasgow Herald', and 'Scottish Field' provided her with a regular income. In 1929 she joined the staff of the Scottish National Dictionary Association, as a researcher based in Aberdeen. In that year also her reputation as an authority on Scottish culinary matters became established with the publication of her 'The Scots Kitchen: its Traditions and Lore with Old-Time Recipes'. It was the first of several works on Scottish food, which included 'The Book of Breakfasts' (1932), 'Recommended Recipes' (1948), and 'The Scots Cellar: its Traditions and Lore' (1956). 'The Scots Kitchen' is an important work, 'full of good scholarship, good wit in its application, and is an excellent and comprehensive survey of the theory and practice of cookery in a country that has always been a responsive friend to France' ('TLS', 27 June 1929). 
A thinly disguised autobiographical novel, 'The Road Home', appeared in 1932; it was to be Marian McNeill's only venture into fiction. In 1957 however she produced the first volume of her 'magnum opus', 'The Silver Bough: a Four Volume Study of the National and Local Festivals of Scotland'. The first volume covered Scottish folklore and folk beliefs, and the second and third volumes provided a calendar of Scottish national festivals. The first volume in particular became a standard work, although there were initial critical misgivings in academic circles. In 1962, for example, the reviewer for the 'Times Literary Supplement' observed of volume 3 that: 'although sound enough where it describes what is generally known and traditional, [it] inspires less confidence when the alleged origins are given, and the sources from which Miss McNeill derives her information on this score are not made altogether clear, nor does her bibliography assist her. ('TLS', 5 Oct 1962)' McNeill was quick to defend her position in a lengthy reply, claiming the work was based on 'living lore acquired, or more correctly imbibed in my childhood in my native Orkneys'. The final volume of 'The Silver Bough' (1968) covered the local festivals of Scotland; reviewers once more attacked McNeill's methods and historical accuracy. But Marian McNeill was held in high regard by the Scottish literary establishment, and in the late summer of 1968 the Arts Council for Scotland gave a party for her and the poet Helen B. Cruickshank, both authors being 'in their ninth decade'. In 1962 she had been appointed MBE in the new year honours list. Undeterred by her critics Marian McNeill continued to write about Scottish food, publishing in 1971 a pamphlet entitled 'Highland Cookery' in which she continued to extol the virtues of the Scottish larder. Marian McNeill died at her Edinburgh home, 31 St Albans Road, on 22 February 1973 at the age of eighty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 49245


Mactaggart, Sir John Auld, first baronet (1867-1956), builder, was born on 30 September 1867 in Anderton, Glasgow, the eldest son and second in the family of two sons and two daughters of Neil Mactaggart (1835-1904), coppersmith, and his wife, Anne Auld (died 1906). Mactaggart was educated in Glasgow and was intended for the civil service, but instead joined Robert Mickel & Co., timber merchants and sawmill owners, where he was trained as a mercantile clerk, and became chief accountant at the firm's Glasgow office. In 1897 he married Margaret Lockhart, daughter of Robert Curtis, a master blacksmith, of Ramelton, co. Donegal, Ireland. They had one son and one daughter. Margaret Mactaggart died in 1927, and in 1928 Mactaggart married Elizabeth Ann 
(Lena; died 1958)
, eldest daughter of the Revd David Orr of Govan, Glasgow. In 1898 he left Mickels to set up his own business, and until 1901 he was in partnership with the builder Robert Pollock, making concrete steps and later building tenements. 
In 1901 Mactaggart started his own firm, J. A. Mactaggart & Co. He began by manufacturing concrete pipes, steps, and lintels, but soon started to build large tenement buildings, mainly for middle-class tenants, in west and south Glasgow. Most of the houses had bathrooms: Mactaggart later claimed to be 'the man who had made Glasgow bathroom conscious' (Morgan, 2.154). He kept some of the properties to let himself, and by 1911 eighty-three tenements provided him with an annual rental of $14,000, and also security to raise loans to buy land and finance building operations. In addition to these, Mactaggart built forty-four cottages for the English workers at the new Yarrow shipyards which opened at Scotstoun in 1908. 
When the royal commission on housing was set up in 1913 to tackle the housing problem in Scotland, Mactaggart gave evidence, urging the reduction of local property taxes in order to encourage people to move into larger houses, thus helping to solve the problem of overcrowding. He also argued for rent control, and this led to the passing of the rent restriction acts. 
During the First World War Mactaggart was occupied with government work, including an Admiralty contract at Gourack. In 1919 he converted the firm into a limited company. The largest shareholders were members of his family, and he became managing director. Mactaggart benefited from the 1919 'Addison Act', which tried to fulfil the government's wartime promise to provide 'homes fit for heroes to live in' by obliging local authorities to undertake housing schemes, and providing large subsidies to enable them to do so. His most important single contract was the Mosspark housing scheme for 1502 houses for Glasgow corporation, worth $1.8 million, which Mactaggart completed despite shortage of building materials and disputes with the trade unions. At the same time, through a consortium made up of his wife and other members of his family, Mactaggart was buying land in Glasgow with a view to future property development, including land at King's Park, to the south of the city, and 114 acres of the Kelvinside estate, at its west end. 
In 1924 J. A. Mactaggart Ltd went into voluntary liquidation, and Mactaggart's son Jack, and his partner, Andrew Mickel (nephew of Mactaggart's former employer, Robert Mickel), formed Mactaggart and Mickel Ltd, with John Mactaggart as the largest shareholder, to concentrate on building houses for private owner-occupiers, while John Mactaggart took over the Western Heritable Investment Company Ltd in 1925. He applied for permission to build blocks of cottage flats at King's Park, subsidized under the terms of the 1924 'Housing Act' which promised subsidies to build houses for rent. Mactaggart had encouraged the MP John Wheatley to include these clauses in the bill. By 1930 he had completed 1356 houses, not only subsidized under the 1924 act, but also financed by Glasgow corporation through loans of 75 per cent of the value of the completed houses. In 1931 agreement was reached for a subsidy and loans for a further 1512 houses at King's Park. Following this he built subsidized houses at Kelvinside, and on corporation land at Cardonald. Altogether the company built 6038 houses for rent with subsidies offered by the 1924 act. 
Mactaggart turned his attention to the London property market in the 1930s. He formed a new company, the London Heritable Investment Company Ltd, which developed luxury flats on a site in Park Lane, next to the Dorchester Hotel, between 1935 and 1938. After the Second World War he formed a new company, Grove End Gardens Ltd, which built and managed luxury flats in St John's Wood. He visited the United States in 1936 to study housing conditions, and was asked by President Roosevelt to prepare a memorandum. Increasingly consulted by the government as an authority on housing, Mactaggart was created a baronet in 1938. 
Although at one time a socialist, and a member of the Independent Labour Party from 1889 to 1902, Mactaggart joined the Liberal Party in 1902 and became secretary of the Glasgow branch, although he refused to stand for election either to Glasgow corporation or to parliament. In 1930 he gave the house and grounds of the Aitkenhead estate, next to the King's Park development, to Glasgow corporation, to be preserved as a public park. He financed the Peace Pavilion at the 1938 Glasgow Empire Exhibition, and, always interested in the film industry, he gave $5000 towards the building of the cinema at the exhibition. Mactaggart was a member of the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow, to which he read a paper on housing and planning in 1943. He was also a JP for Glasgow. His interests spread beyond Scotland: he founded the American and British Commonwealth Association in 1941 (it was merged with the English-Speaking Union in 1947), served as president of the Economic Research Council, and was elected president of the National Federation of Property Owners for 1950-52. 
Mactaggart died at his Glasgow home, Kelmscott, 110 Springkell Avenue, Pollokshields, on 24 November 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 49247


John Ross Menzies (1852-1935), wholesale distributor and newsagent, was born on 17 September 1852 at 28 North Nelson Street, Edinburgh. He was a pawky, industrious Scot with foresight and ambition. Whereas his father had enjoyed the personal contacts of bookselling and wholesaling, he had a hard-headed interest in commercial matters. His driving force confirmed Menzies as the principal 'multiple' of newsagencies and booksellers in Scotland equivalent to the firms of W. H. Smith in England and of Eason in Ireland. He shared Smith's terror of handling salacious or lurid reading material. Local Scottish booksellers and newsagents resented the expansion of Menzies railway bookstalls, which were exempt from early-closing legislation, rates, and taxes. The large, prominent Menzies kiosks at the great urban termini were popular as rendezvous with generations of Scottish travellers and lovers. J. R. Menzies together with his brother, Charles Thompson Menzies (1858-1943), extended the company's wholesale warehouses to Dundee, Carlisle, and Aberdeen. The company opened its first English outlet, a railway bookstall at Carlisle, in 1888, although an informal understanding was later reached with W. H. Smith that neither company would invade the other's business territory. Menzies' annual profits averaged about $8000 in the 1880s. The firm continued in a small way as publishers until 1905, the last book appearing under their imprint being 'Horsebreaking', a monograph on the schooling of ponies by the marchioness of Breadalbane. The business was constituted as a limited company in 1906, at which date it operated 357 railway bookstalls (second only in the United Kingdom to W. H. Smith). John Menzies became chairman and joint managing director of the company in 1906. The company began advertising at Edinburgh in 1913 (though not until 1926 in Glasgow), which stimulated the wholesaling business. But the 1920s were a period of stagnation: John Menzies retired as joint managing director in 1927 and as chairman in 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 49248


Morris, Margaret Eleanor (1891-1980), teacher of dance, was born on 10 March 1891 at 28 Collingham Place, Kensington, London, the daughter of an artist, William Bright Morris (1844-1896), and his wife, Emily Victoria Maundrell. Her parents took her to live in Boulogne when she was a few weeks old, so she grew up both bilingual and Francophile. In 1900 she joined the Ben Greet Shakespeare Company. Child parts in Drury Lane melodramas followed, and between tours she studied classical ballet techniques with John d'Auban, the ballet master at Drury Lane Theatre. In 1907 she joined Frank Benson's Shakespearian company as 'ingenue' principal dancer and understudy to Lady Benson. 
From the age of twelve Morris started to rebel against the limitations of classical ballet, in particular its insistence on the formal positions of the spine. In 1909 she met Isadora Duncan's brother, Raymond, who was lecturing in London on the dance and music of ancient Greece. He emphasized the significance of the six Greek positions (copied from Greek vases) with their accentuated opposition of arms and legs which used every muscle in the body to achieve body control and balance. She began to evolve a freer, more expressive style of dancing, where her emphasis was on the 'natural' rather than the formal. In ballets which she composed, tutus and ballet shoes were never seen. She and her dancers tended to wear flowing clothes and little or no make-up; they danced in bare feet, and trained out of doors wherever possible. 
Using her new concepts, in 1910 Morris composed 'Dance of the Furies', and trained a troupe of children to play the furies for Marie Brema's production of Gluck's 'Orpheus' at the Savoy Theatre, for which she also designed the costumes and the decor. Her work met with great critical success, and her career as a choreographer was launched. She was a startlingly beautiful woman who always attracted men's attention. In 1910 she had a brief but intense love affair with the writer John Galsworthy (1867-1933). He broke off the relationship because of the pain it caused his wife; after his death Morris wrote a highly censored version in 'My Galsworthy Story' (1967). With his financial support she founded a school of dancing in St Martin's Lane, London, to train children in her methods, and she formed her first touring company, Margaret Morris and her Dancing Children. Galsworthy's influence seems to have switched her career path from that of a potential leading dancer herself towards a career devoted primarily to teaching. 
Margaret Morris not only trained dancers for the theatre but, over her long career, she translated, modified, and refined her avant-garde ideas on dance into creative exercise systems for extremely diverse groups of people. She adapted her techniques of breathing, posture, and movement so that they could be used to teach very young children, physically and mentally handicapped children, prenatal and post-natal women, and to aid post-operative recuperation. In 1922 she started the first 'educational school' in England to combine normal educational subjects with professional training in dancing and acting. She became increasingly interested in the health-giving and remedial applications of her work. From 1925 she gave lecture-demonstrations to doctors and midwives and physiotherapists. In 1928 she published 'The Notation of Movement', which detailed the system she had been evolving and teaching since 1913, and which was publicized in the 'Margaret Morris Movement Magazine'. In 1930 she passed the Chartered Society of Massage and Medical Gymnastics examination with distinction. 
The teachers whom Morris had trained in her system of 'Margaret Morris movement' (MMM) started to be appointed residents at schools for disabled children. In 1935, in an attempt to influence the education authorities and to obtain wider recognition as a training college, she set up a non-profit making company in her London headquarters, in Cromwell Road. By 1937 MMM was officially endorsed as relevant to the 'health of the nation' when she was invited to become a founder member of the government's National Advisory Council for Physical Training and Recreation. The fifth marquess of Cholmondeley who, as chair of the Basic Physical Training Association, was concerned that the level of physical fitness in Britain was less than that of other nations, was impressed by Morris's creation of special exercises for each sport. He wrote an introduction to her book 'Basic Physical Training' (1937). Male MMM teachers ran courses at Loughborough College, which had set up a department of physical education in 1931, offering a three-year course to men wishing to become games teachers. Arguably Morris's influence on mainstream education was at its height just before the outbreak of the Second World War. 
It would be impossible to give a full picture of Margaret Morris without speaking of her productive partnership with the Scottish painter and sculptor John Duncan Fergusson (1874-1961) ['see under 'Scottish colourists], whom she first met in Paris in 1913. As both travelled widely in pursuit of their work they could not always live together, though they were always in vital communication. Their dynamic relationship is recorded in what she called her 'biased' biography, 'The Art of J. D. Fergusson' (1974). When the First World War started Fergusson joined her in London, where they started the Margaret Morris Club in Chelsea to replicate the Parisian cafe life they both adored. It became a meeting place for writers, artists, and musicians; members included Augustus John, Jacob Epstein, Katherine Mansfield, Ezra Pound, and Charles Rennie Mackintosh. In 1917 they ran a summer school in Devon, where she was dance director and he art director, and they continued to run summer schools together in Devon and in the south of France annually. Morris was Fergusson's model and his muse, while she was inevitably influenced by his delight in form and colour and his interest in Indian and Cambodian sculpture. As well as becoming an accomplished artist in her own right she increasingly incorporated modernist ideas into her dance teaching. In her choreography she created overall designs of movement, expression, and colour. 
In 1939, when Morris had to close down her seven MMM training centres, she and Fergusson settled in Glasgow, where they set up clubs as they had in London during the First World War. These were the New Art Club and the Celtic Ballet Club. After the war she choreographed and produced ballets and toured with her new company to the USA in 1954 and Russia, Austria, and Czechoslovakia in 1958. In 1960 she launched a Scottish National Ballet which opened at the Festival Theatre, Pitlochry, and afterwards toured leading theatres in Britain. When Fergusson died in 1961 she closed down her Glasgow school but remained active in Glasgow, at the age of eighty-one training dancers for a production of 'Hair'. During the last years of her life she concentrated on the establishment of MMM training centres nationally and internationally. From 1976 MMM received a Sports Council annual grant in recognition that its teachers continued to bring dance exercise to both children and adults across a wide social, age, and ability range. In the late 1970s it was established in Canada, Switzerland, France, Germany, and Japan. Morris died at the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, on 29 February 1980. Many of the avant-garde ideas which she put forward in the 1920s and 1930s have become part of the vocabulary of modern dance. 


@@@@@


doc= 49249


Thomas Morris (1851-1875). Born at St Andrews on 20 April 1851, Young Tom together with his younger brother, J. O. F. Morris (died 1906), followed his father into the clubmaking business and into competitions. By the time he reached twenty Young Tom was an outstanding player. In 1868 he won the open and he went on to win the next three titles as well, becoming outright winner of the championship belt. He was clearly expected to be the greatest golfer of late Victorian Britain, with a style far more graceful than his father's and a capacity for consistent record scores; Old Tom claimed that his son was the one opponent he could not match. However, the younger man's ebullient career ended unexpectedly on Christmas day 1875, when he was found dead in his bed, following a lung haemorrhage, at his home, 6 Pilmour Links, St Andrews. He was buried in St Andrews Cathedral churchyard. Less than four months earlier, on 4 September 1875, his wife had died, together with their baby, in childbirth. The sense of loss throughout the game was considerable and members of some sixty golfing societies subscribed to buy a three-quarters life-size memorial, executed by John Rhind and placed in St Andrews Cathedral cemetery, which shows him playing. 


@@@@@


doc= 49250


Muir, Wilhelmina Johnston (1890-1970), novelist and translator, was born on 13 March 1890 at 14 Chapel Place, Montrose, Forfarshire (Angus), the oldest of three surviving children of Peter Anderson (1864/5-1899), draper, and Elizabeth (Betty) Gray, 'nee' Anderson (1866/7-1930), dressmaker. Her parents were first cousins, originally from Unst, Shetland, and had married on 22 February 1889. Her brothers were Basil Ramsay (1892-1960) and William John (1894-1930). 
Educated at a small private school (1893-9), Townhead elementary board school (1899-1902), and Montrose Academy (1902-07), she studied classics (1907-10) and English and modern history (1910-11) at St Andrews University, graduating in July 1911 with first-class honours in classics. Awarded the Berry scholarship, she studied English literature from 1911 to 1912. Known as Minnie by her family and during her time at St Andrews University, she took part in the women's debating society, the women's suffrage society, and the students' representative council. She was also on the editing committee of 'College Echoes' (the student magazine) from 1910 to 1912. She fell in love with Cecil Wilmot Morrison, a rugby player and medical student with a protracted university career (begun 1903-6, resumed 1910-11, and finally qualified 1916) and they became engaged in the summer of 1911. Two years later Cecil confessed 'his recurrent peccadilloes' and she dramatically threw her engagement ring into the sea from the pier ('Belonging', 12). 
Willa Anderson's first employment was teaching classics at Brancepeth Rectory home school, 4 miles south-west of Durham, from the autumn of 1912 to the summer of 1914, when the beginning of the war led to her becoming an assistant in Latin at St Andrews University classics department (Court minutes, 24 Oct 1914). From 1916 to 1918 she researched an (unfinished) thesis on child educational psychology at Bedford College, London, funded by the Carnegie Trust. She spent a few months in Mansfield House University Settlement, Canning Town, a community in east London, where she taught Bryant and May factory girls ('Belonging', 17-18), then was vice-principal and lecturer in English, psychology, and education at Gipsy Hill Teacher Training College, from September 1918 to summer 1919, resigning when the principal objected to Edwin Muir's 'atheism' in 'We Moderns' (1918). 
Willa Anderson met Edwin Muir (1887-1959) in Glasgow in September 1918. They corresponded and met again in Glasgow and St Andrews, and were married on 7 June 1919 at St Pancras register office, London; in September they set up home in two ground floor rooms in 13 Guilford Street, Bloomsbury. They became Peerie Willa and Peerie Breeks (Edwin Muir's mother's name for him) to each other. Willa Muir worked in a cramming institution in Red Lion Square and then, from January 1920 to 1921, as headmistress at a day continuation school. When Edwin Muir was commissioned to write for 'The Freeman' at $60 an article they decided to travel to Prague as 'a good place to start from' ('Mrs Muir's reminiscences'). They left from Leith on 31 August 1921. 
The next three years were spent in Prague, Germany, Italy, and Austria, and provided the pattern of the Muirs' marriage, working in teaching and translating with their decisions to change country made almost at random. In 1922 they visited Dresden for the weekend and decided to move there; in due course they met A. S. Neill (an old friend of Muir's from student days) at a bus stop and decided to teach at his school at Hellerau, 6 miles from Dresden ('Belonging', 71). Their time there included a walking tour, at Easter 1923, with Gerda Krapp (later Liebricht) and others. After the collapse of the German economy in November, they 'fled' to Italy to join Edwin Muir's friend John Holms and his partner, Dorothy Jennings (journal, 20 Aug 1953). On the way, her husband told Muir that Gerda had declared her love for him as he left, and that he ought to return to her. Muir, describing her feelings of emotional pain and insecurity, claims that they never discussed it again once he had decided not to return ('Belonging', 82-3), but her journals report a painful conversation with him in Newbattle. She could 'still conjure up the emotions of that terrible time' (journal, 20 Aug 1953). What she never knew, apparently, was that he had written from Italy offering to join Gerda, who refused (Gaskill, 49). 
About Easter 1924 'The Freeman' suspended publication, ending the Muirs' only regular income. Invited by Ben Huebsch, the New York publisher, to translate three Gerhart Hauptmann plays into English at $100 a play ('Belonging', 106), they began the translation work which now provided the basis of their income. Muir had learned Czech and was fluent in German, and later maintained that most of the translation work was hers: 'I am a better translator than he is'; she thought she should have shouted aloud: 'Most of this translation, especially Kafka, has been done by ME. Edwin only helped' (journal, Aug 1953), although she said, during the war, that they divided Kafka in two, translated their own half and then exchanged them for further work (C. Soukup, 24). Their translations between 1925 and 1938 included works by Sholem Asch, Lion Feuchtwanger, Heinrich Mann, and others. Muir also translated Hans Carossa and C. Winsloe as Agnes Neill Scott, and 'Songs from the Auvergnat... into Modern Scots' (1931). 
From July 1924 to February 1926 the Muirs lived in Montrose, Penn, Buckinghamshire, and Montrose again (where Muir had a miscarriage in December 1925). They moved to St Tropez, then Menton, between October and May 1927. Muir began her first novel, 'Imagined Corners', in St Tropez. It was not published until 1931, because her work on it had been interrupted by translating and by her son's birth. Muir wrote later that she threw herself into characters, living in them as much as possible: 'they are bound to be versions of myself' (journal, 1948); her relationship with Cecil Morrison formed the model for Elizabeth and Hector's marriage and the starting point for the novel ('Belonging', 125). When she reread the novel, she thought it had 'no apparent knowledge of social fabric 'effects'. Quite pre-Marxian! But a good picture of the world I grew up in' (journal, 1948). Her final judgement was that it contained enough material for two novels ('Belonging', 163). Despite her reservations, the interlocking stories of the Shand and Murray families in Calderwick make a powerful novel with intense explorations of inner feelings and of the society of the town. The 'Glasgow Herald' described it as 'a memorable contribution to the cartography of the soul of Scotland' (2 July 1931). 
The Muirs returned to England in May 1927 and settled in the White House, Dormansland, Surrey, where Gavin Anderson Cormack Muir (1927-1991) was born on 29 October. Muir kept the Marmaduke journal, 1927-31, observing his progress from six weeks, including psychological analyses and his reactions to breastfeeding. From March 1929 to October 1932 they were based at Crowborough, Sussex ('Belonging', 106), then they moved to 7 Downshire Hill, Hampstead. It was here that Edwin Muir had a bare study in the attic and Willa Muir's study was on the ground floor, 'intruded upon at all hours' (ibid., 162). She used to work late into the night, finishing translations and correcting proofs. She finished her second novel, 'Mrs Ritchie', in the press of other work; 'it does not surprise me that I lost control of it in the second half, although the first half is quite good' (ibid., 163). Published in July 1933, it was also set in Calderwick but concentrated on the damage one woman inflicts on her family, herself already damaged by Calvinism and the constriction of possibilities for women. Darker in tone than 'Imagined Corners', it has a powerful and negative sweep with an overly analytic narrator; 'the result is nearer to science than to art' ('TLS'). 
After Gavin was run over and his leg badly broken in July 1933, the Muirs took him to Orkney for a month to recuperate; Gavin and Muir returned for a three-month stay to Isbister House in the summer of 1934, Edwin joining them after driving through mainland Scotland researching his 'Scottish Journey'. They moved to St Andrews in August 1935, staying until 1942, because it was cheaper. Muir wrote 'Mrs Grundy in Scotland' (1936) for Leslie Mitchell's series 'The Voice of Scotland'. Edwin Muir's 'Scott and Scotland' (1936), published in the same series, was more bitter and led to their rift with C. M. Grieve (Hugh MacDiarmid) -- known since 1924, he appears to have already disliked Muir, whose 'overpowering presence has always been a nuisance to friends of Edwin's' ('Letters of Hugh MacDiarmid', 126). Muir collapsed in December 1938 from gynaecological problems caused by Gavin's birth, and had surgery in Dundee conducted by Professor Margaret Fairlie ('Belonging', 201). In the early years of the war translating work dried up, and Muir taught classics at New Park School, which Gavin attended. She contracted bowel ulcers and, hospitalized in May 1941, experienced, as Edwin Muir held her hand, a 'frozen landscape' without feelings, before recovering her sense of connection (ibid., 207). 
In March 1942 Edwin Muir began work for the British Council in Edinburgh and, by August, Muir and Gavin joined him. After the war, Edwin Muir was appointed director of the British Institute in Prague, and Muir took her first flight to join him there in the late summer of 1945. She recorded their stay in her Prague journals, November 1946 to May 1948. The communist coup of February 1948, and subsequent events, led to them leaving Czechoslovakia at the end of July (E. Muir, 'Autobiography', 269). In January 1949 they went to Rome, where Edwin Muir became the director of the British Institute. It closed for financial reasons and they left Rome in July 1950, on the same train as Laurel and Hardy ('Belonging', 263). Edwin Muir became warden of Newbattle Abbey, Dalkeith -- which reopened as an adult education college -- a post he held from 1950 to 1955. Muir taught Latin and Greek unofficially but otherwise was the wife of the warden. 
Muir's unpublished novel 'Mrs Muttoe and the Top Storey' (finished May 1940) had been closely based on their life in Hampstead. Her second unpublished novel, 'The Usurpers' (written February 1951 to February 1952), was based on her Czechoslovak journals recording the difficult relationship between the British Institute and the British Council, and personal problems between staff. Circulated to Macmillan, Chatto and Windus, and Hamish Hamilton under the pseudonym of Alexander Croy (journal, 14 Oct 1952), it was probably libellous; Muir comforted herself that the rejections were for that reason. But as with the earlier unpublished novel she failed to make the fictional transformation of her autobiographical material that she had so successfully accomplished in 'Imagined Corners'. 
After their departure for Harvard, in the autumn of 1955 Muir wrote in her journal that 'the whole of Scotland is a locked area for me'. She had loved 'Newbattle and the beech trees' but 'Lowland Scotland infected Newbattle' (journal, 26 Sept 1955). Reflecting on her illness during the war, she thought that she came back to life only to devote herself to Edwin Muir 'and in a lesser way to Gavin' and that she had to kill her 'vanity' and ambition to write: 'My intelligent Unconscious now told me that in killing, or trying to kill, my vanity I had nearly succeeded in killing myself.... All the Willas, the passionate little girl, the ambitious & vital student, the positive, hopeful & happy new wife, came back together & fused. (journal, 1 Oct, 1955)' Her journals from September to November 1955 record meetings with I. A. Richards, May Sarton, Elena and Edmund Wilson, Robert Lowell, and Karl Miller. 
In May 1956 they returned to Britain, Edwin Muir having a grant from the Bollingen Foundation to write on the Ballads. At the start of her 1947-8 journal, Muir had written 'All emigrants are Displaced Persons. My parents were D.P.s in Angus. So I grew up not fitting into Angus tradition and therefore critical, resentful, unsure. Hence my secret desire to 'own' a house, to belong somewhere'. Her 'secret desire' was only achieved in this last home together, which they bought at Swaffham Prior, Cambridgeshire. During Edwin Muir's absence as visiting professor at Bristol University, from February to March 1958, Muir's letters about her health, Gavin, and Edwin Muir's absence continued to discuss their relationship and her insecurities: 'My dearest love, our lives are so woven together, with memories & shared experience, that they can't be unwoven, I tell myself; so I have stopped worriting about thee having maybe fallen out of love with me. I always was a bit of a Bad Peerie Ting; that is no thing new; so I am just going to leave it at that. (St Andrews, 9.8.M(i) 14)' Edwin Muir died on 3 January 1959. 
Muir paid off the mortgage on the cottage in October 1959, 'so now I can live here till I die' (7 Oct 1959, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 103), the money coming partly from the transfer of Edwin Muir's Bollingen grant to her for writing 'Living with Ballads', he having completed only a few notes. She shared ownership with Gavin. However, Muir became peripatetic once more. In August 1963, relieved of financial worries by the continuation of the Bollingen grant until December 1964, she and her cat Popsy moved into Kathleen Raine's basement, 47A Paultons Square, London. 'Living with Ballads' was well received on publication in 1965. Forsyth Hardy thought that the early chapters, which referred to her own schooldays at the board school, had a 'very special appeal and character' and Robert Kemp, remembering 'her own excellent writings', welcomed the book as coming out 'with her own stamp' ('Arts Review', 18 March 1965, St Andrews 9/8). Despite A. S. Neill asking her in 1964 'How are the book plans? Time you cease to be known as Edwin's Frau' ('Arts Review', 4 Sept 1964, St Andrews 9/8), her last book, apart from 'Laconics, Jingles and other Verses' (1969), was to be her memoir of Edwin Muir, 'Belonging' (1968). She described it as 'very like a Scotch bun... because it has a bit of everything in it, not classified into layers like a respectable English cake' (22 March 1968, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 61). Much of it is drawn from her journals, but its narrative of her and Edwin Muir's lives, with some passages of feminist and psychological analysis, succeeds in a way that 'The Usurpers' does not. 
In February 1969 Muir moved to the British Red Cross Home, Meadowcroft, Cambridge, then, finding the organization too rigid, to a small private nursing home, Church Farm, Over, Cambridgeshire. In the autumn she moved to St Andrews to live with Lillias Chisholm, F. G. Scott's daughter, not understanding the 'transient nature of her impulses' (31 Oct 1969, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 196). After nine days, Lillias told her she had made a mistake. She was rescued by Edwin's niece Margaret and nephew Jim with his wife, Ivy, and she moved to Dunoon in October, 'like a stray cat' (10 Dec 1969, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 199), not able to face a move back to London. They promised her a home for the rest of her life: 'A short life, I hope' (5 April 1970, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 219). Muir died of heart failure on 22 May 1970 at hospital in Dunoon and was cremated at Greenock crematorium on 25 May. Her ashes were scattered on Edwin Muir's grave in Swaffham Prior. 
The 'Glasgow Herald' obituary (23 May 1970) acknowledged Willa Muir as a 'Scottish woman writer and translator... widow of Edwin Muir and herself a writer of distinction'. Peter Butter, Edwin Muir's biographer, felt able to say in 1990 that her 'greatest work, I think she would gladly agree, was to make possible the production of his poetry' before going on to 'give her credit for what she, in spite of difficulties, achieved as a writer' (Butter, 'Willa Muir', 59). But the reprinting of 'Imagined Corners' (1987) and 'Mrs Ritchie', 'Women: an Enquiry' (first published by the Hogarth Press, 1925) and other non-fiction pieces (1996) have enabled an assessment of Willa Muir as a writer in a way that she did not achieve in her lifetime. Passionate, intellectually confident, assertive, emotionally insecure, and, latterly, indomitable in the face of pain from arthritis, with a lifelong feminist awareness apparent in her novels, letters, and journals, she never stopped writing, one of her last letters hoping 'I 'might' get a small book done' (5 April 1970, NL Scot., MS 19703, fol. 219). 


@@@@@


doc= 49252


Thackrah, Charles Turner (1795-1833), surgeon, was born on 22 May 1795 in Leeds and baptized at St John's Church, Briggate, Leeds, on 13 July 1795, the son of George Thackrah (1770-1820), a chemist and druggist, and his wife, Alice Leader (1771-1828). In addition to residences in Leeds, his family had connections in the nearby village of Shadwell. Thackrah originally intended to fulfil his mother's wish that he should have a career in the clergy, and he studied under several local clergymen. However, in 1814 he enrolled as a pupil at the Leeds Infirmary, and in 1815 he moved to London, where for two years he attended lectures at Guy's Hospital, studying under Sir Astley Cooper. In October that year he joined the physical society at Guy's. In March 1816 Thackrah applied to practise as an apothecary, but was refused permission as he was not yet twenty-one; after a wait of three months he was admitted to the Society of Apothecaries. Thackrah's premature attempt to take the apothecaries' examination was illustrative of the tremendous drive and self-belief which characterized his approach to his medical studies and his later career. Thackrah contracted tuberculosis while in London, and, though his poor health did not diminish his ambition, it caused him much suffering and depression throughout the remainder of his life. 
On returning to Leeds in 1817 Thackrah established a private practice and supplemented his income by becoming town surgeon, with responsibility for the care of the town's paupers. In 1818 he wrote a prize-winning essay on the properties of the blood, particularly the process of coagulation, which brought him into dispute with William Hey, the dominant figure at Leeds Infirmary. The argument was resolved in Thackrah's favour after experiments at a local slaughter-house. The essay was published in 1819 and posthumously with a biographical memoir in 1834. In 1821 Thackrah's prestige in Leeds grew after he was invited to give the inaugural address at the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society, for which he acted as joint secretary from 1819 to 1822. In 1823 and 1824 he gave public lectures on physiology at the Philosophical Hall. He became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1821. In 1823 Thackrah's growing reputation was tarnished when it was revealed that he was the father of an illegitimate child, Charles Turner Thackrah Wailes, who was born following an affair with a patient. He acknowledged his son in his will with a legacy of $200. In the spring of 1824 Thackrah married Mary Henrietta, daughter of J. Scott of Wakefield, with whom he had one daughter, Mary Henrietta, born in 1825; mother and child both died in 1828. In 1830 he married Grace, daughter of A. Greenwood of Dewsbury Moor. 
Thackrah also had ambitions as a teacher, in the tradition of his own mentor, Astley Cooper. He began by taking on a few apprentices, before establishing his own school of anatomy at 9 South Parade. Things did not go entirely smoothly. His attempts to have the school recognized by the Royal College of Surgeons were constantly refused, and his efforts to promote the school met with hostility from some of his colleagues at the Leeds Infirmary, particularly when he championed junior members' accusations of misconduct among senior staff. The dispute came to a head in 1827 when one of Thackrah's pupils was successfully prosecuted for an assault on the sub-apothecary at the infirmary, following an argument at a clinical session conducted by the senior surgeon, Samuel Smith. Thackrah sought to defend his student's actions in the local press, claiming that his student was provoked by Smith, whom he accused of conducting a personal attack on himself. Thackrah did little to help his cause with the verbose and arrogant style of his letter, which included a list of all his achievements and publications. Smith replied with an equally vitriolic letter challenging Thackrah to a public contest in dissection, to which Thackrah responded disdainfully by saying that one of his students could attend in his place. After this confrontation Thackrah continued with his teaching and his research, which included a study of cholera. By the time the Leeds medical school was founded in 1831, his rift with the local medical establishment had healed; though not a founder of the school, Thackrah was invited to teach and to merge his school with the new institution. 
However, it is not as a pioneer of medical education that Thackrah is best remembered, but for his writings on occupational disease. Some commentators have suggested that Thackrah's interest in preventive medicine and occupational diseases was stimulated by a meeting with Robert Owen in Leeds in 1815, yet there is no evidence that the two actually met. Thackrah's knowledge of occupational disease came from several years of careful observation, commencing with his appointment as town surgeon and aided by local investigations undertaken by his students. In 1831 Thackrah summarized his observations in a treatise, 'The Effects of the Principal Arts, Trades on Health and Longevity', in which he detailed diseases associated with more than 150 occupations. He also advised on how such diseases could be prevented with reference to diet, alcohol abuse, posture, exercise, pollution, and ventilation. In particular Thackrah studied the impact of the new textile factories on workers' health. Among workers in the flax-spinning industry he observed that the dusty atmosphere of workshops was associated with a high incidence of respiratory disease. However, his greatest criticism of the new factory system was directed towards the exploitation of children. His treatise was well received by factory reformers and was quoted by Michael Sadler when introducing the 'Ten Hours Bill' in March 1832; in the same year Thackrah shared a platform with Robert Oastler in support of the Ten Hours Movement. The treatise was to remain the standard work on occupational diseases for the next sixty years. 
In 1833 Thackrah bought an estate in Shadwell, in response to his wife's concerns over his failing health. Commenting on his last days, his pupil H. Y. Whytehead wrote: 'Bodily suffering, and the entreaties of his dearest friends, were insufficient to induce him to relax his ardour in the pursuit of fame. His health was manifestly declining, and the short intervals of repose, in which he indulged when nature could endure no more, only served to protract his sufferings. A pulmonary affection was superadded to his original visceral disease. (Whytehead, 18-19)' Thackrah died of tuberculosis on 23 May 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 49254


Kydd, Samuel McGowan (1815-1892), Chartist and barrister, was born on 22 February 1815 in Arbroath, Forfarshire, the second son of James Kydd, a currier. He first came to public attention in 1837 in York when he issued a pamphlet which contributed to a national debate about joint-stock banks; his arguments that such banks should issue paper money were an early indication of a deep interest in financial and economic matters. Kydd's circumstances had dramatically changed by the early 1840s when he featured in the Chartist press as a Glasgow shoemaker. He was soon in demand as a Chartist lecturer. Throughout the north of England in 1843-4 he sought to refute the arguments of the Complete Suffrage Union and the Anti-Corn Law League. Having established himself as Chartism's most persuasive protectionist lecturer, Kydd relocated to London. As secretary of the Chartist executive in 1848-9 he was at the centre of the movement's activities. Unlike other executive members he managed to escape arrest, and, without going to the official polls, was twice (in Greenwich in 1847 and the West Riding in 1848) a Chartist parliamentary candidate. During these years Kydd continued to undertake extensive lecture tours, especially in the north and in Scotland. On 18 February 1850 he married Mary Ann Elizabeth (died 1898), daughter of Joseph Appleford. 
Though greatly liked and respected by the Chartist rank and file, Kydd decided to realign himself. By 1850 he was a close associate of Richard Oastler and a fully fledged tory radical, arguing in his lectures and journal articles for factory reform and the reintroduction of tariffs. He became Oastler's secretary, and, using the memorabilia he now had access to, produced, under the pseudonym Alfred, a 'History of the Factory Movement' (1857); it remains a valuable document for students of the subject. Kydd had long desired to enter the legal profession. In 1858 he was admitted to Gray's Inn, and in 1861 was called to the bar. Kydd lived during the second part of his life with his wife in Sutton, Surrey, and operated from chambers in the Middle Temple. Until the late 1880s he practised on the northern circuit and appeared at the York assizes. Shortly before his death he published 'A Sketch of the Growth of Public Opinion' (1888). A man of outstanding ability, Samuel Kydd died at his home, Holly Cottage, Sutton, on 21 December 1892. He left no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49255


Balme, Matthew (1813-1884), factory reformer, was born in Tong, Yorkshire, on 8 July 1813, the third son of Francis Balme (1742-1819), a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth West (died 1846), of Redhill Farm, Dudley Hill, Bradford. He was baptized at St James's Church, Tong, in the parish of Birstall, a month later, and maintained a close association with the Church of England throughout his life. After losing his father at the age of six he became the protege of the Reverend George Stringer Bull, the evangelical curate of Bierley, near Bradford, who later described Balme affectionately as 'my old pupil at Bierley and afterwards my fellow labourer in the good work of youthful protection and instruction' (Ward, 'Balme', 226). On Bull's recommendation, he was appointed superintendent of the model factory school at Bowling, opened in October 1832 by John Wood, the leading Bradford tory evangelical worsted spinner, who had been instrumental in the conversion of Richard Oastler to the cause of factory reform in September 1830. Balme remained superintendent of Wood's school for fourteen years, and when Lord Ashley visited Bradford in 1844 he extolled the virtues of the school where '500 children, under thirteen years of age, are receiving daily the benefits and blessings of a bringing up in the fear and nurture of the Lord' (ibid., 221). On 27 February 1843 Balme married Mary (1815-1866), daughter of Joshua Milner, a Bradford tailor, with whom he had a daughter, Mary (1843-1932). He subsequently entered local government as registrar for the townships of Bolton, Eccleshill, and Idle, and also served as clerk to the Bolton local board, playing a prominent role in both its foundation in 1865 and its controversial dissolution in 1873, when it became incorporated into the expanding borough of Bradford. 
Although the early historians of the factory movement Samuel K. Kydd and Philip Grant recognized his energetic contribution to the success of the movement, Matthew Balme has been described by J. T. Ward, a later historian of the movement, as perhaps the least remembered of the nineteenth-century factory reformers, notwithstanding his steadfast commitment to the campaign for factory regulation from 1831 until 1874. As Balme informed the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science meeting in Bradford in October 1859, 'from his own knowledge and recollection', he could testify to the sufferings of 'children of tender age... required to toil in factories' for excessive hours and experiencing 'cruelties of a revolting nature... often resulting in deformity, sometimes in death' (proceedings of Social Science Association meeting, Bradford, October 1859; Bradford Local Studies Library). As a schoolmaster he had first-hand acquaintance with the impact of the factory system on children, and supplied compelling factual evidence to the Bradford short-time committee, of which he became an early member, during Sadler's campaign for factory regulation in 1831. He became secretary of the Bradford committee in 1838, and of the West Riding committee in 1840. He was responsible for advising local committees throughout the county, correlating their reports and briefing the parliamentary leaders of the movement: Lord Ashley, with whom he maintained a warm personal correspondence for over forty years; John Fielden, who succeeded Ashley as parliamentary leader in 1846; and Lord John Manners, who led the parliamentary rearguard action in 1850 against the use of the relay system by manufacturers determined to circumvent the 'Ten Hours Act' of 1847. He organized election canvassing, petitioning campaigns, and fund-raising drives. He also liaised with the Lancashire central committee, Richard Oastler (who was incarcerated in the Fleet debtors' prison in 1840-44), and other parliamentary supporters of the movement, including leading churchmen, notably C. T. Longley, bishop of Ripon, who vigorously supported the campaign for factory reform in the House of Lords. 
In many respects Balme typified the tory Anglican involvement in the movement, asserting the Conservative paternalistic ethos against the dominant 'laissez-faire' economic doctrines of the influential West Riding Liberal dissenting manufacturers. On 25 April 1863 he was presented with a testimonial recognizing his key contribution to the development of the factory movement, providing 'the connecting link between the more wealthy of its supporters and its less fortunate advocates among the working classes themselves' (W. Yorks. AS, Matthew Balme Collection, deed box 4, case 9, item 80c). After ailing for some months Balme became seriously ill early in August 1884, and died at his home, Blakehill Cottage, Idle, Yorkshire, on 26 August 1884. His obituary in the 'Bradford Observer' (27 August 1884) recalled approvingly that 'on all occasions when attending the meetings of operatives he never omitted to warn the workers against any acts that would bring them into conflict with their employers and as frequently reminded them that it was only by mutual forbearance that satisfactory results could be arrived at.' A photograph of Balme in later life reveals a patriarchal profile, with a sympathetic demeanour, well-defined features, and long silvery-white hair, whiskers, and beard. He was buried in Calverley churchyard on 29 August 1884; a monument erected over his grave, paid for by the subscriptions of over 2000 factory operatives and a cluster of prominent public figures such as W. E. Forster and the earl of Shaftesbury, records that 'for upwards of fifty years he was a faithful and earnest advocate in promoting the physical, social and moral improvement of factory workers'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49257


Davies, Theophilus Harris (1834-1898), businessman and consul, was born on 4 January 1834 in Coalbournbrook, Stourbridge, Worcestershire, the second of the five children of the Revd Theophilus Davies ('c'.1798-1879?), a Welsh Congregational minister, and his wife, Mary Ann ('c'.1798-1849?). By 1837 his father had moved to Ludlow, Shropshire, where he combined his ministry with private tutoring. Davies was educated by his father. 
At the beginning of 1851 Davies was employed as a bookkeeper by a relative in Manchester, the commission merchant and agent Henry Beecroft Jackson. Davies could not do the job, and after six months he was redeployed as a shipping clerk. In 1856 Jackson's associate Robert Chesshyre Janion, a Liverpool merchant and agent of the Northern Assurance Company, appointed Davies as a clerk at his Honolulu office; thus in November Davies set sail for Hawaii, where he arrived in spring 1857. 
In 1867 Janion's partner was in severe financial difficulties, and Davies -- who had accumulated some capital -- became Janion's new partner in Hawaii. In February 1868 Davies also established his own business, Theo. H. Davies & Co., with which he remained involved until his death. (His business was subsequently incorporated in 1894.) It made a number of very profitable investments in Hawaii's rapidly expanding sugar industry. On 5 October 1870 his father married Davies to Mary Ellen (1849?-1907), daughter of George Cocking, a Ludlow chemist and one-time mayor. They were to have five sons and two daughters. 
Davies's partnership with Janion was dissolved following the latter's death in 1881. Davies retained an interest in many of the former partnership's investments, of which the most profitable was to be the Honolulu iron works. By the 1880s he had become one of the wealthiest businessmen in Hawaii. In addition to his business interests Davies found time to be treasurer of the Honolulu Cathedral building committee and to promote a Hawaiian branch of the YMCA. He also served as British vice-consul from 1872 to 1888. He acted as commissioner consul-general from 1872 to 1874 and was acting consul from 1877 to 1878. In 1888 the Hawaiian government considered appointing Davies as its consul-general in London. As a result Davies was required to resign his position of vice-consul in order to avoid a potential conflict of interest. However, King Kalakaua's dislike of Davies meant that the latter did not secure the appointment in London; none the less, Davies had already decided to retire to England that year. 
Davies moved with his family to his new home, Sundown, in Southport, Lancashire, where he remained actively involved in the Liverpool branch of his business. During the Hawaiian political crisis of 1893-8 Davies was a strong supporter of Hawaiian sovereignty; he sought to protect the interests of his god-daughter and ward, Princess Kaiulani, the heir to the Hawaiian throne; and he unsuccessfully opposed the campaign by the Republic of Hawaii for annexation to the United States. 
During his eleven years in Southport, Davies was an active and generous philanthropist who supported in particular the borough's young men and the parish of All Saints. He became a member of the committee of the YMCA in 1887 and served as its president in 1891, 1892, and 1897. Davies also served as president of the Southport Working Lads' Club from its foundation in 1891. An active supporter of the British and Foreign Bible Society and the Church Pastoral Aid Society, he was a member of the council of the Church Missionary Society, of the executive of the Church of England Temperance Society, and of the diocesan temperance committee for Liverpool. Davies supported the Conservative Party and later, in the 1890s, the Liberal Unionists. While in Southport he served as a justice of the peace. However, though he was offered the position of mayor of Southport, Davies did not seek political office. During his time both in Hawaii and in his retirement, he sought to promote both the commercial and the wider interests of the British empire. He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and also a fellow of the Imperial Institute. 
In 1897 Davies moved to his new home, Ravensdale, in Pembury Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, because of his wife's poor health. His philanthropy and parochial work was transferred to the Tunbridge Wells parishes of Trinity and St James. Davies died after a winter visit to Honolulu. He caught a cold that led to his death, at Ravensdale, from what may have been typhoid fever or cholera on 25 May 1898. He was buried in the Tunbridge Wells new cemetery on 27 May. He died a very wealthy man, with real estate in Britain, Canada, and Hawaii, as well as investments in Hawaiian, European, Indian, and Canadian stocks and bonds. 


@@@@@


doc= 49258


Dixon, Sir Owen (1886-1972), judge in Australia, was born on 28 April 1886 at Glenferrie Road, Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia, the only child of Joseph William Dixon (1859-1929), a Melbourne lawyer, and his wife, Edith Annie (1859-1934), daughter of Edward Owen. Both parents came from Morley in Yorkshire, emigrating separately with their parents in the 1860s. He was educated at Hawthorn College and the University of Melbourne where he graduated as bachelor of arts in 1906 and bachelor of laws in 1908. 
Dixon read classics and law. He was much influenced by T. G. Tucker, professor of classical philology, from whom he acquired a love of classical literature and thought that nourished his naturally sceptical mind, and by Sir William Harrison Moore, professor of law, in whom he observed the detachment of the scholar's judgement on modern problems, particularly in public law. He began practice at the Victorian bar in 1910. Dixon soon acquired a reputation for knowledge and skill as a barrister, obtaining an enormous practice and achieving a dominance not seen before or since. 'His quiet and friendly personality, his high standards of professional probity and his powerful mind dominated the Bar' (Dean, 219). 
On 8 January 1920 at St Paul's Anglican Cathedral, Dixon married Alice Crossland Brooksbank (1893-1971), daughter of the Revd H. A. Brooksbank. He was greatly attached to his wife and kept in constant contact with her whenever they were separated. They had two sons and two daughters, all of whom survived them. He took silk in 1922 and in that year made the first of several appearances before the privy council. He made a profound impression on many English lawyers. Sir John Simon suggested that he should take chambers in London and practise at the English bar, but for professional and personal reasons he decided not to do so. In 1926 Dixon agreed to sit for some months as an acting judge of the supreme court of Victoria. In that period he delivered some important judgments but declined permanent appointment at the end of the year. 
In 1929 Dixon was persuaded to accept appointment to the high court, the highest court in Australia with both constitutional and appellate jurisdiction. It was there that his greatness became permanently recognized. He at once began to make a profound contribution to the law which can only be fully appreciated by a close study of his judgments. He believed deeply in Maitland's dictum that the common law was a reflection of 'strict logic, and high technique, rooted in the Inns of Court, rooted in the Year Books, rooted in the centuries' (SeldS year book series, 1.xviii). 
When war broke out in 1939 Dixon offered his services to the government and while continuing to discharge judicial duties undertook the chairmanship of various government boards. In 1942 he accepted appointment as Australian minister to Washington and was relieved of judicial duties. His tasks were considerable and exacting. He worked closely with the heads of the administration and formed friendships that lasted throughout his life, in particular with Justice Frankfurter. He returned to Australia in 1944. Later he formed a close friendship with Lord Simonds with whom he corresponded regularly. 
Dixon was once again absent from judicial duties when, in 1950, he was asked by the Security Council of the United Nations to act as mediator between India and Pakistan in Kashmir. He was received with respect by the disputants, who appreciated his judicial approach, but he failed to devise an acceptable solution for the region's intractable problems. 
On 21 April 1952 Dixon was appointed chief justice of the high court of Australia and there began a period during which the court was regarded as the finest in the English-speaking world. He found judicial work hard and unrewarding but through the work of the court he had a profound influence on the standards of all courts in Australia. The intellectual penetration and meticulous legal scholarship of his judgments set standards for all and his insistence that the court should sit in all state capitals and avoid permanent residence in Canberra kept them to the fore. 
Dixon firmly believed that the judicial task required the application by strict logic and high technique of external standards to ascertained facts. He strove to maintain the unity of the common law but continually faced the dilemma of whether to eradicate error or maintain legal and judicial authority. Some of his most interesting judgments are those concerned with that dilemma, 'Mayfair Trading Co. Pty Ltd v. Dreyer' (1958), for example. He regretted that he had to make the pronouncement he did in 'Parker v. R.' (1963). Many of his judgments have had a profound effect on legal thought in the common-law world: for example, in the field of estoppels see 'Thompson v. Palmer' (1933); 'Newbon v. City Mutual Life Assurance' (1935); and 'Grundt v. Great Boulder Pty Gold Mines Ltd' (1937). His address, 'Concerning judicial method' (delivered at Yale in 1955 and published with other papers and addresses under the title 'Jesting Pilate', 1965), was written in response to what he considered the unsatisfactory reasoning in recent English cases. That address is a masterly exposition of the judicial technique and shows his convictions and his humility. No understanding of his work can be complete without a study of it. In revenue cases 'Sun Newspapers Ltd' (1938), 'Hallstroms Pty Ltd' (1946), and 'Ronpibon Tin NL' (1949), Dixon analysed the concepts of capital and income in the context of deductible outgoings in a way not previously attempted. His judgment in 'National Research Development Corporation' (1959) developed the principles applicable in determining patentable processes. His judgment in 'McDonald v. Dennys Lascelles Ltd' (1933) concerning the right of an innocent party to a sale of land to recover damages on the contract being terminated by an accepted repudiation was followed by the House of Lords in 'Johnson v. Agnew' (1980). His judgment in 'Birmingham v. Renfrew' (1937) concerning the position of the survivor of persons who make mutual wills has also been much referred to in English courts. 
In public and in court Dixon was reserved and circumspect: in private he was irreverent and sometimes indiscreet. Tall, slightly stooped, loose-limbed, with an unusual physiognomy, he led a frugal life and was a teetotaller. He was excellent company. He trusted his friends to treat his conversation as it was intended. He frequently discussed a most serious subject with an extraordinary lightness of touch, almost with flippancy, but generally because he was confident of his own capacity to deal with it. Typical of his sardonic wit was his comment that the Australian constitution had contrived to combine the most difficult features of both the British and the American systems: in Britain there was a totally flexible constitution and utterly rigid judges; in America there was a rigid constitution and totally flexible judges; but unhappily in Australia both the constitution and the judges were equally strict. Similarly he observed that the principal reason for having trial by jury is the experience of what happens when there is a trial by judge alone and the principal reason for having trial by a judge alone is the experience of what happens when there is a trial by jury. Above all he was amused by evidence of human foibles in any form. Although shy by nature he had a great interest in people and enjoyed conversation, especially with those of a younger generation to whom he was particularly kind and generous. 
Dixon retired on 13 April 1964 and took no part in public life thereafter. At his farewell Sir Robert Menzies said that two lord chancellors and a distinguished justice of the supreme court of the United States had described him as the greatest judicial lawyer in the English-speaking world. Dixon received many appointments and honours: KCMG in 1941, privy councillor in 1951, GCMG in 1954, the Howland memorial prize of Yale University in 1955, an honorary DCL from Oxford and an honorary LLD from Harvard in 1958, an honorary LLD from Melbourne in 1959, in 1963 the Order of Merit, an honorary LLD from the Australian National University in 1964, and in 1970 he became a corresponding fellow of the British Academy. Lady Dixon died in September 1971 and thereafter as Dixon's own health further declined, he declined in spirit also and died at his home, Yallambee, 4 Higham Road, Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia, on 7 July 1972. He was buried in Boroondara cemetery, Kew, Victoria, on 11 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 49260


Halfdan (d. 877), king of the Danes, was the brother of Ivarr inn Beinlausi (Ivarr the Boneless). The tradition that both were the sons of Ragnarr Lodbrok (Ragnarr Hairy Breeches) is unreliable. Halfdan and his brother were among the leaders of the 'great army' that arrived in England from Denmark in 865. After wintering in East Anglia from autumn 865, the army moved to York, which it took on 1 November 866. A Northumbrian attempt to retake the city was repelled and the Northumbrian kings Osberht and AElle killed on 21 March 867. The vikings established Ecgberht as their puppet king in the north before moving, in the autumn of 867, to Nottingham in Mercia. The army returned to York in 868, staying for a year before crossing Mercia to Thetford in East Anglia. At this point they engaged the East Angles, killing their king, Edmund (died 869). Unlike his brother Ivarr, who left England at this time, Halfdan was not implicated in this deed by later tradition. Halfdan's army left East Anglia in the autumn or early winter of 870, and invaded Wessex, establishing their base at Reading. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', which for this period is a near contemporary West Saxon source, gives a detailed narrative of the ensuing campaign. The vikings fought nine general engagements against the West Saxons, who were led by their king, AEthelred I, who died in April 871, and his brother and successor, Alfred. The most important of these took place on the Berkshire downs, then called Ashdown, in the early months of 871. Halfdan makes his first appearance in a written source in the chronicle's report of that battle, in which the viking army was drawn up in two divisions: one, opposed by Alfred, was led by 'jarls', the other, which AEthelred engaged, was under the command of 'the heathen kings Bagsecg and Healfdene' ('ASC', s.a. 871). Bagsecg was slain in the battle. The outcome of Ashdown, and ultimately of all the engagements of 871, was indecisive, despite the arrival at some point of a 'great summer army', probably led by Guthrum, which reinforced Halfdan's host. In the autumn of 871 the combined army left Reading and wintered in London. Coins minted there at the time bear the name Halfdan, indicating his status as the army's most prominent leader. From London, in the early autumn of 872, the army was drawn to Northumbria by a revolt against the Danish-appointed puppet king Ecgberht, before it settled for the winter in Mercia, at Torksey on the Trent. The vikings remained there for a year after the Mercians had bought peace from them, until late in 873 they moved to Repton; they drove the Mercian king, Burgred, from his kingdom, establishing in his place Ceolwulf ('fl'. 874-879), who gave them hostages and swore oaths that Mercia should be at their disposal whenever they wanted it. In the following year the viking army divided into two. While Guthrum occupied Cambridge, from where he invaded Wessex again in 875, Halfdan took his contingent north to a base on the Tyne from which he attacked the Picts and Strathclyde Britons. His army then settled in Northumbria from autumn 875, where they 'proceeded to plough and to support themselves' ('ASC', s.a. 876). The area occupied seems to have been broadly the old kingdom of Deira, centred on York; the northern part of Northumbria, Bernicia, remained in the hands of English rulers. 
Halfdan himself does not seem to have settled with his followers. The annals of Ulster's record for the year 875 includes the notice that 'Oistin son of Amlaib, king of the Norsemen, was deceitfully killed by Albann' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 874). Albann was almost certainly Halfdan, his victim the son of Olaf the White, who had partnered Halfdan's brother Ivarr in widespread campaigning in Ireland in the 850s and early 860s. Halfdan may, therefore, have been attempting to reclaim the inheritance of his brother, who had died in Ireland in 873. If so, the killing of Oistin (Eysteinn) was not decisive. Halfdan may have returned to Northumbria to complete the settlement of his warriors, but he appeared again in Ireland in 877. The annals of Ulster record a skirmish at Strangford Lough in that year, between the 'Finngenti' and the 'Dubgennti', meaning literally the 'Fair Heathens' and the 'Dark Heathens', and referring to the Norwegians and the Danes respectively. Halfdan, the king of the Danes, was slain there. 


@@@@@


doc= 49261


Ivarr (d. 873), viking leader, is a figure the facts of whose life are difficult to disentangle from legendary accretions. In the saga tradition of the thirteenth century and later he was one of the many sons of Ragnarr Lodbrok (Ragnarr Hairy Breeches), a Danish king (or, alternatively, a Norwegian chieftain) whose historicity is very uncertain indeed. 
Ivarr's earliest appearance in contemporary or near-contemporary sources comes in the Irish annals, which name an Ivarr (appearing there as Imhar) as the companion of Olaf the White. In 857 the two won a victory in Munster against a group of other Scandinavians and renegade Irish ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 856). The late medieval 'fragmentary annals' claim a victory for Ivarr over a similar force in the following year. By 859 Ivarr and Olaf had allied with Cerball mac Dungaile (died 888), king of Osraige, and together they attacked the lands in Meath of the high-king Mael Sechnaill mac Maele Ruanaid (died 863). Cerball soon submitted to Mael Sechnaill, but it is likely that Ivarr and Olaf were the leaders of those 'foreigners' (that is, vikings) whom the annals record as the allies of the northern Ui Neill king Aed Findliath mac Neill (died 879) in his campaigns in Meath in the following two years. The alliance did not last. In 863, in conjunction with Lorcan, king of Meath, and together with another viking leader named Auisl, Ivarr and Olaf plundered the territory of Aed's nephew Flann mac Conaing, including the spiritually significant Boyne tumuli of Knowth, Dowth, and Newgrange. The enmity with Aed thus created may account for Ivarr's absence from Irish sources, and from Ireland, for the next eight years. 
Direct authority for the presence of an Ivarr among the leadership of the 'great heathen army' that arrived in England in the autumn of 865 is not contemporary, appearing first in the Latin version of the chronicle written by AEthelweard (died 998?), where the name is given as Iguuar. The ninth-century 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', the most contemporary source, does not name him in its annals recording the army's progress, but indicates his status by naming him in connection with an event in which he took no part, the defeat of 'the brother of Ingwaer and Healfdene [Halfdan]' in Devon in 878 ('ASC', s.a. 878). Later sources tell of three brothers who were leaders of the army. As well as Halfdan, text F of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' names Ubba along with Ivarr as heading the army in East Anglia, and the life of St Oswald by Byrhtferth ('fl'. 'c'.986- 'c'.1016) records that Oswald's grandfather had come to England from Scandinavia in the army led by Huba and Hinwaer. In addition, the life of St Edmund by Abbo of Fleury (died 1004) makes Igwaer the conqueror of East Anglia. On the assumption that these sources are correct in identifying this Ivarr as a leader of the great army, his movements can be traced through the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle''s record of the progress of the army through England. After wintering in East Anglia from autumn 865, the army moved to York, which it took on 1 November 866. A Northumbrian attempt to retake the city was repelled and the Northumbrian kings Osberht and AElle killed on 21 March 867. The vikings established Ecgberht as their puppet king in the north before moving, in the autumn of 867, to Nottingham in Mercia. The army returned to York in 868, staying for a year before crossing Mercia to Thetford in East Anglia. At this point they engaged the East Angles, killing their king Edmund (died 869). 
According to AEthelweard, Ivarr died shortly afterwards. The failure of the main West Saxon source, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', to mention Ivarr in its record for the ensuing years, and his appearance in its annal for 878 only with the implication that he was no longer present, indicates that he did not participate in the army's campaign in Wessex, which began in the autumn or early winter of 870 with its move to Reading. Irish sources, however, suggest that AEthelweard's date for Ivarr's death is wrong. The annals of Ulster record a siege of 'Ail Cluaithe' by 'Amlaib and Imar' in 870 ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 869; 'recte' 870). It is hard to avoid the conclusion that these were the same Olaf and Ivarr who had been partners in Irish campaigns in the 850s and early 860s and that the chronological coincidence of the disappearance of the name Ivarr from the English scene with its reappearance in Ireland indicates the identity of the two. 'Ail Cluaithe' is a reference to Dumbarton, the chief fortress of the British kingdom of Strathclyde. Ivarr, it seems, having plundered Northumbria, Mercia, and East Anglia, had resuscitated his old alliance with Olaf, and the two are recorded as returning to Dublin from Scotland in the next year 'with two hundred ships, bringing away with them in captivity to Ireland a great prey of Angles and Britons and Picts' (ibid., s.a. 870; 'recte' 871). 
According to the annals of Ulster, Ivarr died in 873, 'king of the Norsemen of all Ireland and Britain' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 872; 'recte' 873). He is the only viking so described in a contemporary source. If the identity between the Irish and English Ivarrs is accepted, then the sheer range of his activities helps to justify this title. Later traditions suggest a high, perhaps unique, prominence among ninth-century viking leaders. Many of the generation that ruled the vikings at Dublin and York in the first half of the tenth century are named in Irish sources as 'the grandsons of Ivarr', including Ragnall (d. 920/21) and Sihtric Caech (d. 927). One of his sons, Sigfrid, ruled in Dublin from 'c'.881 until 888, when he was killed by his brother, probably named Sihtric (Sigtryggr in Norse), who was himself slain in 896. First named as the son of the more or less legendary Ragnarr Lodbrok by the eleventh-century writer Adam of Bremen, Ivarr was given a prominent place in the Icelandic saga tradition of the twelfth century and later, in which he acquired the obscure epithet inn Beinlausi (the Boneless), which may refer to a snake-like attribute, continuing an association in the saga literature in which Ragnarr died in a snake-pit and another son, Sigurd, bore the epithet Orm-i-Auga (Snake-in-the-Eye). English sources such as Abbo of Fleury's life of St Edmund and text F of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' make Ivarr responsible for the martyrdom of the East Anglian king Edmund. Later Scandinavian sources claim that he disposed of both King AElle of Northumbria and King Edmund by means of the bloodthirsty, and probably fictitious, 'blood-eagle' ritual, in which the victim's ribs were hacked from his spine and his lungs drawn out through his back. 


@@@@@


doc= 49262


Haesten (fl. 882-893), viking leader, makes his first certain appearance in the work of two contemporary Frankish annalists, who independently reported Northmen on the Loire in 882 led by 'A(l)stingus', a Frankish attempt at a name the Norse form of which was probably Hasteinn; he appears as Haesten in English sources and has sometimes been named, in Anglicized form, as Hasting. The West Frankish king Louis III induced him to quit the Loire for the channel coast. Perhaps active in the ravaging of northern Francia by the 'great army' during the 880s, Haesten is next named in the annals of St Vaast under 890. He established a base on the Somme at Argoeuves, then made a 'treacherous' deal with Rudolf, abbot of St Vaast, 'that he might be able to go freely wherever he wanted' ('Annales Vedastini', s.a. 890), apparently undertaking to protect St Vaast against other vikings at Noyon; then on 27 December he attacked St Vaast. It is unclear if Haesten was among those Northmen defeated at the Dyle in 891. The St Vaast annalist reports Haesten's wintering in 891-2 at Amiens, whence he launched a successful surprise attack on forces led by another West Frankish king, Odo. In autumn 892 famine caused the Northmen to leave Francia for England. 
Haesten, the only viking leader named in the section of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' devoted to the years 892-6, crossed the channel, evidently bringing wife and sons, 'with 80 ships', and 'made a fort' at Milton Royal in north Kent. A 'great army' came in 250 ships to Appledore, south Kent. In 893 Alfred, adopting a classic tactic, came to terms with the smaller force: Haesten's two sons were baptized (Haesten himself had perhaps adopted Christianity in Francia), with Alfred and Ealdorman AEthelred of the Mercians as respective godfathers; Haesten gave 'hostages and oaths'; Alfred 'made him generous gifts of money'. Haesten then crossed the Thames to Essex, 'made a fort' at Benfleet, and 'immediately went harrying in that very province which AEthelred, his son's godfather, was in charge of' ('ASC', s.a. 893 [text A]). He made no further attacks south of the Thames, and Benfleet became a key base. 
Meanwhile the Appledore army raided in Wessex, and, wishing to carry booty 'across the Thames into Essex to meet the ships', was beaten at Farnham. The survivors eventually reached Benfleet. Haesten now went raiding again into Mercia, leaving wife and sons at Benfleet with the 'great army'. The raiders included 'great reinforcements both from East Anglia and from Northumbria', which were now under Danish control. Reaching the Severn they made a fort at Buttington. After 'many weeks' besieged by a combined West Saxon, Mercian, and Welsh force Haesten's men 'became distressed for lack of food and had devoured most of their horses, the remainder perishing with hunger'. They attempted a break-out, and a fierce battle ensued, in which 'many king's thegns were slain' ('ASC', s.a. 893 [text A]). AEthelweard, the well-informed author ('c'.980) of a Latin version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', says: 'further effort was seen as foolish by the Danes: they confirmed peace a second time; they did not refuse hostages; they promised to withdraw from that region'. They went back to Benfleet and 'divided out the year's booty' ('Chronicle of AEthelweard', 50). 
Haesten now met Alfred a second time in 893, for, in Haesten's absence, a small contingent of West Saxons, augmented by Mercian troops from London, had 'stormed the fortification at Benfleet, captured all that was in it, goods, women and children', and carried all these off to London, along with some ships. Haesten's second encounter with Alfred thus perhaps occurred at London. Alfred, mindful of their spiritual kinship, 'restored his wife and sons to him' ('ASC', s.a. 893 [text A]). Hasty repairs to the Benfleet ramparts damaged by the Saxon-Mercian force (AEthelweard mentions the collapse of a rebuilt section) confirm the overriding importance of forts to viking strategy. 
Though Haesten never reappears in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', the further Danish efforts of 893-6 may have continued under his leadership. Late in 893 there was another raid into Mercia, again involving forces from East Anglia and Northumbria. After moving to Chester, then Wales, and thence, with their loot, via Northumbria and East Anglia back to Essex, this army went up the Thames and the Lea, where, early in 895, another fort was built, 20 miles above London. When Alfred blocked the Lea, the Danes again escaped westwards, abandoning their ships (and leaving their womenfolk 'for safety in East Anglia'), to Bridgnorth on the Severn, where they overwintered. In summer 896 'the army dispersed, some to East Anglia, some to Northumbria, and those that were moneyless got themselves ships there and sailed south oversea to the Seine' ('ASC', s.a. 896 [text A]). The annals of St Vaast (s.a. 896), naming a viking leader on the Seine as 'Hundeus', clearly distinguished him from 'Alstingus'. Haesten probably ended his days moneyed and settled in England with his family. 
If the 'Hastingus' mentioned by Regino of Prum as 'commander of Northmen' active on the Loire in 866, when they slew Robert, count of Anjou, and in 868, when they accepted a peace-offering of 500 cows from the Bretons in return for hostages, is the same Haesten (and not a kinsman), his uniquely well-documented career spanned three decades. Longevity alone hardly explains why legends later clustered around him. His reputation as an archetypal viking lies behind his legendary appearances in the histories of the dukes of Normandy by Dudo of St Quentin (1015-26) and William of Jumieges ('c'.1070), which take him as far as the town of Luni in north-west Italy, as well as a number of other high-medieval legends of his exploits in north-west France. The genuine Haesten, in the 890s, applied his continental military and political experience to England in campaigns of dramatic mobility, resourcefulness, and skilful manoeuvre matching Alfred's own. Haesten's personal journey from raiding to acculturation and settlement typified the viking age. 


@@@@@


doc= 49263


Olaf the White (fl. 853-871), viking leader, was active in Ireland and northern Britain during the ninth century. His career is given in the Old Norse 'Landnamabok', which claims that his father was named Ingiald, and that his wife was Aud the Deepminded, the daughter of Ketil Flat-Nefr (Ketill Flatnose), who ruled in the Hebrides. Their son was named Thorstein, and his daughter Groa was the ancestor of the earls of Orkney. The career of Olaf the White corresponds with that of the Olaf 'son of the king of Lochland' (Norway) (died 875), also known as Olaf, king of Dublin ('c'.853-871), whose activities are recorded in the Irish chronicles; many scholars consider them to be the same individual. They were active at the same time, in the same place, and were recognized as the leaders of the vikings in Ireland. 
Olaf of Dublin carved out an empire in Ireland and northern Britain, and was the overlord of the vikings in those lands. He first appeared in Ireland in the mid-ninth century, when he took lordship over the vikings and collected taxes from the Irish. In 857 he and his brother Ivarr led an expedition to Munster and defeated a Caittel Find and his army of vikings and renegade Irish. The brothers made an alliance with Cerball mac Dunlainge, the lord of Ossory, in 859 and raided Meath. In 860 Olaf was allied with the future high-king Aed Findliath mac Neill in a confrontation with the high-king Mael Sechnaill mac Maele Ruanaid who had made a show of force at Armagh. The next year the allies raided Mael Sechnaill's lands in Meath. By this time Aed's daughter was Olaf's wife. This alliance ended with the accession of Aed to the high-kingship, and in 863 Olaf, together with his brothers Ivarr and Auisl, made a new alliance with Lorcan mac Cathail, the lord of Clann Cholmain, and plundered Brega. In the course of their campaign they searched four famous caves: 'Achadh Aldai' (possibly to be identified with Newgrange), Knowth, Dowth, and Drogheda. This alliance had ended when, at the monastery of Clonard in 864, Olaf drowned Conchobar mac Donnchada of Clann Cholmain. Olaf moved into Britain in 866 when he and his brother Auisl raided central Scotland with a force drawn from the vikings of Ireland and Britain in a campaign that lasted from 1 January to St Patrick's day. Aed Findliath took advantage of Olaf's absence to lead a sweeping campaign against the vikings in the north of Ireland, destroying their fortresses from Donegal to Antrim. More disasters followed in the next year when a fortress at Clondalkin, called Dun Amhlaim ('Olaf's fort'), was destroyed by the Irish. The same year Olaf's brother Auisl was slain. One record states that he was killed by the men of Munster, when he and Olaf were attacking the monastery of Lismore, although another story claims that Auisl wanted Olaf's wife, the daughter of Cinaed mac Conaing of Brega, and Olaf killed him in a jealous rage. Olaf raided the monastery of Armagh in 869, when reputedly a thousand persons were either captured or killed by the vikings. The following year Olaf and Ivarr returned to Britain and raided until 871, when they returned to Dublin. In that year Olaf departed from Ireland and returned to Scandinavia, leaving behind a son named Oistin, who was slain in 875. 
Although the Norse sagas claim that Olaf the White was slain in Ireland, the Scottish chronicle claims that Olaf of Dublin was in Scotland when he was slain in battle by Constantine I, king of Scots, about the year 875. The two accounts are not exclusive, for there is no indication that at this date the Norse were aware of distinctions between the Gaelic-speaking communities in Ireland and Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 49264


Ragnall (d. 920/21), king of York, was one of the grandsons of the Danish viking Ivarr the Boneless. Information about him comes from English, Scottish, and Irish sources, and from coins. The written sources, though extensive, are often late and garbled and cannot be wholly reconciled one with another. Much remains uncertain. 
After Ivarr's grandsons were evicted from Dublin in 902, Ragnall appears to have established a base in southern Scotland or the Isle of Man. He recruited from local settlers a band of Norwegian vikings, with whom he seized York, where the Danish leadership had been weakened following the battle of Tettenhall in 910. From there Ragnall sailed north to the River Tyne in 914, forcing Ealdred, the reeve of Bamburgh, to flee with his followers to King Constantine in Scotland. Ealdred and Constantine returned that year with an army of Scots and English to face Ragnall, who defeated them at the first battle of Corbridge. Ragnall then divided the eastern lands of the community of St Cuthbert (at Chester-le-Street) between two of his leaders, giving the southern half (from Castle Eden to Billingham on Tees) to Scule and the remainder (between Castle Eden and the River Wear) to Olaf Bald. After sailing north again, Ragnall crossed from the Forth to the Clyde and attacked Dumbarton in the kingdom of Strathclyde. Later in 914 his forces defeated the fleet of a rival viking leader named Bard Ottarsson in a naval battle off the Isle of Man. 
In the following years, with Waterford as his base, Ragnall harried southern Ireland, looting the monasteries of Munster. He was joined by his kinsman (probably his brother), Sihtric Caech, who recaptured Dublin in 919. Meanwhile Ragnall had invaded Scotland and sacked Dunblane. He turned south into Northumbria and with the aid of Guthfrith, another grandson of Ivarr, he fought a second battle at Corbridge in 918, defeating once again the king of the Scots and the English of Bamburgh. Among those killed there was Eadred, son of Ricsige, who had leased from the community of St Cuthbert much of their remaining territory. Ragnall gave the jurisdiction of these lands, lying south and west of Chester-le-Street, to Eadred's sons Esbriht and Earl AElfstan, who appear to have supported him in the battle. With virtually the whole of Bernicia now in the hands of his nominees, Ragnall entered York early in 919 and ruled there as king until his death in late 920 or early 921. Ragnall submitted to King Edward the Elder as overlord some time before his death, but was allowed to keep his kingdom. He minted three issues of coinage bearing the name RAIENALT or RACNOLDT or a similar variant. At his death he was described in the annals of Ulster as 'king of the Finngaill and the Dubhgaill', that is, the 'Fair Foreigners' and the 'Dark Foreigners', meaning the Norwegians and the Danes who had settled in Ireland and northern England. He was succeeded as king of York by Sihtric Caech. 


@@@@@


doc= 49265


Erik Bloodaxe (d. 954), viking leader and king of Northumbria, was the son of Harald Haarfagre ('Harald Fairhair'), king of Norway ('fl'. 872?- 'c'.930). The identity of his father can be inferred from the report of version E of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', which describes him as 'Harold's son' ('Haroldes sunu', 'ASC', s.a. 952, text E). Few facts about Erik are as reliably attested. Although the various extant versions of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' are the most contemporary and dependable written sources for Erik, they nevertheless differ in their narratives of his career in Britain. The faint image of Erik in the near contemporary evidence contrasts with the strongly drawn portrayal of a warrior king in the Icelandic sagas of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Although the saga writers' information is often demonstrably defective, it offers an attractive richness of detail that has led to attempts to vindicate some, at least, of their stories about Erik, in order to construct a coherent narrative of his life. The motivation for such attempts is, above all, the prominence that Erik has in the saga literature, in which his profile is uniquely high for a tenth-century Scandinavian king in the British Isles. Why he attained this status in Scandinavian culture, typified by the epithet Bloodaxe (Blodox), which was first coined by 'Egils saga' of the late twelfth century, is an enduring puzzle. 
Slotting together the annals in the two principal versions of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' for this period, texts D and E, produces a continuous narrative for Erik's career in Britain. His first appearance, in an annal for 948, records his selection as their king by the Northumbrians, meaning the inhabitants of the kingdom centred on York, formerly known as Deira. By this act the Northumbrians reneged on a pledge that they had made shortly before to King Eadred ('r'. 946-55), whose response was to invade and ravage Northumbria, burning down St Wilfrid's minster at Ripon. As the English army returned southward, the army of York overtook its rearguard at Castleford, and 'made a great slaughter there'. When an enraged Eadred threatened to return to Northumbria and 'destroy it utterly', however, the Northumbrians abandoned Erik and paid reparations to the English king ('ASC', s.a. 948, text D). If text E of the chronicle is correct, the Northumbrians' loyalty once again proved fickle, for its annal for 949 records the arrival in Northumbria, for the second time, of Olaf Sihtricson. According to text E, in 952 Olaf in turn was driven out, and the Northumbrians again received Erik as their king. Both versions agree that Erik was expelled for the final time in 954, 'and Eadred succeeded to the kingdom of the Northumbrians' ('ASC', s.a. 954, texts D, E). A twelfth-century Durham tradition records that after his expulsion Erik was killed by a certain Maccus, son of Olaf. The 'Flores historiarum' of Roger of Wendover (died 1236), which includes material drawn from an earlier lost set of northern annals, adds that Erik was betrayed, with his son Henricus (Haeric, Erik) and his brother Reginaldus (Ragnall), by Earl Oswulf of Bamburgh, and was treacherously killed by Maccus on Steinmor -- that is, Stainmore, across which runs the Roman road (the modern A66) from York to Cumbria. Oswulf then became earl of all Northumbria. 
While this narrative is coherent as far as it goes, others are possible, for the chronology of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' for this period is extremely confused. In particular, version E's annals dated 949 and 952 may be as awry as that entered under 948, which records the death of Edmund and accession of Eadred, the true date of which is 946. The sixth section of the 'Historia regum' attributed to Symeon of Durham ('fl'. 'c'.1090- 'c'.1128), which preserves from an earlier northern source annals covering some of these events, often under different dates, only complicates matters further. The evidence of southern English charters suggests that Eadred did not claim to rule over the Northumbrians from 947/8 to 948/9 and from 950/51 to 951/2, leaving room for the sequence of short reigns at York that the standard narrative envisages, that is, Erik-Eadred-Olaf-Erik. Taking account of the severe dislocation of the annals' dates, however, suggests a different sequence, giving Erik only one reign at York. The two different coin types inscribed with Erik's name may correspond to his two supposed reigns, or may represent two issues in a single reign. The contemporary and near contemporary sources offer little certainty as to Erik's status in Northumbria: his influence appears to have been less important than that of Wulfstan, archbishop of York, whose attitude towards him remains frustratingly unclear. Such sources also record a Scottish raid as far as the Tees in 948 or 949, which may have been directed against, or mounted in favour of, Erik, though the protagonist could just as easily have been Olaf Sihtricson. Similarly, it is not certain that, as sometimes suggested, Erik was the leader of the Scandinavian force that the Irish annals attest as defeating a combined army of Scots, Strathclyde Britons, and Bamburgh English in the battle that they date to 952. 
Erik appears in a brighter light in the sagas written in Iceland in the late twelfth and thirteenth centuries, principally the sagas of Hakon the Good ('Hakonar saga Goda') and of Harald Finehair ('Haralds saga ins Harfagra') in 'Heimskringla' by Snorri Sturluson (died 1241), 'Orkneyinga Saga', 'Egils saga', and the longer saga of Olaf Tryggvason ('Olafs saga Tryggvasonar en mesta'). These allege that Erik's mother was Ragnhild, the daughter of a Danish king. Erik is said to have begun his viking career at the age of twelve. On an expedition to the White Sea he discovered his wife, Gunnhild, the daughter either of one Ozurr Toti, or of Gorm inn Gamli (Gorm the Old), king of Denmark. She is said to have practised witchcraft. Erik became king in Norway after the death of his father, Harald, and slew several of his brothers and rivals, before being ousted by his younger brother Hakon, who had been brought up at the court of King AEthelstan (died 939) in England. Erik made his way to Orkney, where he immediately commanded the loyalty of the joint earls, Arnkel and Erlend, sons of Einarr ('fl'. 900). He was then placed in charge of the Northumbrian kingdom by AEthelstan, and fixed his residence at York. Having been displaced by Olaf Sihtricson during Edmund's reign, he undertook plundering expeditions in the neighbouring lands, but was eventually killed in battle against Olaf, along with the Orkney earls and five other princes. The sagas record the names of two of his children: Ragnhild, whom the thirteenth-century 'Orkneyinga Saga' portrays as a power-hungry schemer who married three earls of Orkney in succession, and Harald Grafeld (Harald Greycloak) (died 'c'.970), who became king of Norway. 
A funeral lay for Erik, 'Eiriksmal', reputedly written at Gunnhild's instigation soon after he was killed, is included in the saga 'Fagrskinna'. Only the opening fragment, in which the god Odin welcomes Erik into Valhalla, survives. Erik also appears in 'Egils saga', as the enemy of the famous psychopath and poet Egill Skallagrimsson. When he came before Erik at York, Egill was allowed to redeem his head after he eulogized the king in the praise poem 'Hofudlausn' ('The head-saver'). Notwithstanding this kingly act of clemency, the Icelandic texts generally give Erik a bad press, probably because of their antipathy towards centralized royal authority rather than through any reliance on genuine historical tradition. They are largely responsible for his enduring reputation for ferocious barbarism, cataloguing as they do a career of plunder and homicide remarkable even among tenth-century vikings. The contemporary evidence suggests that in fact Erik was no more violent than other kings and warlords of the time. 
Lacking a historical basis, the saga's stories add no reliable information to Erik's biography, but there are hints that not all of them are entirely fictional. Although it receives no support from the annals, a link between Erik and the famous AEthelstan became current relatively early. The life of St Catroe, written 'c'.1000 by a monk who apparently knew the saint, recounts Catroe's journey, to be dated apparently to 939-40, from his native Strathclyde to the continent, visiting on the way a King Erich in York and King Edmund in England. The dating indicates that King Erich could have been appointed by AEthelstan, and his presence at York would fill a gap in the sources for Northumbria between the battle of 'Brunanburh' in 937 and the advent of Olaf Guthfrithson in 940; there is, however, no explicit statement that this Erich is identical with Erik Bloodaxe. Tales of Erik's plundering Strathclyde, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland may be less fanciful, since it is likely, as the sagas report, that he did not dare to deprive the Northumbrians of their land in order to reward his followers, and had to turn to viking raids instead. It should be noted, however, that no Irish source reports raiders answering to the description of Erik and his men at this period. 
Erik Bloodaxe embodies the contrasts that characterize the modern perception of the viking world, and it is in this that his true significance lies. He was a warrior chieftain in fact and, even more so, in fable. He was a viking leader from the Norwegian royal dynasty, apparently opposed equally to the Dublin-York dynasty of Scandinavian rulers, represented by Olaf Sihtricson, and to the West Saxon kings. The range of his activity, straddling the North Sea and the entire north British mainland, would only be enhanced if he can be identified with the 'Eiric, king of the Isles' mentioned in the twelfth-century Irish saga 'Caithreim Chellachain Chaisil'. Despite the decided heathenism of 'Eiriksmal', he was clearly not antipathetic towards Christianity: he is said to have given Catroe a favourable reception, and his name appears, as 'Eiric rex Danorum' ('Erik, king of the Danes') -- probably indicating the origin of many of his subjects -- in the contemporary commemoration book ('Liber vitae') of the church of Durham. This is a surprising memorial for one whose funeral lay has Odin praise him 'because he has reddened his sword in many a land... and carried a bloodstained blade' ('Eiriksmal', 97). 


@@@@@


doc= 49266


Olaf Tryggvason (d. 999), king of Norway, first appears in 994 when in the company of Swein Forkbeard (died 1014) he failed to conquer London and afterwards raided Essex, Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire. His first appearance in England has often been dated to 991 and he has been made a participant in the famous battle of Maldon in that year. This story is, however, based on an entry in the A text of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', which conflates information relating to both 991 and 994. Olaf had probably joined Swein on his expedition of 994 because Swein exercised the traditional Danish overlordship of Norway. While the army was wintering in Southampton, however, AEthelred II (died 1016) persuaded Olaf to enter his service. A treaty, known as II AEthelred, was set up to regulate the relationship between the English and the Norwegians while they were in England. The deal also involved Olaf's baptism at Andover and an agreement that Olaf would return to Norway and never return to England with hostile intentions. AEthelred no doubt meant to make mischief between Olaf and Swein, since stirring up problems for Swein in Scandinavia would help keep him away from England. 
In later Norwegian historiography Haraldr inn Harfagri 
(Harald Finehair; died 'c'.930)
was regarded as the founder of Norway, which was called his 'allod' (his personal estate). Legitimacy therefore required descent from him. Olaf is duly presented as a great-grandson of Harald but the account of his childhood and youth given by the Icelanders Oddr Snorrason ('c'.1200) and Snorri Sturluson (1179-1241), based on Oddr, is conventional hagiography showing that ideas about his origin were very dim indeed. The story is that Olaf's father, Tryggvi Olafsson, was killed before Olaf was born. His mother then fled to Sweden, and, having been separated from her, Olaf first spent six years as a slave in Estonia and later came to the court of King Vladimir (died 1008) at Kiev. At the age of eighteen he left, intending to return to Norway but only reaching Poland where he married a princess and governed half the kingdom for three years. He then left the Baltic and went raiding in western Europe, finally marrying the sister of Olaf Sihtricson (died 981), king of Dublin. In reality Olaf must have been a chieftain of some standing in Norway when he accompanied Swein to England. His descent from Harald is a postulate made in the twelfth century when the myth of Harald Finehair was constructed. 
On his return to Norway Olaf based himself in Trondelag and secured recognition as king after the murder of Hakon, earl ('jarl') of Hlathir. He extended his influence to all coastal Norway, partly through alliances with leading magnates like Erling Skjalgsson, who was married to Olaf's sister. Olaf is credited with a determined effort to evangelize Norway by the sword, although the eleventh-century chronicler Adam of Bremen described him as a pagan wizard. Efforts to organize the government of Norway and the appointment of 'lendmen' as his local representatives are also ascribed to him, but the basis for this is very slender and the role accorded him in the Christianization of Iceland is pure myth. The only tangible evidence of his government is a few coins struck in his name. On these the moneyer's name is Godwine, but this Anglo-Saxon moneyer did not work for Olaf any more than he did for Swein Forkbeard or Olof Skotkonung, king of Sweden, on whose coins his name also appears: the three kings simply imitated the same Anglo-Saxon coin type. 
Whatever its character Olaf's rule was too brief to leave permanent traces. He was killed fighting against Swein Forkbeard and Olof Skotkonung at the battle of Svold in 999 (a more probable date than the traditional 1000). According to legend he jumped into the sea from his ship, the 'Long Serpent', when the battle was lost, in order not to fall into the hands of his enemies. Danish overlordship over Norway was re-established until challenged by King Olaf Haraldsson (died 1029). 


@@@@@


doc= 49268


Ironside, Isaac (1808-1870), Chartist, was born at Pool Green, Masborough, near Rotherham, on 17 September 1808, the son of Samuel Ironside, clerk at an ironworks and lay preacher at Queen Street Congregational Church. After the family moved to Sheffield in 1809, Ironside was educated at Queen Street Sunday school and the Gibraltar Street Lancasterian school. At the age of twelve he was apprenticed as a stove-grate fitter, then worked at Longden and Walker's Phoenix foundry. He continued his education at John Eadon's night school and the Sheffield Mechanics' and Apprentices' Library, and won a mathematics prize awarded by the 'Edinburgh Review'. In 1833 Ironside joined the accountancy and estate business firm that his father had founded the previous year. From the 1840s he was in complete control of the business and by the end of his life he had become a wealthy and successful accountant and sharebroker, with offices at 40 Queen Street. 
Ironside began a long career in Sheffield politics in 1830, when he moved an amendment at a whig political meeting demanding universal suffrage, the ballot, and annual parliaments. The following year he joined the Sheffield Political Union and became the unpaid campaign secretary for the local radical candidate T. A. Ward. Despite the drift of his politics, Ironside collaborated closely with middle-class Liberals in establishing the Sheffield Mechanics' Institute in 1832. However, by September 1838, when he appeared at a Chartist meeting in Paradise Square, Ironside was demanding the franchise as a prelude to the disestablishment of the church, repeal of the corn laws, nationalization of the banks, the establishment of agrarian colonies, and national education. 
Increasingly immersed in Chartism and socialism, at a Chartist meeting in September 1838 Ironside proposed the erection of agrarian communities and, on 17 March 1839, joined Robert Owen in opening the Hall of Science, Buckingham Street. In 1840 Ironside published 'Brindley and his Lying Braggadocio', a bitter attack on the acerbic Christian controversialist John Brindley; his increasing scepticism of orthodox religion had already ensured his dismissal as honorary secretary of the mechanics' institute library the previous year. Although soon disillusioned with orthodox Owenism, Ironside retained his interest in the Hall of Science, and launched the Workers' Educational Institute there in 1847; he continued his passion for education by helping raise the new mechanics' institution on Surrey Street in 1848. That year he took his 'Address to the French Provisional Government' (a fusion of Chartist and Owenite aspirations) to Paris and, returning bearded, vowed never to shave until social justice had been achieved in Britain. 
Ironside was one of two Chartists elected to the town council in 1846 and remained a councillor until 1868, first sitting for Ecclesall ward and latterly for Nether Hallam. He built up an ultra-radical grouping, calling itself the central democratic party, which numbered twenty-two by November 1849 and which forced several debates on the 'Charter' and national education. On the practical side, Ironside established a health committee and, in 1848, gained council backing for the erection of a model workhouse farm at Hollow Meadows, near Sheffield, which by 1854 had seen 22 acres of wasteland reclaimed and farmed. 
Inspired by the works of Toulmin Smith, Ironside successfully started experiments in anarchist political education. Central to the scheme was the creation of 'wardmotes', local parliaments attended by interested citizens. It was through the wardmotes' approval that Ironside, as chair of Sheffield's highway board in 1852-4, caused the town's streets to be paved and the first deep sewers to be laid, signalling his continued Owenite belief in environmental influences on character formation. 
Ironside helped found the 'Sheffield Free Press' in 1851 and through its pages he led the support of the controversial Russophobe ex-diplomat David Urquhart. He also published a pamphlet entitled 'The Question; is Mr Urquhart a Tory or a Radical?' (1856). This lost him much local popular support and prestige, as did the opposition to his unsuccessful attempt to get Toulmin Smith elected to parliament for Sheffield in 1852. He remained involved with the foreign affairs committee (established in 1855) until his death, pressing his Urquhartist agenda and publishing 'The Part of France and Russia in the Surrender of the Right of Search' in 1866. His only other work, 'Trades Unions: an Address', a defence of union rights, appeared the following year. 
Ironside died after a long illness on 20 August 1870 at his Sheffield home, Alma Grange, Carr Road, Walkley, and was buried in Sheffield general cemetery. With his wife, Elizabeth, who died in 1867, Ironside had four daughters (including Una, who lived on at Carr Road). 


@@@@@


doc= 49269


Einarr, earl of Orkney (fl. early 890s-930s), magnate, was the youngest son of Earl Rognvald of More (died 'c'.894) and a concubine, who was said (by Rognvald) to have been slave-born on both her father's and her mother's side. Torf-Einar was a contemporary nickname. Despite his disability of birth, Einarr was very successful in establishing the More dynasty's control in Orkney, and was the founder of the line of earls which continued in unbroken succession until the ending of the earldom in 1470. The story in 'Orkneyinga Saga' of Earl Rognvald's giving the earldom to his youngest son, expressing the unlikelihood that he would make much of a ruler, and saying that he was glad to get rid of him, is a variant of a common scene in Old Norse literature, the 'provocation scene'. Such a scene always foreshadows the young man in question proving himself to be the opposite of whatever has been predicted for him. Einarr promises that he will never return from the islands; he is given a fully equipped ship of twenty benches by his father, has the title of earl conferred on him by the king, and sails west for his first battle with the vikings who had been overrunning Orkney. 
The circumstances by which the earldom of Orkney was established over the northern isles are not very clear, despite the clarity of the saga account. The means by which Earl Rognvald of More gained control of them, and the nature of the grant he received from Harald Finehair, king of Norway, are very much in doubt, although the saga says that he was given Shetland and Orkney in compensation for the death of his son Ivar on the royal expedition to the British Isles. The 'Historia Norvegiae' of 'c'.1200 makes no mention of any royal grant, but records that the islands were conquered by Earl Rognvald entirely on his own account. However, according to the saga he gave the islands to his brother, Sigurd, who was a 'forecastleman' on King Harald's ship, and Sigurd was given the title of earl by the king. These repeated pieces of information about royal grants could very easily have been added by the thirteenth-century saga writer for contemporary reasons of political correctness. 
The rule in Orkney of Earl Sigurd the Mighty ('fl'. 'c'.870-890) was remembered as the first period of conquest and expansion on the north Scottish mainland, when the earl joined forces with Thorstein the Red, son of Olaf the White and Aud the Deepminded, to overrun 'the whole of Caithness and a large part of Argyll, Moray and Ross' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 5). The story of Sigurd's death after a successful battle with the Scottish earl Mael Brigte (Melbrikta) is a famous incident in the saga. This occurred after he was infected from a cut to his thigh caused by the projecting tooth of the dead Scot, which scratched him as the successful Norse warriors rode back home with their victims' heads strapped to their saddle bows. This incident is also interpreted as a standard literary motif, that of the 'avenging head', but this time with Celtic associations. The likelihood that Sigurd was killed on campaign is strengthened from the added detail (probably reliable) that he was buried in a mound on the banks of the River Oykel, the traditional southern boundary of Norse territory in north Scotland: perhaps indeed at Cyderhall ('Sigurdar haugr', 'Sigurd's Mound') in Sutherland. 
The period after Sigurd the Mighty's death seems to have been one of problems for the earldom: there was the rapid succession of Earl Sigurd's son Guttorm, who died after a year, and Earl Rognvald's son Hallad (given the title of earl by King Harald), who failed to do anything about controlling the vikings who were raiding the islands and Caithness at the time. He gave up his earldom and retired back to Norway as a 'common landholder' ('hauldr'). So Einarr was faced with the task of rescuing the family's possession of the islands, and a skaldic verse records his killing two Danish vikings: 'after that he took over the island territories and became a great leader', in the words of the saga, which goes on to attempt to explain his nickname, declaring (erroneously) that he 'was the first man to dig peat for fuel' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 7). The unreliable nature of this explanation is clear when it is said that he did this at Torfnes in Scotland, which is in Easter Ross (Tarbat Ness), an area with which Einarr had no recorded connection at all. This unsatisfactory linking of nickname with placename shows clearly that by 'c'.1200 it was quite unknown why the earl was called Torf-Einar. 
The saga writer derived most of his information from the five skaldic verses composed by Einarr himself about his contest with Halfdan Long-Leg, the son of Harald Finehair. Relations between the More family and the sons of Harald had deteriorated into a feud, which climaxed in the contest between Einarr and Halfdan, who managed to set himself up as king in the islands for a period. Einarr's victory, and ceremonial killing of Halfdan as an offering to Odin, is expressed in the verses as being his revenge for Halfdan's murder of his father, Rognvald -- revenge that his brothers had failed to exact. The 'blood-eagling' of Halfdan, described in detail by the saga writer, may derive from his misunderstanding of skaldic terminology. The verse certainly suggests that Halfdan was buried under a stone cairn (possibly in North Ronaldsay). 
Einarr's entrenched position in Orkney meant that King Harald was unable to dislodge him in a succeeding expedition to avenge Halfdan's murder, although the king imposed a fine of 60 gold marks on the islands, which may be the only reliable fact to be gleaned from the negotiation, recorded in variant forms in different sagas. The incident was later remembered as the occasion when the Orkney farmers lost control of their family lands (their 'odal'), which they resigned to the earl, who paid the whole fine. It was also interpreted later as being the occasion when the earl lost his own right to his family 'odal' and held his earldom 'in fee' from the king. It is certainly the first of many recorded agreements between king and earl, and was looked back to later as forming a landmark in the formal association of Orkney with Norway. 
It was known in the later middle ages that Einarr 'be lang tyme brukit the said Erildome, habundand in mycht and riches' ('Genealogy of the earls', 75). He seems to have been unchallenged for the remainder of his rule, and 'died in his bed' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 8), leaving three sons. His own successes in establishing his rule in the islands made him a worthy progenitor of the earldom dynasty which he firmly established, despite his slave-born mother. He is described as being tall and ugly, and was moreover one-eyed, though 'still the most keen-sighted of men' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 7): does this personal trait give a hint of Odin's mark on the one earl who has some pagan association in 'Orkneyinga Saga'? 


@@@@@


doc= 49270


Sigurd (II) Hlodvisson (d. 1014), earl of Orkney, is called Digri ('the Stout') in 'Orkneyinga Saga' (composed 'c'.1200). The same epithet is given to King Olaf Haraldsson (St Olaf), and carries the connotation of 'powerful warrior'. The genealogy of the earls of Orkney, compiled 'c'.1420, describes him as 'robustus ac corpolentis, magnus et strenuissimus bellifer' (in the Scots translation 'the wicht and corpolent, ane grete and maist stowt battellare'). He was remembered as 'a great chieftain [who] ruled over several dominions' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 11), although he was not counted among the three most powerful earls (Sigurd (I), Thorfinn (II), and Harald Maddadson). 
Son of Earl Hlodver and of Eithne, daughter of King Kjarval (Cerball) of Osraige in Ireland, Sigurd had interests in the west, and is said to have gone on viking expeditions every summer, 'plundering in the Hebrides, Scotland and Ireland'. He eventually met his death striving to win power in the Norse kingdom of Dublin. Initially he was concerned to establish earldom authority over the north mainland of Scotland, which had been hard to maintain since the conquests of Earl Sigurd inn Riki (Sigurd the Mighty) in the late ninth century. He was challenged by a Scottish 'earl' called Finnleik (Finnlaech) to fight at Skitten Mire in Caithness, where his uncle Earl Liot Thorfinsson had fought a battle previously (there is a possibility that this is a mistaken reference to the earlier battle). Already at this date the earl had to persuade the Orkney farmers to support his campaign in Caithness, and did so by 'giving them back their land-rights'. This is a very interesting reference to the evident disagreement between earls and farmers over the status of their lands. It was believed that even in the time of Einarr (Torf-Einarr) in the early tenth century the farmers had lost their udal right over their lands to the earl. Their success in winning it back from Sigurd indicates the power of the farmers to bargain when the earl requested military service outside the island earldom. There is no reason to doubt that the status of their lands was a point of dispute with the earl, although whether the information that it was negotiated over in this way can be relied on, is unprovable. 
Sigurd was successful in his campaigns on the north Scottish mainland, remembered as being 'powerful enough to defend Caithness against the Scots', who at this date must have been the mormaers of Moray. Indeed, 'Njals saga' claims that he also dominated 'Ross and Moray, Sutherland and the Dales', which suggests much wider-ranging conquests. The memory of his victory at Skitten Mire is bound up with the legends about his raven banner, woven for him by his mother, with magical properties that brought victory to the man before whom it was carried, but death to the man who carried it. At the battle of Skitten Mire the earl lost three standard-bearers, but none the less won the battle. Sigurd's ambitions clearly extended further south and west than Caithness and evidence for an alliance with Earl Gilli of Coll (recorded only in 'Njals saga'), as well as the probable imposition of ounceland units in the Western Isles at this date, suggest that he exercised some control in this locality. 
The information devoted to Sigurd in the main Icelandic text of 'Orkneyinga Saga' is surprisingly brief for such a famous warrior. There is in additional texts the well-known story of his forced conversion by Olaf Tryggvason, who was returning to his homeland to claim the throne of Norway from his campaigns in England in 995, an incident much recounted in saga history. The two met at Osmundwall, in south Hoy, where Sigurd was taken aboard Olaf's ship and baptized, handing over his son Hundi as a hostage. The saga's statement that 'all Orkney embraced the faith' is probably overstated, although one version adds that priests were left behind in the islands by Olaf. As Sigurd renounced his allegiance to Olaf after his son Hundi died, his Christian allegiance may also have wavered. None the less the fact that he married the daughter of Malcolm, king of Scots (probably Malcolm II, who ruled from 1005 to 1034), means that he must have been considered an acceptable Christian ally by the established dynasty of the southern kingdom. This is the first recorded alliance of an earl with the Scots and it suggests that the earl and the king saw mutual advantages in being united against the dynasty of Moray established between them. Thorfinn (II) Sigurdson was the famous son of this alliance, younger than his three half-brothers Sumarlidi, Brusi, and Einarr, who must have resulted from one or more previous liaisons. 
These three elder sons were left in charge of the earldom when Sigurd embarked on his last campaign in Ireland in 1014 (the date of 1005 is erroneously given in 'Orkneyinga Saga'). This was in support of Sihtric Silkenbeard, king of Dublin, in his struggle with Brian Boruma, king of Leinster, for continued control of eastern Ireland. Sigurd's ambitions (as recalled in 'Njals saga') included the hand of Sihtric's mother in matrimony and the kingship of Ireland. The battle of Clontarf is recorded in many different sources to supplement 'Orkneyinga Saga''s meagre information. Passages in 'Njals saga' describe scenes at Sigurd's Orkney residence before the earl left for Ireland, as well as fully recounting the drama of the battle action at Clontarf, just outside Dublin, on Good Friday (23 April) 1014, when the earl was forced to carry his bewitched raven banner, at the cost of his own life, and the collapse of his Irish ambitions. On this occasion the banner did not bring victory to the army before whom it was borne, and the result in several respects foretold the end of an era. 


@@@@@


doc= 49271


Thorfinn (II) Sigurdson (c.1009-c.1065), earl of Orkney, was called inn Riki ('the Mighty') in later sources and remembered as being the most powerful of all the earls of Orkney; he was also the first to be recorded as having been granted the earldom of Caithness in the kingdom of Scotland. He was the son of Sigurd (II), earl of Orkney, and of a daughter of 'Malcolm, king of Scots', most probably Malcolm II ('r'. 1005-1034). He was born 'c'.1009, as he is said to have been 'only five years old' in 'Orkneyinga Saga' when his father was killed at the battle of Clontarf in 1014: he was then living with his grandfather, Malcolm, king of Scots, who gave him Caithness and Sutherland, with the title of earl, 'and appointed counsellors to govern with him' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 13). 
Despite his Scottish upbringing Thorfinn became thoroughly immersed in the late viking world of the Norse settlements around the northern and western coasts of Scotland, which had been raided and conquered by his ancestors. He built on the successes of his father and maintained a maritime 'empire' stretching from Shetland and Orkney to the southern Hebrides, even including Man (and 'a large realm in Ireland' if the saga is to be believed). This was the result of his successful career as a warrior and leader of a war-band ('hird') whose generosity is lauded by his court skald Arnorr Earls' Poet (Arnorr Jarlaskald). Administrative and tax-raising structures (as seen in the territorial units of ouncelands) in the northern isles and the Hebrides were probably developed by him, and the saga writer provides the significant information that after his pilgrimage to Rome Thorfinn gave up piracy and 'devoted all his time to the government of his people and country and to the making of new laws' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 31). He certainly made Birsay in Orkney his chief residence and established the seat of the first bishop there, building Christchurch, 'a fine minster'. It is to this period of time that the full ecclesiastical establishment of churches and priests in Orkney, Shetland, and Caithness can be attributed. Thorfinn's own piety is beyond doubt, as is evident from his pilgrimage to Rome. Neither liaisons nor offspring of any union is mentioned other than with his wife, Ingebjorg 
(Earls' Mother; died 'c'.1070)
, daughter of Finn Arnason of Norway, and one of their sons is named, significantly, Paul (the first Christian name in the earldom family). 
The preliminary phase of Thorfinn's rise to eminence concerned his struggle with his half-brothers, Sumarlidi, Brusi, and Einarr, to gain a share of the earldom of Orkney which they had divided between them on the death of their father in 1014. After Sumarlidi's death Thorfinn claimed his third of Orkney, although it was argued by Einarr that Caithness and Sutherland -- which Thorfinn held -- constituted over a third of their father's earldom. With the support of Thorkel Amundson, an Orkney farmer who fostered Thorfinn when young, he succeeded in acquiring one-third of the islands. The rivalry with Earl Einarr came to a head at a feast at Thorkel's farm at Sandwick, when the earl was murdered by Thorkel (recorded in the Icelandic annals in the early fourteenth century as having taken place in 1020). These events gave the king of Norway, Olaf Haraldsson, an opportunity to intervene in the affairs of the earldom to his own advantage, and there are some highly imaginative scenes, described in the section of 'Orkneyinga Saga' devoted to Thorfinn, of the occasion when the king announced the terms of the agreement made with Brusi and Thorfinn over Earl Einarr's third of the earldom. The Icelandic annals describe this as Thorfinn and Brusi giving the Orkneys into the power of King Olaf. Later, when Olaf was exiled from Norway (1028-30), Thorfinn managed to reverse the balance of power and secure two-thirds of the islands, and Brusi kept one. 
During the negotiations with Olaf, Brusi had to leave behind as a hostage his son, 
At some point during this period (the chronology of the saga account does not permit any specific date to be hazarded), Thorfinn faced attack from a powerful ruler of Scotland, called in the saga Karl Hundason, who claimed Caithness and expected tribute to be paid for it by the earl. The claim on Caithness, and the location of the movement of the armies of both Earl Thorfinn and King Karl around the Moray Firth make it very likely that the Scottish rival was a ruler of the province of Moray, rather than of the southern mac Alpin dynasty: that he may have been Macbeth has often been suggested, though never entirely proven. He was clearly a famous warrior and the battles fought with Thorfinn -- one in Orcadian waters, off Deerness, and the other near Karl's own home base at 'Torfness' (possibly Tarbat Ness in Easter Ross) -- were close-won victories for Thorfinn. The descriptions of them and of Thorfinn, accoutred with 'a golden helmet on his head, a sword at his waist, wielding a great spear in both hands' are highlights of the saga narrative and among the best in Icelandic literature. 'People agree that he went ahead of all his troops', and Arnorr Earls' Poet sang of the encounter: '
Well the red weapons 

fed wolves at Tarbat Ness, 

young the commander who created that Monday-combat. 

Slim blades sang there 

south on Oykel's bank. 
('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 20)' After this encounter Karl disappears from the saga narrative, which (if he can be identified with Macbeth) could be accounted for by his movement south on the take-over of Duncan's kingdom. Such a unique turn of events created an unprecedented situation and might explain the succeeding description of Thorfinn's conquering raids as far south as Fife. 
The next dramatic scenario centres on the falling-out of the two earls, Thorfinn and Rognvald, over the third of the earldom that had belonged to Earl Einarr. Thorfinn's resources were stretched by the arrival of a relative by marriage, Kalf Arnason, who was fleeing from King Magnus, with 'a large following'. The earls came to blows at the naval battle of Roberry, off south Ronaldsay, which was decided when Kalf decided to put his 'six large ships' into Thorfinn's force. Rognvald was finally hunted down and killed on Papa Stronsay just before Christmas 1046, betrayed by the barking of his lap-dog as he hid among the rocks; he was buried on Papa Westray. This was after he had set Thorfinn's house (on the mainland of Orkney) on fire when the earl had made a dramatic escape, unnoticed by the attackers, through a wooden partition wall with Ingebjorg in his arms. The saga tells us that Rognvald's death 'was mourned by many' and that 'everyone agrees that of all the Earls of Orkney he was the most popular and gifted' (chap. 30). 
Thorfinn thereafter ruled the Orkneys unopposed; but presumably in expiation for his murder of Rognvald and at least thirty of his supporters he went on pilgrimage to Rome, where he had an audience with the pope 'and received absolution from him for all his sins' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 31). This famous journey included a visit to Swein Estrithson in Denmark and the emperor Heinrich III in Germany 'who gave him a warm welcome and many fine gifts' (ibid.). Thorfinn died 'towards the end of the reign of Harald Sigurdarson' (Harald Hardrada), that is 'c'.1065, and was buried at Christchurch, Birsay, Orkney, in 'the very church he had built' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 32). A foremost ruler of the Scandinavian world, Thorfinn's 'empire' fell apart at his death and his earldoms were divided between his two sons, Paul and Erlend ['see under 'Paul]. His widow, Ingebjorg, is said in 'Orkneyinga Saga' to have married Malcolm III Canmore, king of Scots: a liaison recorded in no other source, but which may have produced Malcolm's two eldest sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 49272


Harald Hardrada (1015-1066), king of Norway, was the son of the Norwegian petty king Sigurd Syr (Sigurd the Sow) and Asta Guthbrandsdottir, who had earlier been the wife of Harald Grenski 'from Grenland' (west of Oslo Fjord), with whom she had had a son, Olaf Haraldsson (St Olaf). In 1030 at the age of fifteen Harald fought in the battle of Stiklestad, in which his stepbrother was killed and Harald himself was wounded. After the battle he fled east to Sweden and thence went to Russia (Novgorod-Kiev) where he stayed for three or four years at the court of King Yaroslav (died 1054). 
Probably in 1034-5 Harald arrived in Constantinople where he entered the service of the Byzantine emperor. This service is described in a Byzantine source, from which it seems that Harald was a gifted soldier. He rose to command the emperor's special guard of Russians and Scandinavians (Varangians). Norse sources also describe Harald's contribution to the emperor's service, but much of the description of his battles in Asia, Africa, and Sicily is reminiscent of fables and sagas. None the less, the content is partly based in fact. Harald was at one point caught up in the conflict over the Byzantine imperial succession and he amassed a huge fortune in booty. His personal wealth in the end brought him into conflict with the emperor. In 1043 he was forced to flee Constantinople after first securing his riches. 
In 1043 Harald was again in Russia at the court of Yaroslav, whose daughter Elizabeth (Ellisif) he married in 1044. They had two daughters. In 1045 Harald made his way back to Scandinavia. His undisguised aim was to become the king of Norway, if necessary by waging war against the then king, Magnus Olafsson ('r'. 1035-47), Harald's own nephew and the son of Olaf Haraldsson. In preparation for such a war Harald began negotiations with Magnus's Danish enemy, Swein Estrithson, and the Swedish king who was Swein's ally. In the face of this threat Magnus tried to reach an understanding with Harald and in 1046 they agreed to share Norwegian royal power. The following year Magnus died and Harald became sole ruler of Norway. 
Harald's reign was of the greatest significance for the consolidation of a Norwegian kingdom, a development already under way but as yet incomplete. Among other things the inland areas to the east were more firmly annexed to the rest of the kingdom. Harald crushed all opposition to royal power and in general favoured the use of force to solve problems. He arranged for a parley with his chief domestic political opponents where, without provocation, he had them assassinated. If he thought it necessary he ravaged and burnt in Norway just as ruthlessly as he had done earlier during campaigns in the Mediterranean. He also had an autocratic, 'Byzantine' attitude towards the church. He came into conflict with the archbishop in Hamburg-Bremen, who had responsibility for the church in Scandinavia, because he refused to acknowledge his authority. When the archbishop protested by sending envoys, Harald is said to have replied that he knew no archbishop nor lord in Norway other than the king himself. 
Harald founded the dynasty of the later Norwegian kings through his son Olaf Haraldsson the Quiet ('b'. 'c'.1050), who was king from 1066 to 1093. Olaf's mother was Thora Thorbergsdottir, from one of Norway's most prominent families. They had a second son, Magnus ('c'.1049-1069), who ruled jointly with Olaf in the years immediately following their father's death (1066-9). 
As the successor to the throne of Magnus Olafsson, Harald pursued the claim to the kingdom of Denmark that Magnus had made since 1041-2. The claim was disputed by Swein Estrithson. Almost every summer Harald waged war in Denmark, but in 1064 he and Swein began peace negotiations, which resulted in each recognizing the other's kingdom. Similarly Harald claimed that, as the successor to the Danish kings, he had a legitimate claim to the English throne. The dispute over the succession in England in 1066 gave him the opportunity to try to fulfil his claim through an expedition -- the last really great viking raid. 
At the beginning of September 1066 the Norwegian fleet sailed for England via Shetland and Orkney, where they gathered significant reinforcements. They reached the mouth of the Tyne on about 10 September. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' puts the number of ships at 300. It seems that contact had been made well in advance between Harald and the exiled Tostig Godwineson, although it is unlikely that Tostig had gone to Norway to seek Harald, as both the Norman chronicles and the Norse sagas suggest. It seems more likely that communication had been established via emissaries, since Tostig returned to England in April 1066. When Harald landed at the Tyne, Tostig joined him and became his earl. 
The two allies' initial aim was to conquer Northumbria, but they were met by Harold Godwineson's earls Edwin and Morcar and on 20 September the two armies clashed at Fulford just outside York. Harald and Tostig won and Edwin and Morcar fled. A few days later on 24 September the citizens of York surrendered the town to Harald and Tostig. Harald began to load ships to continue his conquest further south. Meanwhile the Yorkshire thegns agreed that Harald would take hostages from the whole of Yorkshire. He awaited them with a large part of his army at Stamford Bridge, east of York, on 25 September. The choice of location could have been due to the fact that Harald had fortified the place or that he controlled the Derwent with his fleet. However, in the meantime Harold Godwineson had advanced from the south in a forced march with far stronger forces than Harald's and had the previous day arrived in Tadcaster. He attacked Harald and Tostig, taking them completely by surprise. Harold Godwineson won after a short but hard-fought battle, and both Harald and Tostig were killed. Later Olaf Haraldsson, who had remained with the ships during the battle, was allowed to take his father's body home to Norway. Among those that followed Olaf was the Englishman Skuli, head of a powerful Norwegian family, who in Norway was regarded as the son of Tostig. 


@@@@@


doc= 49273


Guthfrith (b. before 920, d. 934), another grandson of Ivarr, who had fought with Ragnall at the first battle of Corbridge and replaced Sihtric at Dublin late in 920. Guthfrith was soon driven out of York by King AEthelstan, but he returned to Dublin, where he remained king until his death in 934. Irish sources have a good deal of information concerning Guthfrith's adventures there, but little is known concerning his time at York, and no coins attributable to him have survived. 


@@@@@


doc= 49274


Middleton, Richard William Evelyn (1846-1905), political agent, was born in Putney, Surrey, on 16 February 1846, the younger son of Alexander Middleton (died 1846), Admiralty clerk, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Neave, secretary to the Royal Hospital, Chelsea; they had two sons and one daughter. After a private education Middleton entered the navy in 1860 at the age of thirteen. In January 1873 he was promoted navigating lieutenant and his last service posting was in 1876. In 1877 he married Emily Florence, daughter of Colonel J. W. Rickards, which marked his virtual retirement from service, though he remained on the active list until 1882. In that year he was appointed honorary secretary of the Point House Club, Blackheath, one of the first of a new kind of Conservative political club, and in 1883 he became Conservative agent for the West Kent constituency. His model of the type of full-time professional party agent was the Middlesex agent Wollaston Pym, who set new standards of assiduity and expertise. So impressively did Middleton perform in coping with the cumulatively intricate effects of the 'Corrupt Practices Act' of 1883, the third 'Reform Act' of 1884, and the 'Redistribution Act' of 1885, that, at the instance of the 'Kent gang' of party managers (Lord Abergavenny, Sir William Hart Dyke, and the chief whip, Aretas Akers-Douglas), he was in 1885 offered the post of principal agent and command of the party's 'out of doors' headquarters, Central Office, in succession to G. C. T. Bartley (1842-1910). 
Bartley, like his predecessor J. E. Gorst, had seen the principal agentship as a step in a tory democrat political career, and Central Office as a fulcrum for levering the party in a generally conformable democratic direction. Middleton possessed the invaluable attribute of having no political ambitions. He was an organizational technician of high competence with healthily modest notions of what central party organization of itself could achieve in shaping the course of elections. He was well aware of the extent to which his reputation for success in his profession depended on the advantageous turn for Conservatism in the terms of political trade of his times. A shift towards Conservatism in many middle- and lower-middle-class and artisan constituencies had been observable since 1868 and by the 1880s, with the emphasis given to suburban representation by the 'Redistribution Act', had become the most telling psephological fact of British politics. The complex registration arrangements left intact in 1884 by the third 'Reform Act' helped Middleton and his team of constituency agents to perfect their expertise in keeping registers tight and polls low, which in turn reinforced Conservative advantage. Nor was Middleton unwilling candidly to concede benefits accruing from unpopular or controversial Liberal policies: he declared that he was 'grateful' when Gladstone adopted home rule for Ireland; grateful also when Gladstone endorsed the Newcastle programme in 1891; and 'deeply grateful' when the Liberals attacked the House of Lords and took up the local veto on liquor licences. 
It is one thing to be offered advantages; it is quite another to have the wit to exploit them to optimum effect. It was Middleton's skill as an electioneering manager to optimize the prevailing benefits available to the Conservative Party in the epoch of unionism, empire, and what was widely deplored as the 'age of plutocracy'. Of businesslike habits, energetic yet tactful in his dealings with the constituencies, urbane in his relationship with both superiors and subordinates, he was well prepared by his naval background to navigate the shoals and shallows and currents of new and uncharted political seas. Accorded the courtesy rank of captain and the colloquial sobriquet of Skipper, he worked harmoniously in trio with Akers-Douglas and with Salisbury's principal private secretary, Schomberg McDonnell (1861-1915), through whom he enjoyed direct access to the 'Old Man'. Middleton took 'great satisfaction' from having Salisbury's confidence, and Salisbury is recorded as declaring, 'Douglas and Middleton have never put me wrong.' 
At Central Office (then in St Stephen's Chambers, Westminster Bridge), cramped and 'squalid', with a 'surprisingly small' permanent staff, Middleton's managerial expertise reflected the emerging characteristics of the new age of 'mass' politics. Central Office eclipsed the whip's office as the hub of the Conservative machine. Salisbury's accolade on Middleton in 1896 as 'chief wire-puller of the party' was only half joking. In his comprehensive reorganization of the party's constituencies in 1886-7 Middleton erased the traditional demarcation between counties and boroughs. He dovetailed the National Union apparatus into his new decentralized regional system of divisional subagencies. He worked pertinaciously, on the other hand, to bring the Scottish and Irish organizations under his effective supervision. As honorary secretary of the union he kept a firm grip on it, arranging for his agents to be delegates 'ex officio' and setting one of his ablest subordinates, A. E. Southall, to run it from offices on the floor above Central Office as a propaganda medium. Middleton was always wary of the Primrose League as tending to amateurish meddling; he was wary also of the Liberal Unionists, with whom he dealt with strict propriety, fearful of what he held to be the weakly over-generous dispositions of Salisbury and, particularly, Balfour. He took a great interest in London county council politics and represented Dulwich on the council in 1898-9. He shrewdly kept fences well mended with the police and the drink trade, and solicitously cultivated the 'new journalism' represented most famously by the Harmsworths and the 'Daily Mail'. A criticism increasingly levelled at him within the party was his partiality for a type of Conservative candidate distinguished mainly by wealth and a ready 'generosity', who put himself entirely in the hands of his agent. 
Above all Middleton was concerned to raise the status of his agents by encouraging full-time, professionally qualified men to replace the old breed of part-time electioneering attorneys. He was instrumental in founding in 1891 the Society of Conservative Agents, and began the provision of superannuation and other benefits. To the historians of the Conservative agents, Elton Halliley and Arthur Fawcett, Middleton's was ever the 'revered and honoured name'. In 1894 he launched the Association of Conservative Clubs. 
The reputation of Middleton and Central Office -- already raised by their success in the 1892 election in blocking Gladstone's chances of a majority without Irish support -- was 'made' by the greater achievement in 1895 of gaining a small but telling overall Conservative majority within the Unionist coalition. Lord Londonderry hailed Middleton on behalf of the National Union as the 'brilliant agent', who had done 'more than anybody else to secure the great victory we have achieved'. Fears that financial exigency and his large family (five sons and two surviving daughters) might lead to Middleton's being lured away by business interests led to a subscription being raised in the party. On 19 March 1896, at the Constitutional Club, Salisbury presented Middleton with a cheque for $10,000 subscribed by over 4000 admirers in 'acknowledgement of eleven years, energetic and successful organizing as head agent of the Conservative party'. 
With the unprecedented 'double' of Unionist triumph in the 'khaki' election of 1900, and with Conservatism's electoral ascendancy so manifest in the metropolitan-home counties-Lancashire axis, Middleton's reputation attained its ultimate lustre. That much was fragile in that ascendancy was soon to be exposed. It became clear also that Central Office's efficiency depended too much on Middleton's force of character and personal assiduity; his principal agentship faithfully reflected the weaknesses as well as the strengths of the era of Salisburian Conservatism. Like Salisbury, however, Middleton did not survive to witness the catastrophe of 1906. His stockily energetic appearance had for long belied uncertain health. After a series of breakdowns he was obliged to retire in July 1903, and he died at 6 Grand Parade, Eastbourne, after a long illness, on 26 February 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 49275


Nevill, William, first marquess of Abergavenny (1826-1915), party manager, was born on 16 September 1826 at Longford Hall, Shropshire, the eldest son and heir of William Nevill, the fourth earl of Abergavenny (died 1868), of Eridge Castle, Frant, near Tunbridge Wells, and of Nevill Hall, Abergavenny, and Caroline, daughter of Ralph Leeke, of Longford Hall, Shropshire; he had one brother and three sisters. From his father's succession to the peerage in 1845 until his own succession in 1868, he was styled Viscount Nevill. He was educated at Eton College. In 1848 he married Caroline (died 1892), daughter of Sir John Vanden-Bempde-Johnstone, second baronet, of Hackness Hall, Scarborough, with whom he had five sons and five daughters. In 1849 he was commissioned in the 2nd Life Guards. 
After early years of conventional country and sporting pursuits Nevill developed a consuming interest in working to restore the fortunes of the Conservative Party as it struggled, during the leadership of Lord Derby and Benjamin Disraeli, to regain the confidence of the country after the split under Peel in 1846. Nevill never sought a Commons seat nor much figured in a public role in the Lords; he had no ambition to influence or participate in decisions of high policy. He remained consistently through his long life content to work in the background of politics as organizer, fund-raiser, adviser, and manager-activist for the Conservative cause in the constituencies. He took to heart Disraeli's point that the Conservative Party depended much more than the Liberal on a comprehensive and efficient system of organization. In this 'backroom' sphere Nevill came to have an unrivalled reputation as the 'tory bloodhound' for his assiduous application to electioneering and raising the money to fund it. He was instrumental in founding the Junior Carlton Club in 1864; he was one of the group which started the 'Yorkshire Post' in 1866; he took over superintendence of the National Conservative Registration Association. He came to have a bond of friendship with and admiration for Disraeli, which was warmly reciprocated. 
Nevill was primarily responsible for moving Markham Spofforth out of the party's firm of legal advisers, Messrs Baxter, Rose, Norton & Co., to take over the party agency on the retirement of Philip Rose in 1859, and worked steadily with him until Spofforth was replaced by J. E. Gorst in 1870. With Gorst (party agent 1870-77, 1880-82), a rather prickly 'tory democrat', Abergavenny (as he had become) was never on easy terms; nor was he much at ease during G. C. T. Bartley's brief and troubled term (1883-5). W. B. Skene (1877-80) suited Abergavenny better, but it was not until the arrival at Central Office from Kent in 1885 of R. W. E. Middleton that the Conservative leaders found a principal agent who suited their requirements, and who collaborated smoothly with the concurrent chief whip, who had also 'come under Lord Abergavenny's eye', Aretas Akers-Douglas. 
Abergavenny's most important political insight was to see that the party 'out of doors' would become of immensely greater consequence with the semi-democratic 'occupier' borough franchise of the second 'Reform Act' of 1867. Despite a stubborn reluctance on Disraeli's part, Abergavenny pushed through the arrangements leading to the inauguration in November 1867 of the Conservative National Union, by which the multifarious Conservative local associations and societies were gathered together in permanent institutional form. It is altogether characteristic of Abergavenny's political covertness that Disraeli -- who ruthlessly snubbed that inauguration -- should none the less be credited with it as the genius of 'popular toryism'. Abergavenny followed through the logic of assimilating the provincial Conservative elites by founding in 1883 the Constitutional Club, which effectively in 1887 incorporated the Beaconsfield Club of 1879. He was by this time virtual manager of both the Carlton and Junior Carlton clubs. 
Abergavenny settled into a station of singular prestige in the innermost Conservative councils: the 'Grand Panjandrum'; the 'electioneering Warwick', 'grand seigneur' of the 'Kent gang' of party managers. He was principal trustee of the party fund; he was supreme promoter and vetter of patronage; he greatly assisted Lord Salisbury and Lord Randolph Churchill to come to terms in 1884. He was rewarded by Disraeli with a marquessate (of Abergavenny) in 1876 and by Salisbury with a Garter in 1886. He was lord lieutenant of Sussex from 1892 to 1905, and honorary colonel of the Kent and Sussex yeomanry regiments. 
An imposing yet genial aristocratic figure, Abergavenny made Eridge Castle a centre famed for party hospitality. He features in the various memoirs of his cousin by marriage, Lady Dorothy Nevill. After 1905 ill health obliged him to retire from active party service and he died at Eridge on 12 December 1915, in his ninetieth year, and was buried in the family vault in the church at Eridge Green. 'The Times' marked his death as worthy of a news item in its own right, not a mere obituary. 


@@@@@


doc= 49277


Picts, kings of the (act. c.300-c.900), were the rulers of a now vanished people or peoples who bore a living name in what is now Scotland for some six hundred years. 
That name, from the Latin 'Picti', first recorded in 297, is commonly regarded as derived from the painting or tattooing of their skins practised by those who lived north of the Roman wall, but this derivation cannot be regarded as certain. Roman authors in the fourth century used it in a general way to denote un-Romanized and potentially hostile natives of north Britain. Evidence for later usage comes mainly from Irish sources. Irish invention is evident in Bede's account ('c'.730) of Picts as a single ethnic group. Pseudo-historical texts that were probably extant in the ninth century say that the Pictish country comprised seven regions named after sons of an eponymous Cruithne. Some of the names are given in Irish form, and Cruithni, or related forms, was by that time the equivalent in Irish of the Latin Picti. The seven regions cover the eastern side of mainland Britain as far south as the Firth of Forth. (The western country north of the Firth of Clyde must have ceased to be 'Pictish' by the fifth century, having passed into the orbit of Dal Riata.) It has been argued that more than one native language left traces in the Pictish country. The one that Bede knew about was a Celtic language akin to southern British (Welsh), or perhaps more closely to Gaulish. To modern eyes the country seems best distinguished by its symbolic decorative art, especially stone carving. 
It was said that each of the Pictish regions was, or had been, a kingdom. Kings of Fortriu, roughly equatable with the south of modern Perthshire, are so entitled in annals from the late seventh century onwards, and one king of Atholl is named in 739. 
The names and reign lengths of sixty or seventy Pictish kings are given in regnal lists. The lists are the sole authority for the first thirty kings or so. Most of these must be treated as mythical rather than historical. In the late sixth century, however, the deaths of Pictish kings begin to appear in annal collections, especially the annals of Ulster, while between about 670 and 740 Pictish information may be ascribed to an Iona annal source, and may have more value than in the preceding period, in which annalists may have relied on lists for their chronology. 
Neither lists nor annals show clearly the status of the kings they record. Late medieval copyists of the lists clearly believed that they were dealing with a single series of overkings. Some of the listed kings did undoubtedly have such a status, and the title king of Picts ('rex Pictorum' or 'ri Cruithentuaithe') may have been meant to indicate overkingship; but it is noteworthy that most instances of the title in the annals of Ulster occur before 670, and are perhaps not independent of lists. 
A peculiarity of Pictish regnal succession, as reflected in the lists and annals, is well known. The kings are normally identified as 'son of' ('mac') a named parent. With a few possible exceptions the parent's name is certainly masculine. Yet, until late in the eighth century, no father appears also as king, and in most cases the king's identity in terms of kinship is unknown. This has been commonly regarded as consistent with a matrilineal system in which a king could be succeeded by a uterine brother (his mother's son) or by a nephew (his mother's daughter's son), but not by his own son, and so as according with Bede's belief that the Picts had a preference for matrilineal descent in the choice of their kings, and that the system was still being operated in his own day ('c'.730). Until late in the twentieth century scepticism on the subject could be dismissed as arising primarily from misconceptions, as that matriliny has been confined to very primitive peoples; that matriliny is the same thing as matriarchy (rule by females); and that in a matrilineal society fathers will be too insignificant to be remembered or named. But by the late 1990s more serious objections were coming to be advanced against Pictish matriliny, based upon both a comparative study of patrilinear succession among other early medieval peoples, and a closer examination of the nature and provenances of Bede's sources and the Pictish regnal list. As a result the notion of Pictish matriliny can no longer be taken for granted. 
The earliest Pictish king to be mentioned in the annals is Brude (or Bridei) mac Maelchon. The monastery of Iona was founded in his reign, which may sufficiently explain why the annalists ignored his thirty or so listed predecessors. Also, he was perhaps believed to have been the first Christian Pictish king. One possible predecessor is in fact named in the annals. Four years before the death of Brude they enter the death of 'Cennalath rex Pictorum' (579 in the annals of Ulster). The original list probably gave him a reign of four years to which one version added 'with Brude one year'. Nothing is known of him. It may be that he ought to have been inserted at the beginning, not the end, of Brude's reign. 
Brude was credited with the round figure of a thirty-year reign. Twenty-six years before his death the annals of Ulster, under 557, note succinctly an event for which Brude was no doubt famous: 'Flight [Latin 'fuga'] before Maelchon's son'. A later annalist described it more explicitly in Irish: 'Flight of Scots ['do Albanchaib'] before Maelchon's son king of Picts' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.21). A second entry in the same source replaces 'fuga' with Irish 'immirge', meaning 'migration, shift of ground', suggesting that Scots from Argyll had been frustrated in an attempted expansion eastwards. 
An obvious route for Scottish expansion was by the Great Glen and down Loch Ness. Adomnan of Iona, writing 'c'.700, associates Brude solely with the neighbourhood of the River Ness, but Brude was certainly king of more than a single region. A hundred years after his death the centre of Pictish monarchy seems to have been much further south. 
One group of Pictish lists (A, B, C) contains matter relating to the church of Abernethy, an undoubtedly ancient site on the south side of the Tay just west of the modern Perthshire-Fife border. It attributes the foundation to a predecessor of Brude, 


@@@@@


doc= 49278


Dal Riata, kings of (act. c.500-c.850), rulers in Scotland, were the lords of a realm whose name was also given to an ancient small kingdom, situated in the north-east corner of Antrim, northern Ireland, and named from the 'dal' ('division', primarily in the sense of people rather than territory) of Rete -- a mythical ancestor. 
Traditionally a colony of the Dal Riata settled in Britain, probably before 500, and during several generations the two territories, though separated by 13 miles of sea, formed a single kingdom with its centre of power in Britain. The link was dissolved, perhaps in the time of Domnall Brecc (d. 642/3), but 'c'.700 the Dal Riata in Britain were still, to Adomnan, 'the Irish [Latin 'Scoti'] of Britain', and long afterwards their kings were counted among the overkings of Irish provinces. The eastern limit of their British realm, separating the Scots from the Picts, was 'the mountains of the spine of Britain' ('Life of Columba', 2.46), that is, Drumalban. The northern and southern limits cannot be defined so clearly, but the popular equation of Dal Riata with Argyll is probably not far wrong. The historical kings of the Dal Riata were derived by genealogists from two brothers, Fergus and Loarn (or Lorne), the sons of Erc. Most were descended from Fergus's grandsons, Comgall and Gabran, and ruled territories which included Cowal and Kintyre. The descendants of Lorne ('cenel Loairn') further north had a territory larger than modern Lorne; for some forty years, before and after 700, their kings successfully disputed the overkingship. 
A regnal list, versions of which are still extant, began with 


@@@@@


doc= 49279


Oengus mac Forgusso (d. 761), king of Picts, was also called Angus; both names are Celtic and have Pictish equivalents, Onuist and U(u)rguist. The name of his father, Forgus, however, is unrelated to the later name form Fergus. Since Oengus's brother, who succeeded him, is called king of Fortriu in 763, it may be supposed that Oengus also was primarily king of that Pictish province ['see 'Picts, kings of the]. In 724 the king Nechtan, Derile's son, had received 'clericatus' (probably 'the monastic habit') and relinquished the kingship, perhaps unwillingly. There then followed five years of conflict. The first contestants for the kingship are named simply as Drust and Alpin, possibly Nechtan's nephews. In 728 Oengus, Forgus's son, now heard of for the first time, intervened. After a series of battles in which Drust was killed and Alpin driven out, Nechtan was apparently reinstated for some months of 729. But the end result was that Oengus became overking. His reign, however, was reckoned from 731, if the 'thirty years' of the king-lists is to be believed. Nechtan died in 732. 
In 731 comes the first mention of hostility between Oengus and a Talorg, son of Congus. The names suggest that Talorg's father was of royal Dal Riatan descent and his mother Pictish. He was engaged in battle, and routed, by a son of Oengus named Brude (or Bridei). It seems that Talorg possessed, or obtained soon after 731, support from Dungal, Selvach's son, the head of the Lorne family of Dal Riata, who had held and then lost the overkingship of the Dal Riata ['see 'Dal Riata, kings of]. In 733 Dungal dragged Brude out of sanctuary in Tory Island, and in the next year Oengus took his revenge. A fortress of Dungal's was destroyed and he fled, wounded, to Ireland, 'to be out of the power of Oengus' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.232). In the same year Talorg was handed over to the Picts by his own 'brother', possibly the Alpin (by then part-king of the Dal Riata) who had once held the Pictish kingship. The Picts put Talorg to death by drowning. It is to be supposed that Oengus's son Brude had been set at liberty. 
In this year 734 also a Talorgan, son of Drostan, was captured near the Lorne fortress of Dunollie. He too was drowned, by order of Oengus, five years later, when he is described as king of Atholl. Nothing more is known about him, unless he was the Talorg, son of Drostan, who had been imprisoned by Oengus's predecessor Nechtan in 713. 
In 736 Oengus led a major attack on Dal Riatan territory. He himself took the great fortress of Dunadd, burnt an unidentified 'Creic', and captured Dungal and his brother. A Dal Riatan army led by Dungal's cousin Muredach was routed by Oengus's brother Talorgan, probably at Ederline near Loch Awe, in a district called Calathros. Rock-carvings at Dunadd, it has been suggested, may be evidence of a formal take-over by Oengus. There is no other evidence of him as an acknowledged king of Dal Riata. An annal entry of his 'smiting of Dalriada' (Anderson, 'Kings and Kingship', 186) as late as 741 suggests that he may not have gained immediate control of the whole country in 736. 
Of the latter part of Oengus's reign little is known (the Iona annal source dries up about 740). In 750 a battle was fought between Picts and Britons at a place which Skene identified as Mugdock, a few miles east of Dumbarton, the Britons' chief fortress. Among the many Pictish dead was Oengus's brother Talorgan. In the same year an annalist in Ireland wrote of the 'ebbing of the sovereignty of Oengus' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.240), perhaps referring to the Picts' recent defeat, but more directly to beginnings of Dal Riatan resurgence. In 756 Oengus joined Eadberht, king of Northumbria, in a successful expedition against Dumbarton. 
Oengus died in 761. His son Brude had died in 736. A later Pictish king, Talorgen, son of Oengus, was possibly another son. A continuator of Bede's history says of Oengus that 'as a slaughtering tyrant he carried on his reign's beginning with bloody crime even to the end' (Anderson, 'Scottish Annals', 57). It is not possible to tell whether the Northumbrian writer had a special reason for this judgement, apart from what is known of Oengus's undoubtedly forceful career. 


@@@@@


doc= 49280


Joseph Gibbins senior (1756-1811), who became a button maker in Birmingham. As businessmen, Quakers were required to act with scrupulous honesty in all their business dealings and Joseph Gibbins was said to have given up his business in the 1790s when competition in the trade began to involve the selling of inferior shoddy goods to the public, a practice strictly forbidden within the Society of Friends. In 1797, reputedly with the financial help of Matthew Boulton, he went into business at the Rose Copper Works at Swansea, where he was a supplier to Boulton's Birmingham minting business. Gibbins appears to have first been manager and then treasurer of the company and, at his death in 1811, he owned 150 shares in the firm as well as shares in other metallurgical concerns. 
The Rose Copper Works had offices at both Swansea and Birmingham and from here Gibbins expanded his business interests to the banking sector. In 1804, in partnership with Samuel Galton and his son Samuel Tertius Galton, he set up a bank in Birmingham and in 1809 invested in the Swansea bank of Gibbins and Eaton. Joseph Gibbins and his wife, Martha (1758-1827), had numerous children. Among this large family were Joseph; Thomas, an industrialist who had visited Brazil in the early 1820s; Brueton, partner of Joseph Gibbins junior in the Birmingham Banking Company, founded in 1829; George; William; Martha; Margaret; and Mary. Of those members of the family possessing commercial interests, it is 


@@@@@


doc= 49282


Joseph Gibbins junior (1787-1870) who is best-known as a Quaker banker in the west midlands. 
In 1811 Joseph Gibbins succeeded to his father's share in the Swansea bank of Gibbins and Eaton, and by 1818 he had also acquired Joseph senior's share in the Birmingham bank of Gibbins, Smith, and Goode. In 1836 the House of Commons established the secret committee on joint stock banks and Joseph Gibbins junior was called by the committee as a witness. From his evidence it is clear that Gibbins had been active in bank promotion in the 1820s and early 1830s. In the course of his evidence he stated that he was the originator of the Birmingham Banking Company, founded in 1829; the Gloucester Banking Company, founded in 1831; and, in part, of the Hampshire Banking Company, founded in 1834. He also held a small interest in several other companies. 
Evidence of the direct financing of industry by banks in the early phases of Britain's industrialization is difficult to establish. However, the business activities of the younger Joseph Gibbins offer an example of the practice, commonly adopted by entrepreneurs, of borrowing from banks in which they held a partnership in order to finance their manufacturing interests. In 1813 Joseph purchased a chemical works at Melin Crythan in south Wales, a firm in which he was actively involved for the next five years. By 1826 the Melin Crythan works was in receipt of finance from the Banbury bank of Gillett and Tawney. In an age when the ability to raise borrowed capital relied heavily upon local credit networks the granting of direct finance to a firm at such a geographical distance appears unusual at first sight. However, a closer examination reveals the business connection between south Wales and Banbury to have been yet another link in the impressive religious and kinship network which was so much a part of the Quaker business world. 
In August 1821 Martha [


@@@@@


doc= 49283


Martha Gillett (1798-1882)], a sister of the younger Joseph Gibbins, married 


@@@@@


doc= 49285


William Tierney Robarts (1786-1820) of 49 Lower Grosvenor Street, Middlesex, the fourth son of Abraham, became involved in the family business. Having already been given $20,000 during his father's lifetime, he was left a further $10,000 at Abraham's death. He remained unmarried. As a merchant in Old Broad Street from 1810 he became a director of the family bank. He was also a director of the Bank of England between 1810 and 1820. As a member of parliament he enjoyed the favour of Earl Spencer, and sat for St Albans from 1818. Like his father and eldest brother he was a whig, and like them he remained neutral or even hostile to Catholic relief. He was a regular attender but was not known to have spoken in any debate. However, he voted against indemnifying ministers for their conduct in suspending habeas corpus but voted for borough and parliamentary reform. He died prematurely on 9 December 1820, leaving a sum of $25 each to his supporters in the constituency, anxious to be remembered in 'good opinion and esteem' (Thorne, 24) by friends and family alike. 
Although William occupied an important position in the family concern, 


@@@@@


doc= 49286


Legge, Sir Thomas Morison (1863-1932), factory inspector, was born on 6 January 1863 in Hong Kong, the younger son of Reverend James Legge (1815-1897), missionary and Chinese scholar, and his second wife, Hannah Mary Willetts, 'nee' Johnstone (1822-1881). He was educated at Dollar Academy, Clackmannanshire, at the City of London School, and at Magdalen College School, Oxford, to which he transferred when his father became the first professor of Chinese at Oxford University in 1876. In youth he suffered prolonged ill health following an attack of typhoid fever. Legge entered Oxford University as a non-collegiate student in 1882, migrating to Trinity College in 1884, where he graduated with second-class honours in the natural sciences (physiology) in 1886. He received his medical training at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and graduated MB BCh in 1890. He gained his DPH (Cambridge) in 1893, and MD (Oxford) in 1894. Legge then studied public health on the continent, investigating sanitary arrangements in several cities and publishing his findings in 'Public Health in European Capitals' (1896). The favourable reception accorded this work helped secure his appointment as secretary to the royal commission on tuberculosis (1896-8). Following publication of the commission's report he worked briefly under Arthur Newsholme who was then medical officer of health for Brighton. In 1898, at a time of mounting public concern about occupational ill health, he was appointed the first medical inspector of factories. His initial salary was $600 p.a. 
Legge's appointment to the factory inspectorate formed part of a shift in policy on industrial regulation, one aspect of which was the introduction of specialist inspectors. Before assuming his duties Legge had no particular knowledge of industrial disease, but he tackled his duties with great energy and soon became a leading expert in the field. His early work on lead poisoning established a reputation which grew to encompass most industrial diseases. A chief inspector of factories, D. R. Wilson, described him as 'not only the pioneer, but the greatest living authority on occupational disease'. Legge's professional achievement was to promote awareness of industrial health within the Home Office, to advance medical understanding of a number of occupational diseases, and to help raise health standards in the workplace. 
In 1902, at the annual meeting of the British Medical Association, Legge was honorary secretary of the section of industrial hygiene and diseases of occupation. Three years later he was vice-president of the same section. In the same year, 1905, he was Milroy lecturer at the Royal College of Physicians, taking as his subject industrial anthrax. Legge sat on official committees on compensation for industrial diseases (1906-13) and anthrax (1913-18). He travelled widely on official business and lectured frequently on industrial medicine at venues including Manchester University (1920-32), King's College, London (1920-24), and University College, London (1922-9). In 1919 he undertook a lecture tour of North America. He was appointed CBE in 1918 and given a knighthood in 1925; in 1923 he was the Royal College of Physicians' Bissett-Hawkins medallist. 
Shy to the point of appearing rude, Legge possessed firm convictions and a strong social conscience. His official career ended on a point of principle. In 1921 he represented the British government on the advisory hygiene commission of the International Labour Office at Geneva, helping to draft an international convention to ban the use of lead paint inside buildings. When the time came to implement its terms the British government issued regulations which fell far short of the agreement it had signed five years earlier. Legge resigned his post in protest on 29 November 1926, explaining his decision in a letter to 'The Times' (1 December 1926). At the time of his retirement his salary was $1200 p.a. From 1930 Legge was medical adviser to the social insurance section of the Trades Union Congress. 
Legge wrote 'Thirty Years' Experience of Industrial Maladies' (1929); his 'Industrial Maladies' (ed. S. A. Henry, 1934) was published posthumously. He co-authored 'Cattle Tuberculosis' (1898) with Harold Sessions, and 'Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption' (1912) with Sir Kenneth Goadby. His 'Industrial Poisoning from Fumes, Gases and Poisons' (1913) was a translation of a work by J. Rambousek. Legge contributed many papers to edited books and journals. Between 1919 and 1932 he was honorary consulting editor of the 'Journal of Industrial Hygiene'. 
In youth Legge was an accomplished swimmer and skater. In adulthood his main recreational interest was stained glass, a subject on which he was an authority. An enthusiast for the arts in general, he was a keen water-colourist, especially of industrial subjects. 
Legge married Norah Elizabeth Mack of West Grinstead, Sussex, in 1904. They had two sons and one daughter. He died suddenly at his home, Wintergreen, in Warlingham, Surrey, on 7 May 1932. He was buried at All Saints' parish church, Warlingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 49287


Binnie, Geoffrey Morse (1908-1989), civil engineer, was born in Kensington on 13 November 1908, the youngest of three brothers. His mother was Ethel Morse (1871-1947). His father, William James Eames Binnie (1867-1949), and grandfather, Sir Alexander Richardson Binnie, were both distinguished engineers who together, in 1902, founded the firm of consulting engineers which evolved into Binnie & Partners. He was educated at Charterhouse and read for the mechanical sciences tripos at Trinity Hall, Cambridge. Binnie then served as pupil to a distinguished Swiss engineer, H. E. Gruner, working on hydro-electric projects, and in the testing laboratory of R. Haefeli, attending selected lectures at the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule, Zurich. 
Binnie joined the family firm in 1932, working for four years on the Gorge Dam (Jubilee Dam) project for water supply in Hong Kong. He was taken into partnership on 1 January 1939. On the outbreak of war that year he volunteered for the Royal Engineers, seeing service in Abyssinia, Iran, and Iraq. At the end of the war in 1945 he returned to his firm which, after reduction to a small core, returned to the undertaking of major projects. The two principal projects associated with Binnie are Dokan Dam in Iraq and Mangla Dam in Pakistan. With the concrete arch design of the Dokan Dam, which was begun in 1948, Binnie introduced a technology unfamiliar to Britain and stimulated numerical methods of analysis not previously applied to such a structure. When Binnie was commissioned in 1957 to direct the planning, design, and construction of the Mangla Dam, this was the largest single project undertaken by a consulting engineer. Despite several serious problems the dam was completed in 1967, a year ahead of schedule. 
Binnie retired in 1972 but continued to work as a consultant until 1981. He was a vice-president of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1970-72 (his father and grandfather had been president in 1938 and 1905 respectively), and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1975 and a founder fellow of the Fellowship of Engineering in 1976. 
Binnie suffered partial deafness from birth, a disability which intensified with age. He recalled with gratitude those who, particularly in his early years, helped him to surmount this handicap. He was married first in 1932 to Yanina Parycko, a refugee from Poland, who travelled widely with Binnie and contributed to his outstanding concern for the welfare of staff and their families on major projects in remote areas. She died following a long illness in 1964, leaving a son and a daughter. During retirement, Binnie developed an interest in the history of dams, encouraged by his second wife, Elspeth Maud Cicely Thompson (died 1987), a historian whom he married in 1964. He is remembered as a sociable, considerate, thoughtful man who never lost his sense of fun. He lived at St Michael's Lodge, Benenden, Kent, and died after a heart attack at Benenden, on 5 April 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 49289


Brand, James (1831-1909), public works contractor, was born on 20 September 1831 in Montrose, Forfarshire, the son of Charles Brand (died 1885), mason and contractor, from a Kincardine family, and his wife, Margaret Falconer. He had at least one brother. After leaving school in Montrose he was apprenticed for three years to his uncle William Brand, who was in charge of enlarging Ardross Castle, overlooking the Firth of Cromarty, for Alexander Matheson the opium trader. In 1851 he began to work for his father as clerk of works for the building of the Episcopal church at Arbroath. Charles Brand was part of a consortium which successfully tendered for the extension of the Aberdeen Railway to Inverness, and James Brand worked with him on the sections of the line for which he was responsible. He became manager of the firm in 1853. His father, as part of another consortium, contracted for sections of the Great North of Scotland Railway (GNSR), and was allocated the section between Elgin and Keith. Brand worked there as contract agent in 1856-8, and saw the completion of the route from Aberdeen to Inverness; he was taken into partnership with his father in 1859, forming the company Charles Brand & Son. In 1863 Brand married Jane, daughter of William Gordon, procurator fiscal in Banffshire, and shortly after this was received into the Roman Catholic church. The couple had five sons, two of whom became Jesuit priests, and three daughters, two of whom became nuns. 
During the 1860s the firm was active in railway construction in north and north-east Scotland. It built the line from Keith to Dufftown for the GNSR, opened in 1862, and the section of the highland railway between Bonar Bridge and Golspie. In the late 1860s it expanded into lowland Scotland and then undertook a series of contracts on the Glasgow tramways from 1870, the first to be tendered by Glasgow corporation. Work began in 1878 on an important contract building Grangemouth docks, and the firm went on to build docks in Dumbarton, 1880-84, and Donegal quay in Belfast, 1882-5. 
Charles Brand retired in 1882, and James Brand became sole partner. In that year the firm began work on the eastern section of the Glasgow City and District Railway, the first underground line to be built in Glasgow. It took four years to build because of the technical difficulties of tunnelling underneath buildings in the city centre, often through waterlogged sand, and also the problem of blasting through boulder clay: only 7 yards of tunnel a month were completed while tunnelling under Buchanan Street. This work led to contracts for the Glasgow District subway, to build sections under the River Clyde: this used cable traction, the same system as the San Francisco cable cars, powered by stationary steam engines above ground. Tunnelling began in 1891 and the subway opened in December 1896, only to close again on the first day after an accident. Brand also helped to build the Glasgow Central Railway for the Caledonian Railway: in order to excavate the busy streets in the centre of Glasgow nearby buildings had to be underpinned, and there were problems with water from the River Clyde seeping into the workings. This line opened in 1895. Using expertise gained in Glasgow, the firm was to carry out many contracts for the London underground after the First World War. 
A new partnership was formed in 1903, including Brand's third son, Harry, and after this Brand began to retire from the business. He had been a member of Glasgow parish council since 1875 and chairman of the merged Glasgow parish in 1898-1901. As chairman of the hospitals committee he succeeded in getting the council to build a large new general hospital. In 1904 he sat on the Glasgow municipal commission on the housing of the poor. Brand was also active in the Catholic community of Glasgow, serving on the Scottish Catholic schools committee, and was chairman of the Caledonian Catholic Association. He died on 15 January 1909 in Bournemouth, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49290


Carr, Jonathan Thomas (1845-1915), property developer, was born in Dublin, the eldest son among the ten children of Jonathan Carr (died 1881), a wholesale woollen draper of Cumbrian origin with a business in the West End of London, and his Irish wife. The family was liberal in outlook, art loving, and gregarious: one brother, Joseph William Comyns Carr (1849-1916), became known as an art critic and minor dramatist; another, David Alexander Carr (1847-1920), and a sister, Kate (Hastings), both studied at the Slade School of Art and became painters. 
Carr was brought up in Barnes and in Devonshire Street, St Marylebone, before going to Bruce Castle School, Tottenham, and then King's College, London. He attached himself to John Stuart Mill during his Westminster election campaign of 1865 as a 'political secretary'; he evidently harboured ambitions in radical politics, but for the time being joined his father's firm. 
In 1873 Carr married Agnes Fulton (1849-1902), daughter of the civil engineer Hamilton Henry Fulton (1813-1886), who owned 24 acres close to the new railway station of Turnham Green in suburban west London. This from 1875 became the core of Bedford Park, Carr's first and most successful venture into enlightened property development. Observing that most Victorian estate development was authoritarian in management and gloomy in appearance, Carr harnessed the rising demand for middle-class homes in the suburbs with the fashion for the Queen Anne style in architecture and the aesthetic art-furnishing movement. Bedford Park's layout was not novel, but Carr employed some of the best domestic architects of the day, such as E. W. Godwin, Norman Shaw, and E. J. May, to design the pretty and well-planned houses that line the streets. As well as the customary church, an inn, stores, a club with a library, and even an art school were provided. Minor artists, actors, literati, and liberal emigres from continental Europe flocked to Bedford Park, which was shrewdly puffed in the periodicals. It became admired and lampooned as an aesthetic community, and was satirized in the 'Ballad of Bedford Park', which appeared in the 'St James's Gazette'. It proved a genuine social and architectural novelty, and the chief middle-class precursor of the later garden suburb. Carr built himself a handsome house to Norman Shaw's designs, Tower House (1878-9), in the centre of the development. He presided over Bedford Park as its sole promoter, though the Carr and Fulton families were much involved in its finances. 
In 1881 Carr turned Bedford Park into a limited company and sought new fields of endeavour. The first was Kensington Court, begun in 1882, an effort to shake up London town-house development just as Bedford Park had improved the suburban estate. Special attention was paid to the services: hydraulic lifts were to replace back stairs, and every house was to be electrically lit. He again employed a fashionable architect, J. J. Stevenson, but Kensington Court was never finished to Carr's plans and its fortunes became involved with the larger scheme which caused his downfall. This was Whitehall Court, a huge block of apartments on a prime tract of crown-owned land overlooking the Thames. Carr agreed in November 1883 to take this site, sharing it with the newly founded National Liberal Club, with which he had connections, but the scale of the development was too big for his amateurish methods of finance. In January 1886, with the building hardly begun, Carr and his development company, Whitehall Court Ltd, were saved only by selling out to associates of Jabez Balfour. 
Though Carr escaped bankruptcy his indebtedness was severe and his reputation did not recover. Bedford Park Ltd was wound up in 1886, and in the next year he and his fellow directors in Whitehall Court Ltd were found guilty of gross breach of trust for paying themselves salaries when the company had no dividend. He managed to stay on at Tower House until after his wife's death, according to Lucien Oldershaw 'with the bailiff as his butler. He and his equally impoverished brother would spend long hours playing cards together and getting highly excited when three shillings changed hands' (Ward, 25). Carr was called as a witness at the celebrated Jabez Balfour trial in 1895, when irregularities about the Whitehall Court rescue came out. In 1902 Carr tried to promote a fanciful scheme for a second Bedford Park, to be called Burlingwick, on Chiswick meadows, but this came to nothing. He died at 13 Queen Anne's Grove, Bedford Park, on 1 February 1915, following a bout of influenza. 
Like many property developers, Carr had a sanguine, genial, and persuasive temperament. He had original ideas, imagination, and courage, but was not averse to cutting corners and attracted a reputation for less than complete probity. He may have intended his career in property as a prelude to one in radical politics. The one known photograph of Carr shows him in middle age, with a piercing eye and a full beard. He is said to have indulged in radical and aesthetic dress, notably red ties and velvet jackets. He had two sons, Horace Fulton Carr (died 1900) and Jonathan Fulton Carr. 


@@@@@


doc= 49291


Heddle, Charles William Maxwell (1811/12-1889), merchant, was born in Goree, Senegal, the son of Dr John Heddle (1776-1812), an Orcadian medical officer in the Royal African Corps, and Sophy Boucher, a Senegalese, with whom he had several children. He was educated at the Dollar Academy, Clackmannanshire, at the expense of his uncle, Robert Heddle, who, having made a large fortune trading in Senegal, returned to Orkney in 1818 and bought the estate of Melsetter. Through his uncle's influence he was employed by the London firm of Forster and Smith, then the leading import and export firm in west Africa. After a brief period in the London office he returned about 1834 to west Africa where he spent the rest of his business career. 
Heddle began as Forster and Smith's employee in the Gambia, but by 1838 had moved to Freetown, Sierra Leone. There he set up as an import and export trader, at first with locally recruited partners, but after about 1843, having inherited $2000 from an elder brother, a medical officer in India, on his own. He remained Sierra Leone agent for Forster and Smith, and could draw on their credit, while they acted as his agents in London. He traded from the most conspicuous commercial building in Freetown, a huge old store at the government wharf. 
It was the start of a period of commercial prosperity in west Africa. By the middle of the nineteenth century many of the Sierra Leone recaptives (those liberated over previous decades from slave ships taking them illegally across the Atlantic) and their descendants had moved into the import-export trade. Freetown was becoming a prosperous commercial centre for the export of oil-bearing produce, increasingly in demand for processing in Europe for lubrication, cooking, and soap making. 
Heddle had already begun exporting groundnuts (peanuts) from the Gambia, and is credited with being the first to export them from Sierra Leone. He was also the first entrepreneur to exploit the commercial potentialities of palm kernels, as distinct from palm oil. From the $4 worth he exported in 1846 exports grew until by the 1860s palm kernel exports outstripped the export of palm oil from Sierra Leone and, with groundnuts, had become the mainstay of the export trade. 
It was a period when Heddle's African descent was of no serious disadvantage; indeed, during his years in Sierra Leone almost every senior official post, including governor, was at one time or another held by a man of part African descent. Hence he was not subjected to the discriminatory pressures that would have put him at a disadvantage later on during the period of racial imperialism. In 1845 he was appointed a member of the governor's council, and when the constitution was revised in 1863 he became a member of the legislative council. 
Much of the export produce was grown along the rivers north of Sierra Leone, still unannexed by any European government. Heddle wanted them annexed to Sierra Leone and in 1845 persuaded the government to make treaties of friendship with the ruling chiefs. But policy in London at this period was against further acquisitions of territory in west Africa and, despite his continuing efforts, they were annexed by the French in 1867. 
Heddle is reported as saying that once the first $10,000 has been made the second follows in half the time. But how he made his many thousands is not clear. The total annual import and export figures for Sierra Leone amounted to under $300,000 each at this period, so the profits from import-export trading, shared with many competitors, were limited. He invested extensively in Freetown house properties, but most were valued in hundreds rather than thousands. And although a shrewd property deal with the government netted him $16,000, this was a small sum for a 'merchant prince' (as he was called) who was able to write off unconcernedly a loss of between $20,000 and $30,000 when his uninsured warehouse burnt down. It seems likely to suppose that his largest gains were not made directly in west Africa but from investments on the London stock market. 
In 1871 he left Sierra Leone, lame, and with impaired eyesight, and retired to France, where he purchased a former ducal mansion, the Chateau de Mereville, Seine-et-Oise, which he furnished opulently. He had never married, though with Emilie Caille (died 1876), with whom he lived during his years in Freetown, he had an illegitimate son, John, whom he adopted legally. However, on 4 September 1888, aged then seventy-six, he married a twenty-two year old divorcee, Marie Leocadie Hortense Prume, 'nee' Leduc ('c'.1867-1898). He died at Cannes some eight months later on 29 April 1889. His will, leaving almost everything to his young widow, was contested in the courts, and eventually the estate was shared by settlement between her and his son. She died soon after, as the result of a car crash; he squandered his inheritance and died in debt. Neither left descendants. 
Heddle's estate was valued for probate at $352,018 16's'. 7died Adding to this the money spent buying and maintaining his chateau, and his wife's marriage settlement, the fortune he had gained from his entrepreneurial activities is likely to be closer to half a million than quarter of a million pounds, a fortune far outstripping that of any contemporary in west Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 49294


Fergusson, William (1795?-1846), physician and colonial governor, was born in Jamaica, the son of a Scottish father and a mother of African descent. His date of birth is derived from a tablet erected in his memory in Jamaica, which gives his age at death as fifty-one. He studied medicine at Edinburgh University (1809-12), became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Scotland (1813), and was commissioned in the army with the rank of hospital assistant. On the recommendation of the African Association, an anti-slavery pressure group concerned with advancing people of African descent, he was posted to Sierra Leone and appointed second surgeon to the colony. In 1816 he returned to Scotland to settle a disputed Jamaican bankruptcy case, and on 23 November 1818 he married Charlotte Hall, the daughter of a Musselburgh merchant. Their daughter, Anne, was the mother of the painter William Fergusson Brassey Hole. The bankruptcy case dragged on, and it was 1824 before he rejoined the army on full pay with the rank of assistant surgeon in the Royal African Colonial Corps. In 1825 he was promoted staff surgeon. 
Fergusson was also appointed one of the colonial surgeons with responsibilities in the Liberated African department, which looked after recaptives -- those rescued from slave ships by the navy, and liberated by the courts in Freetown. Eventually the army authorities objected to his combining military and civil duties, but for another two years, particularly during a disastrous yellow fever epidemic in 1829, he went on working without civilian pay. Although he had been appointed on the assumption that his Caribbean origin would protect him from tropical diseases, from his first arrival he suffered regular attacks of malaria. When, in 1830, he returned in medical charge of an invalid governor, he was allowed to stay on in Scotland to restore his health, his years of service having 'nearly made a wreck of my constitution'. 
From the start Fergusson endeared himself to the inhabitants of Freetown: when he went on leave in 1816 they presented him with a testimonial (the first ever offered by the community). As he put it, 'in my colour I possess a passport to their confidence' (Fergusson to Colonial Office, 18 Sept 1822, TNA: PRO, CO 267/57). When, in 1839, he was promoted staff surgeon, first class (equivalent to lieutenant-colonel), Governor Doherty recommended him as a member of the governor's council (the legislative body for the colony) from 'his great experience in the Colony and intimate knowledge of its inhabitants, as well as the confidence of all classes of the population which he largely possesses' (Doherty to Colonial Office, 30 Aug 1840, TNA: PRO, CO 267/159). Moreover, his commanding presence -- tall, handsome, and dignified, but offset by an informal, easy manner -- disarmed prejudice attached to his colour. He was commissioned to act in a vacancy as lieutenant-governor, and took over the post in 1841. Simultaneously John Carr, from Trinidad, was appointed chief justice. Thus the two highest posts in the colony were held by men of part-African descent. In 1844 Fergusson acted as lieutenant-governor again, and in 1845 was commissioned as captain-general and governor-in-chief -- the first, and last, governor of a British African colony of African descent. 
Colonial policy at this period concentrated on supplying labour to replace the slave labour which emancipation had ended in the Caribbean. Sierra Leone, long seen as a useless drain on public money, seemed a possible source, if the Liberated African department could be abolished, and the inhabitants encouraged to emigrate. Fergusson had to implement this policy. In well-informed dispatches, based on his long experience, he explained that, while the slave trade persisted, recaptives would still have to be maintained, and that the settled population had no interest in the Caribbean. Instead they were, on their own initiative, now emigrating back to their homelands in the Yoruba country (modern Nigeria), taking with them the 'Christianity and Civilization' the colony had been founded to promote. Fergusson had already, in 'A Letter to Thomas Fowell Buxton, Esq.', published in 1839, displayed a very positive picture of the recaptive population. Having arrived 'emaciated, squalid, naked' from the slave ships, they were now 'well clad, well housed, independent, quiet, orderly and respectable members of society', stratified into classes, headed by a growing, prosperous bourgeoisie, and maintained by a flourishing import/export trade. This was very different from the customary negative picture of Sierra Leone. The Colonial Office officials were impressed by Fergusson's obvious knowledge, and began to see Sierra Leone in a more positive way, as did the Church Missionary Society, with which Fergusson was closely concerned, which began investing substantially in education. It was the beginning of a period of nearly forty years of economic and social prosperity. 
Forward-looking, Fergusson wanted the colony to expand. He made treaties with neighbouring chiefs and sent a mission to Futa Jalon (modern Guinea) financed by the mercantile community, including, as he proudly reported, some wealthy recaptives. But liver and digestive complaints had undermined his health. He was forced to leave the colony for treatment, and died at sea, on the barque 'Funchal', on 19 January 1846. A tablet to his memory was erected in St George's Cathedral, Freetown, by public subscription. His daughter Anne (died 1891) was the mother of the Scottish historian William Hole (1846-1917). 


@@@@@


doc= 49301


McAlpine family (per. c.1870-1967), civil engineering contractors, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 49302


Montgomery, Henry Hutchinson (1847-1932), bishop of Tasmania and missionary society administrator, was born on 3 October 1847 at Cawnpore, North-Western Provinces, India, the second of five children of Sir Robert Montgomery (1809-1887), lieutenant-governor of the Punjab, and his second wife, Ellen Jane (1824-1920), daughter of William Lambert JP, an administrator in India. After an evangelical preparatory education he entered Harrow School in 1861 where he imbibed public-school athleticism as 'a real education for life' (M. Montgomery, 9). He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge in the autumn of 1866, graduated BA in 1869, and subsequently prepared for ordination in London under the conservative churchman Charles Vaughan, master of the Temple. Ordained deacon 1871 and priest in 1872, he was successively curate at Hurstpierpoint, Sussex (1871-4), Christ Church, Southwark, London (1874-6), and St Margaret's, Westminster (1876-9), and priest at St Mark's, Kennington (1879-89), where he was known for his comprehensive organization of the parish. At St Margaret's he associated closely with the popular author and broad church evangelical Canon (later Dean) Frederick William Farrar and became the intimate and secretary to the dean of Westminster, A. P. Stanley, sympathizing with his commitment to the ideal of a comprehensive national church. On 28 July 1881 he married Maud (1864-1949), Farrar's third daughter, who came to command the domestic affairs of the family; they had three daughters and six sons, the most notable being Bernard Law Montgomery, the future field marshal and first Viscount Montgomery of Alamein. 
Henry Montgomery was consecrated bishop of Tasmania on 1 May 1889 and took up residence in Hobart, throwing his considerable energy and visionary enthusiasm into diocesan reorganization and especially missionary work. While Montgomery nearly doubled the number of churches in his diocese, many of his other initiatives were frustrated by lay apathy, economic recession, and party opposition from radical evangelicals who suspected him of ritualism. He nevertheless became an important advocate of invigorating colonial Anglicanism and extending its pan-imperial connections, particularly emphasizing global missionary co-operation in the Australian board of missions and synod. Because of his activism, in July 1901 he was appointed by a committee of six English bishops, led by his friend and Harrow schoolmate Randall Davidson of Winchester, to the secretaryship of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG). Despite misgivings over abandoning his colonial bishopric, Montgomery became convinced of the importance of creating 'a sort of Foreign Office' for world Anglicanism at the SPG (circular letter, autumn 1901, Temple MSS, vol. 49, fols. 115-16). 
Montgomery's impact at the SPG as a reformer was substantial. A traditional high-church society, the SPG did not cater to the party enthusiasms of either evangelicals or Anglo-Catholics. In order to dispel well-known lethargy at the SPG, Montgomery allied himself with progressive younger clergy and female supporters. Despite opposition from an 'old guard', he drew activists into a reorganized central administration, launched new publications, built a new society headquarters proximate to Church House in Westminster, emulated and co-operated with Anglican evangelicals, and established a new emphasis at the SPG on service to the British empire. Broad in his religious views, warm in his spirituality, and generous in his humour, Montgomery sought to recreate the Church of England as an 'Imperial Church' (Montgomery to SPG standing committee, 17 Aug 1901, Davidson MSS, vol. 151, fols. 322-3) in order to increase enthusiasm for foreign missions, remedy Anglican party factionalism, and reverse the decline of Anglican observance and ordination. As the archbishop of Canterbury's (Davidson) adviser on foreign missions, he proposed and led arrangements for the Pan-Anglican Congress of 1908. In 1902 Montgomery was made prebendary of St Paul's, in 1906 prelate of the Order of St Michael and St George, and a knight commander of the order in 1928. Under his guidance SPG incomes increased sharply, and the society gained a new reputation for innovation. Yet his more ambitious goal of creating imperial unity in the church was thwarted by the local preoccupations of Anglican clergy, differences within the communion over imperial methods and attitudes to race, and the re-emergence of tension between Anglican evangelicals and high-churchmen, especially following the 1913 Kikuyu Controversy in east Africa. In this final evangelical/high-church controversy of the pre-war period, in which the Anglo-Catholic bishop of Zanzibar accused the evangelical bishops of Mombasa and Uganda of heretically ecumenical associations with nonconformists, Montgomery retreated from an earlier ecumenism out of fear for the authority and distinctiveness of the Anglican communion. 
Montgomery served the SPG with patriotic verve through the war years, and finally resigned the secretaryship in 1918, retiring in 1921 to the family property at New Park, Moville, co. Donegal. He spent his final decade in occasional church and SPG work, and writing. He died at New Park on 25 November 1932, and was buried in the Moville church cemetery on 30 November. His wife survived him. 
Montgomery was the author of twenty-five books on theological or missionary subjects, most notably 'The Light of Melanesia' (1896), 'Foreign Missions' (1902), 'Life's Journey' (1916), and 'Life and Letters of George Alfred Lefroy' (1920). 


@@@@@


doc= 49308


Lawson, Henry John (1852-1925), bicycle designer and company promoter, was born at 1 Nevills Court in the City of London on 23 February 1852, the son of Thomas Lawson, brass turner and Calvinistic Methodist minister, and his wife, Ann Lucy, 'nee' Kent. Little is known about Lawson's early life, but he followed his father as a mechanical model maker in London and then appears to have gained experience in the bicycle trade in Brighton as a young man. He married, on 25 January 1879, at the Providence Chapel, Brighton, Elizabeth (Lizzie) ('b'. 1850), daughter of George Olliver, carpenter. They had two daughters and two sons. 
Lawson's adult life falls into three distinct phases, of which the first was active and inventive involvement in the cycle trade and industry, when he contributed to the complex and gradual evolution of the safety bicycle. In the second phase he turned to company finance, initially in the related areas of cycles and pneumatic tyres, but culminating in the motor industry, which in its early years was closely related to them. After the collapse of his profiteering and monopolistic schemes, the last years of his life seem to have been spent in obscurity and poverty. 
In 1873-4 Lawson designed a safety bicycle, described as the 'first authentic design of safety bicycle employing chain-drive to the rear wheel which was actually made' (Caunter, 34). In 1876 the Likeman and Lawson low bicycle was patented, with a large rear wheel and powered by pedals and levers. It superficially resembled a back to front Ordinary or penny-farthing machine, but with an easier riding position; a few were made by Haynes and Jefferis of Coventry. The Bicyclette, Lawson's third design, appeared in 1879. This more closely resembled the Ordinary machine in having a larger front wheel, but its smaller size, improved distribution of the rider's weight, and chain drive permit Lawson to be classed with others, above all John Kemp Starley, as a progenitor of the modern safety bicycle which was central to the boom of the mid-1890s. Lawson had become manager of the Tangent and Coventry Tricycle Company, but appears not to have had plans to manufacture his own design, approaching BSA, who produced two prototypes only. 
In 1884 Lawson patented a lady's safety bicycle, but then entered the second phase of his life, for which he was to become notorious, that of company promotion. In 1887 the Haynes and Jefferis concern was transformed into the Rudge Cycle Company, Lawson acting with the Coventry solicitor George Woodcock. The latter died in 1891, but by then Lawson's role in company promotion was linked to those of E. T. Hooley and his associate, Martin Rucker. Their activities stemmed from a desire to benefit from the exceptionally favourable market conditions by obtaining capital gains in cash through company flotations. However, Lawson went on into new fields with a scheme 'to create a motor car industry in this country and to control it himself' (Richardson, 17). 
Lawson floated the British Motor Syndicate Ltd in 1895 (this subsequently became the British Motor Company Ltd, then the British Motor Traction Company Ltd), followed in 1896 by the Great Horseless Carriage Company Ltd (subsequently the Motor Manufacturing Company Ltd). The reality failed to match these grandiose titles or Lawson's greedy ambition, with one exception: the Daimler Motor Company (re-formed in 1904) proved to be an enduring outcome of Lawson's schemes. The Daimler patent rights had been bought from F. R. Simms's Daimler Motor Syndicate by the British Motor Syndicate in 1895 and sold in 1896 to the Daimler Motor Company which was based in Coventry. 
For the embryonic automotive industry, there were no profits records to assess and scarcely any measure of current demand. In such a situation, a showman-promoter like Lawson could flourish, at least temporarily. The Motor Car Club, which Lawson founded in late 1895, may be regarded as part of his publicity machine, and the more responsible element in the motor world, including F. R. Simms, found it desirable to create the independent Automobile Club of Great Britain and Ireland (later the RAC) in mid-1897. 
Meanwhile Lawson continued his scheme of monopoly. To the Daimler rights he added those of the American inventor E. J. Pennington (1858-1911), which were of doubtful value. Their joint Anglo-American Rapid Vehicle Company, organized in the United States in 1899, collapsed. In July 1901 the death blow to Lawson's schemes was delivered by Mr Justice Farwell in a High Court decision; he dismissed an action by the British Motor Traction Company for alleged infringement of Maybach's carburettor patent, on the grounds that Maybach's method had been anticipated by both Edward Butler and George Wilkinson. 
A receiver was appointed to the Traction Company in February 1903 and in the following year Lawson was indicted with Hooley for conspiring to defraud a speculator, Alfred Paine, and also shareholders and creditors of the Electric Tramways Construction and Maintenance Company Ltd. Hooley, defended by Rufus Isaacs, was acquitted, but Lawson, who conducted his own case, was sentenced to one year's hard labour. By then in his fifties, Lawson thereafter seems to have faded from the motor world and the public scene, until the Bleriot affair of 1915-16. In this Lawson again played the syndicate card, acquiring the Bleriot Manufacturing Aircraft Company Ltd on 17 June 1915, a few days before the issue of a prospectus which gave no indication that control had in effect passed into Lawson's hands. The company was wound up in 1916 following an extraordinary general meeting marked by some disorder. Lawson died at his home, 25 Roxborough Avenue, Harrow, Middlesex, on 12 July 1925, summed up by the 'Motor' as 'poor' Harry J. Lawson, although it charitably commented that his chief fault was that 'his optimism was twenty-five years before the times' (cited in 'DBB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 49309


Leathart, James (1820-1895), lead manufacturer and art collector, was born on 25 November 1820 at Hill House, Alston Moor, Alston, Cumberland, the son of John Leathart ('b'. 1793), mining engineer and lead miner, and Margaret Setree (1792-1870). He attended Alston grammar school until the age of fourteen when he was briefly employed by Burnett and Pattinson, an industrial chemical firm, before accepting a position as clerk at Locke, Blackett & Co. in Newcastle upon Tyne. He devoted his entire career to this firm of lead manufacturers, studying chemistry and metallurgy in his spare time in order to improve his knowledge of the industry. He was rewarded when he was placed in charge of a new smelting and refining plant at St Anthonys, Newcastle upon Tyne, in 1846. He became sole managing partner of the firm in 1857. In the following year, on 22 June, he married Maria Hedley (1840-1899), the daughter of a Newcastle soap manufacturer, with whom he had thirteen children. 
Although Leathart's salary never exceeded $600 per annum, he managed to form one of the finest collections of contemporary art in England. His early interest was in the English landscape school, represented by artists such as David Cox and John Varley. After he met the artist William Bell Scott, head of the Newcastle School of Art, his taste shifted to the more avant-garde Pre-Raphaelites. Scott's enthusiasm for advanced art impressed Leathart and he gradually sold off his earlier purchases to finance the acquisition of paintings and watercolours by artists including Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Ford Madox Brown, John Everett Millais, Edward Burne-Jones, Albert Moore, and James McNeill Whistler. His collection was distinguished by his predilection for solemn subjects, such as Millais's funereal 'Autumn Leaves' (1855, Manchester City Galleries), Albert Moore's sombre 'Elijah's Sacrifice' (1863, Bury Art Gallery and Museum), and Burne-Jones's compelling representations of 'Sidonia von Bork' and 'Clara von Bork' (both 1860, Tate collection). Leathart displayed his collection at his home in Gateshead alongside the blue and white Chinese porcelain favoured by devotees of the aesthetic movement. Fellow art lover John Hamilton Trist ranked Leathart's collection as 'one of the first in England' (J. H. Trist, 9 March 1868, Leathart MSS, University of British Columbia). 
Leathart introduced Pre-Raphaelite and aesthetic art into the unusually close-knit community of Novocastrian businessmen, both in his capacity as secretary of the school of art and of the North of England Society, and as a member of the executive committees of the mechanics' institute and the Newcastle Arts Association. As a result of his proselytizing, chemical merchants Jacob Burnett and Alexander Stevenson embraced the credos of the aesthetic movement, and even more conservative collectors, such as ironmaster Sir Isaac Lowthian Bell and the armaments manufacturer Sir William Armstrong, commissioned works from Rossetti and Burne-Jones. Due to Leathart's enthusiastic but unassuming influence, Tyneside merchants and manufacturers shared artistic as well as business interests. His propensity for networking among businessmen-collectors affected his own family circle: his daughter Margaret married the son of the Liverpool banker George Rae, who was one of Rossetti's major patrons. 
Despite his passion for collecting, Leathart was forced to sell a number of works of art privately after Locke, Blackett & Co. suffered financial reverses due to foreign competition, overcapacity, and the failure of new laboratory processes. Money worries weakened Leathart's constitution and brought on his death from pneumonia on 9 August 1895 at his home, Bracken Dene, Low Fell, Gateshead, co. Durham. He was buried at St John's Church, Gateshead Fell, co. Durham. His main asset was his art collection, which his heirs sold at the Goupil Gallery in June and July 1896 and at Christies on 19 July 1897; a few items remain in the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 49315


Leese, Sir William Hargreaves, second baronet (1868-1937), lawyer, was born at Send Holme, Send, near Guildford, Surrey, on 24 August 1868, the eldest son of Sir Joseph Francis Leese, first baronet (1845-1914), cotton spinner and later recorder of Manchester (1893-1914) and MP for Accrington (1892-1910), and his wife, Mary Constance Hargreaves (died 1928). He was educated at Winchester College and at Trinity College, Cambridge (1887-90), where he developed a keen interest in cricket and acting, which he retained for the rest of his life. His own desire was for a military career but instead he followed his father's wishes and became a barrister of the Inner Temple. He was called to the bar in 1893, the year in which he married Violet Mary Sandeman (died 1947), daughter of Albert George Sandeman (1833-1923), head of the Sandeman drinks business (1868-1923), a director of the Bank of England (1868-1918), and its governor (1895-7). There were three sons and a daughter of the marriage. 
In his early years at the bar, Leese forged his own link with the Bank of England through its solicitors, Freshfields, who instructed him as junior to Sir Charles Matthews in a number of prosecutions for forgery. A closer connection was offered to Leese when Freshfields invited him to join them as a partner, an invitation he accepted. He was disbarred, admitted a solicitor, and became a partner in Freshfields in 1906. 
From the beginning Leese worked, as intended, on Bank of England matters which had been, since 1819, always conducted by a member of the Freshfield family. Dr Edwin Freshfield, who had recruited him, was senior partner of the firm and was at this time in his seventies. Neither his son, Edwin Hanson Freshfield, nor his nephew James William Freshfield, though both partners in the firm, had shown the interest in or dedication to the practice of law of the family's three previous generations. Following the death of Dr Freshfield in 1918 and the retirement from practice of his son in 1921, Leese became the senior partner of the firm. He succeeded his father as second baronet in 1914. 
Under Sir William's leadership the firm was modernized. The telephone was brought out of the basement, a lift was installed, and considerable refurbishment of the offices at 31 Old Jewry (which the firm had occupied since 1898) was carried out. Sir William's own room, with its handsome mahogany desk, thick carpet, and walls hung with choice watercolours, was apparently much admired in the City -- such tasteful luxury being at that time unusual in the offices of City solicitors. He had style; Sir Godfey Morley of Allen and Ovary recalled (in 1978) a visit to Freshfields in the 1930s when he was an articled clerk: 'It was a hot summer's day and Sir William was sitting without his jacket (unusual in those days) wearing a most beautiful silk shirt' (Morley, 9). 
From 1914 to 1930 Sir William bore sole responsibility for the Bank of England's legal work. This included acting for the trustees of the loans developed to ease the payment of German reparations, and for the Securities Management Trust which held the bank's interest in the merged firms of Armstrong, Whitworth & Co. and Vickers Ltd. In the 1930s, as the bank's involvement in industrial organization became greater and Sir William also became involved in the international loans made to Austria and Hungary under the auspices of the League of Nations, other Freshfield partners were appointed to take on parts of the bank's work. In 1935 Leslie Peppiatt was recruited from the British American Tobacco Company to understudy Sir William's work for the bank. 
Despite such a busy professional life -- and Sir William was an active member of the Council of the Law Society -- for many years he found time to give free legal advice at Cambridge House in the East End and to take an interest in the Boy Scout movement. He was widely respected in the City and beyond, not least for his ability to find solutions to difficult problems with common sense, tact, and friendliness. 
Sir William's sporting interests encompassed golf, horse-racing, and dry-fly-fishing as well as cricket. His enthusiasm for the stage never faltered and he continued to participate in the dramatic productions of the Old Stagers and the Windsor Strollers. He died suddenly of heart failure on 17 January 1937 while on holiday at the Victoria Hotel, Sidmouth, Devon. He was succeeded as third baronet by his eldest son, Oliver William Hargreaves Leese. 


@@@@@


doc= 49317


Leslie, Andrew (1818-1894), shipbuilder, was born on 1 September 1818 at Garth, Dunrossness, in the Shetland Islands, the only son and younger of the two children of Andrew Leslie (died 1829), a crofter, and his wife, Christina, 'nee' Allison. When he was six weeks old his parents were evicted, and his father moved the family to Aberdeen, working as a cartman and on coastal ships out of Aberdeen. After his father's death the family moved back to the Shetland Islands. At the age of thirteen Leslie began work as a rivet catcher before starting an apprenticeship as a boilermaker at the iron works of John Vernon & Co. in Aberdeen. He also studied technical drawing at evening classes with Charles Mitchell, who later established an iron shipyard on the Tyne. He was promoted to foreman, but left in the early 1840s to set up his own business in Aberdeen as a boilermaker and blacksmith. 
In 1853 Leslie moved to Tyneside, leased 9 acres at Hebburn in open country east of Hebburn Quay on the south bank of the Tyne, and founded an iron shipyard and boiler works. After a brief partnership with John Coutts, a Scot who at Walker in 1840 had established the Tyne's first iron shipyard, which had since failed, Leslie became sole owner of the Hebburn yard. Because of the shortage of local labour, he recruited most of his skilled craftsmen from Aberdeen, to the extent that Hebburn became known as 'little Aberdeen'. He launched his first ship, the steamship 'Clarendon', in 1854, but progress was slow after this, at a time when most ships were still being built in wood, and the yard had an annual average output of 2000 tons during the first decade. From the beginning many of Leslie's ships were for overseas customers: twelve of his first twenty ships were for Russian owners, beginning with the 1000 ton 'Mogoustschi' for the Russian Steam Navigation and Trading Company for its new service from London to Odessa. He built more than sixty ships in all for Russian companies, and his first steel-framed vessel, the 'Grand Duchess Olga', launched in 1880, was built for the Russian S. E. Navigation Company. His principal English customer was Holts, the Liverpool shipping line, from 1861. 
By 1863 Leslie had built fifty-three ships, and his business was valued at $90,000. Needing more capital for the business, he entered into negotiations with Thomas Coote, a local businessman, who in 1863 bought a partnership for his son, Arthur, who had served his apprenticeship at Denny & Co., the Dumbarton shipyard. Arthur Coote later married Leslie's adopted daughter. The company became known for its paddle steamers, beginning with the 'Enterprise' in 1864. It built many cross-channel paddle steamers, including the twin-hulled 'Calais-Douvres', launched in 1877. Between 1863 and 1875 output grew to more than 10,000 tons a year, and in the period 1876 to 1885, despite the depression of the mid-1880s, average output was 16,000 tons, with a peak in 1881 of 23,500 tons. By 1885, 260 ships had been built at the Hebburn yard, and there was employment for more than 2000 men. Although Leslie had no sympathy for the trade union movement, giving evidence to the royal commission on trade unions (1867-9), he managed to retain the loyalty of his workmen, many of whom stayed with the firm all their lives. 
From 1860 there was increasingly close co-operation between Andrew Leslie & Co. and the marine engineering firm R. and W. Hawthorn, with Hawthorns supplying thirty-one sets of machinery for ships built in Leslie's yard between 1860 and 1870. Following Leslie's retirement in 1885 the two firms amalgamated to become R. and W. Hawthorn, Leslie & Co. Ltd. 
From 1859 until 1880 Leslie lived in Wallsend House, Wallsend, across the river from the yard, and played an important part in local affairs. He was a member of the first Wallsend school board, and its first vice-chairman, and he was one of those who worked to establish a local board of health, which was set up in 1867: he was elected to the board in 1869 and served until 1878. He served as a Tyne improvement commissioner for thirteen years, and was a JP for Northumberland and Durham. He also did much to develop Hebburn. He built more than four hundred houses for his workmen, with gas lighting supplied from the gas-producing plant in his shipyard. He was the chairman of the meeting that established the Hebburn Co-operative Society in 1866, and contributed to the cost of building a school and a workmen's institute. Leslie was a presbyterian and donated $900 in 1873 for the building of St Andrew's Presbyterian Church in Hebburn, close to the shipyard, for his Scottish workmen and their families. He was a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers from 1858, and of the Institution of Naval Architects from 1882. 
Leslie was married to Margaret, 'nee' Jordan ('c'.1829- 'c'.1888); they had one adopted daughter. Leslie died on 27 January 1894 at his home, Coxlodge Hall, Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne, and was buried on 1 February at Rosebank cemetery, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 49320


Lewis, David (1823-1885), department store owner, was born in London, the son of Wolfe Levy, a Jewish merchant. He had at least one brother, who emigrated to Australia in the 1840s. In 1839 Lewis went to Liverpool to work for Benjamin Hyam & Co., a firm of tailors and outfitters, and within eighteen months he was appointed manager of the Liverpool branch. In 1842 he was put in charge of opening new branches in Scotland and Ireland, and of supervising existing branches. On 6 September 1856 he married Bertha, daughter of Isaac Cohen, the rabbi in Dover. 
Lewis started his own business at 44 Ranelagh Street, Liverpool, in 1846, selling men's and boy's clothing. Most of the clothes were made in his own workshop, as was usual at the time, and he also designed new clothes -- his speciality was knickerbocker suits. His customers were mainly working-class, and had not been able to afford tailoring before. From the beginning he established principles which were to guide his business throughout his life: he refused to haggle, setting a low price and sticking to it; he did not give credit; and he was always willing to exchange unsatisfactory goods. He never borrowed money, and he always ploughed his profits back into the business. In 1859 he opened premises in Bold Street, in a more fashionable area, and in 1864 began to sell London and Paris women's fashions. At the same time he was extending the Ranelagh Street shop, eventually buying five adjacent properties, and he built a clock tower, which became a Liverpool landmark. He continued to add departments, including women's shoes in 1874, and tobacco in 1879, and as the business expanded, he began to buy goods in from outside, making bulk purchases directly from the factories. 
In 1877 Lewis opened a new shop, next door to George Henry Lee in Basnett Street, and called it Bon Marche, after the Paris store. As in Paris, all kinds of goods were displayed, with the emphasis on women's fashions and Paris 'nouveautes'. Lewis kept it completely separate from his main store, and its clientele was quite different. Its lavish attractions included a model of the Strasbourg Cathedral clock, and 'Christmas Fairyland'. 
A large new store opened in Market Street, Manchester, in 1880, built in the French Renaissance style, with six departments. Other departments were soon added, including a grocery department with deliveries twice a day to the suburbs. In the early 1880s Lewis began to sell tea, in response to the rapid expansion of tea drinking in working-class families, and Lewis's two-shilling tea became famous nationally. Another well-known line was velveteen: the velveteen department was the largest in the Manchester store, and a large mail-order section was developed. Lewis built extensions on to the store, and by 1885 there were seven floors. 
Two more branches were opened in the 1880s. In 1884 a small shop opened at 15 Waingate in Sheffield, selling tea, and soon expanded to sell such familiar Lewis lines as velveteen and cigars, but, with a depression in the cutlery trade, Sheffield was not prospering at this point and the shop closed down at the beginning of 1888. The huge Birmingham store, however, opened as a department store in 1885 in the newly built Corporation Street, on 850 square yards of land leased from the Birmingham corporation, and focusing on women customers, attracted 40,000 on the opening day. 
Lewis was always aware of the importance of advertising. In 1869 he began publication of halfpenny memorandum books, with advertising on the cover and in eight special pages in the centre, and sold 20 million in the 1870s. In 1882 he launched a series of 'Penny Readings', and sold a quarter of a million in the first eleven weeks. In 1880 and 1881 he spent 10 per cent of the gross sales of the Manchester store on advertising. When rival Manchester shopkeepers took him to court in 1881 for blocking the market square, Lewis printed 100,000 copies of his story of the trial and offered one to every householder in Manchester. Shortly before he died he chartered the famous steamship the 'Great Eastern' for a year, arranging for it to be anchored in the Mersey estuary as part of the Liverpool International Exhibition of 1886, to be used as a social centre. 20,000 went on board in the first four days, and over half a million visited it. 
Lewis died on 4 December 1885 at his home in Liverpool, after a long illness, and was buried three days later in the Hebrew cemetery, Fairfield. Out of a small men's tailoring business he had created a large department store, the largest in Liverpool, catering for the working classes of the north of England, with branches in other cities. He had no children, but he had encouraged members of his family to join what he always regarded as a family business. Louis Cohen, Bertha Cohen's nephew, who was born in Australia, and who married Lewis's niece, Mary Levy, succeeded him as head of the business. 
Lewis set up the David Lewis Trust, to be used for charitable purposes in Liverpool and Manchester. His executors developed the David Lewis Northern Hospital, and in 1906 the David Lewis Hotel and Club Association was founded, as a neighbourhood centre, in the Liverpool docklands. 


@@@@@


doc= 49321


Lewis, Sir Edward Roberts (1900-1980), record and gramophone company executive, was born at Allerton Mount, Duffield Road, Derby on 19 April 1900, the only son in the family of four children of Sir Alfred Edward Lewis (1868-1940), banker, and his wife, May Roberts. His father was an employee and later chief general manager of the National and Provincial Bank. Lewis was educated at Rugby School and Trinity College, Cambridge. Thereafter he entered the world of finance and at the age of twenty-five established his own stockbroking firm, E. R. Lewis & Co., which continued to trade in the late twentieth century. In 1923 he married Margaret Mary ('Masie'), daughter of the Revd George Dickson Hutton; they had two sons, one of whom died while still at Rugby School, attempting to rescue a drowning boy at the school's boys club summer camp. The other later became the senior partner in the stockbroking firm that Lewis founded. 
Through his stockbroking activities, Lewis became acquainted with the Decca Company, which manufactured recording and play-back equipment and developed the world's first portable gramophone. In the summer of 1928 Lewis's firm acted as brokers for Decca's stock market flotation, and the apparently excellent prospects of the firm, together with the boom then happening in the broader music industry, ensured that the share issue was oversubscribed some twenty fold. Lewis's interest in the company and music industry in general began to take up more and more of his time and he attempted to put his expertise to work in expanding Decca. His idea was for the company to build on its worldwide reputation and distribution network by expanding into the business of record production and manufacture, a far more lucrative branch of the industry than that of the manufacture of equipment to play records on. 
However, when Lewis approached Decca's board of directors with his plans for establishing Decca's own catalogue of records, complete with a roster of artists, they were sceptical. They went as far as inspecting a possible factory site -- the ailing Duophone Company's record factory at Shannon's Corner, Kingston -- but turned Lewis down in January 1929. Undeterred, Lewis fell back on his own financial expertise and industry contacts, and set about forming a syndicate, the Malden Holding Company Ltd, with a view to establishing a record company of his own, based around the Duophone factory. In the event, Lewis and his colleagues decided to take over Decca, since it had an established name and network, and on 28 February 1929 a new Decca issue was made, shares this time being oversubscribed nearly twofold. The new business that began trading with such high hopes was soon engulfed in the great depression which began with the Wall Street crash later that year. As countless companies went to the wall, Lewis faced a titanic struggle to prevent Decca going under, a struggle that lasted a decade. Within a year of the 1929 issue, Decca's bankers were threatening foreclosure, and at its financial nadir some years later, the company even had its telephone cut off. It was not until 1945 that Decca's shareholders began to make even a small profit from their original investments. 
As disaster loomed in 1931, Lewis argued for a change in the company's management, more rapid expansion, and, in an attempt to eat into the market share of the newly formed Electric and Musical Industries (EMI) conglomerate, substantial cuts in the retail price of Decca records. Lewis eventually got his way, but not without a series of managerial tussles, intense lobbying of shareholders, and even a nationwide tour on his own part (he never claimed for his travel expenses in all his years at Decca) to assess the company's performance in the market place. By September Lewis had secured the departure of Decca's managing director, S. C. Newton, and 'de facto' became his successor, although he took no official position other than becoming a member of the board. In practice, however, he had effective control of the company. It had been Lewis's intention for this state of affairs to last only a few months, but he was soon tied into the company's long-term prospects and was forced by the exigencies of the deepening great depression and attendant decline in the record industry (in Britain between 1929 and 1938 record sales fell by eighty-five per cent) to think of new ways of keeping Decca afloat. He signed new artists such as the singer Gertrude Lawrence and the best-selling dance-bandleader Jack Hylton, combining this with a policy of consistently lowering retail prices below those charged by EMI. In the early 1930s Lewis strengthened the Decca popular and classical record catalogues by accessing the recordings of two important overseas record companies. To achieve this, he first acquired the American Brunswick Record Company, then a subsidiary of Hollywood film-makers Warner Brothers, which marketed records by leading popular American artists such as Bing Crosby and Al Jolson. He then concluded a licensing agreement with the German Polydor Company giving him access to a whole range of classical recordings. Nevertheless, by 1933, as the record industry continued to disintegrate, Decca found itself in further difficulties, managing to raise only $23,000 on a share issue of $120,000. Despite the deep personal depression that Lewis experienced as a consequence of all this, he persevered, mobilizing his own resources and those of friends and family to take up the rest of the issue, though not without experiencing considerable hardship in the process of finding money to pay for it. At the same time, every available economy was made within the company and as part of this drive loyal staff accepted salary cuts. Lewis later recalled that without such selfless devotion the Decca enterprise could never have survived, but his own diplomatic skills and sheer determination were also important ingredients. 
By 1934 Decca was breaking into the lucrative American market and the record division at least turned in its first profit. During this period, in order to supervise his growing transatlantic trade, Lewis travelled back and forth between Britain and the United States. Yet even this expansion proved a drain on the company's slender resources. However, through a combination of Lewis's adroitness, good luck, and a gradual upturn in the global economy, by the time the Second World War broke out in 1939, it appeared that Decca had weathered the storm. In the circumstances of war, demand for records began to rise: Lewis attributed this, in Britain at least, to the greater need for home entertainment as city centres closed down and blacked out in the face of much feared and expected air-raids. Furthermore, in 1940, Decca engineers began experiments in the field of radio navigation, a form of radar. Initial scepticism on the parts of both the British and United States military delayed its development somewhat, but, by 1944, entirely successful tests ensured that the 'Decca Navigator', as the final product was called, was crucial in the execution of the D-day landings at Normandy. Decca subsequently diversified into more specialized technical defence related fields, and its air and sea navigation equipment proved a cornerstone of the company's post-war development. Indeed, this area of the business continued to be profitable during the late 1970s, when the record division ran into serious trouble, and, in 1980, when the business was finally sold and broken up, the defence sector proved to be Decca's largest single asset. 
After the war, Decca came into its own and saw its profits surge. Lewis had an ear for popular and classical music, and gathered around him a strong team of artist and repertoire managers and classical record producers. He also had a great respect for (and a good grasp of) the ever changing tastes of the record buying public. His guiding principle was that it was no use arguing with the public about what it wanted. The only serious mistake Decca made was to audition and reject the Beatles, though they did sign the Rolling Stones and a host of other rock bands. That aside, Decca prospered under Lewis, who did not even assume the official title of chairman until 1957. He never claimed to be a technical or recording expert, but his great skill in co-ordinating and maximizing the efforts of the experts he worked with earned him the gold Albert medal of the Royal Society of Arts for services to the development of electronics in 1967. He was knighted in 1951. 
Lewis was a man who combined a cheerful calm manner with incredible business acumen. A fervent believer in private enterprise, he was a vocal opponent of state intervention in the market place after 1945, a view articulated most notably in his business memoirs, 'No CIC', first published in 1956 (the CIC in the title stands for 'Capital Issues Committee', the body established after the war to supervise capital issues and transfers). Lewis's point was that had its restrictive practices been in force during the 1930s, he would never have been able to build up Decca into the successful business it became. Like many who create, build, and retain close personal control over large enterprises, Lewis was unable to appoint a successor or relinquish control of the business. As a consequence, in 1980, days before his death, the business, then in the grip of a serious financial crisis, was sold. 
Lewis was not an extravagant man, despite his huge personal fortune. He donated large sums of money to Rugby School and the Middlesex Hospital, and he was more interested in watching a cricket match than living a life of obvious luxury. His first wife died in 1968 and in 1973 he married Jeanie Margaret, daughter of Thomas Henry Smith, a farmer. During the latter period of his life Lewis had a London home at 69A Cadogan Place, Chelsea, as well as one in the country at Bridge House Farm, Felsted, Essex. He died of cancer at his London home, on 29 January 1980. He was survived by his second wife. 'Leaving aside his successes in the field of electronics', noted his obituarist in 'The Gramophone', 'he will always be remembered as one of the great men of the record industry'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49323


Lewis, John (1836-1928), department store owner, was born at Town Street, Shepton Mallet, Somerset, on 24 February 1836, the fifth child (of nine) and first son of John Lewis (1798-1843), a cabinet-maker and baker of Town Street, and his wife, Elizabeth Speed. Orphaned when his father died, he was brought up by an unmarried aunt, Ann Speed, and educated at the local grammar school. Lewis was apprenticed at fourteen to a draper in Wells, and then worked for various firms before joining Peter Robinson of Oxford Street in 1856 as a buyer for silks and dress materials. 
In 1864 Lewis began his own drapery business at a small leasehold shop at 132 (later 286) Oxford Street. Thus began twenty years of lonely bachelor life, which Lewis did not recollect with any fondness. The work was hard and dreary, but the location of the shop and Lewis's simple and honest trading policy -- based on a wide assortment of good-value merchandise -- proved successful. From silks, woollens, and cotton fabrics, he diversified into dress fabrics and clothing, then later furnishing fabrics and household supplies, such as china and ironmongery (though not food). Sales increased from $25,000 in 1870 to about $70,000 a decade later. By 1895 this expansion had allowed him to rebuild the original shop as a three-storey department store, with retail showrooms, warehouse space, and a customers' restaurant. He employed about 150 people, with 100 female staff housed in a hostel nearby, in Weymouth Street. 
The business remained private, with Lewis continuing to build it up by working long hours. On 1 November 1884 he married Eliza Baker ('b'. 'c'.1854), a schoolmistress from a west-country family who ran a drapery business. His wife was one of the first students at Girton College, Cambridge. Lewis took no one into partnership until his two sons, John Spedan Lewis (1885-1963) and Oswald Lewis (1887-1966), came of age. His only attempt at expansion outside Oxford Street was the acquisition of Peter Jones Ltd, Chelsea, the control of which he had bought in 1906, when he walked from his store to Sloane Square with $20,000 in banknotes in his pocket. Spare capital from his business was invested quite randomly in various properties, some hundred of which were bought in his lifetime. Always an outspoken and colourful character, Lewis engaged in a running battle with his landlords (the Portland estate) to redress what he considered was an unfair balance of power between landlord and tenant; and he spent some weeks in Brixton prison in 1903 for contempt of court. 
On his own terms, Lewis's life was a great success. By 1924 sales had reached $921,000. His customers had been served well by his department store and so had Lewis. For more than twenty years he lived in a large house on Hampstead Heath with his wife and family, and he drove a good pair of horses and later ran a Rolls-Royce. He was appointed to St Marylebone vestry (later the borough council) between 1888 and 1919, and was the elected Liberal representative for the West Marylebone division of London county council between 1901 and 1904. On the other hand, he was a hard and arbitrary employer, with the persona of a Victorian curmudgeon. One staff member recalled that in the late 1920s, 'he still came down from Hampstead in the old Rolls Royce from time to time and would sweep round the place sacking anyone he didn't like the look of' (Macpherson, 23). 
Lewis's son Spedan later wrote a withering portrait of his father's conservative business methods. 'His aims in life, his ideas and his methods were really quite ordinary but the ideas were held with a vigour and the methods were applied with an energy that was far indeed from being ordinary. With very little education and no friends he found himself in an occupation to which he was in many ways ill-suited. (Lewis, 5)' The result was that by the twentieth century John Lewis had 'got himself into the position of being the captain of a big ship much under-engined and with those engines much under-fuelled. As a whole the staff were not nearly good enough' (Lewis, 14). These comments were no doubt partial (Spedan and his father disagreed on business matters); however, evidence for their veracity can be found in John Lewis's business performance, which was far less dynamic than that of his rivals, such as William Whiteley, Frederick Gorringe, and Owen Owen. A staff strike in 1920, persistent mismanagement and losses at Peter Jones, and his reluctance to hand over control to his sons, which effectively prevented an infusion of fresh ideas, were other features of the founder's rule. 
John Lewis died on 8 June 1928 at his home, Spedan Tower, Branch Hill, Hampstead, London. His death allowed his son Spedan to implement his more imaginative 'partnership' ideal, and so make the John Lewis department store nationally famous. However, the name was retained as a tribute to John Lewis's 'first-rate reputation for general trustworthiness' (Lewis, 15). 


@@@@@


doc= 49327


Livesey, James (1833-1925), civil engineer, was born at Preston, Lancashire, the youngest of three sons of Joseph Livesey (1794-1884) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Williams (died 1869). Livesey was a precocious, innovative child, endowed with an enquiring mind. He demonstrated an early flair for engineering, an aptitude that was recognized and encouraged by his father, sometime proprietor of the 'Preston Guardian' and a leading light in the local temperance movement. He was educated at Mr Isherwood's day school in Preston and apprenticed at the age of fourteen to Isaac Dodds, working on the Caledonian Railway. At the age of sixteen he entered the engineering works of Musgrave & Co., Bolton, specialists in agricultural equipment. Subsequently, he worked at the famous Manchester locomotive firm, Beyer, Peacock & Co. and served as a railway engineer in Spain on the Isabel II Railway, before establishing in Manchester in 1862 his own business, manufacturing newspaper-folding machinery. While in Spain he may have married a Spanish woman. A son, Fernando Harry, was born in 1860. He had at least two other sons, and two daughters. Later he practised as an engineering consultant, and it was in this capacity that he became associated with the Buenos Ayres Great Southern Railway Company, of which he became chief engineer, and thereafter several other British-owned South American railways, many of which were promoted by Alexander Henderson, first Baron Faringdon. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Iron and Steel Institute, and was director of the Costa Rica Markets Company Limited. 
Livesey is credited with several inventions, including newspaper-folding and -cutting machinery (he presented a mechanically folded newspaper to Queen Victoria at the Great Exhibition in 1851), cast-iron railway sleepers (laid experimentally in Britain and Argentina), grain elevators, and domestic sanitation systems, but his career is most closely associated with the engineering consultancy business that he founded, successively James Livesey, James Livesey & Son, Livesey, Son, and Henderson, and, ultimately, Livesey and Henderson. His early ventures were backed by his father; subsequently he obtained financial support from W. Owen, iron manufacturers and equipment makers of Rotherham, and from Alexander Henderson. In 1885 his son, Fernando Harry (later Sir Harry) Livesey (1860-1932), joined the consultancy business, followed in 1891 by Henderson's brother, Brodie Haldane Henderson. Brodie Henderson became senior partner in 1893 when Livesey retired, and at this point the firm was known as Livesey and Henderson. Associated with railway engineering at a relatively early stage in the history of the industry, Livesey was from time to time connected with several prominent figures, including Thomas Brassey the contractor, Andrew Carnegie the American steel magnate, Sir Sandford Fleming, promoter of Canadian Railways, and George Hudson, the railway king. Besides working in Spain, he cultivated business contacts in France and Scandinavia and travelled extensively in the Americas, from Canada to Argentina. Touring in the USA and Canada, he familiarized himself with the distinct techniques of railway building in North America, and worked briefly as a railway engineer in Canada. Subsequently, he spent lengthy periods in the River Plate region, where he supervised work on a number of pioneer lines, including the Central Uruguay, the Buenos Ayres and Rosario, and the Entre Rios, in addition to the Buenos Ayres Great Southern. Under his direction, the partnership was also concerned with railway construction in Brazil, Chile, Peru, and Venezuela. Later the firm developed an extensive contract business in Africa. 
After a colourful life, several times having been involved in serious railway accidents, Livesey died of pneumonia at his London residence, 4 Whitehall Court, Westminster, on 3 February 1925, at the age of ninety-two. He was buried at Rotherfield, his estate in Sussex, on 6 February. He was survived by three sons and two married daughters. In addition to an estate valued at over $300,000, he left property in Sussex, and houses in France and Norway. 


@@@@@


doc= 49330


Longman family (per. 1724-1972), publishers, had their origins at Winford near Bristol. The family tree has been traced back to Thomas Longman, a Somerset yeoman, whose third son, also named Thomas, born 'c'.1612, was apprenticed to a Bristol 'sopemaker' in 1626, being made free in 1633. He married Ann, the daughter of Ezekiel Wallis, an alderman and one-time mayor of Bristol. There were three generations of Longman soapmakers before the advent of seven generations of Longman publishers. The local soap trade was in decline, however, after 1738. When Ezekiel Longman, sheriff, died in 1708, the London book trade, through which the Longmans made their way into history, was already flourishing, offering, if never without risk, expanding markets and rising profits. 

Thomas Longman (1699-1755), the first in the line of publishers, was born at Bristol in 1699, the son of Ezekiel Longman's second marriage, and he was nine years old when his father died. No evidence survives about why in 1716 his guardians sent him to London to be apprenticed to a Lombard Street bookseller, John Osborn (died 1734), at the sign of the Oxford Arms. In 1724, one year after his articles expired, Thomas (remembered in the firm as Thomas I), using an inheritance from his Bristol relatives, acquired for $2282 9's'. 6died a publishing house at the sign of The Ship. It had been in existence since 1640, owned by different families, the last of them that of William Taylor, remembered as publisher of Daniel Defoe's 'Robinson Crusoe' (1719). John Osborn was an executor. Taylor had moved premises to Paternoster Row, occupying a property later numbered 39, in 1711 and had also acquired the Black Swan, an adjacent property, at the corner of Paternoster Row and Ave Maria Lane. 
Thomas, who did not immediately acquire all the Taylor copyrights -- 'Robinson Crusoe' was not one of them -- always called himself a bookseller and not a publisher (the term was not then used in its current sense), and he never printed any of the books that bore his imprint, usually an imprint shared with others. From 1725, moreover, he was joined as a partner by John Osborn's son, also called John, who died without issue in 1733 six months before his father. There was one even closer family connection with the Osborns. Thomas married the elder Osborn's daughter, Mary (died 1762), on 27 January 1731, in St Paul's Cathedral. They too had no children. 
Almost at once Thomas had added to the shares in the titles of books he acquired from Taylor at a time when such shares were bought and sold at convivial but exclusive sales. He paid particular attention to science titles, beginning with an edition of the works of the chemist Robert Boyle, prepared by Peter Shaw, his doctor, who helped Mary through a serious illness in 1735. Seven years earlier he had been one of a consortium which published the influential 'Cyclopaedia of Arts and Sciences' compiled by Ephraim Chambers, whom he is said to have treated with 'the liberality of a prince and the tenderness of a father' (H. Curwen, 'A History of Booksellers', 1873, 82). His best-remembered enterprise, however, is that of being one of a later consortium which produced Samuel Johnson's 'Dictionary of the English Language' in 1755. Thomas died on 18 June that year, nine years to the day from when the agreement with Johnson was signed. 
It was Mary who on Thomas's death became the senior partner in what was by then a thriving business, alongside Thomas's nephew Thomas Longman (1730-1797), who was keenly interested in the theatre and married Elizabeth Harris, the sister of a proprietor and manager of Covent Garden. Without him the Longman business, thriving though it was, might have come to an end very near its beginning; and it was fortunate for its survival and further growth that he had no fewer than twelve children. His eldest son, Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842), was an outstanding figure in the Longman line of publishers. The second son, George (1776-1822), provided further dynastic connection, highly valuable in trading terms. With the fortune bequeathed to him by his father, he went into business with the enterprising paper maker John Dickinson, and was the first Longman to become a member of parliament. 
The connections continued and became more intricate. In 1843 William Longman (1813-1877) married Emma Pratt-Barlow, daughter of a rich railway director, whose brother had married John Dickinson's daughter, and in 1874 Thomas Norton Longman (1849-1930), eldest son of Thomas Longman (1804-1879), married Florence Pratt-Barlow, Emma's niece. Six years later Charles James Longman (1852-1934) married Harriet Ann, the daughter of Sir John Evans, who was a treasurer of the Royal Society and president of the Society of Antiquaries as well as a paper maker. 
There was another connection, this time with printing. Mary (1801-1870), one of the daughters of Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842), married Andrew Spottiswoode, later printer to Queen Victoria, a member of the famous printing house founded by his grandfather William Strahan, main printer for the early Longmans. 
The name Norton had come into the Longman family in 1736 following the purchase by Thomas Longman (1699-1755) and Samuel Buckley from the Norton family, its patentees, of the royal grant and privilege of printing William Lily's 'Latin Grammar' dating back to the sixteenth century. The last Thomas Norton Longman was always known in the business as Mr Norton. 
Such family connections and convergences have often been noted, as they were in 1854 by a publisher very different from the Longmans, Charles Knight; and in 1924, the 'Publishers' Circular', a valuable periodical launched in 1837 by a group of publishers including William Longman, numbered Longman names, as Knight had done, like sovereigns. Five were called Thomas, and it was only because there were by then too many Longmans in the business that the last Thomas Norton Longman dropped the numbering. 
Yet there remained a strong sense of family hierarchy. In 1924, at the time of the much celebrated bicentenary of the house, Harold Cox -- the last editor of the 'Edinburgh Review', the quarterly which Longmans had owned throughout most of its history -- suggested as a firm believer in the 'principle of heredity' that 'the example of the firm of Longmans' was of more than family interest. Through six generations (and there was to be a seventh) a single family had 'successfully administered an important and constantly expanding business', preserving 'the traditions on which the original success of the firm was based', but developing them 'to meet new needs or to seize new opportunities' (Cox and Chandler, 48). 
Even more eloquently, Sir George Otto Trevelyan, the nephew of Macaulay, paid tribute at the time of the bicentenary to the house with which his own family had been and remained in such close dynastic connection. It was not, he said, 'a creature of the State, nor of the Church, nor of the Universities, nor of any corporate body'. Nor was it 'the creation of the money-making impulse'. The house stood both for 'self-help and the effort of the individual' and for 'family tradition, for ideals of public usefulness and assistance to the cause of literature and science, handed on from generation to generation' (Cox and Chandler, 56). In the Trevelyan family that cause was perpetuated by Sir George's son G. M. Trevelyan, who had already written several books for Longman by 1924, including his 'British History in the Nineteenth Century', published two years before. His 'English Social History' (1944) was as much of a Longman bestseller as Macaulay's five-volume 'History of England' (1849-61). The cheque for $20,000 paid to Macaulay by Longman on account in 1855 has been carefully preserved. 
Dynastic links were present inside the Longman business at almost every level as well as between the Longmans and other families. Thus the Greens, father and son, Bevis (1793-1869) and William Ellerby (1836-1918), spanned almost a century of the business, and from 1889 to 1926 the imprint used by the Longmans was 'Longmans Green'. Not until 1959 did it become 'Longmans'. The success of the family, as the Longmans themselves appreciated, always depended on the taking in of 'outsiders', the first of them Owen Rees (1770-1837), a Welsh dissenter from a very different background from the Longmans, who was made a partner in 1797 before the death of Thomas Longman on 5 February 1797. There were many non-Longman partners in the nineteenth century, their names recorded in the successive imprints of the house. The longest list of names, six of them -- Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green -- was on the imprint between 1823 and 1825. 
In briefly describing the house of Longman & Co. in 1859, the year of the retirement of Thomas Brown and the death of Cosmo Orme, 'The Times' (6 September) claimed that 'perhaps nothing more has tended to raise the House to its present position than the plan adopted by the principals of introducing fresh blood from time to time'. It noted also, however, that 'like some of our other well-known institutions, its origin is lost in obscurity'. The family itself made every effort to find out, and this remark could not have been made ten years later. 
In 1842, before the mid-Victorian boom years in the history of publishing, an obituary notice of Thomas Norton Longman in the 'Annual Register', in which the Longmans had had a share since 1805, described him as the head of a house 'which has for more than a century been distinguished as the Leviathan of publishing and bookselling'. The description was to become more familiar between 1851 and 1870, when the mid-Victorian publishing business was dominated by a few great leviathans, as they were called at the time, with the house of Longman heading or near the head of them. 
The basis of the house's strength was capital. Thomas Norton Longman had left nearly $200,000 in 1842, when he died accidentally after falling from his horse on his way back from Paternoster Row to his house in Hampstead; and Bevis Green, who died in 1869, left about the same sum. Nevertheless, success depended not only on capital but on the display of publishing skills. A new phase in the history of the family began in 1842, when for the first time two sons, Thomas and William, succeeded to the control of the firm. They were given good advice by the aged Sydney Smith, then a canon of St Paul's living not far from Paternoster Row. 'You and your brother', he told them, 'are arrived at years of great maturity and are quite capable of conducting your own business... I expect you [both] to live together upon the strictest terms of friendship and to be ready to make mutual concessions' (Wallis, 19-20). They followed his advice, whether they needed it or not, and from the start divided their responsibilities in a sensible manner. By virtue of his age Thomas Longman (1804-1879) was chairman, but William, who was born on 9 February 1813, was a more dynamic businessman, although, like earlier Longmans, he was singled out by contemporaries less for his dynamism than for his 'courtesy, geniality, kindliness and ready hospitality'. The latter quality had always been stressed by his father, who generously entertained his authors as well as published them. 
In 1873 it was said of William by Henry Curwen, author of an early history of the book trade, that he succeeded through a combination of enterprise and discretion, and the former quality was evident in 1863 when he arranged the acquisition of the business of J. W. Parker, not the first or last of Longman acquisitions, which greatly strengthened the Longman list of authors. John Stuart Mill was one of them, and his 'Subjection of Women' (1869) and his revealing 'Autobiography' (1873) were major Longman publications in a completely different genre from John Henry Newman's 'Apologia pro vita sua' (1854), a book published by Longman at Newman's own request. 
In the Parker list there were three historians very different from Macaulay and from each other -- J. A. Froude, who became a close friend of the Longman family, H. T. Buckle, and W. E. H. Lecky. Two other of Longman's highly successful mid-Victorian publications were P. M. Roget's 'Thesaurus' (1852), frequently re-edited, first in dynastic fashion by his son and grandson, and 'Gray's Anatomy' (1863), a far less original work, but one which was also to go through many new and distinctly different editions, including a lavish centenary edition in 1958. In this and other books the Longmans paid particular attention to illustrations. 
The mid-Victorian theological list was extremely varied, and while it included Newman, with very different religious views from those of the family, it also included the highly controversial works of J. W. Colenso, deposed for heresy -- and reinstated -- bishop of Natal: Colenso had written many successful mathematical textbooks at various levels for Longman, to whom he sold the copyright for $10,000. Education was already a Longman speciality, but the width of their publishing list is demonstrated by the presence in it of the novelist Anthony Trollope ('The Warden'); the traveller Richard Burton (Longmans did not publish his erotica); the sociologist, would-be psychologist, Herbert Spencer; the philologist Max Muller; the soldier Evelyn Baring, later Lord Cromer, whose 'Staff College Essays' appeared in 1870 when he was a lieutenant; the man of many parts Sir John Lubbock, later Lord Avebury, 'qua' anthropologist; and the widely read writer on cookery Eliza Acton. 
Longman was the second of the publishing leviathans to be described at length in a series of three anonymous articles in 'The Critic' in 1860, written by a well-known Victorian journalist, Francis Espinasse. (Murray was the first, Blackwood the third.) He traced the story of the dynasty back to Bristol and described its association under Thomas Norton Longman and Rees with an at least equally remarkable list of pre-Victorian authors, some of whom had already become leading names in English literature -- Samuel Taylor Coleridge, William Wordsworth, Robert Southey, and Sir Walter Scott. The second edition of the 'Lyrical Ballads' (1800), with its famous preface, had already joined Johnson's 'Dictionary' in a Longman hall of fame. And before Macaulay there had already been one other long-remembered record payment, that of $5000 presented to Tom Moore for his now largely forgotten Romantic poem 'Lalla Rookh' (1817), which went through six impressions in its first year. Espinasse ended his article with a reference to a new edition of Johnson's 'Dictionary'. Only the house of Longman had survived from the original consortium. 
A regular Longman publication that survived all rival publications was the 'Edinburgh Review', the whig quarterly through which Macaulay came to fame. Launched in 1802 in association with the Scottish firm of Archibald Constable, it remained in joint Constable-Longman hands after only a short break until it became Longmans' exclusive property in 1826 after the collapse of the Constable business. Edited by Francis Jeffrey, it had established substantial political importance before the advent of its Victorian editor Henry Reeve, a personal friend of the Longman family, who stayed in his chair for forty years from 1855. In unpublished memoirs the last Thomas Norton Longman could write in 1921, eight years before the review ceased to appear, that the family had been fortunate in all 'our editors, and all has been such smooth running that there is little or nothing to report'. 
This last Thomas Norton Longman, son of Thomas Longman (1804-1879), was one of a new generation of Longmans who took over at Paternoster Row following the death of the first William Longman on 13 August 1877. He had joined the business as a young man of twenty and had become a partner in 1873. Four years later William's son, Charles James Longman, with impeccable whig first names, became a partner too. A third Longman, George Henry (1852-1938), also entered the business and became a partner in 1879. He took little part in the literary side of the house, but had responsibility for foreign trade and, loosely, for financial affairs before the advent of professional accounting. A fourth Longman, Hubert Harry Longman (1856-1940), was not much involved in the business at Paternoster Row, but for a time was given charge of the Ship Binding Works at Great Saffron Hill, conveniently not far away. This was a subsidiary company, formed in 1887. Hubert Harry's main interest was in Liberal politics in Surrey, and he was the only Longman to be made a baronet -- in 1909. 
Effectively publishing control of the house of Longman was now in the hands of Thomas Norton Longman and Charles James Longman (1852-1934), the latter the junior but the more powerful of the two. Known as CJ, he was educated at Harrow School and at University College, Oxford; he was also known in the book trade as Black Longman on account of his square-cut black beard. He could be autocratic in his treatment of employees and even of authors. It was reputed that he lost the young Winston Churchill, whose first books were published by Longman, because Churchill lit a cigar in his presence. It was CJ, however, who was largely responsible for the negotiations leading up to the acquisition in 1890 of the house of Rivington (founded in 1711), which involved more complex issues than the acquisition of J. W. Parker in 1863. CJ was surprised to be approached by Francis Hansard Rivington about a take-over since Rivington had been in charge of the business for thirty-nine years. 
The Rivington deal strengthened the Longman theological list even more than the Parker deal had done, and Longmans were now the publishers of Newman the Anglo-Catholic as well as of Newman the Roman Catholic. They were placed in direct contact too with the high-church party in Oxford. Yet this was not the only new link forged during the period. CJ was a close friend of the novelist Rider Haggard, and it was through this and similar links that Longmans published Robert Louis Stevenson's 'Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde' (1886). On very different fronts CJ fostered the increase in the number of school textbooks and the expansion of the overseas side of the business, two developments which converged with the development of English language teaching. A key appointment was that of J. W. Allen in 1884, who arrived at Paternoster Row with teaching experience with the Liverpool school board. His experience and acumen added to Longman family profits, but he did not become a partner until 1918 on the death of W. E. Green, who left him his shares. 
The head of the house of Longman, the last Thomas Norton Longman, claimed in typewritten memoirs that as 'Longman the 5th' he had the right to have the casting vote on all details relating to the form and price of any book: 'my very blood is printer's ink and my very bones are made of a mixture of type and paper'. In one of his very first business transactions, however, that with Disraeli, then Lord Beaconsfield, he yielded to the author in 1880 on many points in relation to the publishing of Disraeli's 'Endymion'. He confessed that he was surprised too by the immediate great success of 'The Voyage of the Sunbeam' (1877) written by Anna Brassey, daughter-in-law of the great contractor: it sold a quarter of a million copies in a popular edition and was translated into every European language. 
Like his cousin, Thomas Norton Longman later put much of his trust in the unremitting literary advice given to the house by Andrew Lang: Lang had been at Oxford with Frederick William Longman (1846-1908), who because of an accident became a lifelong invalid and could not take part in the business. Lang also wrote a regular column, 'At the sign of The Ship', for 'Longman's Magazine', founded in 1882, priced 6died, and edited by CJ, which lasted until 1905 without ever acquiring the reputation and prestige of the 'Cornhill' or 'Macmillan' magazines. 
Scientific and medical books fell within Thomas Norton's range of responsibilities, with CJ cultivating the history side of the business. In 1881 the 'English Historical Review' was launched, edited by a Longman author, Mandell Creighton, later bishop of London, to be followed in 1905 by a new twelve-volume series on the political history of England, the first of many later Longman series. One of these was to be the responsibility of Cyprian Blagden, formerly a public schoolmaster, an inspector of schools, who came to know more about the history of the Longman business than any member of the family. In his penetrating booklet 'Fire More than Water' (1959) he claimed that those Longmans who had controlled the business during the 107 years since 1842 had provided no new 'publishing answers'. They had provided the old answers 'over and over again under new conditions and with changing problems' (Blagden, 29). There was limited truth in the remark as far as the first seventy years were concerned, for by 1964 the house of Longman was making more of its longevity than of its enterprise, and at the end of the First World War Thomas Norton and CJ were still in charge at the top. Thomas Norton retired a year later; CJ, increasingly conservative, not until 1928: in his last years he refused to keep a telephone in his room. He died in 1934. 
It made very little difference to the daily business routines of the family when in 1889 Longmans Green became a family company, or, indeed, when in 1926 a limited liability company transformed the partners into directors. Each lunchtime they held a meeting to discuss business after a boy employee had taken round the relevant papers to each director's room, using the words 'Mr Green desires your presence' long after the last Green had died. No formal votes were taken at the meetings. 
Nevertheless, emphases were changing, with an increased concentration on education and on overseas expansion. School textbooks became increasingly profitable after the 'Education Acts' of 1870 and 1902, and so did textbooks in English and vernacular languages for overseas, some of them produced abroad. There had been an early Longman connection with America when Thomas Longman (1730-1797) was chairman, and in 1889 a branch of Longmans Green was opened in New York. By 1918 it had built up a substantial independent business, not only in textbooks. A branch in Toronto followed in 1922. In India branches had been opened in Bombay in 1895 and in Calcutta in 1906. Blagden headed the Indian operations from 1941 to 1948. 
Two new Longmans arrived in Paternoster Row in 1906 -- Robert Guy Longman (1882-1971), the younger son of George Henry Longman, and his cousin William Longman (1882-1967), the son of C. J. Longman, the first of them educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, and the second at Harrow School and University College, Oxford. They both became partners three years later, once again specializing in their interests. Robert Guy was a highly intelligent and sensitive publisher with a lively interest in music and literary tastes of his own. It was he who encouraged novelists as different as Elizabeth Bowen, Stella Gibbons, and Mary Renault and the American author and playwright Thornton Wilder. He did not retire until 1948. William, always known in Paternoster Row as Mr Willie, concentrated on finance and accounts, inheriting a traditional and ritualized system, but, following the 'Companies Act' of 1914, one required to follow standard procedures of accounting. 
William was a shy man, who by the time when he retired in 1964 after thirty years as chairman was something of a recluse. Yet, like his father, he was involved in the higher politics of publishing. C. J. Longman had been first president of the newly formed Publishers' Association in 1896 and again from 1902 to 1914, and had given his full support to the net book agreement, regulating the retail prices of books, which had been initiated by Frederick Macmillan. William, who was president from 1929 to 1931, was described by a fellow publisher, Stanley Unwin, as the best president the association ever had. 
In their own publishing Robert Guy Longman and William Longman had to help steer their ship, still the Longman publishing logo, through the troubled seas of two wars and unprecedented depression. There was one family tragedy too. Eight weeks after the beginning of the First World War William's younger brother Frederick (1890-1914) was killed in action. During the depression the house of Longman had to turn for financial assistance to an outsider, Kenneth Boyd Potter, a member of a shipping family with its own rich and varied dynastic history, who became a director, bringing in necessary capital in 1926 and playing a bigger part than any of the Longmans when it became a public company in 1948. He was one of three directors who then disposed of some of their shares as part of a capital reorganization, William receiving $57,252 for his and Robert Guy $72,996. 
It would have been impossible to foresee this outcome on 29 December 1940 when at the height of the German air assault on Britain 39 Paternoster Row was totally destroyed along with neighbouring buildings. The fires that burnt there, started by incendiary bombs, were far more devastating than those of an earlier fire in 1861 which led the Longmans to have built on the site an imposing new building in Portland stone 'in the Renaissance style'. Literature, supported by the Arts and Science, was represented in the keystone of the main arch. It was with these two fires in mind -- and the great fire of London of 1666 -- that Blagden wrote 'Fire More than Water', noting that fires had their phoenixes, a lesson of 1940 as much as of 1861. 
In 1939 part of the Longman business had already been transferred to Wimbledon, and it was to suburban houses there that Robert Guy and William Longman now moved out, carrying on their business as far as possible as usual after a back list of nearly 6000 titles had been reduced to twelve. And there was further fire to come, for in April 1941 the old Ship Binding Works was put out of action. Even then the trials were not over, but in 1947 it was possible for the Longmans and their employees to return to London, this time to the West End not the City -- first to 6 and 7 Clifford Street, and next, in 1961, to 48 Grosvenor Street, not far away. These had been eighteenth-century domestic houses, built about the time when Thomas Longman started his business in 1724. 
There was no one single domestic residence passed on from one generation to another. The first Thomas Longman had lived and worked in Paternoster Row. So, too, had several of the later members of his family. Thomas Norton Longman (1771-1842) was the first to move out from the City to Mount Grove, Hampstead, in 1798: all his children were married in Hampstead parish church, and a bust in memory of him was placed there, donated by J. R. McCulloch, the political economist, and other friends. 
After his marriage in 1838 Thomas Longman (1804-1879) moved to a Nash house in Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, moving again further out of London ten years later, but keeping a London house in Sussex Gardens, where the youngest of his five daughters was born. It was the daughters whom he commemorated in a stained glass window in the Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley Street, complete with ships and black swans. Thomas moved later to Hampshire, where in 1860 he built an imposing new house at Farnborough Hill, designed in deep rose brick by Henry Edward Kendall, and set in a substantial estate. It too incorporated a frieze of stone terracotta panels depicting in high relief ships in full sail and swans swimming on water surrounded by palm trees. It was not bequeathed to any of his children, however, and two years after his death in 1879 it was acquired by the exiled French Empress Eugenie, who lived there until her own death in 1920. 
Thomas Longman's brother, William, who produced an even larger family consisting of seven daughters and three sons, lived in Hyde Park Square in London before acquiring houses first in Chorleywood and later in Berkhamsted, so that the Longman family, while mostly retaining London houses, was now scattered geographically. It was not until 1908 that the last Thomas Norton Longman, Thomas Longman's eldest son, acquired a substantial country house, Shendish, near Apsley, Hertfordshire, which had been built by Charles Longman, the Dickinson partner, in 1853 and which was occupied after his death in 1873 by his son Arthur (1843-1908), also a partner in the Dickinson paper business. Thomas Norton Longman retired to Shendish in 1919 exactly fifty years after his first arrival at Paternoster Row. He was buried there in a churchyard which was built at the expense of the Longman, Dickinson, Pratt-Barlow, and Evans families. 
Charles James Longman, Thomas Norton Longman's nephew, had a country house in Hertfordshire, Upp Hall, Braughing, near Ware, coincidentally not far from Harlow, where the Longman business was to move in 1968. His elder son, William, recorded that CJ was the last member of the family to live in style. He had four children, three of whom were given public-school and university educations, and possessed a town house, complete with mews and a coachman, as well as his country estate, where he employed seven domestic servants, two gardeners, two labourers, and two gamekeepers. 
The gamekeepers were more than status symbols, for most of the Victorian Longmans, beginning with Thomas Longman (1804-1879), were keenly interested in sports, a few of them more than they were in the business. The first William, deeply involved as he was in business affairs and in his own historical researches, which led him to write several books mainly on medieval English history and the architecture of St Paul's, was a founder member of the Alpine Club and its president from 1871 to 1874. C. J. Longman was an association football blue at Oxford and champion of England at archery in 1883, and along with his partner, the last Thomas Norton Longman, produced many books on different sports in their 'Badminton Library', begun in 1885 with the duke of Beaufort as its editor. CJ himself contributed the volume on archery. The series was supplemented later by a monthly 'Badminton Magazine'. George Henry Longman captained the Eton cricket eleven and Cambridge University, played regularly for the Gentlemen against the Players, and sponsored a Longman cricket club for employees of the business. Arthur Longman (1843-1908), like his father a partner in Dickinson & Co., was master of the Old Berkeley hunt. 
The last of the Longmans, Mark Frederick Kerr Longman (1916-1972), was more interested in the arts than in sports, but he had a country house at Bishopstone, on the top of a hill near Salisbury, an eighteenth-century rectory with Victorian connections. It is reputed to have been the model for Anthony Trollope's Plumstead Episcopi in 'The Warden', which was published by Mark's great-grandfather in 1855. 
Mark was the son of Henry Kerr Longman, who never entered the Longman business, but who came to its rescue as a stockbroker when for the only time in its history it faced banking problems in 1932. Mark's three forenames all came from the female side of his inheritance. In 1874 George Henry Longman had married Mary Frances Kerr, the daughter of Lord Frederic Kerr, whose brother was called Mark, and since the last Thomas Norton Longman had no male heir -- he had four daughters -- and William Longman had no children, it was through Henry Kerr Longman that the two of the last generation of Longmans entered the publishing business. Of his five sons, John Cecil Longman (1912-1965), who never intended to become a publisher, was made a director on the same day as his younger brother Mark, and their cousin, Thomas Michael Longman (1917-1978), only son of Robert Guy Longman. Thomas Michael was the only member of the family to leave the house of Longman. In 1959, unhappy about the decision of his fellow directors not to allow him to extend the theological side of their business, he set up a publishing business of his own, taking with him as partners two of his house colleagues, G. C. Darton and John Todd. 
Mark Longman had joined the house straight from Cambridge in 1938, returning after war service in 1946. Described in the headline of his 'Times' obituary (6 December 1972) as an 'outstanding publisher', he had become head of what was now simply called Longmans in 1964. An effective chairman and a brilliant speaker, he was president of the Publishers' Association from 1969 to 1971, following in the footsteps of an earlier generation of Longmans. He was also an energetic president of the National Book League, believing strongly in the future of the book in an age of new electronic media. 
There were great hopes for the future of the Longman business when it moved out in 1967 to a new building in Harlow New Town. It was designed by Sir Frederick Gibberd and proudly named Longman House. The warehouses had moved out earlier in 1959. The business was still expanding on the educational side with non-Longmans, like John Chapple and John Newsom, who inspired the move to Harlow, playing a major part. The expansion overseas, particularly in Commonwealth countries, had been so substantial that in 1966 a Longman Group of companies was constituted, their locations ranging from Nigeria to Australia, the Caribbean to the Pacific, with Mark as its first chairman. Exports and overseas sales then accounted for three-quarters of the Longman total. They depended on enterprise on the periphery rather than at the centre, where there was a shortage of family capital. In 1968, therefore, Mark initiated and carried through friendly negotiations that resulted in the take-over of the Longman Group by the Financial and Provincial Publishing Company, owned by S. Pearson & Son, and two years later Pearson Longman Ltd was formed. The pedigrees of the Longman and Pearson families, the latter with its origins in Bradford in 1856, sharply contrasted, but the first chairman of Pearson Longman, Patrick Gibson, had been at Eton with Mark and was proud to link the two family names in the company's new title. 
In the same year Mark became vice-chairman of Penguin, and after the death of Sir Allen Lane, founder in 1936 of the famous paperback business, he played a major part in arranging a merger between Pearson Longman Ltd and Penguin. It was not to last, but both companies continued to operate within the Pearson Group, a large conglomerate, dealing in many other products besides books, including porcelain and wine, until Pearson Longman, which flourished in the 1980s under the leadership of Tim Rix, a non-Longman and a non-Pearson, ceased to exist in 1994. That decision was taken not at Harlow but by the Pearson Group in London. 
Mark's widow, Lady Elizabeth Lambart, daughter of the tenth earl of Cavan, who had seen Mark through a long and crippling illness, survived this last landmark event in the Longman story. She had worked briefly inside Longmans as a secretary, and she was proud of the part that Mark, her second cousin, had played not only within the business, but within publishing as a whole. He was also chairman of the Fine Art Society, and his portrait by Graham Sutherland is a worthy memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 49332


Lord, Leonard Percy, Baron Lambury (1896-1967), engineer and motor vehicle manufacturer, was born at the Public Baths, Priory Street, Coventry, on 15 November 1896, the youngest of the two children of William Lord (1867-1911) and his wife, Emma, 'nee' Swain (1863-1938). His father originally followed the trade of carpenter but at the time of Leonard's birth was a superintendent of the public baths. Interestingly, in view of his later career, the Triumph Cycle Company was next door. His mother held the post of matron at the baths. In 1906 his parents took the licence of the Hope and Anchor Inn, White Friars Lane, Coventry. About this time he began to attend Bablake School in Coventry, which had a strong technical emphasis including a fully equipped carpenter's workshop and a working forge. He did well enough to continue his education beyond the statutory leaving age of thirteen. His fees, like those of many of the Bablake's boys, were paid for by Coventry education committee. 
Lord left school in 1913 aged sixteen and used his technical training to get a job at Courtaulds as a jig draughtsman. He later described these years to his colleague Miles Thomas: 'It was to keep his mother in comfort and to provide her with little luxuries that, when the young Leonard had finished his day's work at Courtaulds in Coventry, he went and taught night classes at the local 'Tech'. It was there that he first had to make an effort to control his temper, because he very nearly got into trouble for throwing the wooden-backed scrubber used for cleaning the blackboard at someone who got on his nerves' (Thomas, 180). 
Lord moved to Vickers for a short period, before joining Coventry Ordnance Works for the duration of the First World War. After the war he worked for a number of engineering firms. On 16 July 1921 in Coventry he married Ethel Lily (1896-1978), daughter of George Horton, who was also in the motor trade. They had three daughters. 
In 1922 Lord moved to Hotchkiss which made power units for Morris cars. Originally a manufacturer of machine guns, Hotchkiss was now part of the supplier chain set up by one of the motor industry's leading entrepreneurs, William Morris, to 'feed' his Morris Motors assembly plant at Cowley near Oxford. The Morris strategy throughout the 1920s was to take over suppliers, set up new companies, and purchase ailing rivals. In 1923 Hotchkiss was taken over and renamed Morris Engines. 
This proved opportune for Lord who was handed the job of purchasing and commissioning the updated equipment required. When he discovered that the new automatic transfer machines were not reliable, he recommended they should be reconverted to individual units. His boss, Frank Woollard, remonstrated that this would be 'tantamount to admitting that we have spent a vast sum of money on a mistaken policy' ('The Motor', 1955) but Lord argued that the firm would lose more money if it ignored his advice. Lord made a strong impression on Woollard: 'In this young man, not yet thirty years of age, I found all the qualities which go to make the ideal executive: an analytical mind coupled with a lively inventive capacity and an ability to present a case with all the implications fully considered. He was positive in outlook and prompt in action. ('The Motor', 1955)' William Morris agreed. In 1927 he bought the bankrupt Wolseley Motors and appointed Lord to overhaul its out of date factories. He was so effective that in 1933 Morris made him managing director of Morris Motors itself. Lord began the modernization of the Cowley factory, utilizing the mass production techniques introduced to Britain from the United States by the Ford Motor Company. He also established a new model range to improve the company's market position. Herbert Austin, founder of the Longbridge factory outside Birmingham, was the other major force in motor manufacturing and had, to date, dominated the small-car market with the popular Austin Seven. But the Seven was now a decade old and the Morris Eight, launched in 1934, gradually took over its position as the best-selling small car in Britain. 
By 1934 Morris was a multi-millionaire bearing the title Lord Nuffield in recognition of his generous charitable donations and his business empire had become the Nuffield Organization. He had come to rely on Leonard Lord, both as a friend and as a dynamic manager who could be trusted to keep a firm grasp on the business. Others were less enthusiastic. Nuffield's publicity chief (later vice-chairman) Miles Thomas described Lord's impact: 'There is no doubt that when L.P.L. splurged onto the Cowley scene he awoke people to the hard facts of life... in a remarkably short space of time he made that Cowley factory into one of the most efficient instruments for assembling motor cars to be seen anywhere in Europe. He walked roughly over the toes of anyone who got in his way' (Thomas, 'Out on a Wing', 172-3). 
When Nuffield eventually fell out with his protege, it was not because of Lord's forceful personality. Having promised to step back from the business now he was in his mid-fifties, Nuffield found himself unable to cede the amount of control Lord had begun to feel was due to him. The personal rift which developed between them was deeply hurtful to both men. Miles Thomas described Lord's mood at the end of 1936: 'He sat in my office one afternoon while the strain and anger of the split were still heavy on him and, suddenly blowing the ash off the inevitable cigarette between his lips, said, 'Tommy, I'm going to take that business at Cowley apart brick by bloody brick'' (Thomas, 'Out on a Wing', 181). In August 1936 Lord resigned and, with his wife, embarked aboard the 'Queen Mary' for an extended voyage around the Americas. Nuffield was a generous man and on Lord's return in 1937 appointed his now unemployed friend as manager of the Nuffield Trust for Special Areas, which held $2 million for distribution to development schemes benefiting areas in economic distress. 
Lord, though, was looking for a way back into the industry and in 1938 he accepted an offer from Nuffield's great rival, the Austin Motor Company. As works director at the Longbridge factory he began to modernize their manufacturing process as he had done at Cowley. Lord Austin was by now in poor health. Nevertheless, he played a key part in preparations for the Second World War as chairman of the Shadow Factory scheme. Austin's death during 1941 made Lord the most powerful man in the company. Joining him was George Harriman who had been faithfully at his side since they met at Morris Engines in 1923 while Harriman was still an apprentice. Lord directed Austin's war effort which included two shadow factories building Lancaster and Stirling bombers. The impressive productivity of Longbridge led Lord Beaverbrook, minister of aircraft production, to give him an additional responsibility as controller of Boulton Paul Aircraft Ltd with a remit to boost their production of Defiant night fighter planes. 
As the war drew to an end Lord began to plan for a return to civilian production. Building on its wartime contribution, the motor industry was at the forefront of efforts to rebuild Britain's shattered post-war economy and Lord took a prominent role in the nation's drive to earn foreign currency. He regularly undertook two voyages per year to promote Austin products and a succession of new assembly plants was set up in territories including Canada, Australia, Argentina, South Africa, and Mexico. The artisan's son, always accompanied by his wife, travelled first class on luxury liners. Nevertheless these trips involved a punishing schedule of networking. Any leisure time they were able to snatch was hard-earned. 
In the spring of 1948, for example, Lord embarked on a five-week tour, visiting dealers and charming government officials across Portugal, Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, and the Canary Islands. In the evenings he invited yet more corporate and diplomatic guests on board the 'RMS Andes': 'The usual procedure will be to reach Port in the early morning, hold receptions and visit Showrooms and Service Stations throughout the day and return on board the same evening' ('Austin Press Release', March 1948). Increased export earnings were confidently predicted as a result. His efforts to design the right car for the American market were less successful. Lord steam-rollered the sports convertible A90 Atlantic into the 1948 Austin product range but it failed to sell in the United States despite intensive publicity. 
Lord set up a rather different enterprise in 1949 at Bargoed in Wales which manufactured a sophisticated pedal car designed for children. The factory's purpose was to provide employment for former miners suffering from the lung disease pneumoconiosis caused by inhalation of coal dust. At the same time he embarked on a determined drive to take Longbridge to the forefront of the post-war industrial world. A series of modern facilities was constructed on the old flying ground, culminating in 1951 with the state-of-the-art 'Car Assembly Building', clad outside in glass and fitted inside with an advanced set of automated production lines. 
Nevertheless the position of the British motor industry was steadily weakening in world markets, making a merger between the old rivals at Longbridge and Cowley inevitable. Though Lord Austin was gone, Lord Nuffield lived to see the formation of the British Motor Corporation (BMC) in 1952 with its headquarters at Longbridge. The new structure appeared to treat the merging organizations equally by distributing the top jobs between the existing senior managements. This was, however, an illusion. In 1954 Lord Nuffield accepted the honorary post of president and went into retirement leaving Lord to become chairman with his own protege, George Harriman, as deputy chairman. 
It took two years of damaging in-fighting to reach this point which Lord, still nursing a festering resentment over his departure from Cowley, did nothing to discourage. This would become BMC's biggest weakness. Austin and Morris continued to run separate dealerships, between them selling six marques and several models dating back to 1947-8 to a confused public. Lord's solution was 'badge-engineering'. A limited number of the established engineering 'platforms' would be refreshed by replacing the old-fashioned styling with a choice of new body styles utilizing some or all of the six different badges available. This would cut production costs and provide a smaller model range without sacrificing the perceived brand-loyalty of customers. He asked Pininfarina, the Italian design house famous for its work with Ferrari, to create the designs and a series of elegant 'Farinas' began to launch in 1958. 
At the same time Lord was concerned that BMC's products were less advanced than those of its continental competitors. In 1955 he recruited Alec Issigonis, British designer of the acclaimed post-war Morris Minor, putting the factory's impressive technical facilities entirely at his disposal. Issigonis and his small team began work on a family of three new cars until the end of 1956 when the 'Suez Crisis' sparked anxiety about world fuel supplies. Lord personally instructed Issigonis to put the two larger cars to one side and concentrate on a fuel-efficient small car which must be on the market within two years. It was a brave gamble to unleash the creativity of his maverick designer in this way and he was rewarded with the revolutionary 'Mini'; but innovative engineering was expensive and the development period was too short to undertake a thorough testing programme. Issigonis himself commented: 'When Len Lord told me to go ahead and build it I was horrified. I even told him he was mad to build a car on what we had been able to demonstrate at that stage' (Bardsley, 205). 
The car was full of production faults when it was launched in 1959 incurring large warranty and re-engineering costs. Worse still, the sales department had no idea where to pitch it in the market, so they failed to take these factors into account. Instead, they decided simply to make it as cheap as possible to underprice what they perceived to be competing products. Over the next few years Issigonis returned to the other two cars in the model range, applying the principles he had used on the Mini to the medium-sized 1100 and the larger 1800, one a best-seller and the other a failure. Other firms, however, waited until the costs of parts and tooling came down before they copied the principles on which the Mini was based so that BMC were ultimately not the ones to benefit from the technology they pioneered. 
In November 1961 Lord stepped down as chairman of BMC. Knighted in 1954, he was elevated to the peerage in March 1962, choosing the title Baron Lambury of Northfield. In his retirement he turned his attention to another of his interests, raising Hereford bulls for breeding on his farm in Gloucestershire. He died of coronary thrombosis and chronic emphysema and bronchitis on 13 September 1967 at his home, Warrens Gorse, Daglingworth, near Cirencester. His barony became extinct. 
Lord's death occurred just as Britain's motor industry was about to move into another crucial phase. Negotiations were already underway for the merger which would bring together what was left of the British motor industry as the British Leyland Motor Corporation though this time BMC was the weaker partner. 
Opinions of Len Lord remain as controversial as the man himself. His successor George Harriman gave instructions for his mentor's office to be preserved as he left it the day he retired. The less partial Miles Thomas astutely recognized a basic contradiction in people's reaction to him: 'When he was relaxed Len Lord was a friendly and fascinating character. Like many a man with a brusque unyielding exterior, he was shy at heart. His apparent rudeness was a protective mechanism. But he certainly achieved results in making motor cars, and although he upset many people, his ideas worked and helped executives who were paid a bonus on production to receive larger monthly cheques' (Thomas, 180). 
Lord was a driving force behind the essential modernization of production methods at both Cowley and Longbridge, enabling the British motor industry to compete in world markets. He spearheaded an export drive fundamental to Britain's post-war economic recovery. Yet his judgement in relation to the marketplace was not always sound. He masterminded the union of the industry's two major rivals, something which had once seemed unthinkable but in the end became inevitable, but failed to ensure that the two elements worked in harmony. This Achilles' heel would hamper all efforts to revive Britain's motor industry for decades to come. 


@@@@@


doc= 49334


Lysaght, John (1832-1895), manufacturer of sheet iron, was born in the parish of Mallow, co. Cork, Ireland, in March 1832, one of several children of William Lysaght, farmer, and his wife, Frances Atkins. After receiving his early education in Ireland, in his late teens he was sent to Birmingham and Bristol where he trained in civil engineering and, perhaps more crucially, established a friendship with Robert Clarke, whose father had a number of business interests. One of these, in Bristol, specialized in 'zincing' iron buckets and, on his father's death in 1857, Clarke made a present of it to Lysaght. Not long after, in 1858, the latter married Ellen Moss (died 1882). They had at least two children. 
Over the succeeding decades, the business expanded substantially. By 1860 galvanized and corrugated sheet iron were being produced, alongside a widening range of galvanized products destined mainly for the agricultural industry. In 1869 the business was moved across Bristol to St Vincent's where, in contrast to the six men and a boy employed in 1857, 400 men were employed in 1878. John had also started, in 1876, a constructional department for the production of structural ironwork at nearby Netham. 
Expansion created openings within the business for several of Lysaght's relatives; these included his eldest surviving son, Frederick Percy, and nephew, Sydney Royse Lysaght, who on his death became respectively chairman and managing director of John Lysaght Ltd. Sydney's brother, 
John Lysaght's business interests were incorporated in 1880 under the title John Lysaght Ltd, with a registered nominal capital of $162,000. Despite this, however, Lysaght remained clearly in charge of the company's development, and it is recorded that he had a strong aversion to committees. He also did not approve of the contract labour system which operated in the west midlands, a factor which undoubtedly contributed to several conflicts with the labour force there. At Bristol, however, where labour organization was quite different, Lysaght operated a humanitarian system which, in the 1880s, included the provision of a factory canteen, a large meeting hall and recreation centre, a well-stocked library, and a sick and medical club for the workforce. 
Growth during the 1880s, based largely on exports, especially to Australia (in 1885, 90 per cent of the firm's output was exported, with the bulk, around 70 per cent, going to Australia), led to the purchase of other works. When the Osier Bed ironworks was acquired in 1885, William Royse also became responsible for its management. By the early 1890s, however, it was clear that Staffordshire was doomed as a sheet-producing region, so Lysaght, together with William Royse, planned the development of a new sheet-rolling complex on a coastal site at Newport, south Wales. The Orb Works, as the complex was called reflecting the 'Orb' brand name which Lysaght had adopted for his products in 1857, commenced production in 1897, but he did not live to see it. He died on 1 October 1895, from a neck tumour, at his home at Springford Stoke Bishop, Gloucestershire. At that time his business employed nearly 3000 workers in Bristol and Wolverhampton. A Conservative in his political sympathies, Lysaght had not been particularly attracted to public life, though he had been a magistrate in Bristol and its high sheriff in 1882. 
In 1901, having overseen the movement of sheet production from Wolverhampton to south Wales, William Royse Lysaght took over management of the Orb Works which, by 1913, alone employed 3000 workers. He was subsequently responsible for the decision to build the Normanby Park Steelworks at Scunthorpe, which was designed to supply the Orb Works with steel. The experience gained by William Royse and his brother Sydney from the development of the Orb and Normanby works played an invaluable role in subsequent developments in Australia. Following the interruption of supplies from Britain during the First World War, the company decided to establish a production plant at Newport, New South Wales. This plant, which came into production in April 1921, was to help make Lysaght's Galvanised Iron Proprietary Ltd one of the largest steel producers in Australia. Before completion of this project, the Lysaght business interests were sold to H. Seymour Berry and, in 1920, amalgamated with those of Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds Ltd. 
William Royse Lysaght married Effie Elizabeth Stavern Gladstone in 1890; they had three children. A member of the Iron and Steel Institute since 1888, William Royse was elected to its council in 1915 and became a vice-president in 1924 and its president in 1933-5. His role as spelter adviser to the Ministry of Munitions during the First World War led to his appointment as CBE in 1918. He was also a deputy lieutenant and justice of the peace for Monmouthshire, and the county's high sheriff in 1915. He died on 27 April 1945 at his home in Castleford, Tidenham, near Chepstow, Monmouthshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 49335


William Royse Lysaght (1858-1945), steel manufacturer, also played a prominent part in the company's development. Born on 23 July 1858, one of several children of Thomas Royse Lysaght, John's elder brother, and Emily Moss (sister of Ellen), in 1874 William Royse was sent by John to the Gospel Oak Company's works at Tipton, Staffordshire, to learn the business of producing sheet iron. When, in 1878, Lysaght, in order to provide a regular supply of puddled iron, acquired the Swan Garden ironworks at Wolverhampton, William Royse was brought from Gospel Oak to run the plant. 


@@@@@


doc= 49338


William Hepburn McAlpine (1871-1950), born on 31 October 1871 at Daffanbank, Merry Street, Motherwell, proved an efficient administrator in the firm's head office in Glasgow. In April 1893 Robert and William became their father's partners. Between 1884 and 1904, Robert McAlpine & Sons built nearly 150 miles of railway in Scotland and Ireland, pioneering the use of mass concrete in railway works. The firm's most famous contract was for the construction of the 40 mile Mallaig extension to the West Highland Railway in 1897-1901, which included the impressive 21 arch Glenfinnan Viaduct, and the Borrodale Viaduct, which featured the longest concrete bridge span (127 ft 6 in.) ever to have been built. McAlpine's third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49339


Miller, Sir James (1905-1977), builder and local politician, was born on 16 March 1905 in Morningside, Edinburgh, the second of the three sons of James Miller (died 1922), architect. He was educated at George Heriot's School, Edinburgh, and at the age of fourteen was apprenticed to his father, while studying architecture in the evenings at Edinburgh College of Art. 
After his father's death Miller, at the age of seventeen, took over the firm, turning his attention to building inexpensive private houses. In 1927 he built a development of twelve semi-detached bungalows, which sold quickly, despite their relatively high price of $840 each, and went on to produce a highly successful design, the two-bedroom 'Type A' bungalow, built of reconstituted stone and concrete, which cost only $475, with a deposit of $25 and weekly payments of 17's'. The business grew rapidly as developments went up in all parts of Edinburgh. He increased the range of designs to six, while buying land on the outskirts of the city for future developments, and he formed a partnership with his younger brother, John Manson Miller. 
In 1933 Miller married Ella Jane, daughter of John Stewart, an Edinburgh butcher. They had three sons and one daughter. The business was converted into a limited liability company, James Miller & Partners Ltd, in 1934, with all the shares owned by Miller and his two brothers, and it went on to become the largest housebuilding company in Edinburgh. As well as building private houses and flats, the company managed garages, cinemas, and dance-halls, and Miller was also a director of the builders' merchant John and James Lawrence, an important supplier of pre-cast stone. 
During the Second World War the business undertook government contracts, building airfields and factories, and in 1941 embarked on open-cast mining contracts in Yorkshire for the government. Offices in London and Wakefield were opened, and in 1942 it took over L. J. Speight & Partners, a contracting firm in London. After the war James Miller & Partners built thousands of council houses for local authorities all over the country. Miller designed a new, non-traditional house, built of brick or concrete with standardized components produced in his own factories at Craigleith and Granton: 7000 were built in the early 1950s. In the later 1950s Miller, who was in charge of the housing side of the business, designed new houses for the private market, while his brother John expanded the company's mining concerns in Yorkshire and Northumberland, and handled the contracting. Two of Miller's sons were taken into the business. 
During the 1960s a group structure began to evolve, and in 1970 the Miller Group was formed, including Miller Construction and Miller Homes Northern. Miller retired from the day-to-day management of the company, and established Heritable Development Consultants, which was later incorporated into the Miller Group. He resigned his Miller Group directorships in 1973, and his son James became managing director of James Miller & Partners while his son Roger became managing director of Miller Homes Northern. 
Miller was elected a member of Edinburgh town council in 1936, serving until 1954. He was a JP from 1942. He held various offices, including that of city treasurer in 1946, and he was lord provost of the City of Edinburgh in 1951-4. In 1953 he was knighted, and the honorary degree of LLD was conferred on him by Edinburgh University. A businessman in London as well as Scotland, Miller was an alderman for Bishopsgate in 1957-72, and served as lord mayor of London in 1964-5: during that year he devoted himself full-time to his official functions, and left his brother and sons to run the business. He was the first, and only, person to have held the offices of both lord provost of Edinburgh and lord mayor of London. He was made GBE in 1965. 
Miller was a keen sailor, and after the death of his youngest son in a road accident in 1966 he gave $75,000 towards the cost of building the training ship the 'Malcolm Miller'. He also bought the former Clyde puffer 'Auld Reekie', and fitted it out as a training ship. Despite his London interests in the latter part of his life, Miller remained firmly based in Scotland: he loved highland gatherings, and was chieftain of the highland gathering at the Festival of Scotland held in Richmond, Surrey, in 1973. It was he who instituted the highland games at Murrayfield in Edinburgh. He died on 20 March 1977 in Edinburgh, survived by his wife. His remains were cremated at Warriston on 23 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 49340


Samuely, Felix James (1902-1959), civil engineer, was born on 3 February 1902 in Vienna of a Jewish family. His father was in the medical profession and he had a younger sister. Matriculating in science at the Kaiser Friedrich Gymnasium, Berlin, in 1919, Samuely gained a Dipl.Ing. degree at the Technische Hochschule Berlin-Charlottenburg in 1923. The thesis he submitted as part of his studies dealt with the design of reinforced concrete bridges, and he remained in Berlin for a year, working with a firm of contractors, Held and Francke. This was followed by further experience with a consulting engineer, a Dr Bauer, in Vienna. Returning to Berlin in 1925, he spent four years with the contractor, Tragerlagergemeinschaft GmbH, on steel buildings and was introduced to the new technique of welding steel. 
In 1929 Samuely set up in practice with Stephen E. Berger, with whom he had been at university, as Berger and Samuely Consulting Engineers, attracting young architects as clients. His commissions at this time included the construction of a factory and offices for Fromms Act Kopenick with Arthur Korn and he was also one of those who worked on the design (unbuilt) for the Josty Haus, a skyscraper in Potsdamerplatz. The firm also built the first welded-steel building in Berlin, an office block in Georgenkirchenplatz. After the 1931 July slump in the German stock market and the resulting depression, Samuely, in some despair for the future, accepted an offer from the Russian government to go as a specialist to work on the design of a large steel production plant in Sverdlovsk. Lack of professional help and unacceptable living conditions prompted a move to Moscow where he designed heavy steel industrial buildings and later carried out further research on welding. 
In 1932, while he was in Moscow, Samuely married Henny Pfingst, who came from Berlin. The following year he left Moscow and travelled with his wife to Manchuria and China looking for any suitable professional opening, but without success, and they eventually returned to Berlin. Later in 1933 he was invited to London; he managed to obtain a monthly extendable permit to stay, and Henny joined him at the end of the year. He was introduced to Ove Arup (1895-1988), then chief engineer of J. L. Kier & Co., who appointed him to carry out the structural calculations for the spiral ramp of the penguin pool designed by the architect, Berthold Lubetkin (1901-1990), for the London Zoo. Samuely showed his mastery of calculation by completing this task over a weekend, and he subsequently joined J. L. Kier & Co. on a permanent basis. During this time he also wrote a number of articles on welded steelwork and a book in German on welding which was never published. 
In 1934 the architects Serge Chermayeff and Eric Mendelsohn, who had recently come from Berlin, won the competition for the Bexhill Pavilion. They invited Samuely to become their structural engineer, and this led to his going into partnership with Cyril Helsby and Conrad Hamann to form the firm of Helsby, Hamann, and Samuely. Although Bexhill Pavilion was conceived in reinforced concrete, Samuely, for reasons of economy, persuaded the architects to change to welded steelwork, on which he had become a leading expert. The building was the first public welded steel building in Britain and as such was studied by many bodies, including the district surveyors of the London county council who would not, at that time, accept such a construction. Two years later they relented, when Samuely, in association with the architect Joseph Emberton, built a new department store in welded steel for Simpson's of Piccadilly. The firm flourished doing further work first for Mendelsohn and Chermayeff and then for Chermayeff alone, as well as helping many leading Modern Movement architects such as Wells Coates, A. V. Pilchowski, Denys Lasdun, Connell Ward Lucas, and Frederick Gibberd. Samuely's imaginative structures were not only in welded steelwork but in sheet metal, reinforced concrete, timber, and brickwork. 
In 1935 Samuely went to live in Hampstead, London, where he rented a flat in Highfield Court, remaining in Hampstead for the rest of his life. In 1937 he became senior lecturer in structural engineering at the Architectural Association School of Architecture, a position he held until his death. His interest in architecture led him to become a member of the MARS (Modern Architectural Research) Group of architects and in 1939 he studied air-raid precautions with Conrad Hamann, writing a book on civil protection. When war broke out, his application for citizenship had not been completed and he was classified as an alien and prohibited from working on projects of national importance. By then Helsby had left the partnership, Hamann had joined a government agency, and Samuely became a consultant to Scaffolding, Great Britain (SGB), designing some outstanding lightweight welded steel tube and rod roof structures. 
Samuely's workload was sufficiently low to allow him time to study privately for UK qualifications. In 1941 he passed the Royal Aeronautical Society's examination to become an associate member and later in 1943 gained a BSc (Eng) degree in structural engineering with first-class honours from London University. The following year he was accepted as an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and a member of the Institution of Structural Engineers. During the war years he was also very active with the MARS Group in planning studies for the future. His particular interest lay in transport and in June 1942 he edited, with Arthur Korn, the group's 'Master Plan for London'. He wrote and lectured on economic construction and became a great influence on architects in the early post-war reconstruction with his pioneering structures and by stimulating better understanding and co-operation between members of the building team. 
Because of the shortage of steel and timber and the trend for building technicians to seek stable employment in factories, Samuely began his studies into the use of precast and pre-stressed concrete. He wanted to minimize timber formwork and maximize crane handling on site, and his solution was to promote composite construction made up from expensive pre-cast concrete and relatively cheap 'in situ' concrete. Samuely's first major, and perhaps best, building using such techniques was a factory at Malago, Bristol (architect J. E. Collins), for E. S. and A. Robinson in 1949. This was followed by Hatfield Technical College and a host of other educational buildings. He developed the use of external pre-cast concrete load-bearing frames for office construction, such as the National Dock Labour Board in London (architect Frederick Gibberd) of 1953 and for the US embassy (architect Eero Saarinen in association with Yorke, Rosenberg, and Mardall), also in London, in 1958. For long-span construction Samuely quickly moved from curved concrete shells with their large on-site labour costs to folded plates of composite construction. Where appropriate he used lightweight steel lattices and timber folded plates and on occasion pre-stressed the roofs further to reduce weight and cost. For the British pavilions at the Brussels International Exhibition in 1958 he used a timber folded plate construction for the government pavilion and a latticed steel folded plate roof for the industrial pavilion which was taken down at the end of the exhibition and re-erected in Hilversum in the Netherlands. 
Samuely will be remembered, above all, as the engineer of the Skylon (for which the architects were the firm of Powell and Moya) at the Festival of Britain in 1951. To provide the necessary restraint against wind oscillation he pre-tensioned the main cables of the Skylon, a measure which meant that two of the three proposed bracing cables to each pylon could be omitted. The resulting, widely acclaimed, streamlined design was thus brought about by a brilliant collaboration of architect and engineer. 
Samuely's extensive writings include 'Welding' (1935) and 'Steel Economy' (1939), as well as the MARS plan for London (1942). He gave important lectures on force and form (1950) and on space frames and stressed skin construction (1952) at the Royal Institute of British Architects; and others on structural prestressing (1955) at the Institution of Structural Engineers and composite construction (1952) at the Institution of Civil Engineers. He was awarded the Telford premium by the Institution of Civil Engineers for his lecture and paper on the Skylon (1952). In June 1960 the Architectural Association devoted the whole issue of its journal to his life, listing his buildings and his writings and giving a clear picture of his outstanding contribution to engineering and the built environment. 
Samuely had a unique gift for the conception of structural forms. He was consulted by many architects and, as he wished to be personally involved with each project from concept to completion, he always kept his office small. He was an energetic, cheerful, small, rotund man with a quizzical smile known affectionately to colleagues, architects, and friends as Sammy, and generations of architectural students have an enduring memory of his lectures on lettuce girders. He and his wife had a long and happy marriage and enjoyed travelling together. They had no children. He died on 22 January 1959 in the London Clinic, 20 Devonshire Place, London, following a heart attack, leaving his wife and his mother, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium in Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 49341


Shepherd, Edward (c.1692-1747), building craftsman and architect, played a major part in the development of west London in the first half of the eighteenth century. Nothing is known of his antecedents and early life before his marriage on 14 May 1710 to Elizabeth Hill in St Marylebone parish church. He had a brother, John, a plasterer, with whom he often worked and who was once castigated by the duke of Chandos for having been 'drunk from morning to night and never minded the workmen' (Baker, 370), another brother, Joseph, and a sister, Frances. His wife's brother, George Hill, was a carver in wood and stone, who also worked on several of Shepherd's buildings. 
Shepherd apparently trained as a plasterer, and gave this as his trade in 1718 when he took building leases of house plots in the vicinity of Hanover Square. Thereafter he extended his speculative building activities to other major developments in west London, such as on the Cavendish-Harley estate to the north of Oxford Street and the Grosvenor, Berkeley, and Curzon estates in Mayfair. 
In the meantime, his career seems to have benefited from an association with one of the richest men in the country, James Brydges, first duke of Chandos, who had been paymaster-general to Marlborough's army. Chandos used his great wealth in various building enterprises, including the erection and subsequent embellishment of a large mansion at Canons, near Edgware, in Middlesex (since demolished), where work seems to have been almost continually in progress between about 1713 and 1725. Here Shepherd appears to have been employed initially as a building craftsman and later in a supervisory capacity. He also helped to supervise some of the duke's other building enterprises in Bridgwater and Bath, where he had some association with John Wood, the principal architect of Georgian Bath. For Chandos, Shepherd also built two houses on the north side of Cavendish Square and the rectory at Great Stanmore, near Canons (all demolished). He also remodelled the Great Lodge at Enfield Chase (demolished) and undertook alterations to Shaw House, Newbury, Berkshire. 
From 1723 onwards Shepherd took several parcels of ground on the Grosvenor estate under building agreements and there he erected some of the finest Georgian houses in London. These include 66 Brook Street, which has an outstanding display of ornamental plasterwork in its principal rooms; 72 Brook Street, where Shepherd himself lived for a brief period and which, with its mixture of decorative plasterwork and woodcarving, may have been in the nature of a show house; 12 North Audley Street, where he provided a richly embellished gallery at the rear, possibly to the designs of the Irish Palladian architect Sir Edward Lovett Pearce; and 71 to 75 South Audley Street, where the interiors contain several examples of the fine plasterwork which became a trademark of his work. In 1728 he undertook to build on the north side of Grosvenor Square and erected three houses (since demolished) with a uniform palace-like facade which showed considerable maturity of design. The architectural writer Robert Morris claimed that Shepherd had provided a design for the whole of the north side of the square, but that it proved impossible to secure the agreement of the various owners of building plots to carry this out. Of the three houses which he did build, the centre one with a columned and pedimented facade was described in 1730 as 'the fine house in Grosvenor-Square built by Mr. Shepherd the famous Architect' ('St James's Evening Post'). 
By this time Shepherd had acted as executant architect at 4 St James's Square, where Henry Grey, duke of Kent (1664-1740), built a grand town house, ostensibly of his own designing, and at Boreham House in Essex, where both James Gibbs and Henry Flitcroft appear to have been involved in the design. Indeed, Shepherd's rapid graduation from the status of a building craftsman to that of an architect who displayed an understanding of Palladian precedents, even if he frequently interpreted them in an individualistic way, suggests that he associated with the group of architects who were setting the standards of taste at that time, including Colin Campbell, who designed a house for himself on one of Shepherd's building plots in Brook Street and lived there as a near neighbour of Shepherd himself. 
As an architect Shepherd also designed the Goodman's Fields Theatre in Whitechapel (subsequently demolished) and the first Covent Garden Theatre (burned down in 1808), undertook work at Hampden House, Buckinghamshire, and added wings at Petersham Lodge, Surrey (demolished). He was also responsible for the monuments in Flitton church, Bedfordshire, to the duke of Kent (signed 'Edw:d Shepherd Arch:t') and Lady Annabell de Grey. He almost certainly provided the design for the handsome Palladian house at 17 Bruton Street, Mayfair (subsequently the birthplace of Elizabeth II and since demolished), where the building lessee was his brother John. Other work which has been attributed to him on stylistic grounds includes Barnsley Park in Gloucestershire. 
Throughout his career Shepherd continued to work as a speculative builder. In 1740-42, on the site of the notorious May fair, he built Shepherd Market (which was named after him) and other developments in the vicinity of Curzon Street. He erected a two-storey market house with butchers' shops on the ground floor and a large room for entertainments above (rebuilt in 1860), and several other buildings in the area. At the time of his death he was building yet another large town mansion on the north side of Curzon Street, but this house, which subsequently took the name of Crewe House, was much extended and altered by later owners. 
Shepherd died on 21 October 1747, 'greatly lamented by all who had the Pleasure of his Acquaintance' ('Penny London Post'). His funeral was held in St George's Church, Hanover Square, where he had been a vestryman for several years. His widow continued to run his building business until her own death on 18 June 1761. They appear to have been childless, and the bulk of their estate, which included Shepherd Market and other property and was said to be very considerable, was left to a great-nephew. The estate was heavily mortgaged, however, and the complication of discharging the mortgages and family disputes in later generations led to a succession of Dickensian chancery cases which embroiled the estate for the best part of a century. 


@@@@@


doc= 49342


Walker, Thomas Andrew (1828-1889), civil engineering contractor, was born on 15 October 1828 at Kerrymore, Brewood, Staffordshire, the first of three children of Robert Walker, land agent of Brewood, and Ann Hay. In 1845, after a brief course in applied science at King's College, London, he began his professional career by undertaking work on parliamentary surveys. Walker became one of the most important civil engineering contractors of the nineteenth century, demonstrating exceptional management abilities in undertaking some of the largest contracts of his day. In 1847 he was employed by Thomas Brassey on the North Staffordshire Railway and remained with him until 1854 working on the Royston and Hitchin, and Newcastle and Ashbourne, railways, and for the last two years on the Grand Trunk Railway of Canada. On 6 January 1852 Walker married Fanny Beetlestone; they had four surviving daughters. In 1854 he began his own contracting career in Canada, building railways for the government of the Lower Provinces for a further seven years. 
Walker returned to England in 1861. Then, as assistant to P. Pritchard Baly, in 1863 he made a survey for the Oryol and Vitebsk Railway in Russia. During 1864-5 he made extensive railway surveys for Charles Manby in Egypt and the Sudan. He returned to England in 1865 and managed the contracts for the Metropolitan Railway extension and the construction of the Metropolitan District line. He undertook these works, from Edgware Road to the Mansion House, jointly with Peto and Betts, Kelk, and Waring Brothers, completing the work by 1 July 1871. From this date to his death he was engaged, at first in partnership with his brother Charles and then alone, in a series of contracts for some of the largest engineering projects of the late nineteenth century. He undertook the extension of the East London Railway from the north end of the Thames Tunnel to its junction with the Great Eastern line at Shoreditch. This work involved tunnelling under the London docks and was completed in 1876. The engineer for the East London line, Sir John Hawkshaw, was so impressed with Walker's work that he entrusted him with the construction of the Severn railway tunnel, designed to shorten the Great Western route from Bristol to south Wales. Work had begun on the tunnel in 1873, but, after slow progress, was handed over to Sir John Hawkshaw as chief engineer and Thomas Walker as contractor on 18 December 1879. Characteristically, Walker employed a great deal of steam-powered machinery on this job. The work was one of great difficulty owing to the irruption of water, but was completed in 1889, when the tunnel was opened to goods traffic. Walker spoke of the 'ever-varying and strangely contorted strata, and the dangers from flood above and flood below' and said 'one sub-aqueous tunnel is quite enough for a lifetime' (Walker, preface). During the tunnel works he was also engaged on the Deal and Dover Railway (1880); the Elham Valley Railway (Canterbury-Folkestone, 1889); completion of the Prince of Wales Dock, Swansea (1881); extension of Penarth Dock (1884); Barry Dock (1889), and part of the Barry railway; and completion of the Lisvane Reservoir for Cardiff corporation (1886). 
Walker's last undertaking was his greatest work. In June 1887 he obtained the contract for the whole works of the Manchester Ship Canal, at $5.75 million. As soon as he had possession of the land the chief engineer said that Walker 'showed great energy in commencing to erect huts, hospitals, and chapels for the workmen' (Williams, 419). Walker was renowned for the care and provisions made for his army of navvies. He established the administrative structure and amassed the largest group of steam-powered contractor's plant assembled for one contract up to that time. This included locomotives, waggons, cranes, and excavating machinery, and the first 'steam navvy' was at work in December 1887. Unfortunately within two years of starting work Walker died, and the ship canal company took over the work and the construction plant, valued at over $860,000. Walker died, of Bright's disease, at his home, Mount Balan, in Caer-went, Monmouthshire, on 25 November 1889. He was buried at St Stephen's Church, Caer-went. Walker's success as a contracting engineer is indicated by the fact that his estate was valued at nearly $1 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 49343


Holme, Bryan (bap. 1776, d. 1856), lawyer and a founder of the Law Society, was baptized on 29 December 1776 at Tunstall, near Lancaster, the son of William Holme and his wife, Elizabeth. He attended a school at nearby Wray and was articled in 1793 to John Baldwin, a solicitor in Lancaster. On admission in 1800 he worked in Lancaster for a short time before moving to London about 1803 where he entered the offices of Bleasdale and Alexander, solicitors of Hatton Court, Threadneedle Street, and New Inn. Bleasdale and Alexander was a well-established firm which acted for the London Assurance Corporation and the Hudson Bay Company. Holme began as a managing clerk, specializing in chancery work, but he soon became a partner in 1806. The following year he married Anne Simpson, a daughter of Samuel Simpson, shipowner and merchant of Lancaster. In 1810 Holme was elected a member of the Society of Gentlemen Practisers, an exclusive London-based solicitors' association, but he did not become involved in its activities. 
By the early 1820s Holme had become the senior partner of the eminent firm of Holme, Frampton, and Loftus. In 1823 he emerged as the leading figure in the project to establish a permanent society for the solicitors' profession, to be called the Law Institution. Until this time the associations for solicitors had been confined either to the metropolis or to localities in the provinces. None had achieved a major impact on the profession as a whole. The Law Institution represented a new departure and an attempt to form a country-wide professional organization. A number of prospectuses were issued and subscriptions invited to raise a fund for the institution and the building of a hall and library. In 1825 meetings of the subscribers were held in London which led to the formation of the Law Institution. A committee of management, of which Holme was an original member, was appointed to put the scheme into effect. A site in Chancery Lane, at the heart of London's legal quarter, was purchased in 1828 for the construction of the hall, which was completed in 1832. In 1831 a royal charter was obtained and the institution became the Society of Attorneys, Solicitors, Proctors and others, not being Barristers, practising in the Courts of Law and Equity of the United Kingdom, or more simply, the Incorporated Law Society. The name was altered to the Law Society in 1906. 
After his initial central role in the formation of the society, Holme played a less conspicuous part in its subsequent development. He became neither chairman of the committee of management nor president. However, he continued as a member of the committee of management (and later the council) until his death, and served on several subcommittees, particularly those which reflected his professional and personal interests, such as the library and chancery subcommittees. His role as the principal architect of the society was recognized in a resolution passed at the special general meeting for accepting the charter in January 1832, and was further celebrated by the raising of a subscription for a full-length portrait by Henry William Pickersgill which was hung in the society's hall in 1834. 
Holme continued to practise and quietly pursued his interests in literature and book collecting. He presented many books to the society's library. Late in life, in 1854, he again became involved in professional matters, when plans for establishing a benevolent institution for the relief of aged and infirm London solicitors were broached. Holme was chairman of the provisional committee, but before matters could proceed beyond the circulation of a prospectus, his health declined and the scheme came to nought. Holme died at his residence in Brunswick Square, London, on 15 July 1856 of heart disease and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. It is curious that his death passed largely unremarked by the Incorporated Law Society and the profession. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49344


Young, James (1810-1891), railway contractor, was born on 10 February 1810 at Littlemill, near Kilmacolm, Renfrewshire, Scotland, the son of James Young, farmer and local contractor, and his wife, Margaret Glover. He had at least one brother. He was educated at the parish school, and then worked as an overseer on the building of the Glasgow and Garnkirk Railway, the first major railway contract in Scotland. He returned home to run his father's contracting business, which concentrated on road mending and dyke building. In 1836 he married Janet, daughter of Archibald Bulloch, coalmaster, of Glasgow. They had five sons and five daughters. In 1854 he won his first important contract, to build the Calderbank section of the Monklands Railway. For some years he was in partnership with Robert Ward, and their work included sections of the Caledonian, Milngavie, and Wemyss Bay railways. 
In the mid-1870s Young formed two family businesses, in partnership with his brother and his eldest son: they were James Young & Sons, a coalmining and lime-quarrying business, which managed a mine at Baljaffray, Duntocher, and a contracting firm, James Young & Co. The latter built the western section of the Greenock and Ayrshire Railway, which ran underneath the town to the harbour. This was followed by contracts to build sections of the Glasgow, Bothwell, Hamilton, and Coatbridge Railway in 1875: Young dealt with the problem of cutting through heavy boulder clay in the Bellshill section by using a steam excavator based on an American machine, the first to be used in railway construction in the United Kingdom, thus saving on time and labour costs. Other important contracts included work on the Yoker and Clydebank Railway in 1881, and the St Andrews and Anstruther Railway. In 1882 he successfully tendered to build the western section of the first underground railway to be built in Glasgow, the Glasgow City and District Railway, running west-east across the city. Although Young's contract was for a section of only just over a mile, he had to solve the technical problem of how to tunnel through sand without disturbing the existing buildings. This contract earned the firm over $200,000. 
Young retired in 1886, and moved to the sea, to Dunholme, Skelmorlie, Ayrshire. His eldest son took over the management of the business, which continued to win major railway contracts, including one for the Glasgow Central Railway, but the firm was wound up within twenty years. James Young died on 18 June 1891 at Skelmorlie, and was buried at the Glasgow necropolis. 


@@@@@


doc= 49346


Carter, Samuel (1805-1878), lawyer, was born on 15 May 1805 in Coventry, where his father, Samuel Carter, lived and his grandfather was mayor in 1786 and 1799. He was educated in West Bromwich at the school run by his uncle the Revd John Corrie. At the age of sixteen or seventeen he became an articled clerk in the office of another uncle, Josiah Corrie, a leading Birmingham solicitor. The choice of law as a career was not surprising given that another uncle, John Carter, was an attorney and town clerk of Coventry from 1812 to 1836. 
On admission, Carter joined Corrie in partnership and commenced practice in Birmingham. Shortly afterwards began his connection with railways. In 1831 Corrie and Carter were appointed solicitors to the newly formed London and Birmingham Railway, which later became the London and North Western Railway Company. When the Birmingham and Derby Railway Company was constituted in 1835, Carter was again appointed solicitor. This company later developed into the Midland Railway. For the next twenty-five years railway work was to dominate Carter's life to the exclusion of other professional and public interests. It was said that in one parliamentary session he had control of forty bills relating to these two companies. Carter developed an unrivalled expertise in parliamentary business and railway policy, being noted in particular for his sound judgement, ability in delicate negotiations, and a combination of shrewdness, intellect, and a strict sense of integrity. 
After Corrie's death about 1840, Carter continued to practise in Birmingham until 1850. He then moved to London and carried on the railway work. In 1860 he resigned his position as solicitor to the London and North Western and eight years later he retired from practice, having ended his connection with the Midland. By this time Carter had become a landowner, having purchased an estate at Battle, Sussex, in the late 1850s. This was sold about 1875, though he did retain a small estate in Kenilworth, which had been inherited from his mother's family. 
In 1868 Carter returned to Coventry. Up until this time he had shown little interest in public life, but he was persuaded to stand as a Liberal candidate at a by-election in Coventry in March 1868 and was elected. However, it was to be a short parliamentary career; he was defeated at the general election in November 1868. Nevertheless, he had during that time addressed the house on the Irish Church question and the general carriers acts. Carter stood again unsuccessfully at the general election of 1874. 
Shortly before his death Carter published two pamphlets on the subject of the jurisdiction of the railway commissioners and the question of debenture holders. Despite his former connection with the industry these pamphlets were not well received by the trade press. Carter's interests were not confined exclusively to his profession and railway business, but also ranged over art, literature, and science. Carter died at his London home, 3 Clifton Place, on 31 January 1878, and was buried in the family vault at Kenilworth. He was survived by his wife, three sons, including the painter Hugh Carter, and one daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 49347


Gem, Thomas Henry (1819-1881), lawyer and tennis player, was born in Birmingham on 21 May 1819, the eldest son of William Henry Gem (died 1856), a well-known Birmingham solicitor and one of the clerks to the Birmingham magistrates. He was educated under Dr Major at King's College, London, and articled at the age of sixteen to H. M. Griffiths, solicitor of Birmingham. On admission in 1841 he commenced practice in his native town. Though he built up an extensive private practice and acquired numerous legal and public appointments, 'Harry' Gem, as he was widely known, was principally known for his sporting, literary, and other public activities. 
Gem was an active sportsman throughout his life, enjoying cricket, horse-riding, athletics, and 'pedestrianism', yet it was the game of lawn tennis for which he was known in the midlands. His part in the development of the rules of the game went largely unrecognized, save by his contemporaries in Birmingham and Leamington Spa. In the 1850s Gem was a keen racket player and leading spirit of the local club, but his enthusiasm was blunted by the necessity for expensively constructed courts. With his friend J. B. A. Perera, a Birmingham merchant, he drew up rules for a game named 'pelota' and later 'lawn rackets', with an emphasis placed upon simplicity and athleticism. The first game was played in the garden of Perera's Edgbaston residence about the year 1865. In 1872 Gem and Perera moved to Leamington Spa where they established a club and the name changed again to 'lawn tennis'. Consequently, this predates the claims of Major Walter C. Wingfield to be the inventor of lawn tennis, the publication of his book on sphairistike, and the debate on the origin of the game in 1874-5. 
In 1859, to the detriment of his other activities, Gem had thrown himself into the cause of the volunteer movement. He initiated the attempts to establish a local corps in Birmingham, holding the position of honorary secretary to the founding committee. At the time of his death Gem held the rank of major in the 1st Warwickshire (Birmingham) rifles. However, the movement made little progress in Birmingham and the waning of interest led to Gem's renewed preoccupation with tennis. 
Gem was a prolific author. He wrote on numerous subjects and in a variety of forms, the majority of his works being for private or limited circulation. He contributed regularly to 'Baily's Magazine' on a wide range of subjects, such as pugilism, horses, bull-baiting, and other sporting matters. Other material included election squibs (he was a staunch Conservative), songs, poems, verses (for example, on tennis), and a history of the Birmingham rifle corps. His major piece, completed shortly before his death, was a dramatization, in verse, of the 'Bardell v. Pickwick' trial scenes from Charles Dickens's 'Pickwick Papers'. In addition to writing for the stage, Gem was considered an accomplished performer of light comedy in local amateur productions. He was the first president of the Birmingham Dramatic Club and a member of the Birmingham Amateur Dramatic Association. 
Gem also gained prominence locally as a result of his legal posts. On the death of his father in 1856 he succeeded to the office of clerk to the Birmingham magistrates. In addition, he held appointments as magistrate's clerk to the Kings Heath and Balsall Heath petty sessions and clerk to the commissioners of taxes for the hundred of Hemlingford. 
In 1852 Gem married Ellen Maria Willcox (1831/2-1899). He died at 21 Portland Place, Leamington Priors, Warwickshire, from 'paralysis', on 4 November 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 49348


Martineau, Sir Thomas (1828-1893), lawyer, was born on 4 November 1828 in Bristol Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, the son of Robert Martineau, a manufacturer and prominent local figure, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Samuel Smith, another local industrialist. A descendant of a Huguenot family that had settled in Norwich during the late seventeenth century, Martineau was a nephew of the Revd James Martineau and Harriet Martineau. On the death of the latter he became sole literary executor and co-executor of her estate with his brother. Martineau grew up in and remained a prominent member of Birmingham's Liberal and Unitarian circle. He was educated at the Birmingham and Edgbaston proprietary school (1838-44), where he developed a close friendship with Alfred Wills, who later became a judge and well-known alpinist. At school they set up and ran a library, a magazine, and later a debating society. 
Martineau left school in 1844 and was articled to Arthur Ryland, solicitor of Birmingham, and his mother's first cousin. From 1849 his legal education continued with Ryland's agents in London, Sharpe, Field & Co., and later in the chambers of the conveyancer, John Wilson, and the special pleader, T. H. Baylis. He was admitted in 1851 and immediately joined Ryland in partnership, the firm being known as Ryland and Martineau until the death of Ryland in 1877. Martineau succeeded his late partner to the prestigious post as law clerk of the Birmingham assay office. By this time he had achieved a high reputation in the local profession. However, it was not until this point in his career that he became fully active in the public life of Birmingham. Nevertheless, he had exhibited a keen interest in local affairs since the 1850s and had taken his first steps in the political and cultural life of the town. Soon after qualifying he became active in local Liberal politics, later acting as an election agent. It was also at this time that Martineau was a member (and later president) of the Birmingham and Edgbaston Debating Society. It was through this society that he was to develop a friendship with Joseph Chamberlain. About the year 1860 he was elected to the council of the Birmingham and Midland Institute, which had been established by his partner, Ryland, in 1853. Martineau subsequently held office as honorary secretary and vice-president. In 1860 he married Emily, daughter of Timothy Kenrick, a hardware manufacturer of West Bromwich. Her sisters were married to Joseph Chamberlain and Charles Gabriel Beale. 
In 1876, Martineau entered the town council as representative for the Edgbaston ward and began a notable municipal career, which illustrates well the important role of eminent solicitors in provincial public life. In 1883 he was elected alderman and in 1884 became mayor for the first time. He was re-elected in 1885 and again in 1886. In addition to being thrice mayor he served on a variety of committees, his legal knowledge and experience proving invaluable. Indeed, the three major improvement projects for which he became widely known saw a convergence of his professional and political interests and drew extensively on his professional skills. As chairman of the parliamentary committee in 1882 Martineau took responsibility for the 'Birmingham Consolidation Bill'. This measure affecting the government of Birmingham engendered considerable local opposition which continued through the courts and both houses of parliament. Much of the parliamentary work fell to Martineau, which necessitated a stay in London of several weeks to monitor the progress of the bill and shepherd it through its various stages. 
It was, perhaps, with the creation of Birmingham as an assize town and the erection of the Victoria Law Courts in Corporation Street that Martineau attracted most public recognition. As a member of the Birmingham Law Society he had been active in the promotion of an assize scheme and made his maiden speech in the town council on the subject. After much debate and several attempts, assize status was granted in 1884. Though assizes were commenced soon afterwards, it was not until 1887 that building work on the new courts was started. Queen Victoria laid the foundation stone during her jubilee year and was received by Martineau as mayor. Two days later, on 25 March 1887, the honour of a knighthood was conferred upon him at Windsor. 
The third project with which Martineau was associated again drew heavily on his legal expertise and negotiating skills. The Birmingham water scheme required his attendance before the House of Commons select committee on the bill. He successfully piloted the bill through parliament in 1892, but was to die before the scheme was started. 
Martineau was involved in many other local movements and aspects of civic life. He held positions on the governing bodies of numerous charitable, educational, and cultural organizations. He was appointed a borough justice in 1880 and acted regularly until his death. A keen gardener, he established the Gardeners' Association of which he was first president. Towards the end of his life he was president of the midland iron and steel wages board; a further recognition of his local prominence and abilities in arbitration and negotiation. In the late 1880s he served on the royal commission on market rights and tolls. 
Martineau's health began to deteriorate in 1888, but he did not retire from practice until the beginning of 1893. He died on 28 July 1893 at his residence, West Hill, Augustus Road, Edgbaston; he was survived by his wife, Lady Martineau, and his children, Ernest and Clara. 


@@@@@


doc= 49349


Ryland, Arthur (1807-1877), lawyer and local politician, was born on 23 August 1807 at Edgbaston, Birmingham, the fifth of six children of John Ryland, wire manufacturer. After attending the Revd D. N. Walton's School in Cherry Street, Birmingham, and a spell in his father's business, he was articled to William Palmer in 1823. On admission in 1828 he practised alone and with his elder brother Timothy, before entering into partnership with Thomas Martineau in 1851. He was married twice. His first wife, and mother of his daughter, Frances, was the daughter of Thomas Tyndall. After her death he married his cousin Anna Smith Phipson. 
Ryland belonged to an old Unitarian Birmingham family which had long held a leading position in the town. He occupied a prominent place in the public life of Birmingham from the 1840s to the 1870s. His public role was shaped by his religious beliefs, family influence, occupation, and professional ideology. He quickly built up a successful practice, attracting work from private clients, companies, and public bodies. He held several important legal appointments, such as clerk to the justices and clerk to the guardians of the assay office. In 1852 he published a treatise on the law relating to the assay of precious metals. Questions of law reform also occupied his time. Ryland was active in local and national professional organizations and played an important part in their development. In 1831 he founded the Birmingham Law Library Society. He was president of the Birmingham Law Society in 1873 and again in 1876. He was influential in the creation of the Metropolitan and Provincial Law Association, and in 1863 was the first provincial solicitor elected to the council of the Incorporated Law Society, London. 
Ryland's professional training and acumen, wide social circle, reforming zeal, and personal beliefs made him the ideal 'committee man'. He had firm views on the duty owed by professionals, especially solicitors, to devote their skills and knowledge freely to the service of the community. These views found their most concrete expression in an address to the Birmingham Law Students' Society in 1861. 
Ryland was a staunch Liberal, being connected with the Political Union, the incorporation movement in the 1830s, and the agitation that saw the town council replace the older, oligarchic municipal bodies in 1851. He first entered the council in 1854 at a time when it was dominated by the parsimonious 'economist' party. Ryland orchestrated a campaign both within and outside the council to change the nature of municipal government. He remained on the council until 1874 (as mayor in 1860 and alderman from 1861) and made a large contribution to establishing the basis from which Joseph Chamberlain could build the 'civic gospel'. 
Ryland was instrumental in the foundation, administration, and support of numerous local charities and institutions. His major achievement was the establishment in 1853 of the Birmingham and Midland Institute to rectify the dearth of adult education facilities and literary culture in Birmingham. The plan drew widespread support, including that of Charles Dickens, who performed the first public readings of 'A Christmas Carol' to raise funds. 
Ryland began to retire from public life in 1874. He left Edgbaston and built a house near Bromsgrove, Worcestershire. Although in bad health he took a holiday at Cannes, France, where he died on 24 March 1877 as the result of inflammation of the lungs. He was buried at Cannes. 


@@@@@


doc= 49350


Vizard, William (1774-1859), lawyer, born in Dursley, Gloucestershire, was the second of the six sons and four daughters of William Vizard (died 1807) and his wife, Ann ('nee' Phelps). Both the Vizard and the Phelps families had been well-established landowning families in Gloucestershire for a century or more. William Vizard senior was a solicitor, practising in Dursley. Two sons were articled to him and joined the Dursley firm, while William was sent to London after completing his education at school in Gloucester. 
In 1790 Vizard was articled to Thomas Lewis of 12 Gray's Inn Square. Five years later he was admitted a solicitor and in 1797 he established his own practice at 7 Holborn Court. Thomas Creevey, a barrister then practising in the court of chancery, had chambers in the same building. Creevey had connections with the whig party and he became a personal client of Vizard, providing him with introductions to prominent whig lawyers and politicians, including Henry (later Lord) Brougham. 
Brougham was to be a most significant influence in Vizard's life, as a client, a friend, and a patron. From 1807 until 1812 the two worked together as counsel and solicitor, presenting the case in parliament, on behalf of the merchants of Liverpool and Manchester, for the repeal of the 1807 orders in council. 
Vizard soon became closely involved in whig politics. In 1812 he accompanied the distinguished whig lawyer Samuel Romilly to Bristol to seek election there -- unsuccessfully in the event -- and from then on he was active in the whig party machine. 
In 1811 Vizard married Mary Hodges and, leasing some 30 acres of land in Dulwich from Dulwich College, he commissioned the building of Kingswood Lodge (later known as Kingswood House) where the Vizard family lived until 1831. The Vizards had two sons: William, educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, who became a barrister and later registrar in the court of bankruptcy; and Henry Brougham, educated at Blackheath School and Trinity College, Cambridge, who became a clergyman. There were also two daughters, Frances and Caroline, the latter named after a significant client. 
At some point between 1811 and 1813 Vizard was, at Brougham's suggestion, appointed solicitor to Caroline, then princess of Wales. Estranged from the prince regent, Caroline spent the years between 1814 and 1820 travelling in Europe. Vizard's work for her did not become onerous until she returned to London in June 1820 when her husband succeeded to the throne, following the death of George III in January that year. 
Determined that she should not be queen, the new king, George IV, instructed the government to introduce to parliament a bill of pains and penalties to dissolve the marriage. It was Vizard's task to organize the queen's defence during the second reading of the bill in the House of Lords -- known as the trial of Queen Caroline -- which took place between August and November 1820. Vizard himself announced the government's withdrawal of the bill from the balcony of the House of Lords to the crowd supporting the queen. Caroline's death in August 1821 ended three years of intensive activity on her behalf by Vizard, who continued for some time to be occupied with settling her estate for her executors. 
Vizard's connections with Caroline and the whigs brought him many aristocratic and wealthy clients for whom he conducted much litigation in the court of chancery. His expertise in the court's proceedings was recognized in 1824 when he gave extensive evidence to the commission investigating the court and the delays for which it was then notorious. In the 1830s he came to be regarded similarly as an expert on parliamentary practice, particularly the committee procedures for private bills. 
When Henry Brougham became lord chancellor in 1830, Vizard was appointed to his private office as secretary of bankrupts, the first solicitor ever to hold the office. Surviving evidence (in the Brougham papers) suggests that he played a significant role in the reform of the bankruptcy system carried out by Brougham. Vizard continued to hold the post of secretary of bankrupts in succeeding whig administrations, from 1835 to 1841 and from 1846 to 1852. He was also, for a time, solicitor to the secretary of state for the Home Office, combining all these official appointments with a large professional practice. 
'Great zeal, promptitude and ability' were the qualities attributed to Vizard by his obituarist (in the 'Solicitors' Journal') and it seems that he was also not lacking in business sense. In the 1830s he bought the Hoyland Hall estate, near Sheffield, from the earl of Mulgrave (a whig associate and a friend) and in the 1840s Vizard was instrumental in the development there of the Hoyland Silkstone colliery. In 1831 he sold the family's Dulwich home and bought a house and estate at Little Faringdon, Oxfordshire. After the death of his first wife in 1833, he married his second wife, Mary Cipriani, who outlived him; there was one child, a daughter named Anne, of this marriage. Vizard was professionally active until the early 1850s, managing his practice and being involved with the early development of the Law Society. In retirement he enjoyed country pursuits until his death at Little Faringdon on 15 January 1859. He was buried in his home town, Dursley, nominated through his influence in 1832 as the returning place for MPs for West Gloucestershire. The firm he founded continues to practise in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49351


Harald Maddadson, earl of Caithness and earl of Orkney (1133/4-1206), magnate, was the first earl of Orkney to be born of a native Scottish comital line: his father, Maddad, earl of Atholl (central highlands), married Margaret, daughter of Earl Hakon Paulsson of Orkney, so that their son Harald unusually claimed the earldoms of Orkney and Caithness through his mother. The Countess Margaret is implicated, in 'Orkneyinga Saga', in arranging for the removal of her brother, Earl Paul the Silent, and securing the succession of her son Harald to the joint earldoms at the age of five in 1139. It is probable that there were also weighty political considerations behind this activity, as there is evidence of strong Scottish interest in events in the northern earldoms at this time, particularly with a view to extending royal authority over Caithness. 
Harald had to contend with the rivalry of his half-cousin 
The political situation changed markedly in 1151 when Earl Rognvald departed for Palestine on his pilgrimage. This celebrated enterprise takes up five complete chapters of 'Orkneyinga Saga', which provide a unique account of such a journey by a northern magnate from this period. An entry (sub anno 1151) in the Icelandic annals records only 'The journey to Jerusalem of Earl Rognvald Kali of the Orkneys: and of Erling Skakki' (Anderson, 2.213). The impetus for the expedition was personal piety rather than the call to join a crusade, and it may have been undertaken in emulation of King Sigurd Jorsalafarer's ('Jerusalemfarer's') famous journey in 1108. The earl, with Bishop William and other well-born companions, including Erling Skakki, left Orkney in the late summer of 1151 in fifteen ships. The fleet sailed through the Strait of Gibraltar, after which Eindrid Ungi went straight to Jerusalem with six ships while Rognvald tarried in Narbonne. During his stay there he composed several verses -- included in the saga -- in honour of the lovely lady Ermingard, verses which show strong influence from courtly love poetry, possibly the first such examples in skaldic verse. Further verses, many of them Rognvald's own composition, record events which occurred during the rest of the journey, such as his swim across the River Jordan. Having visited Jerusalem, the party made its way back north via Constantinople, where they were received by the emperor and his Varangian guard, then sailed to Apulia where they took horses for the journey to Rome, arriving back in Orkney for Christmas 1153. This is most impressive evidence for the wide-ranging role of the earls of Orkney as players on the world scene of twelfth-century Europe. They were now fully participating in the cultural and religious activities of Christian Europe rather than threatening them from the periphery. 
Harald was left as sole ruler of the earldoms during Rognvald's absence. The opportunity was seized by Eystein, joint king of Norway and rival to his brother Inge, to impose his authority on the young earl by a military expedition to the west (the first since that of Magnus Barelegs in 1098). Finding Harald was in Thurso in Caithness, the king sailed with only three skiffs from his fleet over the Pentland Firth to take Harald by surprise. In his submission Harald redeemed himself with 3 gold marks, a payment which has been interpreted as a feudal 'relief', although the relationship between earls and kings was as yet scarcely so formalized. In Rognvald's absence another claimant, Erlend, son of Harald Smooth-Tongue and cousin to Harald Maddadson, rose to the fore and was given Rognvald's half of Caithness by the Scottish king, Malcolm IV. Erlend then went to Norway and obtained a grant of Harald's half of Orkney from King Eystein. Behind him lay the support of many powerful kinsmen, including that of the unscrupulous Swein Asleifsson. The safe return of Rognvald in 1153 from his pilgrimage led to the so-called 'war of the three earls', the events of which are graphically described in the saga narrative. It ended with the death of Erlend on the island of Damsay and the settlement of Harald and Rognvald as co-earls. 
Continuing tensions in this still-violent society led to the murder of Rognvald on 20 August 1158 by Thorbjorn Clerk at Forsie in Caithness. One of the most talented and best-loved of all the Orkney earls, he was described as 'very popular there in the Isles and far and wide elsewhere. He had been a friend in need to many a man, liberal in money matters, equable of temper, steadfast in friendship, skilful in feats of strength and a good skald' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 104). He was buried in St Magnus's Cathedral in Kirkwall, the finest surviving Romanesque cathedral in Scotland, which was built in fulfilment of the vow which he took on his attempt to win the earldom in 1136. The expense of the building programme was partly borne by the earl's generosity, although an agreement was made with the Orkney farmers, according to which they contributed funds in return for the abandonment of the threat to impose an inheritance fee on their family estates. In this pious age, the violent death of the popular earl led to his rapid sanctification. His relics are said in 'Orkneyinga Saga' to have been taken up by Bishop Bjarne in the 1190s, with leave of the pope, and he became the second Orkney saint. 
By contrast with Rognvald, Harald was less highly regarded, it being said of him only that he was 'a great chief, the tallest and strongest of men, obstinate and hard-hearted' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 105). Now unrivalled within his own power base, Harald's ambitions seem to have extended in the next phase of his life beyond Orkney and Caithness and southwards to Ross, which had come under the influence of previous earls of Orkney. He became involved in the complex and dangerous situation created by the pretensions of the rebel Macheth dynasty in Moray and Ross, which caused the kings of Scots problems intermittently throughout the twelfth century. That Harald associated himself with the Macheth cause is clear from his bigamous second marriage (in the 1170s probably) to Hvarflod Macheth, daughter of Malcolm Macheth ['see under 'Macheth family], who was earl of Ross for at least six years until his death in 1168. Harald was probably also strengthening Orkney earldom claims to lands in Ross by this marriage. The military significance of this frontier zone was fully recognized by King William, who built and fortified two castles in 1179 at strategic points in Easter Ross just before the MacWilliam rebellion of 1181, in which, however, Earl Harald played no part. Not until 1196 did he show signs of acting rebelliously, which then gave the king good reason to send one, if not two, expeditions north, one of which actually reached Thurso on the northern coast of the Caithness earldom, the first time royal Scottish forces had penetrated into earldom territory. The explanation given in the later chronicle of John Fordun was that Harald had been goaded into rebelling by his wife's ambitions, and certainly one of the peace conditions demanded by King William subsequently was that Harald put Hvarflod away and take back his first wife, Affreca, daughter of Duncan, earl of Fife (died 1154) (which he refused to do). 
There are a remarkable number of contemporary accounts of the royal expeditions north to contain Harald, apart from 'Orkneyinga Saga' itself (which is not very coherent or informative about this stage of Harald's life). Some of these accounts suggest that Harald's son Thorfinn had reacted to the presence of the Scottish king's feudal vassals on the southern frontier of earldom influence by leading an attack into Moray, thereby inviting retaliatory action by the royal Scottish forces. Fordun says that the king's expedition of 1196 subdued both the provinces of the Caithness men (Caithness and Sutherland), and also that the earl's son and heir, Thorfinn, was taken hostage. Roger of Howden says that the earldom of Caithness was first divided and then taken away from Harald altogether. Half of it was given to Harald Ungi ('the younger'), the grandson of Earl Rognvald, who was later killed in battle near Wick. There was also, according to the saga, an attempt to replace Harald with Rognvald Godredson, king of the Hebrides. At some point Harald was forced to go south to King William's presence, accompanied by the bishops of St Andrews and Rosemarkie, in order to beg for his earldom back, but whether in 1197 or after a later incident in 1202 is not clear. There is, however, no doubt either that Harald had to pay a large fine, or that his son Thorfinn died in prison after having been blinded. 
Harald compounded his own problems by making the grave mistake of antagonizing the church, which was to the forefront of Scottish policies regarding Caithness. He was considered responsible for leading the attack on the residence of the bishop of Caithness at Scrabster in 1201, when Bishop John had his tongue cut out and was partially blinded. This was the culmination of problems between the bishop and earl which had been developing in the 1190s, provoked by the bishop's ban on the payment of a church tax instituted by the earl -- the ban probably represented an attempt to impose Scottish order in a part of the earl's dominion which had hitherto been under the Orkney bishop's authority. Reports about the ban on the earl's grant of the tax had reached the ears of Innocent III, as, indeed, did information about the attack on the bishop, for which a heavy penance was laid on the chief perpetrator. The mutilation of the bishop provided the earl's Scottish overlord with the perfect opportunity for an avenging expedition north, and for the attempted appointment of more rival earls. Yet the evidence also suggests that Harald was a pious and generous benefactor to the church, giving an annual gift of 1 mark of silver to the canons of Scone, as well as the above-mentioned annual tax of 1died from every house in Caithness for the papacy (modelled on the payment of Peter's Pence which had been recently instituted in Scandinavia, including Orkney). Earl Harald is also named in a lost charter as taking the monastery of 'Benkoren' (probably Bangor, in Down) under his protection, another indication of the range of his seaborne activities. 
In his Scandinavian earldom Earl Harald also played the dangerous game of being implicated in rebellion against the established king and of having to suffer the consequences. He gave support to the 'Eyjaskeggjar' rebels ('Island beardies'), who planned to restore the illegitimate son of King Magnus Erlingsson to the throne against the impostor Sverre. Two years after the defeat of the rebels at the battle of Floruvoe in 1193, Earl Harald was forced to go to Bergen and submit to King Sverre, with his close friend and relative Bishop Bjarne to plead his case. The peace terms were harsh and included the loss of the Shetland Islands and half of the revenues of Orkney, along with the imposition of a royal steward ('sysselman') in his earldom to collect moneys and administer newly acquired royal estates. The permanent representatives of encroaching royal authority were tolerated only as long as their position was protected by their royal masters, and both the Caithness steward and the Orkney 'sysselman' were eventually murdered on the earl's orders. 
Harald Maddadson had the misfortune to live at a time when royal power was increasing markedly, making it inevitable that restrictions should be imposed on independent warlords of his class. He was also unlucky to be faced with determined and powerful kings in both Scotland and Norway who would not tolerate any signs of disaffection by the rulers of dangerously independent earldom dynasties, and who were able to reach out to the remoter parts of their kingdoms in their drive to extend their authority. Military expeditions into his territory, confiscations of his hereditary lands, and impositions of heavy fines for his failure to fulfil conditions and abide by restrictions imposed on him after his submission at humiliating peace meetings, all are symbols of the changed world of the late twelfth century in the most northerly kingdoms of Europe. Remarkably, when Earl Harald died in 1206, after a violent life in which he had been earl for nearly seventy years, he held the whole of Caithness once more and had also reacquired Shetland, a notable survival achievement by the last representative of the old-style free-ranging viking earl, whose authority had been challenged by new-style royal overlords. 


@@@@@


doc= 49352


Rognvald Kali Kolsson (c.1103-1158), who claimed the two earldoms through his mother, Gunnhild, the daughter of Earl Erlend (died 1099), and who conquered Orkney in 1136. Two years later Rognvald agreed to allow Harald to hold half the earldom, perhaps in return for recognition of his own rights in Caithness. That an agreement was reached by 'all the best men of Orkney and Scotland' ('Orkneyinga Saga', 72), shows the extent of the pressure from the south on behalf of the young Harald, whose grant of the title of earl at such an age was unprecedented. Moreover, it was done without any apparent reference to the kings of Norway, although some thirteen years later Rognvald did take Harald to visit King Inge, one of the three rival sons of Harald Gilli. Scottish interest is clearly seen in a charter issued probably between about 1140 and 1145 by King David I to Earl Rognvald and another, unnamed, earl and the 'good men' of Caithness and Orkney, ordering them to protect the monks -- probably from Dunfermline -- established at Dornoch in Sutherland. 


@@@@@


doc= 49353


Maud (d. 1131) was the daughter of Waltheof, earl of Northumbria (c.1050-1076), son of Earl Siward who had helped to put Malcolm III on the Scottish throne, and Judith (died in or after 1086), a niece of William the Conqueror. Maud's first husband was Simon (I) de Senlis 


@@@@@


doc= 49354


Macheth family (per. c.1124-1215), rebels, took part in revolts against four successive kings of Scots over some ninety years. Their first known representative, 


@@@@@


doc= 49355


Archibald (d. 1198), administrator and abbot of Dunfermline, was of unknown origins. He became abbot in 1178 or 1179, and soon after his appointment witnessed two 'acta' of King William the Lion ('r'. 1165-1214), one being the foundation grant for the king's major new abbey at Arbroath. He also witnessed 'acta' of Hugh, bishop of St Andrews from 1178 to 1188, the king's candidate in the disputed election to that see in 1178. He is likely to have been one of the Scottish envoys to Pope Lucius III ('r'. 1181-5) in the spring of 1182 in connection with that dispute; a bull confirming Dunfermline Abbey's possessions was issued at Velletri on 30 April 1182. This journey was possibly the occasion of his receiving (very unusually for a Scot) a writ of protection from Henry II of England, no doubt seeking to ward off during his absence unwanted attentions on the abbey's lands in Lothian from the English garrison then in Edinburgh Castle. 
Little more is known of Archibald's care for Dunfermline's estate and church, except for a few grants of land made by him; during his rule gifts were made to the abbey by William the Lion and others. In addition to his loyalty to the king in the St Andrews dispute, and his many appearances as a witness to royal 'acta' (there taking precedence over other abbots), he had probably also shown a talent for administration, for there then developed another side of his career, unique in twelfth-century Scotland, that of an abbot fully involved in the king's secular business. After the late 1180s he appears regularly and conspicuously as a royal adviser and servant, perambulating marches, granting sasine of lands, acting on the king's behalf in court, witnessing agreements there, and surveying and recording lands and rents. He was active in at least eight major royal centres throughout Scotland. Some of his work was probably a resumption and review of royal rents in the south of Scotland after the restoration of Roxburgh and Berwick castles in 1190-91. Whatever his official title in all this (if indeed he had one), he was evidently versatile and useful. By 1195, at the latest, this part of his career had ended; a record of it, now lost, 'the roll of Abbot Archibald of ancient rents in money and ancient waitings' (Thomson, 1.118), was still in the Scottish royal archives in 1296, and so probably had some importance beyond his lifetime. Archibald was still alive in February 1198, but died, perhaps before 24 August, in that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 49356


Ermengarde (d. 1233), queen of Scots, consort of William I, was a daughter of Richard, vicomte de Beaumont-sur-Sarthe, who was the son of Constance, an illegitimate daughter of King Henry I of England. She thus had (somewhat thin) royal blood to commend her when Henry II of England proposed her, in May 1186, as a bride for William I (William the Lion), king of Scots. The bride's social rank meant that the king was disparaged by the match, but he and his advisers reluctantly accepted it. The marriage took place at Woodstock on 5 September 1186; Henry II paid for the four days of festivities and returned Edinburgh Castle (in his hands since 1174) to the king of Scots as part of the bride's tocher (dowry). King William was to provide $100 of rents and forty knights feus in Scotland for Ermengarde; he probably honoured the first part of this, as she later had her own household, and dwellings and lands at Crail and Haddington. 
At the time of her marriage Ermengarde, whose date of birth is unknown, was called 'a girl' ('puella') by a contemporary; possibly she was just at (or even below) the canonical age of twelve years for marriage and that this was another reason for the king's reluctance to accept her. After the wedding she was escorted back to Scotland by Jocelin, bishop of Glasgow, and other Scottish nobles; the two kings went off to Marlborough, perhaps for some hunting. 
Whatever her age, the queen's duty was to bear a legitimate and preferably male heir. During the years between 1187 and 1195 her eldest child, Margaret, was born, and probably also another daughter, Isabella. Then, on 24 August 1198, a boy, the future king Alexander II was born at Haddington. He was the first surviving legitimate son born to a reigning king of Scots for some seventy years and, not surprisingly, a contemporary noted that 'many rejoiced at his birth' (Anderson, 2.348). Later, there was a third daughter, Marjorie. 
In July-August 1209 a diplomatic crisis between England and Scotland led to the treaty of Norham. By it the marriages of Ermengarde's two eldest daughters into the English royal house were proposed, and a few days later both girls were delivered at Carlisle, along with other hostages, to the justiciar of England. Whether their mother had art or part in the treaty is unknown; probably, she did not. But in further negotiations at Durham in early 1212, when her husband was absent, she mediated actively between the two sides. A contemporary observer calls her 'an extraordinary woman, gifted with a charming and witty eloquence' (Bower, 4.469). She may have charmed King John; no more Scottish hostages were handed over and Alexander was to be knighted and, later, married to an English princess. The Scottish representatives had ensured that he would succeed to a still separate kingdom of the Scots. 
After her husband's death, on 4 December 1214, Ermengarde remained grieving at Stirling, while the inauguration of Alexander II took place at Scone. The royal Christmas feast for 1214 was held at Forfar and the king and his mother were back at Stirling in January 1215; afterwards they went together to Arbroath to see the tomb of King William. Ermengarde probably played a part in Scottish politics, especially with regard to relations with England in 1215 and later; with other Scottish leaders she was excommunicated and then absolved in 1217. In 1225 she and Alexander II began to assemble property for their foundation of the Cistercian abbey of Balmerino, and by 1229 the first members of the house were in place. Unusually for Scotland, it was dedicated to St Edward the Confessor, for whom the queen seems to have had a special veneration; her only other known religious gift was to the hospital of St Edward at Berwick. Ermengarde died on 11 February 1233 and was buried at Balmerino. 
Ermengarde's eldest daughter, Margaret, was married at London on 3 October 1221 to Hubert de Burgh, justiciar of England and later earl of Kent. Her second daughter, Isabella, still single, returned to Scotland in 1223. In May 1225 she was married at Alnwick to Roger (III) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, a minor and probably some twenty years her junior. Custody of Roger was given to Alexander II, but the earl probably returned to England after 1233. The couple were childless; Bigod repudiated his wife in 1245 but was compelled to take her back in 1253. She was still alive in October 1263, but her date of death is unknown. She was buried at Blackfriars in London. In 1227 Marjorie was sought as a bride by Henry III's brother, Richard of Cornwall, who came to Scotland to speak to Ermengarde about the match. But his proposals pleased neither the Scots nor Henry III, and negotiations were broken off. She was married on 1 August 1235 at Berwick to Gilbert Marshal, earl of Pembroke ['see under 'Marshal, William (II)], who died in 1241. They, too, were childless. Marjorie died on 17 November 1244 and was also buried at Blackfriars in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49357


Macwilliam family (per. c.1130-c.1230), claimants to the Scottish throne, descended from Duncan II ('r'. 1094), that is, from the first marriage of Malcolm III (died 1093) and so from the ancient line of Scottish kings. But the family took its name from the king's son, William fitz Duncan (d. 1151x4) ['see under 'Duncan II], described in an English source as earl of Moray. The origin of William's claim on Moray is not clear. Alexander II's foundation at Elgin Cathedral in 1235 of a chaplaincy in memory of King Duncan might suggest that the latter had had a right in the area which could have passed to his son. Alternatively, it has been proposed that William's claim came from a first wife related to Angus, earl of Moray, who was killed in battle in 1130 when in revolt against David I. Angus had claimed the crown, and on his death without direct heirs any right he had to that would thus have passed to William fitz Duncan. 
William fitz Duncan was strenuously loyal to David I, especially in the campaign of 1138 in the north of England against King Stephen, and no claims to Moray or to the crown were pressed by his heirs soon after his death. No Macwilliam is known to have taken part between 1154 and 1164 in the revolts of Somerled, lord of Argyll, or of a group of Scottish earls against Malcolm IV (1160). Nor were similar claims put forward at any time by the heirs of William's presumed second marriage to Alice de Rumilly (a son, William of Egremont, who died 'c'.1165, and three daughters). But by the 1170s things had changed. 
The death of Somerled of Argyll in 1164 and the division of his lordship brought instability to the western seaboard. No earl of Moray was appointed following William fitz Duncan's death, and after 1165 King William the Lion tightened his grip there. He named no successor as earl of Ross after the death of Malcolm Macheth in 1168. Royal government was extending its arm and some local lords, faced with this, preferred to support another line. In 1179 the king and his brother, Earl David, led an army into Ross. Two castles (mottes) were built at Redcastle and Dunskeath and measures were agreed to strengthen the defences of Inverness. The likely reason for the trouble is activity by the Macheth family, claimants to the earldom of Ross. Possibly the Macwilliams too were involved; they are reliably said to have been restive before 1181, when 


@@@@@


doc= 49358


William (d. 1168), bishop of Orkney, is remembered in Orcadian secular and ecclesiastical tradition as the 'first bishop' in the Orkneys. The Icelandic lists of the bishops of Orkney all start with him and no previous bishop is mentioned by name in 'Orkneyinga Saga' (although it states that Earl Thorfinn founded the bishopric at Birsay 'c'.1050 as a seat for the first bishop in the earldom). William is certainly the first who can authoritatively be said to have been resident in the see, and the episcopal seat was moved to Kirkwall by him (following the initiative of Earl Rognvald Kali) where it remained thereafter. His origins are unknown, but that he is unlikely to have been Norwegian is suggested both by his name and by the comment in the saga that he was a 'clerk of Paris'. The length of his episcopate is disputed, as the statement in the saga that he was bishop for sixty-six years is generally doubted, but the date of 1102 for his appointment would fit well with the period when the earldom was under the control of King Magnus Barelegs ('r'. 1093-1103), who at that time dominated the Norwegian colonies in the west and would have been able to choose a cleric from that locality. Certainly William's epithet indicates that he was of great age when he died. It is not known who consecrated William and his rule was not undisputed, as York sources give clear evidence of the appointment of rival candidates and of papal backing for their claims. The divisions among the sons and grandsons of Earl Thorfinn probably helped to create a situation in which rival earls looked to rival bishops. Bishop William's part in the quarrel of Magnus and Hakon is never spelt out in the saga, although it can be deduced that the two were going to attend a peace meeting on the island of Egilsay, where Bishop William is otherwise mentioned as residing, when the final episode of the quarrel resulted in the killing of Magnus by his cousin in 1115 or 1116. 
Any part played by Bishop William in these dramatic events had been forgotten, or was deliberately omitted, when the life of St Magnus came to be written down. It is likely that he had been a supporter of Hakon, and the miraculous circumstances in which he is said to have been convinced of the sanctity of the martyred Magnus provides illuminating evidence of clerical adaptation to changed political circumstances as well as evidence of the hagiographer's skill. William then led the move to have Magnus's relics translated to Kirkwall 'c'.1138 and worked with the successful claimant and nephew of Magnus, Rognvald Kali, in the building of the magnificent new cathedral dedicated to his martyred uncle and undoubtedly endowed by the new earl. The fame of the martyred Magnus added lustre and wealth to the Orcadian see, and the bishop participated in another religious phenomenon of the age when he accompanied Earl Rognvald on his pilgrimage to the Holy Land (1151-3). This famous journey forms one of the fullest parts of the saga and Bishop William is said to have captained one of the ships on the outward journey across the Mediterranean, and to have accompanied Rognvald on his return journey overland by way of Rome and Scandinavia. The links between his bishopric and Norway were strengthened in 1153-4, when the papal legate Nicholas Breakspear set up the archbishopric of Trondheim, in which all the sees of the Norwegian colonies were included. William died in 1168 and was buried in the new cathedral of St Magnus in Kirkwall, his tomb being moved into the extended chancel in the thirteenth century, when an inscribed lead plaque (which records the epithet by which he was known) was laid in his coffin. 


@@@@@


doc= 49359


Swein Asleiffson (d. 1171?), pirate, was the son of Olaf Hrolfsson of Gairsay, chieftain on Orkney and steward of Caithness, and of Asleif, described as 'a wise woman, of good family and strongest character' ('Orkneyinga Saga', trans. Taylor, 218). His exploits are known almost exclusively from 'Orkneyinga Saga'. Some, such as the killing of Somerled of Argyll, are certainly fictitious, and the chronology of Swein's life must be treated as conjectural. Nevertheless, his existence is confirmed by the account of his great-grandson contained in 'Sturlunga saga'. Moreover, 'Orkneyinga Saga' was written soon after Swein's death and includes some information which can be corroborated. 
Swein's youth was presumably spent on his father's estates, Gairsay in Orkney and Duncansby in Caithness. In late December 1135 his father, Olaf, was killed by an enemy of Earl Paul of Orkney and Caithness, and Swein's (perhaps elder) brother, Valthjof, was drowned while sailing from his estate on Stronsay. That Swein became known as Asleif's son may have been in reference to his mother's strong character, or to the fact that he was left fatherless at a young age. Soon after, Swein was outlawed by Earl Paul for killing a member of the latter's bodyguard. He fled to the Hebrides, then joined Paul's half-sister Margaret and her Scottish husband, Maddad, earl of Atholl. In the spring of 1136 Swein returned to Orkney, kidnapped Paul, and took him to Atholl. The earldom immediately fell to a Norwegian claimant, Rognvald Kali Kolsson. 
Paul was subsequently maimed or killed so that Harald, the young son of Margaret and Maddad, might become joint earl of Orkney with Rognvald. This plan may have been conceived with David I to enhance Scottish influence in the Scandinavian north. 'Orkneyinga Saga' records that a Scottish bishop, John (possibly David's tutor, the bishop of Glasgow), travelled to Orkney in 1138 to formalize Harald's recognition. Hopes of influencing events in Caithness and Orkney would explain the assistance which King David and his successor, Malcolm IV, allegedly gave Swein on three later occasions. 
By 'c'.1139 Swein took over the lands of his father and brother; he became one of Rognvald's chieftains and (perhaps slightly later) was made his steward in Caithness. His sister, Ingigerd, married Thorbjorn, the young Earl Harald's councillor, and it may be at this time that Swein was briefly married to Ragnhild Ogmund's-Daughter, who bore Olaf, his first son. Swein wreaked vengeance on the faction responsible for his father's death, burning their house at Helmsdale in Sutherland. He then gave assistance to the Hebridean who had sheltered him while outlawed. This expedition, which raided Wales and Lundy island, led to his second marriage, to Ingirid Thorkel's-Daughter, a wealthy widow from the Isle of Man related to Earl Harald. They had a son, Andres (who married a sister of Bishop Bjarni of Orkney), and several unnamed daughters. 
The couple were betrayed by Swein's Hebridean host and erstwhile ally, and returned to Orkney. After a retaliatory raid to the Hebrides, Swein angered several Orcadian chiefs, including his brother-in-law Thorbjorn, by claiming a disproportionate share of plunder. Earl Rognvald attempted to settle the dispute, until Margad (Swein's deputy in Caithness) killed one of the earl's supporters. 'Orkneyinga Saga' claims that Swein refused to turn Margad, a companion since his youth, over to Rognvald and the slighted chiefs. After a siege near Freswick in Caithness, Swein and Margad escaped to David I, who arranged a settlement. 
Swein's influence diminished after 1151, when Rognvald travelled to Jerusalem leaving Earl Harald and Thorbjorn in control. Feud arose when Swein's brother Gunnar was outlawed by Harald for having an affair with the latter's mother. Swein intercepted Harald's revenues, and subsequently retreated to the Scottish king to have his rights in Caithness recognized by a higher authority. He then joined Erlend, a new claimant to the earldoms, and took command of his campaign. However, after initial success, Erlend was killed during an attack by Harald and Rognvald (who returned in 1153) in December 1154. 
Rognvald invited Swein to join him and arranged a settlement. The chieftain gave up half his lands, his warship, and 2 gold marks, but warned that 'this settlement will hold best if I am not treated disrespectfully' ('Orkneyinga Saga', trans. Taylor, 322). When Harald had Swein's house on Gairsay occupied, Swein was prepared to burn it, thinking that the earl was inside, but was persuaded that his own wife and daughters, who were within, would not be let out, and rather than burn them he disarmed Harald's men. The earl was not in fact there, and Swein's wife, Ingirid, would not betray the whereabouts of her kinsman Harald. Swein ran off Harald's ale and left with Ingirid and their daughters. A lasting settlement was arranged in 1155. Immediately afterwards, Rognvald returned his share of Swein's confiscated property, and Harald soon did the same. Swein later fostered Harald's son Haakon on Gairsay, and built a large drinking hall there. 
Swein maintained a large retinue on the proceeds of piracy. According to 'Orkneyinga Saga' he died when raiding in Ireland, one autumn between 1165 and 1180, through falling into a pit trap after securing Dublin's nominal surrender. His pious death-speech, out of character for this aggressively worldly figure, has been interpreted as a late addition to the saga. An unsuccessful Orcadian attack on Dublin is dated to 1171 by Gerald of Wales, the annals of Ulster, and other sources. In these accounts, however, the perpetrator is called John the Mad, and is described as assisting the ousted king of Dublin. Moreover, Gerald places these events around Whitsun (16 May) and states that John was killed in battle. The date of Swein's death thus remains, like most of the details of his life, conjectural. His exciting life is the subject of Eric Linklater's novel 'The Ultimate Viking' (1955). 


@@@@@


doc= 49360


Fergus, lord of Galloway (d. 1161), prince, has been described variously as king, kinglet, prince, or lord of Galloway. He was of unknown ancestry, but was probably descended from a native dynasty of south-west Scotland. When first recorded, at the consecration of Glasgow Cathedral in 1136, Fergus was accompanied by Uhtred (died 1174), the son of his marriage (datable to 'c'.1120) to an unnamed illegitimate daughter of Henry I of England. From the same marriage he had a daughter, Affreca, whom he married to Olaf Godredsson (died 1153), king of Man. Fergus's second recorded son, Gilbert (died 1185), occasionally described as elder brother of Uhtred, may have been the child of a previous, irregular, liaison. 
The ruler of a strategically located territory on the periphery of the spheres of power of the kings of Scotland and England, Fergus is traditionally represented as an independent or semi-independent magnate of the Norse-Celtic world of the Irish Sea and Hebridean regions. While the growing power of the Scottish crown may have curtailed his freedom of manoeuvre, he was largely successful in limiting foreign influence over his lands. The military manpower of his extensive domain led to his being courted by both kingdoms, but his co-operation may have extended only so far as the limits of mutual interest. 
The southward expansion of Scottish royal authority saw Fergus drawn into the orbit of David I, king of Scots ('r'. 1124-53), and the Galwegians played a prominent role in David's campaigns against King Stephen in England after 1136. There is no evidence for the basis of the relationship between Fergus and David, which probably stemmed from simple recognition of the growing power of the Scottish king in the lands around the head of the Solway Firth, but it led to the provision of substantial numbers of warriors for David's armies. Atrocities committed in 1138 are ascribed in contemporary accounts of the campaign to the Galwegians, and their undisciplined action in the battle of the Standard in that year contributed significantly to the Scottish defeat. 
Fergus was not involved in David's English ventures after 1138, but his relationship with the Scottish crown continued. The marriage of his heir, Uhtred, to Gunnilda, daughter of Waltheof of Allerdale, a prominent Cumbrian nobleman related to David by descent from the latter's great-uncle, Maldred, strengthened that relationship, at the same time binding Waltheof's family into the political framework of David's extended realm. Likewise, the marriage of Affreca to Olaf of Man drew an important regional power into the enlarged sphere of influence of the Scottish crown. 
David I's attempts to free the Scottish church from the claims to metropolitan authority made by the archbishops of York did not, apparently, extend to the Galwegian bishopric of Whithorn, which had close links with York extending back to the eighth century. No bishops are recorded at Whithorn from the early ninth century until the appearance 'c'.1128 of Bishop Gilla-Aldan, whose appointment may represent the revival of the old see. Fergus is often credited with the revival of Whithorn and the appointment of Gilla-Aldan, but there is no evidence for this, and Archbishop Thurstan of York (died 1140), who needed loyal suffragan bishops both to strengthen his claims in Scotland and to fend off challenges to his status from the archbishop of Canterbury, is a more likely candidate. As the ruler of Galloway, however, Fergus must have been involved in any physical process of revival. His foundation of the Cistercian abbey of Dundrennan in 1142, colonized from Rievaulx in Yorkshire rather than Scottish Melrose, emphasizes the York connection. 
In the 1150s Fergus's involvement in Scottish affairs declined. From 1153 his attention focused on Man and the Hebrides, where the assassination of his son-in-law had been followed by an attack on Galloway. There is, however, no evidence that Fergus assisted his grandson, Godred II, to win the Manx throne, or that he supported him in the general war in the Hebrides against Somerled of Argyll after 1154. A lessening involvement in Scottish matters, however, need not imply a rift with the new government of Malcolm IV ('r'. 1153-65). Indeed, the capture at Whithorn and delivery to the king in 1156 of Donald MacHeth, son of Malcolm MacHeth, pretender to the Scottish throne, indicates the contrary. 
Restoration of English control over Carlisle in 1157 marked a turning point in Fergus's relationship with the Scots. Scottish influence in the Solway region diminished, and Fergus perhaps seized the freedom of action which this afforded in an effort to assert his authority over his unruly sons. Only a garbled account survives, but it appears that Fergus sought to capitalize on the unrest triggered by Malcolm IV's participation in Henry II of England's expedition to Toulouse in 1159 and raided Scottish territory in a move to silence domestic opposition from his sons. 
Malcolm's return in 1160 led to speedy settlement of the disturbances over Toulouse, freeing him to deal with Fergus: three invasions of Galloway were mounted in the course of the year. Perhaps weakened by discord with Uhtred and Gilbert, Fergus came to terms, and was obliged to resign his lordship and to retire into Holyrood Abbey at Edinburgh, where he died on 12 May 1161. Fergus's fall resulted in the partition of his lands between his sons, the imposition of more rigorous supervision over Galloway, and the beginning of moves to draw the region more effectively under Scottish overlordship. 


@@@@@


doc= 49361


Roland, lord of Galloway (d. 1200), magnate, was the eldest son of Uhtred, lord of Galloway (died 1174), and his wife, Gunnilda, daughter of Waltheof of Allerdale in Cumbria. He had two brothers, one of whom perished in battle in 1185, while the second, Fergus, made his career in the service of his nephew, Alan. In his marriage, made before 1185, to Helen de Morville (died 1217), daughter of Richard de Morville, lord of Lauderdale and Cunningham and royal constable, Roland had five children, four of whom reached adulthood. His elder son, Alan, succeeded to his parents' estates, while the younger, Thomas, became earl of Atholl through marriage. 
Known in his youth as Lachlan, his preference in adulthood for being known as Roland, the Norman-French equivalent of Lachlan, symbolizes the spread of foreign influences into Galloway which followed the overthrow in 1160 of his grandfather, Fergus of Galloway. Military conquest by Malcolm IV had replaced loose Scottish overlordship with rigorous supervision; royal officials were established in territories bordering Galloway, and Roland's father, and his uncle, Gilbert, between whom Galloway had been divided, were encouraged to settle colonists to meet new obligations due to the crown. This regime held until 1174, when King William the Lion was captured during his invasion of England in support of Henry II's rebellious eldest son. Uhtred and Gilbert, who had served in William's army, seized this opportunity to throw off Scottish overlordship and, having returned to Galloway, they attacked William's officers and appealed to their kinsman, Henry II of England. Revolt turned into civil war as rivalries between the brothers surfaced, and in September 1174 Gilbert murdered Uhtred. An English embassy negotiated terms, but, despite an offer of substantial tribute, when he learned of his kinsman's murder Henry II refused to make terms with Gilbert, and in 1175 sent the now-freed King William to subdue him. Supported by the Scots and by Uhtred's friends, Roland regained control of eastern Galloway, possibly as early as October 1176, when his uncle submitted to Henry II. Despite his continued open hostility to the Scots, Gilbert thereafter retained possession of western Galloway under English protection. 
After 1174 Roland forged links with the Scottish crown. On his uncle's death in 1185, he enjoyed tacit Scottish encouragement for his takeover of Gilbert's lands and disinheritance of the latter's son, Duncan, in defiance of the wishes of King Henry, who in 1186 brought an army as far as Carlisle in an effort to subdue Roland. In a negotiated settlement, Roland swore homage and fealty to Henry II, but he was William's man. By 1187 he was active in the Scottish king's service, leading the force which defeated the MacWilliam pretender to the Scottish throne at 'Mam Garvia', near Inverness. Between about 1187 and 1190 he was appointed justiciar, possibly to restore royal authority in south-western Scotland. 
Under Roland the Anglo-Norman infiltration of Galloway gained pace. His few surviving charters show him introducing members of his kin, mainly from Cumbria, to assist in his establishment of control over the reunited lordship, while the church, too, was cultivated in a move to consolidate his position. His foundation 'c'.1192 of Glenluce Abbey in Wigtownshire, a daughter house of Dundrennan, saw the establishment of a friendly community in the heart of his uncle's former estates. But there is no evidence to support the view that he swept aside the native nobility to make room for dependent incomers, and it is clear that his family's power continued to rest on the support of the Celtic aristocracy. 
Roland's horizons, however, had shifted beyond the confines of Galloway and, while still enjoying the relative independence of his patrimony, he moved at ease into the ranks of the Scottish nobility. The Morville marriage facilitated this trend. On the death in 1196 of his brother-in-law William, the Morville estates in Scotland and England devolved, with the office of constable, on Roland and his wife. There is little evidence for Roland's exercise of office, but it is likely that his attendance at Lincoln in November 1200, when King William the Lion swore fealty to King John for his English lands, depended on his position as constable and justiciar. From Lincoln Roland continued to Northampton, where he opened a lawsuit concerning a portion of his wife's inheritance, but on 19 December he died in the town and was buried there in the abbey of St Andrew. 


@@@@@


doc= 49362


Alan, lord of Galloway (b. before 1199, d. 1234), magnate, was the eldest son of Roland, lord of Galloway (d. 1200), and Helen de Morville (died 1217), sister and heir of William de Morville, lord of Lauderdale and Cunningham and royal constable. He had two brothers and two sisters, of whom Thomas (d. 1231) became earl of Atholl in right of his wife, Ada married Walter Bisset of Aboyne, and Dervorguilla married Nicholas de Stuteville of Liddel in Cumbria. 
Alan contracted three marriages: to a daughter of Roger de Lacy, constable of Chester; to Margaret (died before 1228), eldest daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon, in 1209; and, 'c'.1229, to Rose, daughter of Hugh de Lacy, earl of Ulster. The first two marriages produced children, but only daughters attained adulthood. Helen, his daughter by his first marriage, married Roger de Quincy, while Christina (or Christiana) and Dervorguilla ['see 'Balliol, Dervorguilla de], the children of Alan and Margaret, married William de Forz and John de Balliol respectively. Alan had one bastard son, Thomas. 
Cross-border landholding and kinship with King John of England made Alan a man of consequence in both realms. His relationship with the king of Scots, based on loose overlordship rather than feudal subordination, allowed freedom of manoeuvre where his actions did not conflict with Scottish interests. Galloway's military resources and substantial fleet gave added influence; Alan's aid was courted unsuccessfully by John for his 1210 campaign against the Ulster Lacys, but he agreed to send one thousand men for the abortive Welsh campaign of 1212. A grant of estates in Antrim in 1212 was designed to draw him actively into the defence of Angevin Ulster against the native Irish. Despite such favours from John, when Alexander II entered the civil war in England in 1215, aligning himself with John's baronial opponents, Alan joined the Scottish king and was his chief lieutenant in the occupation of Cumberland and Westmorland from 1215 to 1217. 
From 1225 Alan used the freedom afforded by the loose overlordship of the Scottish crown to interfere in the feud between King Ragnvald of Man and his half-brother, Olaf. His private interest, arising from efforts to secure Antrim with Ragnvald's support against the threat of a Lacy restoration, coincided at first with Anglo-Scottish policy towards the region and received the tacit support of his Scottish overlord. The prospect of a pro-Scottish client in Man led Alexander II to acquiesce to the marriage in 1226 of Alan's bastard son, Thomas, to Ragnvald's daughter, but the marriage provoked revolt against Ragnvald. Despite the support of Galwegian galleys and warriors, Ragnvald was overthrown and slain in 1229 by Olaf. Alan's ensuing attempts to conquer Man for Thomas destabilized the Hebrides and western highlands, thereby threatening Scottish territorial interests, and in 1230-31 prompted active Norwegian support for Olaf. Joint action by Alan and Alexander averted catastrophe, but Scottish and Galwegian interests had diverged and the 1231 campaign marked the end of further Galwegian involvement in the Manx succession; Alan's dynastic ambitions had caused an undesirable war with a major foreign power. 
Uncertainty over the succession to Galloway shadowed Alan's later years. His nearest legitimate male heir was Patrick of Atholl ['see under 'Thomas, earl of Atholl], son of his younger brother, Thomas, who had died in 1231, but, although Celtic practice did not debar his bastard son, Thomas, Alan's closest heirs by feudal law were his three daughters, all married to important Anglo-Scottish noblemen. To King Alexander, the crisis precipitated by Alan's Manx ventures made partition, and the attendant opportunity to replace the loose overlordship enjoyed by Alan with a more tightly defined relationship, an attractive proposition, for succession by Thomas threatened a revival of Galwegian interests in Man and so of risks to Scottish security. Alan died about 2 February 1234 and was buried in Dundrennan Abbey, where his mutilated tomb effigy survives. Partition of the lordship followed and, despite a rebellion in 1235 in favour of Thomas, was successfully enforced. 


@@@@@


doc= 49364


Thomas, earl of Atholl (d. 1231), magnate, was the younger son of Roland, lord of Galloway (died 1200), and Helen (died 1217), daughter of Richard de Morville, lord of Lauderdale and Cunningham and constable of the Scottish king. He had one brother and two sisters who survived to adulthood: Alan, who succeeded in 1200 to the lordship of Galloway; Ada, wife of Walter Bisset of Aboyne; and Dervorguilla, wife of Nicholas de Stuteville of Liddel in Cumbria. A marriage to an unidentified wife, contracted before 'c'.1207-8, produced a son old enough to serve as a hostage in England in 1213. Before January 1210 he married Isabella, elder daughter of Henry, earl of Atholl, and received the title of earl. With her he had two sons, but only the younger, Patrick ['see below'], survived childhood. Maduff, 'son of the earl', a witness to a charter of Isabella in her widowhood, may be the son of the first marriage, or illegitimate. Thomas had one certain bastard, Alan. 
The extent of Thomas's inheritance in Galloway is unknown, but from 1204-5 it furnished him with a fleet of galleys. In that year he entered the service of King John, who hired the vessels for use in the abortive Normandy campaign and for the 1206 expedition to Poitou. This service brought property in northern and western England, apparently lost when he returned to Scotland 'c'.1209. It was probably in the period 1205-9 that Thomas committed the rape at York for which he was pardoned in 1212 at the request of the Scottish king. In 1211 Earl Thomas served against the MacWilliams in Ross, and in 1212 he began a series of operations in Ulster directed against Aed O Neill, the MacWilliams' ally, which culminated in 1214 in his construction of a castle at Coleraine. Scottish and English policies here coincided, and an initial small grant of land in Ulster from John was enlarged in June 1215 into a substantial lordship centred on Coleraine. This, and a grant of the custody of Antrim Castle, were unsuccessful moves designed to win the earl's support in John's conflict with the barons -- he is not known to have played any part in the civil war in England of 1215-17. 
In June 1219 Earl Thomas gave homage and fealty to Henry III and received confirmation of his Irish possessions, but in July 1222 was ordered to surrender Antrim, and by 1224 Coleraine had been destroyed by O Neill. The mounting threat to Ulster from Hugh de Lacy, who was trying to recover the lordship there of which John had dispossessed him, saw English attempts to retain Earl Thomas's interest in Ireland, with cash payments and temporary grants of land being made until his possessions in Ulster could be restored. When the crown reached an accommodation with the Lacys in 1226, an apparently ineffective attempt was made to safeguard the earl's possessions. His inability to defend his Irish lands in the early 1220s arose from Earl Thomas's commitment to his brother's venture into Manx politics. In 1221 his galleys destroyed a Hebridean fleet off the Irish coast and slew Diarmait O Conchobhair, claimant to the kingship of Connacht, which was held by an ally of Henry III, and in 1228 Earl Thomas was again active in the Isles, joining Alan's invasion of Man in support of the exiled King Ragnvald. But Earl Thomas gave no further aid after Ragnvald's death in 1229, and by July 1230 his ships were once more in English service, probably for Henry III's expedition to Brittany and Bordeaux. Earl Thomas's death, possibly as the result of a tournament accident, and his burial in Coupar Abbey are recorded in 1231. In 1252 Patrick, son of Constantine of Goswick, a knight of the earl of Dunbar, was pardoned by Henry III for the killing of Thomas of Galloway. Isabella survived him for an unknown number of years, but was dead before 1242. From about 1233 to perhaps about 1237, the earldom was held by Alan Durward, possibly through exercise of the wardship of the heir, Patrick, and in 1237 an unnamed earl of Atholl, perhaps Durward, witnessed the treaty of York. 
The career of 


@@@@@


doc= 49365


David, earl of Huntingdon and lord of Garioch (1152-1219), magnate, was the youngest in the family of three sons and three daughters of Prince Henry of Scotland (c.1115-1152) and his wife, Ada de Warenne (c.1123-1178). His grandfather David I, in whose honour he was named, and his elder brothers, Malcolm IV and William the Lion, were successive kings of Scots from 1124 to 1214. He enthusiastically adopted Anglo-Norman values and played an ample supporting role in transforming Scotland into a stronger, European-style kingdom. Sent as a hostage to the English court in July 1163, he returned to Scotland as heir apparent to William the Lion immediately after his accession in 1165. Although never formally designated William's successor, David regularly attested royal charters as chief lay witness, and was occasionally named with his brother in the exercise of authority. His responsibilities were substantially increased by grants of extensive territories in outlying regions where William vigorously sought to consolidate and extend his control. 
In 1174 David gained the earldom of Lennox, which he held in the king's name until it was restored to its native house, perhaps in 1185. It has been suggested that David was formally granted Lennox in custody during a minority, but it seems more likely that his role was to enforce royal authority following a pronouncement of forfeiture (later rescinded) against the earldom's rulers. By 1182 he had taken charge of imposing estates on Tayside and in mid-Aberdeenshire, where he controlled the 'frontier' district of Garioch, his principal Scottish power base, important as a centre of operations, defensive and offensive, against the men of Moray and Ross to the north. These acquisitions, centred on the castle-burghs he established at Dundee and at Inverurie (the caput of Garioch), guaranteed his place as one of the kingdom's greatest magnates; and as he strengthened his local influence through innovations on the Anglo-Norman model, so he contributed in good measure to the increasing might of the crown, especially by reinforcing its dominance north of the Mounth (the eastern Grampians). But Scotland was scarcely his entire world. From 1163 his career had continued to unfold under the influence of Anglo-Scottish relations, often in the context of the difficulties raised by Scottish claims to the northern English counties, and by English counter-claims to the overlordship of Scotland. He was knighted by Henry II at Windsor on 31 May 1170 and, together with William the Lion, pledged allegiance to the English king's son, the young King Henry, on 15 June, the day after the latter's coronation. Apparently with some reluctance, David returned to England as his brother's ally in April or May 1174 in aid of young Henry's rebellion, begun the year before. In 1173 William had offered David the honour and earldom of Huntingdon; but only the additional grant of Lennox seems to have secured his intervention in this doomed venture. In the event he acquitted himself well: operating from Huntingdon and Leicester he rallied the midland insurgents, imposed his lordship on the Huntingdon honour, and defied Henry II until news of William's capture at Alnwick reached him late in July 1174. 
David was a principal party to the treaty of Falaise in December 1174, and in August 1175 went with William the Lion to York, where they publicly acknowledged Henry II as Scotland's lord superior. The Huntingdon honour, confiscated in 1174, was restored to William in March 1185. With Henry II's approval and perhaps at his bidding, William at once transferred it to David with the title of earl. This was the outstanding landmark in his life. As the most powerful Anglo-Scottish magnate of his day, he became a major focus for the increasing Normanization (or Anglicization) of Scottish society, forged 'cross-border' property ties that in smaller ways reflected his own, and was conspicuous in Anglo-Scottish diplomacy. Despite his dual allegiance, he never entirely lost William's trust. Admittedly, in 1195 William planned to marry his eldest daughter, Margaret, to Otto von Brunswick (the future emperor Otto IV), on the understanding that Margaret would inherit the kingdom, thus excluding David from the succession. But William's main aim seems to have been not so much to marginalize David as to regain Northumberland and Cumberland, with which King Richard I, Otto's uncle, promised to endow the couple. In any event, William quickly withdrew his proposals when an influential noble faction in Scotland spoke up on David's behalf, and no lasting damage was done to the brothers' friendship. David long remained prominent in Scottish governance, and in February 1206 possibly acted as regent during William's absence. 
From 1185, however, David was tenaciously committed to moderating warlike Scottish policies, a stance determined by more than self-interest. His experiences in 1174-5 had impressed on him that peace with the stronger English state was essential to Scotland's well-being -- though, ironically, the greater the English government's fears of Scottish belligerence, the more he would profit from English royal favour. He gave unquestioned loyalty to Richard I, who rewarded him with an advantageous marriage to Maud 
(or Matilda; died 1233)
, sister of Ranulf (III), earl of Chester, whom he wed on 19 August 1190. It is possible, though perhaps unlikely, that he joined Richard on crusade; and he besieged Richard's enemies at Nottingham in March 1194. He was a war captain in Normandy in July 1194, and served there again in 1197. He was frequently at the English court for discussion of Anglo-Scottish affairs, as on 5 December 1189, when Richard released Scotland from English overlordship. When David's prospects of kingship receded with the birth of William the Lion's long-awaited son, Alexander, in 1198, his standing became more firmly dependent on Anglo-Scottish peace. He worked energetically to this end after King John's succession in 1199, when William demanded the border shires with renewed persistence. Regularly employed by John as an emissary to the Scots between 1199 and 1209, he also supported him in Normandy, Maine and Anjou from 1199 to 1203. During a fresh Anglo-Scottish crisis in 1209 his presence at the Scottish court strengthened the hand of those who urged William to seek an agreement with John at Norham. John's punitive terms undermined the moderates' credibility; but this treaty removed for some time the threat of Scottish aggression. 
Since David's usefulness to John had diminished, he now began to fall foul of the English king's arbitrariness and rapacity. In August 1212 they were sufficiently estranged for John to suspect David of conspiring with other magnates apparently to kill him. An implausible assassin, David nevertheless had to surrender Fotheringhay Castle, his chief English seat. The decline of his political influence was accelerated by advancing years and illness. His frailty was noted when, aged sixty-two, he attended Alexander II's inauguration banquet (6-7 December 1214), and he does not appear among the young king's counsellors. He took no known part in the baronial opposition to John at the time of 'Magna Carta'; and his rebellion, half-hearted at best, was delayed until after the Scots had invaded in October 1215. He began to make his peace with the English crown in September 1217 and finally received letters of reseisin on 13 March 1218. Praised by Jordan Fantosme for his wisdom and compassion, he was no doubt a conciliator by nature as well as by necessity. He had the grim satisfaction of being proved right when Alexander II's war effort in 1215-17 collapsed. His influence on royal policy making must not be overstated; yet his career demonstrated the possibility of serving Scottish and English interests alike, as well as the personal rewards to be gained from membership of a cross-border elite. He thus helped to pave the way for the continuous peace and often friendly contact that characterized Anglo-Scottish relations from 1217 to 1296. 
Countess Maud survived her husband and did not remarry, dying in 1233. They had three sons and four daughters. The first and second sons, Henry and David, died in infancy, predeceasing their father. The third son, John of Scotland (1206-1237), became a ward of his uncle, Earl Ranulf (III), was married to Helen, daughter of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth, in 1222, and on attaining his majority had livery of the earldom of Huntingdon on 25 April 1227. He was created earl of Chester on 21 November 1232, shortly after the death of Earl Ranulf, whose senior coheir he was, and died childless at Darnhall, Cheshire, in June 1237. He was buried in the chapter house of Chester Abbey. Margaret, the eldest daughter, married in 1209 Alan, lord of Galloway; Isabel married Robert (IV) de Brus (died 1226x33); Maud (or Matilda) married John of Monmouth (died 1257); and Ada married Henry Hastings (died 1250). It was from Margaret and Isabel respectively that the houses of Balliol -- through the marriage of Margaret's daughter Dervorguilla to John de Balliol (d. 1268) -- and Brus (Bruce) inherited their claims to the throne of Scotland. David also had four known illegitimate children, three sons and a daughter. Earl David died at Yardley Hastings, Northamptonshire, his later English home, on 17 June 1219. He was interred in Sawtry Abbey, Huntingdonshire, though it had apparently been his long-standing wish to be buried in Lindores Abbey, Fife, a monastery of the Tironensian order founded by him 'c'.1190, and colonized from Kelso Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 49366


Sir Philip Frederick Rose, second baronet (1843-1919), solicitor and businessman, then became Disraeli's executor. The younger Rose was born in London on 4 November 1843, educated at Harrow School from 1857 to 1860, and joined his father's firm in 1865. On 25 July 1866 he married Rose Annie Pym (died 1925). He travelled even more widely than his father on financial business, from US investment trusts to British and foreign railways. He retired in 1894, and, after the death of Disraeli's literary executor, Lord Rowton, in 1903, he initiated and discreetly controlled the official biography by W. F. Monypenny and G. E. Buckle. Consequently, Monypenny's early volumes sanitize Disraeli's debts, give no hints of mistresses, and entirely omit marital spats; Buckle's later volumes were likewise subjected to Rose's approval. In 1917, after completion of the last volume, he again purged the papers and recorded destruction of 'a great many' (P. F. Rose, memo, Bodl. Oxf., MS Hughenden R/I/C/1). Having thus arbitrarily removed primary biographical materials but scrupulously fulfilled his father's motto, 'probitate ac virtute', he died at the family home, Rayners, on 23 October 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 49367


Peach, Lawrence Du Garde (1890-1974), playwright and author, was born at home at 32 Conduit Road, Nether Hallam, Sheffield, on 14 February 1890, the son of a Unitarian minister, Charles Peach (1862-1943), and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Munns (1863-1940). He was educated at Manchester grammar school (1903-9), where his outstanding abilities as an actor were soon revealed; he went on to graduate at Manchester University in English language and literature (1912). He then obtained a post as Lektor at Gottingen University. During the First World War he served in the Manchester regiment and in military intelligence, reaching the rank of captain. His marriage to Emily Marianne Leeming (1889/90-1972), a fellow student, the daughter of Matthew Leeming, a dentist, took place at the Chorlton-cum-Hardy Unitarian Church on 25 September 1915. 
After the war Peach resumed his academic career, proceeding to the degree of PhD at Sheffield University (1921); the title of his two-volume thesis was 'A study of the dramatic relations of France, Spain, and England in the XVII century' -- no doubt inspired partly by the work of his Manchester professor, C. H. Herford. Its object was largely to illustrate by comparative analyses the manner in which dramatic themes and situations already exploited by leading European playwrights were adapted by English authors -- Dryden, Wycherley, and others -- utilizing different stage conventions and more familiar modes of thought. In 1922 he was appointed to a lectureship at the University College of the South West of England and from 1924 to 1926 acted as central organizer of an appeal in support of efforts to secure full university status for the college. While at Exeter he engaged in freelance journalism, submitting sketches to such journals as 'London Opinion', 'The Humorist', and, most notably, 'Punch'. But finding authorship more lucrative than university teaching, he resigned his post at the university college in favour of full-time literary work. In 1925 Chatto and Windus published some of his 'Punch' contributions under the title of 'Angela and I' -- 'Angela' being the female participant in his imaginary dialogues. Two years later John Lane at the Bodley Head brought out an illustrated travel volume, 'Unknown Devon'. Peach's penchant for satire and 'situation comedy' led him to believe that his talents might find a market in the expanding field of playwriting for the amateur stage, as well as the professional theatre. He therefore planned several series of dramas 'tailored' to meet the needs of specific groups (such as plays for boys or plays for women) with a bias towards historical themes. His one-act and two-act plays were especially acceptable to youth groups, women's institutes, and educational organizations. 
From 1923 Peach was keen to exploit the potentialities of broadcasting, and he is chiefly remembered as one of the pioneers of radio drama. He realized that this new medium demanded from scriptwriters a readiness to experiment with conventions not appropriate to stage presentation. He aimed also to appeal to juvenile listeners, for whom -- in the 'Children's Hour' especially -- he produced innumerable examples of dramatized history and biography. At a later stage he utilized similar material when putting together ambitious pageants for Sheffield, Manchester, and other cities. He also composed film scripts, but turned down offers of prestigious employment in Hollywood because he was reluctant to submit to the vagaries of producers and sub-editors. 
In 1918 Peach's father ended his association with Chorlton in order to become official minister at Great Hucklow, a small Derbyshire village formerly of some importance in the leadmining industry. Soon afterwards Lawrence and his wife also settled in the Peak District. This gave him an opportunity to form a company of thespians capable under his direction of performing plays from the established repertory along with pieces composed by himself. The members of this troupe were mostly local people co-opted on the strength of their natural talent for acting; but at the back of Peach's mind was the conviction that such an amateur group could be trained to achieve a standard of performance higher than was common among many 'rude mechanicals'. In their early days these 'village players' had to make do with a stage constructed in one of the larger recreational rooms of the local Unitarian holiday home. Later the need for improved amenities induced Peach to purchase a rectangular building deserted by leadminers, and convert it into a small theatre. Right from the start this venture proved successful and led to a novel form of co-operative enterprise in a somewhat backward area. This activity was part of a national 'village drama' movement which Peach warmly supported. He chaired the drama committee of the Derbyshire Rural Community Council (1924) and espoused the cause of amateur theatricals in the pages of the 'Derbyshire Countryside', a monthly he edited from 1931 to 1948. Eventually the doings of the village players came to be so widely appreciated that a minimum of publicity was all that was needed to ensure capacity audiences, and 'house full' notices were frequently in evidence. But the claims of authorship and theatrical involvements did not deter Peach from taking on civic and political responsibilities. In 1929 he stood as Liberal candidate in the general election -- though with little hope of victory, since Derby had long been a Labour stronghold. Even so, Peach's intervention helped to increase the Liberal vote from 7083 in the 1924 election to 11,317 in 1929. 
During the 'entre-deux-guerres' period Peach's engagements were multifarious: his services as author, lecturer, and adjudicator were in constant demand. He maintained a long-standing connection with the Sheffield Repertory Company, and when the Sheffield Playhouse suspended productions in 1939, he assisted in the company's evacuation to Southport. At first his own players were down-hearted at having to abandon their annual three-weekly 'seasons'; but Peach attempted to counter their despondency by writing plays which reflected aspects of life amid wartime frustrations. Those male members of the village players who were of military age were either called up or enrolled in the Home Guard, in which Peach became a major. Admittedly, petrol rationing kept many visitors away from Great Hucklow; but in spite of the temporary closure of their little theatre, the company never suffered total collapse until 1971, when a combination of difficult circumstances put an end to further activities. 
From the mid-1950s Peach found time to undertake a substantial non-dramatic assignment for the Loughborough-based educational publishers Wills and Hepworth. He was commissioned to produce a number of short illustrated volumes on historical and archaeological subjects intended for young people of school age. Each item in this highly successful 'Ladybird' series -- over twenty titles in all -- ran to fifty pages and dealt with such topics as Stone Age man, Roman Britain, William the Conqueror, Oliver Cromwell, Charles II, Florence Nightingale, Captain Cook, and Charles Dickens. Peach had no qualms about adding to the already considerable stock of what many would regard as merely 'potted' knowledge: his efforts were anything but run-of-the-mill regurgitations of standard textbook material. In spite of their concise format, the 'Ladybird' books are factually irreproachable and presented in a lively prose style calculated to awaken interest in Britain's cultural and political history. Peach's 'Ladybird' books were as influential as any professional historian's in shaping youthful minds' knowledge of the British past. 
Peach's success as a literary man was the outcome of a modest ambition to augment 'the public stock of harmless pleasure' while maintaining a keen interest in social affairs. For his services to literature he was made an OBE in 1972; he had been made an honorary DLitt of Sheffield University in 1964. Sadly he left no autobiography, which would have been a significant addition to the annals of English provincial drama. But tantalizing snatches of reminiscence occur in his various prefaces. If his plays are no longer seen on the commercial stage, this is attributable to changes of taste among theatregoers witnessed over the last fifty or sixty years. But Peach's enduring literary monument is unquestionably the unique account of dramatic activities at Great Hucklow which he published in 1952, 'Twenty-Five Years of Play Producing, 1927-1952'. He died at his home, The Bungalow, in the nearby village of Foolow, Derbyshire, on 31 December 1974, his wife having died two years previously. 


@@@@@


doc= 49368


Acland, Sarah Angelina (1849-1930), photographer, was born at Broad Street, Oxford, on 26 June 1849, the second of eight children and only daughter of the physician Henry Wentworth Acland (1815-1900), who was then Lee's reader in anatomy at Christ Church, Oxford, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Cotton (1815-1878). In 1856 'Angie' and her brothers became the second group of children in Oxford to be photographed by Lewis Carroll, after Alice Pleasance Liddell and her sisters, daughters of H. G. Liddell, dean of Christ Church, who were the Acland siblings' closest childhood friends. For the first fifty-two years of her life she lived in her parental home, 39-41 Broad Street, Oxford, before moving, in May 1901, after her father's death, to a large villa, Clevedon House, in Park Town, north Oxford. 
From October 1862 Acland was educated with two female cousins in the schoolroom of the house of her uncle Thomas Dyke Acland, eleventh baronet, on the Killerton estate in Devon. In April 1866, she transferred to Mayfield, a girls' boarding school in Southgate, north London, popular with the daughters of Oxford academics. After she left Mayfield in July 1867 her health declined, and she sought treatment for two seasons in the spa town of Wildbad in the Black Forest, and spent a succession of winters on the French riviera. She returned to Oxford permanently shortly before the death of her mother in 1878, in order to take over the running of her father's busy house. However, she retained the status of an invalid for life, lameness in one leg requiring her to use a walking stick and confining her to a 'rollstuhl' (wheelchair) for periods. 
Acland's love of art was encouraged by her father, who was a patron of the Pre-Raphaelites. Her formal artistic education began in June 1864 under the Oxford art master William Riviere. At Mayfield she was taught by the watercolourist David Hall McKewan. After leaving Mayfield she joined the recently founded Oxford School of Art, studying with Alexander Macdonald, who became a lifelong friend. In November 1870 she began taking private lessons from John Ruskin, who lodged with the Aclands during his first two years as Slade professor of art at Oxford. During Ruskin's time in the house the Aclands were visited by Julia Margaret Cameron. Angie Acland witnessed the famous altercation between photographer and critic in her parents' drawing room: 'Mrs. Cameron thumped his poor frail back exclaiming 'John Ruskin you are not worthy of photographs!'' (Devon RO, 1148m/7/1, 52). Acland developed a close personal attachment to Ruskin, referring to him as her 'Cricket', he calling her his 'Teaze'. After he moved to rooms in Corpus Christi College she continued to act as his 'secretary' of sorts (Ruskin to Acland, undated, Bodl. Oxf., MS Acland d. 170, fols. 51-2), dealing with correspondence from his other 'girl friends' (Ruskin to Acland, 11 Aug 1875, Bodl. Oxf., MS Acland d. 170, fols. 155-6), and undertaking paid artistic commissions, such as colouring plates for his publications and copying drawings for his lectures. The relationship came to an end after Ruskin's final split with the university in 1885, but they continued in correspondence until 1888. 
Acland's decision to take up photography was prompted by the gift from her father of a Kodak no. 3 camera for her birthday in 1891. Her first photographs were taken at Beechwood House, the New Forest home of her friends Helena Mary (Ellie) Heathcote and Beatrice Henrietta (Be) Heathcote, daughters of Sir William Heathcote, fifth baronet. The following summer she purchased a Watson & Sons Acme: a high-quality half-plate field camera, with which over the next ten years she explored a variety of different monochrome genres, from domestic interiors, through figure studies and landscapes, to copywork. 
The genre in which Acland first achieved public success was portraiture. She photographed William Ewart Gladstone and his wife on 25 October 1892, during the prime minister's visit to Oxford to deliver the Romanes lecture. Her programme of portraiture was facilitated by access to the eminent men and women who visited her Broad Street home, including Lord Salisbury and Lord Kelvin. Her portraits of Ruskin, taken at Brantwood, Coniston, on 1 August 1893, were widely reproduced. She joined the Oxford Camera Club as the first woman member in June 1894, and made her debut as public speaker at the club when she gave a lecture entitled 'Home Portraiture' in February 1899. That year she exhibited for the first time at the annual exhibition of the Royal Photographic Society (RPS), showing lantern slides of four portraits, which led to her election to the society on 11 December 1899. 
Acland's lasting contribution to the progress of photographic history was her work in colour. In 1899 she turned to the problem of orthochromatic photography: the correct representation of the relative brightness of different colours in a monochrome photograph. In 1899 and 1900 she conducted a series of experiments into the capabilities of the 'Spectrum Plate' of the manufacturer James William Thomas Cadett. Beginning in 1900 she became the first amateur to make a successful study of the capabilities of colour photography proper. 
The colour photographs that brought her international attention were made with the process of Edward Sanger Shepherd, in which three separate exposures were taken through red, green, and blue filters, before being recombined as cyan, magenta, and yellow prints. Her earliest datable Sanger Shepherd separation negative was exposed in June or July 1900, but not exhibited at the Camera Club until March 1901, due to the death of her father in autumn 1900. At the RPS annual exhibition in autumn 1901 she exhibited six colour lantern slides, mostly of still life subjects, and from 1902 to 1904 several colour prints on paper. Her most admired colour photographs were lantern slides from negatives taken in 1903 and 1904 during visits to Gibraltar, where her brother Willie was admiral superintendent of the dockyard. They include views of the Rock and North Africa, studies of the vibrant flora, and portraits of the residents. Her complete collection of Gibraltar slides was shown during a lecture at the Camera Club in December 1904 and at the RPS in June 1905. The latter was regarded as ground-breaking, marking as it did the definite assumption of 'three-colour work as a process for the travelling amateur' ('Photography', 13 July 1905, 548). The enthusiastic reception of her slides prompted the RPS to invite her to show them again during a series of 'Lantern lectures' later in 1905, and as the first of the 1906 lecture series. She was elected a fellow of the RPS on 1 February 1905. 
Acland tested the French Lumiere Autochrome plates as soon as they became available in England in September 1907. She submitted a portrait of her goddaughter to the inaugural exhibition of the Society of Colour Photographers later in the month, in what is the earliest Autochrome by a woman known to have been exhibited in public. Autochrome photography, which she carried out with a Sinclair 'Una' field camera, would soon supplant the Sanger Shepherd process as her main specialism. Most of her photographs with the new plates were taken on the island of Madeira, where she overwintered for six months every year from 1908 to 1915. In Madeira she also experimented with other 'screen plate' colour processes, including the Omnicolore, Dufay Dioptichrome, and Paget Colour processes. After 1913 she preferred the Paget process for most purposes, whether seascapes of Funchal Bay, studies of flowers in the quinta gardens, or telephoto views of the mountains. 
Acland was active in charitable work, through raising funds for a cabmen's shelter in Broad Street, Oxford, and organizing the collection of 'comforts' for soldiers in the South African War. For many years she was secretary of the Acland Home for nurses, founded in memory of her mother. Gardening was also a keen interest, as in later life were astronomy and meteorology: in 1916 she was elected a fellow of the Meteorological Society on the strength of sunshine records she kept in Funchal. 
Acland's time in Madeira was brought to an end by the First World War, while the strain of the war also led her to give up most of her photography. Shortly before her death she consolidated her life's work by compiling several presentation albums of portraits annotated with reminiscences of her sitters, and preparing a photographically illustrated manuscript memoir. She died at her home, Clevedon House, on 2 December 1930, and after a service at Christ Church Cathedral was buried in Holywell cemetery, Oxford. She left her plates, both monochrome and colour, to her photographic collaborator, James Henry Minn (1870-1961). On Minn's death the majority went to the Bodleian Library, before the colour examples were transferred to the Museum of the History of Science in 1988. 
Acland has attracted attention from historians as an example of a dutiful unmarried daughter of the Victorian period, who sacrificed herself to the service of her parents and their home (Jalland, 260-62; Peterson, 18). Her significance in the history of photography lies in her successful use of the Sanger Shepherd process before the release of the Autochrome in 1907. Despite the subsequent success of the Autochrome, her reputation was such that in 1936 the authority on the history of colour, Henry Oscar Klein, could still write that 'the colour transparencies of Miss Acland, done with the Sanger-Shepherd process, have never been surpassed in brilliancy and truthfulness of colour, and only Technicolor of to-day can approach them' (H. O. Klein, 'Colour Photography of To-day', 'British Journal Photographic Almanac', 1936, 173). 


@@@@@


doc= 49369


Marie (d. 1284), queen of Scots, second consort of Alexander II, was the elder daughter (there were also three sons) of Enguerrand (III) de Coucy, known as the Great (died 1242), lord of Coucy in Picardy and great-grandson of King Louis VI of France ('r'. 1108-37), and his third wife, Marie de Montmirail. She was admired by Matthew Paris for her beauty and was brought from France to be married at Roxburgh on 15 May 1239 to the forty-year-old Scottish king Alexander II (1198-1249). Alexander's first wife, Joan of England, had died childless in 1238, and he had urgent dynastic reasons for his remarriage. In terms of European diplomacy, it evoked Alexander's alliance with the French in 1216-17, when he and Marie's powerful father had probably met during the Franco-Scottish invasions of England. Such a reassertion of Scottish independence alarmed King Henry III, and contributed to the tensions that almost precipitated another Anglo-Scottish war in 1244. 
Little is known about Marie's influence on the culture of the Scottish court, though her chancellor, Master Richard Vairement, possibly hailed from Vermand, near Coucy, and her nephew Enguerrand de Guines (who ultimately succeeded as lord of Coucy in 1311) became a leading Scottish magnate by wedding Christiana de Lindsay 'c'.1280. Politically the most important result of Marie's marriage was undoubtedly the birth of her only child, the future Alexander III, on 4 September 1241. She played no significant part during her son's troubled minority after Alexander II's death in 1249. According to Matthew Paris, as queen mother she was assigned a third of Scottish royal revenues, and he estimated her share at between 4000 and 7000 merks a year. Marie was at Dunfermline Abbey for the translation of St Margaret's relics on 19 June 1250, and crossed to France in October, but returned with a magnificent retinue for Alexander III's marriage to Margaret of England at York on 26 December 1251. She then appears to have lived mainly in France until 1268. No doubt the ambitious Comyns had wanted to be rid of her so as to reinforce their dominance over the young Scottish king; but she also had pressing family duties in her homeland, due to the succession of her second brother Enguerrand (IV) de Coucy as a boy in 1250, and his imprisonment by King Louis IX ('r'. 1226-70) in 1256. 
Early in 1257, apparently to appease Louis for her brother's indiscretions, Marie married her second husband, Jean de Brienne or d'Acre, butler of France, whose father and namesake had been crowned king of Jerusalem in 1210 and emperor of Constantinople in 1231. They visited Scotland briefly in 1257, and both were appointed to a Scottish regency council in September 1258, though their role in state affairs was purely nominal. When Marie separated from Jean de Brienne in 1268 and returned to Scotland, Alexander III secured an agreement whereby she might remain in Scotland at her pleasure, and Jean (who long outlived Marie, dying only in 1296) would receive from her dower an annual pension of 500 merks. In 1276 she was granted safe conducts by the English government to undertake a pilgrimage to Canterbury and return to Scotland. In 1284 (the precise date is unrecorded) she died overseas, presumably in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 49370


Duncan II (b. before 1072, d. 1094), king of Scots, was the son of Malcolm III (d. 1093) and his first wife, Ingibiorg, of the house of Orkney earls. He was described by William of Malmesbury as 'nothus', bastard, a slur intended to explain the succession in the kingship of the sons of Malcolm's second wife, Margaret (d. 1093): when William I of England took Duncan as hostage from Malcolm he is unlikely to have taken an illegitimate son. William Rufus released and knighted Duncan in 1087, along with Ulf, son of Harold II, but Duncan was intermittently at Rufus's court until the death of his father in 1093, when, in return for homage, he obtained the English king's consent to his seeking the Scottish throne. He seems to have scraped together a force of English and French, but was successful in driving out his uncle Donald III and became king before the end of 1093. 
Probably on his way north, Duncan sought the help of St Cuthbert, to whom he restored the long-lost lands of Tyninghame, in what is the earliest Scottish charter, whether in original or copy. In it Duncan describes himself as 'heritably undoubted king of 'Scotia'' (Lawrie, no. 12); he makes the gift for his father, brothers, wife, and infants, but adds as reassurance that he has caused his brothers to make the grant; his mother is not mentioned. The signatories include Edgar, presumably Duncan's half-brother, and a Malcolm who is usually taken to be a full brother -- not an impossibility but lacking any confirmation. Duncan's seal is single-faced and shows him armed as mounted knight with lance and pennon; perhaps it was produced for the occasion by the monks of Durham. He granted land to Dunfermline Priory, the foundation of his stepmother, Margaret, thus confirming that he was on good terms with her sons. 
Duncan's reign was brief and stormy; first some Scots attacked and drove out his foreign contingent, and he had to swear that he would never reintroduce them to Scotland. Then in a second rising, under Donald III and Edmund, son of Malcolm III, he was killed, apparently with some treachery, by the local mormaer at Mondynes in the Mearns on 12 November 1094, a date preserved by an obit at Durham, where he was highly regarded, though he was allegedly buried on Iona. Donald III resumed the throne; Duncan, despite his Gaelic name, Donnchad, was too Anglo-French for Scotland. He had married Etheldreda (or Octreda), daughter of Gospatric, the earl of Northumbria who fled to Scotland in 1072, but only one of their children is known, William fitz Duncan (d. 1151x4). 
William probably came to Scotland with his uncle David before 1124, and supported the latter loyally and effectively after he became king in 1124. He led the contingent which attacked Wark Castle in January 1138, ravaged in Yorkshire fiercely, won a victory at Clithero, and devastated Craven before joining the king at Cowton Moor in August, where he angrily opposed the attempts of Robert (I) de Brus (died 1142) to persuade David to go home. He then fought at the battle of the Standard, but does not seem to have accompanied David south in 1141, and, apart from witnessing charters, is not heard of again until David I confirmed him by force in the honour of Skipton and Craven in 1151. William married Alice de Rumilly, who inherited lands in Copeland and Skipton, and himself inherited Allerdale, south of Derwent, through his mother. It is surely likely that he also had Scottish lands, and in an English inquest of the thirteenth century he is called 'earl of Moray', a province forfeited to the crown in 1130; but he is never so called in Scotland. According to charter evidence William fitz Duncan had died by 1154. 
William had two sons, a Gospatric who is once mentioned and may have been a child of an earlier marriage, and William, 'the boy of Egremont', who succeeded to his father's English lands and died childless in or soon after 1163, so that the inheritance passed to his three sisters. William fitz Duncan made no known claim to the throne of Scotland, nor did his lawful heirs in 1291, although 'Orkneyinga Saga' (about 1200-40) makes the striking comment that the son of Malcolm and Ingibiorg 'was Duncan, king of Scots, father of William who was a great man, and whose son, William the noble, every Scotsman wanted for his king' ('Orkneyinga Saga', 72). This may, however, be a confusion with William's son, Donald MacWilliam ['see under 'Macwilliam family] (probably illegitimate), who from 1179 led a rebellion against King William the Lion with support from Moray and Ross. 


@@@@@


doc= 49371


Berkeley, Walter of (d. c.1193), administrator, was one of a number of Anglo-Norman knights from south-west England who went to seek their fortunes in Scotland during the middle decades of the twelfth century. His parentage is unknown, but he was almost certainly named after the village of Berkley, near Frome, in Somerset. He arrived in Scotland with his brother Robert 'c'.1165, immediately entered royal service, and was appointed to succeed Philip de Valognes as chief chamberlain of William the Lion 'c'.1171. He held this office until his death, when it reverted to his predecessor. Walter of Berkeley was regularly at King William's court before and after his appointment, but almost nothing is known in detail about his important financial functions as chamberlain. Robert, who became lord of Maxton, Roxburghshire, probably by marriage to a native heiress, also frequently attended on William the Lion, often at Walter's side. Walter fought in William's campaigns against northern England in 1173-4, and in December 1174 was named among the twenty earls and barons of Scotland required to find hostages under the treaty of Falaise. 
Royal favour had by 1182 brought Berkeley sizeable estates to be held for knight-service, most notably Inverkeilor, Angus, later the barony of Redcastle, and Newton, near Hawick, later the barony of Chamberlain Newton. Robert of London, a kinsman from Somerset, gave him property at St Boswells and the land of Plenmeller, near Haltwhistle, in the Scots king's liberty of Tynedale. Walter carried Scottish royal influence into the semi-independent province of Galloway, where he was endowed with the large lordship of Urr by Uhtred, son of Fergus, 'c'.1170 and very likely built Urr's great motte-and-bailey castle, the most impressive of all surviving Scottish earthworks of this type. He was a benefactor of the Tironensian monks of Arbroath Abbey, and was reconciled shortly before his death with the Cistercian abbey of Holm Cultram, Cumberland, part of whose territory in Galloway he had engrossed. It is possible, though by no means certain, that he married first an unidentified lady who was the heir of Ardoyne, Aberdeenshire. Walter's (second?) wife, Eve, may have been a daughter of his patron Uhtred, lord of Galloway. She was subsequently married to Robert de Quincy, justiciar of Lothian, after whose death 'c'.1200 she purchased land at Stenton, Haddingtonshire, and granted it to Melrose Abbey for the salvation of the souls of her two husbands and of her brother, Roland, perhaps Uhtred's son and successor of that name. 
Walter and Eve had a son called John who must have died young, and Walter was succeeded by two daughters. Of these, Agatha surrendered her claims to Ardoyne in return for land in Laurencekirk, Mearns, after her marriage by 'c'.1190 to Humphrey, son of Theobald de Adeville (probably Addeville, near St Lo, in Normandy). Humphrey took the surname of Berkeley, and from them descend nearly all the Scottish Barclays. The other daughter, of unknown name, carried Urr and Inverkeilor to her husband, Enguerrand de Balliol, probably a younger son of Eustace de Balliol (died 'c'.1208) of Bywell. The date of Walter's death is not recorded, but 'c'.1193 can be inferred from the fact that his name then disappears from the witness-clauses of Scottish royal charters. 


@@@@@


doc= 49372


Herbert (d. 1164), bishop of Glasgow, was probably one of the first monks brought by Earl David from Tiron in France to found Selkirk Abbey about 1114, for he became its third abbot in 1119 and must have presided over its shift to Kelso about 1127. He failed in his hopes to become bishop of Durham when William Comyn was rejected there in 1142, but was elected to succeed John (another Tironensian monk) as bishop of Glasgow early in 1147. He was consecrated by Eugenius III at Auxerre on 24 August 1147, but during his episcopate ignored repeated papal injunctions to promise obedience to York. He is found witnessing royal charters, including no fewer than twenty-six of Malcolm IV. 
Herbert certainly worked energetically for his cathedral, increasing the endowment of at least three of its prebends and adding a seventh to the existing six; named canons first appear in his time. His introduction of customs of Salisbury probably marked the formal constitution of the chapter as a 'collegium'. He commissioned a life of Kentigern of which only the early chapters survive, but the preface shows that this work was an important recasting of an ancient life, and it was probably the main source for the life written after 1176 by Jocelin of Furness. 
Perhaps in early 1164 Somerled so ravaged around Glasgow that its clergy and people fled. According to the 'Carmen de morte Somerledi', Herbert was absent, and Kentigern's failure to respond to his prayers led the bishop to disparage the saint. But Kentigern eventually awoke to his duty, persuading the bishop to leave his bed and set out for Glasgow without knowing that Somerled had returned. When he heard, and despite misgivings, Herbert rallied his forces and attacked Somerled at Renfrew, killing him and destroying his force. 'A priest cut off the head of the miserable leader Somerled, and gave it into the bishop's hands. As his custom was, he wept piously on seeing the head of his enemy, saying, 'the Scottish saints are truly to be praised'. And he attributed the victory to the blessed Kentigern, whose memory keep ye always. (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.258)' In the same year, 1164, Herbert died, at some time before 13 September and probably in Glasgow. 
Herbert continued the work of his episcopal predecessor John, and these two are eloquent testimony to the effectiveness of monk-bishops in a rapidly developing church. Herbert's encouragement to the institutions of Glasgow Cathedral probably explain revived interest in the cult of Kentigern, which was perhaps popularized by the defeat and death of Somerled. It is difficult to believe that Herbert, now old, led the men of Glasgow; but he certainly seems to have inspired them. 


@@@@@


doc= 49373


Florence (V), count of Holland (1254-1296), claimant to the Scottish throne, was born at Leiden in 1254, perhaps in July, the son of William (II), count of Holland and king of the Romans (1227-1256), and Elisabeth of Brunswick (1228-1266), and grew up in an atmosphere of intrigues under changing regentships and during the early years after his coming of age in 1266. In 1268 or 1269 he married Beatrice de Dampierre (1253/4-1296), daughter of Gui, count of Flanders (died 1305), with whom he probably had nine children, of whom seven died in infancy. He also fathered at least seven bastards. At the start of his reign Florence was in free and undisputed possession of only a relatively small part of his territory and he considered it his main task to remedy this situation. In 1283 the southern part of Holland was freed from its feudal ties with Brabant. After a disastrous campaign against the rebellious West Frisians in 1272, a more successful one in 1282 formed the beginning of the subjection of the north of his territory, completed in 1289. And from 1278 onwards, by a shrewd but unscrupulous policy, the count managed to gain considerable power over the adjacent prince-bishopric of Utrecht and to extend his own territory at the bishop's expense. But Florence's authority over the Zeeland Islands, where an unruly nobility stood in his way, remained uncertain, and in 1290, after a short war, he was forced to recognize the suzerainty of the count of Flanders over the isles. 
From about 1280 Edward I of England acted as a mediator in several of Florence's conflicts with his neighbours. The king's interest in the strategically important county of Holland, as well as his influence on Florence, are apparent from two contracts concluded in 1281 and 1285, arranging the marriage of the count's daughter with the king's son Alphonso (died 1284), and of Florence's son and heir, John (Jan), born in 1284, with Edward's daughter Elizabeth respectively. In 1291, after the death of Margaret, the Maid of Norway, the count was among the principal claimants to the Scottish throne ['see also 'Competitors for the throne of Scotland]. He asserted that his great-great-great-grandmother Ada, a sister of King William the Lion, had been recognized as heir to the throne after her other brother, David, earl of Huntingdon (died 1219), from whom the other main contenders were descended, had either relinquished his own claim in return for the lordship of Garioch, or lost it through forfeiture as a felon. Court proceedings were delayed to allow Florence time to produce the relevant documents, but though it is certain that in 1291 a (forged) relinquishment by Earl David existed in Scotland, Florence never produced it, but withdrew his claim at the last moment in 1292. It is unclear who or what influenced his actions, but it may be significant that in June 1292 he struck a deal with Robert (V) de Brus (died 1295), another claimant, for their mutual advantage should either of them succeed to the Scottish throne, and that in 1290 and 1291 he had received large sums under the treaty of 1285 from Edward I, with whom he had come to Norham for the opening of the Great Cause in May 1291. 
Florence's relationship with Edward I remained unchanged for the time being, and in 1294 he acted as the king's main negotiator over a treaty with the king of the Romans. In 1295, however, while Edward was building up a coalition against France which included the count of Flanders, Florence entered upon a new war with that county. Edward reacted with measures damaging to the economic interests of Holland, and Florence then concluded a treaty with the king of France (January 1296). A conspiracy of nobles from his own county, aimed at kidnapping the count and delivering him into the hands of the English king, miscarried disastrously and ended in Florence's murder near Muiden Castle (east of Amsterdam) in June 1296; he was buried at Rijnsburg Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 49374


Cumin, William (d. c.1160), ecclesiastic and administrator, was notable for his infamous attempt to usurp the bishopric of Durham between 1141 and 1144. His family origins, possibly from Bosc-Bernard-Commin near Rouen, are obscure. There were several families of Norman clerks in England with connections to cathedral towns such as Bayeux and Rouen, and the Cumin family seems to have been one of them. Several Cumins appear in the chanceries of Henry I and Henry II and in a clerical or ecclesiastical context in Rouen and Bayeux. A John Cumin, probably of the same family, was an administrator prominent in the service of Henry II before becoming archbishop of Dublin in 1182. 
The earliest reference to William Cumin occurs 'c'.1121, when he appears as a witness to a gift by Ranulf, chancellor of England, to Bernard the Scribe. He was a pupil and protege of Geoffrey Rufus, who became chancellor of England in 1123 and in 1133 bishop of Durham, and Cumin's career advanced with that of his patron. Shortly after 1125 Cumin had become archdeacon of Worcester, and it seems probable that Geoffrey Rufus took his protege with him when he became bishop of Durham. At Durham it appears that Cumin came into contact with David I of Scotland ('r'. 1124-53), who made him chancellor of Scotland by 1136. William Cumin was thus another prominent member of the Norman occupation of the Scottish royal household so much encouraged by David I after his accession in 1124. Two of Cumin's nephews, William and Osbert, took advantage of the family's breakthrough in Scotland. Symeon of Durham's chronicle describes nephew William as an accomplished young knight trained in the art of warfare and administration, while Osbert was in the service of David's son, Henry, earl of Northumberland. 
As chancellor, William Cumin became actively involved in David's policies of absorbing the English northern counties into his kingdom and of supporting Empress Matilda and the Angevin cause against King Stephen in the English civil war. Captured when King David and his army were defeated at the battle of the Standard, near Northallerton in the North Riding of Yorkshire, on 22 August 1138, he was set free in September on the instructions of Alberic, the papal legate. Cumin's ambitious attempt to become bishop of Durham in 1141 fitted in well with the Scottish king's policy in northern England. 
In late 1140 or early 1141 Cumin was the guest at Durham of his former patron, Geoffrey Rufus. Realizing that Rufus was near death, Cumin decided to try to secure the see for himself, but Rufus died before William had won all the support necessary for his successful candidature. Nevertheless, buoyed by the Scottish king's support, Cumin took over the administration of the see; but Roger Conyers, the constable, refused to pay homage to him and the prior and one of the archdeacons insisted on a canonical election. Cumin's position was briefly strengthened by Empress Matilda's approval of his candidature, but the papal legate excommunicated him. By 1142 King David appears to have distanced himself from Cumin, and so from 1142 to 1144 William acted as an independent adventurer striving, according to the chronicle of Melrose, 'with blind ambition' to be made bishop. He used violence, and even attempted deceit through a forged letter from the pope purporting to support his candidature. 
Cumin's intimidatory tactics could not prevent a canonical election taking place at York in 1143, when William de Ste Barbe, dean of York, was chosen bishop of Durham. It was not for another year that Cumin surrendered his claim to the bishopric, by which time two of his nephews, William, his favourite, and Osbert, had died in the conflict; William de Ste Barbe had also won the crucial support of David's son Henry. In return for renouncing his claims to the bishopric, Cumin secured the secular fortunes of his family through another nephew, Richard, who was given the castle and honour of Richmond. William Cumin himself, after imprisonment and cruel treatment by Richard de Luvetot, sought to revive his career in the south, where he received the support of Gilbert Foliot, then abbot of Gloucester. By 1146 William was in favour with Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury, who pressed his case for absolution before the pope 'c'.1152. Thanks to favour from the Angevin party, Cumin began to regain his benefices in England. He appears prominently in witness lists to Henry of Anjou's charters of 'c'.1153, and again in 1154 and 1156, after Henry had become king of England. By 1156-7 Cumin had recovered his archdeaconry of Worcester. But he was no longer archdeacon by 1161, and it seems probable that he died 'c'.1160. By this time the secular fortunes of his family had a firm foundation, first in Tynedale, Northumberland, and then in southern Scotland, through the favour given by the Scottish royal family to Cumin's nephew Richard. William Cumin's dramatic but unsuccessful attempt to become bishop of Durham should not obscure his part in the foundation of what was to become the most powerful baronial family in thirteenth-century Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 49375


Andrew (d. 1184), bishop of Caithness, probably came of a wealthy land-owning family in Perth and Angus. After becoming a monk at Dunfermline, he was appointed to the new see of Caithness by King David I ('r'. 1124-53). The see may have been set up as early as 'c'.1139; Andrew is its first known bishop, at some point between 1147 and 1151. Thereafter he was until 'c'.1180 a very regular witness of 'acta' of kings David I, Malcolm IV ('r'. 1153-65), and William the Lion ('r'. 1165-1214), usually at places in 'Scotia' (that is, Scotland north of Forth) and rarely far from the presumed family lands. He granted the church of Holy Trinity, Dunkeld, to Dunfermline Abbey and a toft in Forfar to Arbroath Abbey; in Angus he held three 'shires' which were later granted to Arbroath by King William. 
With other Scottish bishops Andrew is addressed in papal letters of 1155 and 1162, commanding them to show obedience to the archbishop of York. He was apparently not involved in the negotiations before the convention of Falaise in 1174, but with other bishops he swore allegiance to Henry II at York in August 1175. Again with others, he refused obedience to Roger, archbishop of York (died 1181), at Northampton in January 1176, and was probably present when the papal legate, Cardinal Vivian, who visited Scotland in 1176-7, decided the issue of obedience in favour of the Scottish church. 
In view of his regular presence at court it is unlikely that Andrew was much in his diocese or had real influence there. He is said to have consented to an annual tax, which his successor tried to revoke, granted to the papacy by Harald Maddadson, earl of Orkney and Caithness (died 1206). Andrew died at Dunfermline on 29 or 30 December 1184. 


@@@@@


doc= 49377


Margaret, countess of Kent (1187x95-1259), princess, was the eldest daughter of William the Lion, king of Scots (d. 1214), and Ermengarde de Beaumont (d. 1233). She was born at an unknown date between early 1187 and April or May 1195, when her father's illness caused a succession crisis in Scotland. She was perhaps recognized then as his heir; by another account it was proposed by the English court that she should marry Richard I's nephew Otto, duke of Saxony (died 1218), but the Scottish magnates objected because the king's younger brother, David, earl of Huntingdon (d. 1219), was a suitable heir. But the king recovered, and Margaret's expectations changed again in 1198 when her brother, the future King Alexander II, was born. Nothing more is known about her until August 1209 when, as a consequence of the treaty of Norham, she was sent south as a possible bride for the future King Henry III of England. But nothing came of these proposals, and clause 59 of 'Magna Carta' suggests that there had subsequently been pressure for her being returned to Scotland. But this, too, had no effect, and on 3 October 1221 she was married at London to Hubert de Burgh (c.1170-1243), justiciar of England. Henry III gave her away, but the match was a disparagement; de Burgh was of gentry stock and was not ennobled, as earl of Kent, until February 1227. Their only child, Megotta (Margaret), was probably born in the early 1220s. In 1232 de Burgh was reported to be planning to divorce Margaret, but in the same year he fell from royal favour, was stripped of his offices, and was imprisoned; Margaret, deprived of personal treasures and possessions, took sanctuary at Bury St Edmunds until her husband and the king were partly reconciled in 1234, when Henry III made grants for her maintenance. At Bury, Margaret organized the secret marriage of Megotta to Richard de Clare (died 1262), a boy of about the same age and heir to the wealthy honours of Clare and Gloucester. De Burgh may not have known of this; its discovery in 1236 reopened the breach with the king, and Megotta's death in 1237 made no difference; de Burgh was completely out of public life by 1239 and died in 1243. Margaret succeeded to lands in which they had been jointly seised and held them until her death in the autumn (before 25 November) of 1259; like her husband, she was buried at Blackfriars in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49378


Balliol, Dervorguilla de, lady of Galloway (d. 1290), noblewoman and benefactor, was a daughter of Alan, lord of Galloway (b. before 1199, d. 1234), and his second wife, Margaret, eldest daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon (d. 1219). Born some time after 1209, the date of her parents' marriage, her distinctive Gaelic name, Derbhforgaill, was probably derived from an Irish ancestor in the Galloway line, possibly from an aunt, and was in turn transmitted to a granddaughter through one of her own daughters. Although Dervorguilla was the lord of Galloway's third daughter, and the second of his marriage to Margaret, the fact that Margaret was herself an eldest daughter was adjudged to give Dervorguilla's son, John, the stronger right to the vacant throne of Scotland over the claims of Robert (V) de Brus, son of Margaret's younger sister, Isabel. This was the outcome of the Great Cause of 1291-2, the culmination of a series of events in which Dervorguilla's connections transformed the fortunes of the Balliol family. 
In 1233, at least five years after the death of her mother, and two years after the death of her uncle -- the last of her father's legitimate male heirs -- Dervorguilla married John de Balliol (b. before 1208, d. 1268), lord of Barnard Castle in co. Durham. In the following year, on or about 2 February 1234, her father died, and Dervorguilla and her new husband inherited a third share of the Galloway lordship; they later took charge of her natural brother, Thomas of Galloway, imprisoning him in Barnard Castle. Following the death in 1237 of her maternal uncle John (le Scot), earl of Huntingdon and Chester, Dervorguilla and her elder sister, Christina (or Christiana), succeeded to their mother's right in the honour of Huntingdon and in Earl John's Scottish lands, mainly in eastern and north-eastern Scotland, and to various properties in eastern England granted in exchange for their claims upon the earldom of Chester which Earl John had inherited in 1232 through his mother, Maud, wife of David, earl of Huntingdon, and sister of Ranulf (III), earl of Chester; after 1237 the honour of Chester was retained in English royal hands. The deaths of Christina (in 1246) and Earl John's widow meant that Dervorguilla's share was substantially enlarged. Christina's death also meant that her share of her father's inheritance was divided between Dervorguilla and her eldest (half-)sister, Helen, wife of Roger de Quincy, earl of Winchester and constable of Scotland, Dervorguilla's evidently being the larger and more valuable share. 
Between 1234 and 1246 Dervorguilla clearly brought a considerable accession of wealth to the Balliol family. Precise figures are lacking, but her Scottish lands alone probably came to be worth slightly less than $470 per annum. In her widowhood, after 1268, she retained much of her vast inheritance and dower in her own hands and was a considerable patron. An early fifteenth-century chronicler, Andrew Wyntoun, composed a lengthy panegyric entitled 'How Devorguil that Lady Spendyt hyr Tresoure Devotly', crediting her with the foundation of friaries in Dumfries and Wigtown. As in the case of the fifteenth-century bridge across the Nith at Dumfries that bears her name, her reputation for pious munificence has probably gone beyond authenticated record. None the less, she was the first and last member of the Balliol family to have both the incentive and the means to become the founder of a major monastery. In 1273 she endowed the Cistercian abbey of Dulce Cor or Sweetheart in eastern Galloway in fond memory of her husband, whose corpse was reburied there, and whose embalmed heart she kept in an ivory casket. On his behalf, she also brought together the endowments and formulated the statutes of Balliol College, Oxford, a house of scholars founded as an indirect result of transgressions committed by her husband against the bishop of Durham in 1255 (her name is commemorated there by the Dervorguilla Society). 
Dervorguilla de Balliol died on 28 January 1290 and was buried in Sweetheart Abbey. She is known to have had at least eight children with John de Balliol, and she outlived all except the youngest of her four sons, Hugh, Alan, Alexander, and John, later King John. The names and sequence of her four daughters are uncertain but they were probably Margaret, Cecily, Ada, and Eleanor, in that order. 


@@@@@


doc= 49379


Umfraville, Sir Ingram de (d. in or after 1321), baron, was certainly a descendant of the Umfraville family of Prudhoe, Northumberland, though his exact parentage is obscure. He was perhaps born about 1260, since in 1279 he or a namesake sought from Edward I the lands of his late father Robert, perhaps the younger brother of Gilbert de Umfraville, earl of Angus (died 1245). However, Robert was born before 1212 and died before 1257, dates which make him a somewhat unlikely father to Ingram and his younger brothers. Although he was said to have been married to a daughter of Ingram de Balliol of Urr (in Kirkcudbrightshire) and Redcastle (in Angus), Ingram de Umfraville was given a Balliol forename, and his mother or grandmother must have been Ingram de Balliol's sister or daughter; he himself assumed the Balliol of Redcastle arms. 
Knighted and in receipt of an annual fee of 20 merks from Alexander III, Umfraville was not among the barons who acknowledged Margaret, the Maid of Norway, as heir presumptive to that king in 1284, and, apart from his fee, is not mentioned during the period of guardianship (1286-91). He accepted Edward I's overlordship at Norham on 13 June 1291, and was named an auditor in the Great Cause by Balliol; he was present at King John's homage to Edward at Newcastle on 26 December 1292, when he was named eighth of sixteen barons, and witnessed a charter of John at Dundee, 23 February 1293. But he was not among the eighteen Scottish magnates summoned to serve Edward in Gascony in June 1294, and in July 1295, when a parliament at Stirling deprived King John of power, Umfraville was probably not one of the council of twelve then appointed, for he was one of four commissioners sent to France to conclude an alliance with Philippe IV. Probably he was still in France during Edward I's invasion and the Scots' defeat at Dunbar in 1296, but he had returned by 28 June, when he surrendered Dumbarton Castle; his homage to Edward at the end of August calls him 'of the county of Ayr' and the order to restore his lands was sent to the sheriffs of Berwick and Ayr. It is not clear how he acquired these lands, some apparently in Carrick. 
Umfraville was one of sixteen Scottish nobles ordered by the English to support the guardian, Brian Fitzalan on 26 September 1297, in response to the Scottish victory at Stirling Bridge (11 September); he had not supported Robert Bruce's rising (June 1297), nor that of Wallace, but he must have deserted the English and was probably active against them in 1298. In February 1299, on the recent death of Ingram de Balliol, Edward I gave all his lands to one coheir, Henry Percy, because the other, Ingram de Umfraville, was the king's enemy and rebel. In August of that year, when the Scots invaded Ettrick Forest, Umfraville was named first as their leader, in a host which included several earls and the two guardians, Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick (the future Robert I), and John Comyn the younger. As a result of the guardians' bitter quarrel, the Scots named William Lamberton, bishop of St Andrews, as principal guardian and Umfraville as sheriff of Roxburgh (a castle in English hands) with 100 horse and 1500 foot (a large force for the Scots) to attack the border. 
The following May, 1300, another quarrel, between the bishop and Comyn, led to Umfraville being chosen to replace Carrick as guardian; if this act was not as inconsequential as it seems at first sight, Umfraville must have been seen as a peace-keeper with influence over the volatile Comyn. In the first half of 1301 a truce allowed the Scots to contact King John, who appointed John Soulis as guardian; in September Umfraville and Soulis led a large force in attacking Lochmaben, unsuccessfully. In 1302 a delegation of six, including Umfraville, went to Paris in a desperate but unsuccessful search for continued French support. The war was renewed and in 1303 Edward I reconquered southern Scotland. When the Scottish leaders submitted in February 1304, Umfraville was still in France, and in July Edward I would offer no safe conduct to him, Soulis, or James Stewart until Wallace was handed over to him. Umfraville returned, perhaps after Wallace's taking (3 August 1305); his lands were restored in October 1305 for a fine of his rents for five years -- the longest period imposed on any of the Scottish leaders -- and in March 1306 he was in Liddesdale, as one of Edward I's captains. He had been driven from his patriotic role by the murder of John Comyn at the hands of Carrick's followers. 
In the years that followed Umfraville played a minor role as an English commander in south-west Scotland; in August 1308 he was made guardian of Galloway and was keeper of Caerlaverock Castle; he and it disappear in 1310-11, when he may have been taken prisoner. With other Scots he attended Edward II's parliament, probably in August 1312, to advise on Scottish affairs. On 24 June 1314 he was taken prisoner at Bannockburn and despite leave a month later to his brother William and others to seek money for his ransom in France, he remained in Scotland for six years. At some point before 1320, Robert I had Ingram de Balliol's barony of Redcastle partitioned to give Umfraville his moiety (Robert kept Percy's half); it is clearly implied that Umfraville had made terms, and this is confirmed by finding his name fifteenth in the long list of nobles who petitioned Pope John XXII on 6 April 1320, a document sponsored by the government (the declaration of Arbroath). 
Not long after, in August 1320, a major conspiracy against Robert I was revealed, and among those tried and executed was Sir David Brechin, who had not been party to it, but had had guilty knowledge of it. Moved by his execution, states Barbour in 'The Bruce', Umfraville sought Robert's leave to return to England, which was chivalrously granted. The role of Umfraville in that poem is indeed remarkable. He is said to have gone to Perth with Valence in 1306 and instructed the latter in a successful ruse to catch the Scots unawares; he sent Carrick men to kill Bruce by subterfuge; as commander in Galloway he had a red bonnet on a spear carried before him as token that he was the most chivalrous knight; he advised Edward II on the morn of Bannockburn to play the 'feigned withdrawal' strategy, but was rebuffed by an over-confident king; on his departure from Scotland he advised Edward to make a long truce so that the Scots would lose their military skills, advice which in 1323 Edward took, though to no profit. Barbour had some written source, perhaps a treatise on chivalry, which portrayed Umfraville as a wily but chivalrous tactician. Barbour's story of his departure from Scotland fits with his recorded arrival at Edward II's court in December 1320, when he disingenuously claimed that he had never made peace with Robert I. Edward gave him generous gifts and, in February 1321, leave to depart to France -- the last that is heard of Ingram de Umfraville. His career epitomizes the conflicting claims to loyalty which beset a minor Scottish baron in 1290-1314; Edward I could not win him for the English, but Robert I did. 
In 1346 a namesake, described as 'Scot', fought on the English side at Nevilles Cross, and for thirty years served Edward III on the border; he was perhaps a great-nephew of the earlier Ingram. The name of the latter's wife is not known; in 1296 he had two daughters, Eve and Isabel, but since no son is recorded, he probably had none. 


@@@@@


doc= 49380


Coldingham, Thomas (d. 1316), merchant, was possibly the son of the Gregory of Coldingham mentioned among the Berwick burgesses in 1291, and himself became a burgess of that town. Thomas was active in Berwick in the wool and hides trades possibly from 1293, certainly from 1303, while his transactions with Durham Priory are well documented from 1309, when boom conditions were experienced until 1315. The wool was presumably sold on to Flanders or Italy. He traded in wool futures, and made loans to the monks, and there is evidence that behind him was 'my company' ('societas mea'); some of his partners can be identified as his executors after his death. He dabbled in the land market, leasing the fishings of Paxton, and buying the wardships and marriages of tenants of Coldingham Priory, in order to make a profit on their estates during a minority. He is the earliest Scottish merchant of whose business there are any details. He died in 1316, between 9 February and 12 May, when the economy of his town was collapsing; his wife and children, if any, are unknown, unless the Thomas Coldingham, reputedly ejected from Berwick by Robert I, was a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 49381


Owen the Bald (d. 1018), king of the Cumbrians, who succeeded Malcolm and ruled in Cumbria until his death in 1018, after which his realm was finally absorbed into the kingdom of the Scots. 


@@@@@


doc= 49382


Donald (d. 975), king of the Cumbrians, was the son of Owen, who as ruler of Strathclyde was active in the 930s as an ally of Constantine II, king in Scotland between 900 and 943, against AEthelstan of Wessex; it was probably Owen, rather than his son, whom AEthelstan defeated with Constantine at 'Brunanburh' in 937. Donald was apparently king by 'c'.941. About that year Kaddroe, a clerical aristocrat of Pictish or British descent who was highly regarded at King Constantine's court, passed through Donald's lands intending to go to the continent. 'King Donald [Dovenaldus] ruled over the people there, and because he was a relative of [Kaddroe] he received him with all joy; after keeping him with him for some time, he brought him to the town of Loida, on the bounds of the Norse [of York] and the Cumbrians. ('Acta sanctorum', March, 1.476)' The unidentified 'Loida' must be in the region of Stainmore Common, on the borders of Yorkshire and Westmorland; this was long recognized as the southern boundary of the kingdom of Cumbria and the diocese of Glasgow. A point that emerges from this story is that although Kaddroe was related to Donald, he is not described as a relative of Constantine; Donald and Constantine were therefore presumably unrelated. 
A son of Donald, whose name appears in garbled form as Rhadarc or Amdarch (or slight variants of these; possibly Rhydderch), slew Culen, king in Scotland, somewhere in Lothian in 971, 'because of the rape of his daughter, whom the king had carried off for himself' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.476). It is not stated that this Rhadarc, son of Donald, was king at the time; but he must have been an important personage among the Britons, since the king of Scotland was interested in his daughter, and since he appears to have been in command of a considerable British war band. He is not heard of again; by 973 his brother Malcolm was 'king of the Cumbrians' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.478), and was one of the kings said to have rowed King Edgar on the Dee at Chester in that year. Another of the kings said to have been involved is named as Dufnal; he is not otherwise identified, and may be the same Donald, son of Owen, still living but now with his son associated in the kingship. 
The death of 'Domnall, son of Eogan, king of the Britons, on pilgrimage' is recorded in the Irish annals s.a. 975; likewise a late Welsh source records that in 975 'Dunguallon, king of Strathclyde' went to Rome and received the tonsure (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.480). He must have resigned the kingship in Malcolm's favour by this time; possibly, indeed, 'de facto' power had passed to his sons by 971. Donald (or perhaps more accurately Dyfnwal) may have been more independent of the kings of Scotland than some of his predecessors. From the 870s the kings of Strathclyde appear to have been clients of the kings of Scotland; in at least one instance the son of a king of Scotland was imposed as king of Strathclyde. From 954 to 971, however, the kingship of Scotland was disturbed by serious internal dynastic feuding, with the crown changing hands by violence four times. It was probably as a result of this, as well as the collapse of viking York, that the Strathclyde kings were able to reassert a measure of independence under Donald and under his sons -- Malcolm, who at his death in 997 was described as 'king of the Britons of the north' (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 1.517), and 


