@@@@@


doc= 49383


Strathbogie, John of, ninth earl of Atholl (c.1260-1306), magnate, was the son of David of Strathbogie, earl of Atholl, who died on crusade at Tunis in 1270 and who was the grandson of David Hastings, a previous holder of the earldom, and his wife, Forueleth. David of Strathbogie married, as his second wife, Isabella Chilham, heir to lands in Kent and Dover and a granddaughter of Richard, a bastard of King John of England. Their son, John, a minor at his father's death, was placed under the care of his mother's second husband, Alexander de Balliol of Cavers. He appears to have reached his majority by 1284, when he began to take part in affairs of state. 
Despite being a Bruce supporter during the Great Cause, Atholl was present when John, king of Scots (John de Balliol) did homage to Edward I in 1292, and he ratified the treaty with France in February 1296. A month later he invaded England under the earl of Buchan, and shortly afterwards was captured at Dunbar. Atholl gained release from the Tower of London in 1297 by serving with Edward in Flanders. On his return to Scotland, he may have fought in the battle of Falkirk on the patriotic side; he was certainly with the Scots in 1299, taking part in a raid on the south-east of the country and the meeting of the Scottish political community at Peebles. In February 1300, as sheriff of Aberdeen, he attended the justiciar's court held by John Comyn, earl of Buchan, although Buchan's younger brother, Sir Alexander Comyn, claimed to be sheriff of Aberdeen for King Edward. Atholl had an interest in north-east Scotland through his estates of Stratha'an and Strathbogie. A few months later he attended the parliament at Rutherglen, siding with the bishop of St Andrews against John Comyn the younger of Badenoch, during an argument between the two. 
The earl probably submitted to Edward during the latter's campaign in north-east Scotland in 1303, and was appointed warden and justiciar north of the Forth on 29 March 1304. His deputy was the earl of Strathearn. In that office he complained to the king about the power invested in his old enemy, Sir Alexander Comyn, who now held four castles in the area; Edward duly reduced them to two. Atholl also presided over a case involving his deputy, Strathearn, concerned, ironically, with the activities of the patriotic government of which he had been part. In 1305 he was ordered to find a site for a new castle that Edward was intending to build 'in a good place beyond the Forth' ('CDS', vol. 2, no. 1722). Around July he complained to the king about the insufficiency of his fee; although Edward attempted to deal with his complaints, the earl, like others before and after him, was left with doubts as to the value of English service. 
Despite remaining at Berwick immediately after the murder of John Comyn in February 1306, Atholl joined Robert Bruce, his former brother-in-law, in time for the latter's inauguration at Scone; he was one of only three earls present. It is possible that he was responsible for the presence there of Isabel, countess of Buchan. After the battle of Methven he was given charge of the queen and of his own niece, Marjory Bruce, taking them from Kildrummy to the sanctuary at Tain, where they were later captured. Atholl himself was seized after being shipwrecked in the Moray Firth in August 1306. Taken to London, on 7 November 1306 he was hanged on a gallows 30 feet higher than usual (in deference to his English royal blood), then decapitated and burnt. 
Although engaged to a daughter of Sir William Soulis in 1286, Atholl certainly married Marjory, daughter of Donald, sixth earl of Mar, and sister of Isabel, the first wife of Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick (later Robert I). Their son, David Strathbogie, became earl of Atholl on his father's death, but he was in English hands at that time. Having been sent to defend Dundee Castle, Earl David submitted to King Robert with the rest of the English garrison in 1312 and was made constable of Scotland. He deserted the Scots on the eve of the battle of Bannockburn, apparently because Edward Bruce had seduced his sister, and remained on the English side thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 49384


MacDougall, Ewen, lord of Argyll (d. in or after 1268), king in the Hebrides, was the son of Duncan of Argyll, king in the Hebrides, and grandson of Dugald, also king in the Hebrides. Dugald, who is the eponym of the clan MacDougall, was the son of Somerled (died 1164), king of the Hebrides and 'regulus' of Argyll and Kintyre. 
In 1248 MacDougall and his kinsman Dugald mac Ruairi sailed to Bergen seeking the title of king in the Hebrides (or Sudreys) from King Hakon of Norway ('r'. 1217-63), who claimed overlordship. Hakon recognized Ewen as king and, on the death of Harald Olafsson, king of Man and the Hebrides, in 1249, sent Ewen to the isles with a general commission to act on his behalf. However, Alexander II, king of Scots, MacDougall's overlord in Argyll, who sought to incorporate Man and the Hebrides into his own kingdom, led an army to Argyll, and demanded that Ewen renounce his allegiance to Hakon and surrender his castles. No man can serve two masters, said Alexander. On the contrary, said Ewen, it was quite possible so long as the masters were not enemies. Ewen refused to give up his Norwegian allegiance. Alexander pressed on against him but caught fever, and on 8 July 1249 died on the island of Kerrera, by Oban, in the heart of Ewen's territories. 'While wishing to disinherit an innocent man', wrote Matthew Paris, 'he unexpectedly breathed out with that ambition the breath of life' (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.89). 
In 1250 MacDougall was in the Isle of Man, where he gave offence to the Manxmen by adopting the style 'rex insularum', and was driven out. In 1253 he and Dugald were again in Bergen, from where they sailed with King Hakon against Denmark. In 1255, through the mediation of Henry III of England, Ewen was restored to Argyll. 
In 1263 MacDougall again found himself in confrontation with a major ruler. Hakon of Norway sailed in person to the Hebrides to assert his rights against the Scots. He required his sub-kings in the Hebrides, including Ewen, to join the expedition. Ewen refused and was dispossessed. The Norwegian expedition met with disaster, however, King Hakon dying in the Orkneys on his return to Norway after the battle of Largs. By the treaty of Perth between Scotland and Norway in 1266 Man and the Hebrides were ceded to Scotland, and MacDougall was restored to his island possessions. His last recorded appearance is in 1268. 
Descended from many generations of Hebridean sea-kings, Ewen MacDougall seems to have been equally at home in the Gaelic and Scandinavian worlds. His many castles included Dunstaffnage in mainland Argyll, the impressive hall house of Aros on Mull, and the island stronghold of Cairnburgh between Mull and Tiree. He defied two powerful kings in the space of twenty years yet retained all his lands. It has been argued that Ewen left only daughters. However, there seems little doubt that he was the father of Alexander MacDougall of Argyll, with other sons, and the lineal ancestor of the later chiefs of MacDougall. Ewen's daughter Mary married in succession Magnus Olafsson, king of Man and the Hebrides (died 1265), Malise, earl of Strathearn (died 1271), Hugh, lord of Abernethy (died 1291/2), and Warin Fitzwarin (died 1299) -- a wide selection which gives some indication of the status and far-ranging connections of Ewen MacDougall and his family. 
Ewen's name occurs in contemporary sources in a variety of disguises, the Gaelic Eoghan (Ewen) being readily confused with Eoin (for John). Thus he appears in the Manx chronicle as Johannes Dugaldi, and in Norwegian sources as Jon Duncansson. Matthew Paris calls him Oenus of Argyll. His Gaelic style may well have been Eogan MacSomairle. In his sole surviving charter he names himself Eugenius. During the thirteenth century the descendants of Somerled split into three distinct segments: the MacDougalls, the MacDonalds, and the MacRuaris. Later generations looked back to Ewen as a chief of the MacDougalls. 


@@@@@


doc= 49385


MacDougall, Alexander, lord of Argyll (d. 1310), magnate, succeeded his father, Ewen MacDougall (d. in or after 1268), as head of his kindred. Himself the son of a king -- for Ewen had been king in the Hebrides under the crown of Norway -- he served two kings of Scots, Alexander III ('r'. 1249-86) and John (John de Balliol, 'r'. 1292-6), and two kings of England, Edward I ('r'. 1272-1307) and Edward II ('r'. 1307-27), and bitterly opposed a third king of Scots, Robert I ('r'. 1306-1329). For a time he seemed set to recreate the hegemony of his ancestor Somerled (died 1164), king of the Hebrides and 'regulus' of Argyll and Kintyre; but he died in old age, in exile, in English service. 
In 1275 MacDougall was one of the leaders of a Scottish expedition sent to subdue the Isle of Man. In 1284 he was among the Scottish magnates who took the oath acknowledging Margaret, the Maid of Norway, as heir-presumptive to the crown. Subsequently Alexander supported John de Balliol in the competition for the throne of Scotland and acted as one of his auditors. MacDougall's wife was a Comyn of Badenoch, and this, together with the fact that his dynastic rivals, the MacDonalds, supported the Bruce claimant, helps to explain his support for Balliol, who as king conferred important administrative powers on MacDougall as part of a policy of extending royal authority in western Scotland. But private quarrels continued, and in 1299 Alexander MacDougall killed Alexander MacDonald, chief of his kindred, who may have been his son-in-law -- 'the person who was best for hospitality and excellence that was in Ireland and Scotland', according to the Ulster annals (Hennessy and MacCarthy, 2.393). Some years previously the MacDougalls had accounted for Cailin Mor Campbell, head of another prominent west highland family. 
After the deposition of John, king of Scots, in 1296, MacDougall at first opposed Edward I. Later, however, he and his son, John MacDougall of Argyll, became committed supporters of the English king, and in 1305 Alexander was appointed to Edward I's council for Scotland. The slaughter of John Comyn of Badenoch in 1306 intensified the MacDougalls' opposition to Robert Bruce, who was inaugurated king of Scots in that year. In 1307 and 1308 King Robert broke Comyn and MacDougall power. After the fall of his mainland castle of Dunstaffnage in 1308, Alexander MacDougall (although not his son John) came briefly into the king's peace, and attended his parliament at St Andrews in 1309. Shortly afterwards, however, he fled to England, where both Alexander and John attended a council held by Edward II at Westminster in June 1310. Alexander MacDougall died at the end of 1310, perhaps in Ireland, where he and John had been directed in English service. 
From Alexander MacDougall and his son John descend the later chiefs of clan MacDougall to the present day, some accounts to the contrary notwithstanding. A daughter, Christian, married Maolmuire Lamont, and another married Lachlan MacRuari. 


@@@@@


doc= 49386


Hart, Heber Leonidas (1865-1948), judge and jurist, was born on 31 March 1865 at 5 Binfield Road, Clapham, the youngest of several sons and one of eight children of Percy Matthew Hart, company registrar, of Wimbledon, and his wife, Sarah Ann Stillwell. He was named Heber after Bishop Reginald Heber (1783-1826), author of the hymn 'From Greenland's Icy Mountains', and, at the suggestion of the clergyman officiating at his baptism, was given the second name Leonidas in preference to his parents' original choice of Leonard. Both his forenames provoked mirth in others but were 'a prolific source of life-long annoyance' to Hart (Hart, 'Reminiscences', 54). 'Heber Hart' also suggested that he was of Jewish or German-Jewish origin, whereas, as he often felt obliged to make clear, he was 'absolutely English' (ibid., 58) and of pious Anglican parentage. Educated at private schools, he graduated at the University of London as a bachelor of laws with first-class honours in 1886. He was called to the bar of the Middle Temple in 1887 and joined the south-eastern circuit, taking the further degree of doctor of laws at London University in 1893. In 1894 he helped to establish the general council of the bar. 
As a junior Hart had a large general practice and frequently appeared in headline catching cases. He was led by many of the most eminent counsel of the day, a galaxy which included Sir Edward Clarke; Sir Charles Russell (later lord chief justice), who impressed Hart with his 'overmastering natural eloquence' (Hart, 'Reminiscences', 23); Sir Frank Lockwood; W. O. Danckwerts (later lord justice), 'easily the most masterful of leaders' (ibid., 29); the often 'irascible' (ibid., 20) Sir Robert Reid (later Lord Chancellor Loreburn); Henry Herbert Asquith, the future prime minister, whom he found 'neither genial nor attractive as a leader' (ibid., 146); F. E. Smith (later Lord Chancellor Birkenhead); and Sir Edward (later Lord) Carson, 'a model leader' (ibid., 27). Of all the orators whom he heard in a lifetime's experience, however, none in Hart's view compared for 'psychic power' with Sir Henry Irving, whom at the age of twelve he saw perform in 'The Bells'. 
Specializing in commercial law, Hart wrote 'The Law Relating to Auctions' (1895) and was elected first honorary member of the Auctioneers' and Estate Agents' Institute; he followed this with 'The Law of Banking' (1904), which ran to three further editions in 1906, 1914, and 1931, and became Gilbart lecturer in banking at London University in 1922. He took silk in 1913. In 1915 Lord Chancellor Haldane appointed him recorder of Ipswich, a position which he occupied until his retirement in 1936. He became a bencher of the Middle Temple in 1923, and was reader in 1931 and treasurer in 1937. 
From 1920 the foreign secretary, Lord Curzon, appointed Hart as the British member of the mixed arbitral tribunals established under the post-war peace treaties with Germany, Austria, Hungary, and Bulgaria. The task of the tribunals, which sat in London, was to resolve suits in contract and tort between British litigants and subjects of former enemy states in circumstances where the legal effects of war would otherwise have denied redress to either side. Each tribunal had unlimited jurisdiction to decide on fact and law, including complex questions of international law, and its decisions were final and not subject to appeal. Issues of fact ranged 'from the value of the world-wide concerns of great industrial companies to the items of a tailor's bill' (Hart, 'Reminiscences', 39). Hart adjudicated together with a representative of the relevant state and a neutral president, but it was invariably he who took the lead in giving judgment. The workload was immense: some 10,000 cases fell to be decided by the Anglo-German tribunal alone. Hart sat from 1920 to 1931 until the work was complete, and he personally drafted most of the judgments, now in the Public Record Office. The strain of responsibility took its toll in insomnia and 'cardiac and nervous exhaustion' (ibid., 41). 
Hart was a Liberal, an active partisan of the imperialist wing of the party. He stood unsuccessfully as a parliamentary candidate for the Isle of Thanet in 1892, South Islington in 1895, and Windsor in 1910. In 1900 he founded the Imperial Liberal Council, whose aim was empire federation, and he criticized the 'Statute of Westminster' (1931) for severing the constitutional ties between Britain and the dominions. From 1916 he was chairman of the Eighty Club, whose purpose was to further the Liberal cause in parliament, and from 1918 to 1923 he was chairman of what became known as the 1920 Club, founded to promote the cause of the Coalition Liberals under Lloyd George and to advocate their fusion with the Conservatives in a national centre party. 
Hart's professional career did not match his promise. His appointment to the mixed arbitral tribunals cut short his progress as a leader and may have cost him the high judicial promotion for which his gifts seemed to mark him out. While many of the advocates who appeared before him at the tribunals were raised to the Court of Appeal and House of Lords, his own services went unrewarded. Yet his contribution to the tribunals was distinguished, important, and original. 'I had a free hand in preparing what appeared to me the simplest and best rules of procedure' (Hart, 'Way to Justice', 8), and in general the 'unique experience' (ibid.) gave scope to his extensive learning, his judicial flair, his creative ingenuity, and reforming zeal. He seized the opportunity to cut through 'the thraldom of archaic formalism' (ibid., 69), especially the rules of evidence, and to reduce the technicalities of English law to its underlying principles and to those of continental jurisprudence, which he saw as essentially akin. 'The entire laws of contracts and torts', he wrote, 'may be viewed as respectively expansions of two deep-seated imperatives of the ethics of civilised peoples, namely, 'Keep your promise' and 'Injure no man'' (Hart, 'Mixed arbitral Tribunals', 13-14). 
The 'experiment' of the tribunals stimulated Hart's appetite for law reform generally. Holding that 'our legal system is grievously at fault' and 'may be the worst in western Europe' (Hart, 'Way to Justice', 8, 26), he aired his views in a hard-hitting little book, 'The Way to Justice: a Primer of Legal Reform' (1941), published when he was over seventy-five. In the spirit of Bentham, whom he quotes at length, he attacked the English legal system root and branch. He held that a bench of three judges should be the norm in every court of first instance, arguing for the abolition, both in civil and criminal cases, of trial by jury, or what he called 'a fortuitous assemblage of twelve people unacquainted with law or legal procedure, and not improbably including one or more persons of indifferent character or intelligence or unjudicial mind' (ibid., 55). He deplored the two-tier appellate system from Court of Appeal to House of Lords as a lottery -- arbitrary, unfair, and prohibitively costly for the loser -- calling for a single supreme court of appeal. He questioned the principle of the presumption of innocence and the rule against self-incrimination, arguing that both were outweighed by the need to protect the community from crime. He urged the abolition of most rules of evidence. Above all he condemned the very basis of the English legal system, reliance on precedent, and called for the law to be codified in order to 'obviate the enormous waste of time, labour and money now involved in the search for relevant authorities, and their examination, citation and discussion' (ibid., 35), after which 'every volume of law reports... might then be burnt' (Hart, 'Reminiscences', 357). Such radical proposals 'received attention and also some criticism' ('The Times', 5 Feb 1948). Whatever their merits, some of the issues which they raise only began to receive serious consideration half a century after his death. 
A founding member of the Romilly Society (1898), established to encourage penal and prison reform, Hart opposed both capital and corporal punishment, believing that sentencing should be 'neither retaliatory, vindictive nor retributive' (Hart, 'Reminiscences', 325). As recorder of Ipswich he put his ideals into practice, to his own satisfaction but not without controversy. He chose to err on the side of mercy, imposing whenever possible a bind-over rather than a custodial sentence. In consequence of what he called 'my notorious leniency' (ibid., 34), defendants appearing before him regularly pleaded guilty, so that few cases came to trial. In the interests of impartial justice he held that recorders and judges should not have local allegiances in the area to which they are appointed and should not socialize with the lay magistrates with whom they sit on appeal. At the swearing-in of new justices he would remind them that a magistrate should 'comport himself towards the accused as he would feel it right to be treated himself if their relative positions were reversed' (ibid., 98). These admonitions still bear repeating. 
Hart was a Christian philanthropist, who believed that 'underneath the shows of life there lies... the brotherhood of man' (Hart, 'Reminiscences', 326). He championed the Church Army and the nascent Salvation Army at a time when General Booth's ideas, publicized in 'In Darkest England' (1890), met with 'opposition and ridicule' (ibid., 78). He admitted to 'my own excessive religiosity -- a morbidly developed sense of accountability to an unseen Power' (ibid., 176). There was something in Hart of a late Victorian individualist, combining personal eccentricities with strong convictions. As secretary of the London University defence committee from 1894 to 1900, he took part in the long controversy surrounding the university's reorganization. He played a 'prominent part' (ibid., 81) in opposing women's suffrage. He opposed boxing, fox-hunting, and the compulsory teaching of the classics; he advocated decimal coinage and the metrification of imperial weights and measures. He regarded reform of English spelling on phonetic lines as 'a truly urgent matter' (ibid., 356). He argued against pacifism -- during the First World War he served as a special constable, and became company commander of the Stepney battalion of the London volunteer regiment, receiving the post-war rank of honorary captain -- but he also wrote 'The Bulwarks of Peace' (1918) in support of a League of Nations. 
Hart was indifferent to sport, and particularly contemptuous of golf; his one physical recreation was sea voyages. He was cultivated and well read, becoming president of the Johnson Club in 1943. His acquaintances included the Victorian critic Theodore Watts-Dunton, the friend of Swinburne, whose cure from dipsomania was first effected at The Pines, 9 Putney Hill, London, where Hart himself lived continuously from the age of seventeen. He was a member of the Reform Club. A bachelor until the age of seventy-six, on 31 October 1941 he married Mabel Neal ('b'. 1891/2), a spinster more than twenty-five years his junior, the daughter of Thomas Neal, agriculturist. Hart died at his Putney home on 4 February 1948 of heart disease and arteriosclerosis, and was survived by his wife. He was cremated at Putney Vale on 7 February and his ashes were interred in the family vault at Putney Vale cemetery two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 49387


Hardy, Theodore Bayley (1863-1918), army chaplain, was born on 20 October 1863 in the Southernhay district of Exeter. He was the son of George Hardy, a commercial traveller, and his wife, Sarah Richardson; George was her second husband, her first having died. George himself died in 1866 and Sarah supported her large family (several boys from the first marriage and two, including Theodore, from the second) by running a preparatory school. 
Theodore was educated at home until he was nine and later attended the City of London School (1879-82), from where he went on to London University. On 13 September 1888 he married Florence Elizabeth Hastings, the third daughter of William Hastings, a Belfast civil engineer. Hardy graduated BA in 1889 and then taught for two years in London before moving to teach at Nottingham high school, where he remained for sixteen years. During this period he was ordained deacon (1898) and then priest (1899) and was licensed as a curate for Burton Joyce. 
In 1907 Hardy became headmaster of a small establishment, Bentham grammar school, which had the advantage of being situated in Hardy's beloved countryside, as well as providing closer access to his wife's family in Northern Ireland. In 1913 Florence was diagnosed terminally ill, and so Hardy resigned from the school and took the living of Hutton Roof (in the diocese of Carlisle), which gave him time to nurse her. In June 1914 his wife died; their two children had left home -- William studying to be a doctor in Belfast, and Elizabeth at London University. After the war broke out Hardy tried numerous times to enlist as a chaplain, and even considered alternatives, such as going as a volunteer stretcher bearer, to which end he attended an ambulance class. 
Eventually Hardy was accepted as a chaplain, being commissioned as a temporary chaplain of the fourth class on 16 September 1916, despite his advanced years (he was almost fifty-three), and proceeded to France. He was attached to the infantry base depots at Etaples but pressed insistently to be sent up to the line and in December 1916 joined the 8th Lincolnshire regiment (and later was also attached to the 8th Somerset light infantry), part of 63rd brigade of the 37th division. He saw service in the Loos, Arras, Ypres salient, Somme, and Cambrai sectors. 
Hardy soon became renowned for his devotion to the men under his pastoral charge. He insisted on staying in the front-line trenches, anxious to be of as much use as possible to those who were most threatened. His willingness to risk his life in looking after the wounded, or trying to ensure that men were tended, or buried, or brought in from no man's land endeared him to those who could be cynical about their chaplains. 
The only still photographs of Hardy in the field show him in typical mode, working at the advanced dressing station at Feuchy chapel, near Arras. He refused all attempts to move him back from the line, even if only to give him a rest; he frequently said that he was a dreadful coward, but that his place was at the front, and in any case, with his wife dead and his children grown up, the prospect of death did not perturb him. He told his senior chaplain, the Revd Geoffrey Vallings DSO, that he 'loved his children intensely but that he believed that he could do no better, if God so willed, than join his beloved wife in the presence of the Lord' (Raw, 44). 
In the opening days of third Ypres (his division was in action to the east of Wytschaete) Hardy was made DSO (gazetted 18 October 1917). It was awarded for his concern for the wounded, in particular for staying out with a wounded man, trapped in mud, in no man's land for many hours and under constant fire, and despite the fact that his own wrist was broken. He remained with this man until he died. Hardy collapsed with exhaustion shortly afterwards. He was to win the MC in October 1917 for his bravery near Hill 60 (Ypres salient) when he assisted with the evacuation of the wounded from a heavy battery position while it was under a severe bombardment. 
During the dismal winter of 1917-18 the division remained in the salient; Hardy invariably accompanied the ration parties to the front and then stayed on and visited the outpost positions, bringing cigarettes, sweets, and conversation. His arrival was frequently accompanied by the sentence with which he is most popularly identified: 'It's only me, boys' (Raw, 61). 
In a series of incidents in April 1918 the bravery that Hardy displayed was recognized by the award of the Victoria Cross, gazetted on 11 July 1918. Among other things he stayed with and tended a wounded officer some 10 yards from a German machine-gun position and then sought help to bring him back to the British lines; he rescued a man buried by a shell and endeavoured to save another, all the time under heavy shell fire; and he saved the life of an officer by tending his wounds, received out in no man's land while on a patrol. 
Theodore Hardy was now the most highly decorated chaplain in the army; he was presented with the VC by George V at Frohen-le-Grand on 9 August, the event being briefly captured on film. He was wounded on 10 October 1918 while returning from a visit to forward troops who had recently crossed the River Selle. He died of his wounds and pneumonia at the no. 2 base (Red Cross) hospital at Rouen on 18 October two days short of his fifty-fifth birthday, and was buried in the vast Commonwealth war graves cemetery, the St Sever cemetery extension in Rouen, on October 20. A memorial was erected in Carlisle Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 49388


Goddard, Charles (1769/70-1848), Church of England clergyman, was born in Westminster, the son of Charles Goddard, though rumour attributed his paternity to Charles Lloyd, secretary to Lord Grenville. He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in November 1787 aged seventeen. He left Oxford in the summer of 1789 without taking a degree. In August 1789 he was appointed to a clerkship in the Home Office, which he held until October 1794, and he became personal secretary and precis writer to Grenville, the home secretary. When Grenville was foreign secretary, Goddard, as the minister's protege, was made collector and transmitter of state papers in that department, with a salary of $500, and subsequently received a pension of $850 a year when he relinquished the office. He served as a midshipman at the battle of Trafalgar, was later a prisoner in France, and was freed through the influence of Charles James Fox. 
About 1813 Goddard was ordained and served for seven years as curate of Hitcham, Buckinghamshire, where Joseph Goodall, the headmaster of Eton College, was rector. As a curate he established district committees at High Wycombe and Aylesbury of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK), and supported the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Incorporated Church Building Society. In 1814 Sir George Pretyman-Tomline, the bishop of Lincoln, made him prebendary of Louth in Lincoln Cathedral, and further promoted him to the archdeaconry of Lincoln (1817). He was additionally presented by Bishop Howley of London to the rectory of St James Garlickhythe, London, in 1821. In that year he received an Oxford MA by decree and proceeded BD and DD. He delivered the Bampton lectures at Oxford in 1823, later published as 'The Mental Condition Necessary to a due Inquiry into Religious Evidence' (1824). Although a pluralist (see J. Wade, 'The Extraordinary Black Book', 1832, 107) who owed his advancement to the notorious nepotist Pretyman-Tomline, he was a conscientious clergyman associated with the Hackney Phalanx, the reformist circle of traditional high-churchmen. 
Goddard was an energetic archdeacon. Between 1817 and 1822 he visited about 400 of the 516 parishes in his archdeaconry. His visitations were rigorous. At Leake in 1820 he ordered all the bells to be rung to test their soundness, causing the parish clerk to comment, 'Archdeacon you call him. I think he is the Archdevil' (letter from Dr Parkinson of Ravendale; Binnall, 158-9). Where he found a dilapidated church he required the churchwardens to summon a vestry to levy a rate to pay for repairs. If they refused he threatened legal action. He encouraged the establishment of clerical lending libraries at each visitation centre in his archdeaconry, conducted on the basis of the rules for such libraries drawn up by Thomas Bray, one of the founders of the SPCK. On financial grounds he ceased to undertake further routine visitations in 1827; his archdeaconry was worth only $30 a year and his prebend $14. 
Goddard worked closely with John Kaye, bishop of Lincoln from 1827. He urged Kaye to reintroduce rural deans into the diocese and recommended as candidates competent, locally respected, resident incumbents whose ecclesiastical opinions conformed to his own. He saw non-residence as the great evil in the church, although he recognized pluralism as an economic necessity for many clergy. In his 1833 charge to the clergy in his archdeaconry he admitted the need to augment benefice incomes, and in his 1836 charge supported the ecclesiastical commissioners' policy, which he had previously opposed, of diverting cathedral endowments to this purpose, acknowledging parliament's moral right to redistribute endowments intended for public objects. But he criticized the 'Church Discipline Bill' of 1839 for interfering with bishops' spiritual jurisdiction, and opposed proposals for government inspection of church schools. 
In 1844 Goddard resigned the archdeaconry and accepted the subdeanery of Lincoln Cathedral in order to allow the establishment of a new canonry under the 'Dean and Chapter Act' (1840) linked to the archdeaconry and thus provide an adequate income for future archdeacons. In 1836 he had exchanged his London rectory for that of Ibstock, Leicestershire. He died at Ibstock on 21 January 1848 aged seventy-eight and was buried there. He had intended that his charges, beginning with the second (published in 1819), should provide his clergy with a manual of ecclesiastical discipline and clerical duty, but he did not complete the task. 


@@@@@


doc= 49389


Hudson, Charles (1828-1865), mountaineer, was born on 4 October 1828 in Ripon, Yorkshire, the only son of Joshua Hudson, gentleman, and his wife Jane, 'nee' Abbott. He had two older sisters. He was educated at St Peter's School, York, under the Revd William Hey, who recalled Hudson as intellectually undistinguished, but exercising influence over others on account of his athleticism. G. F. Browne certainly remembered him as 'our very best athlete' ('Recollections of a Bishop', 1915, 104-5), capable of a 21 foot long-jump in ordinary boots; on a walking tour in what is now Cumbria in 1845 he averaged 27 miles daily. He was admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, in March 1847, and elected scholar in 1850, taking his BA in 1851, and proceeding MA in 1854. In 1851 Hudson stroked the college eight to head of the river, won the fours and pairs (in a boat fitted with a special rudder to compensate for Hudson's superior strength), and rowed a dead heat in the sculls. In the same year he travelled to Switzerland for the first time, and he spent the winters of 1851-2 and 1852-3 in Geneva. Here his 'distinguished and polite manners gained him admission to all the fashionable houses' (P. Chaix), where he enjoyed dancing until the small hours. Hudson became a keen if unsuccessful chamois hunter, and acquired a taste for alpinism, climbing minor peaks and experimenting with a bivouac in an improvised sleeping bag at over 7000 feet and at -13 degree F in February 1853. Between 24 and 25 March 1853 he walked from Bionassay to Geneva and back within twenty-four hours, a round trip of 86 miles. 
Hudson was ordained deacon on 18 December 1853, taking priest's orders the following year. He seems to have undergone an evangelical conversion: the secularity of his journals from the early 1850s contrasts with his later pattern of private devotions (even during climbs) and the extreme piety of letters surviving from the 1860s. Frequently taking pupils, he would request their relatives to join him in daily prayer for them at a pre-arranged hour. Hudson assisted the Revd J. Prior at Kirklington, and volunteered as a chaplain to the Army Works Corps in the Crimea, where he spent the winter of 1854-5. After the fall of Sevastopol he crossed Armenia with the unfulfilled intention of climbing Mount Ararat. Hudson was curate of St Mary's, Bridgnorth, from 1856 to 1857, and in 1860 became vicar of Skillington, Lincolnshire. His climbing campaigns in the later 1850s led to his election to the Alpine Club in 1859 (sitting on its council 1863-5) and as a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (1865): Leslie Stephen described Hudson as 'the strongest and most active mountaineer I have ever met', and, although much more experienced on snow than on rock, he was widely regarded as having talent and stamina unmatched except perhaps by Whymper. In 1855 he participated in the first ascent of the highest summit of Monte Rosa and the first guideless ascent of Mont Blanc (important in breaking the stranglehold of the Chamonix cartel), an experience recounted with E. S. Kennedy in 'Where there's a Will there's a Way' (1856). 
In 1865 Hudson travelled to Switzerland with a former pupil, D. R. Hadow. After pioneering a new route on the Aiguille Verte and taking Hadow up Mont Blanc, Hudson planned an assault on the Matterhorn with Hadow and the guide Michel Croz. Joined by Lord Francis Douglas, his guides the Taugweilders, and Edward Whymper, the party successfully achieved the first ascent on 14 July 1865. Early in the descent, however, Croz, Douglas, Hadow, and Hudson plunged to their deaths: the initial cause of the accident is unknown. Hudson's horribly mutilated remains were identifiable only from his wallet and a letter to his wife, Emily Antoinette, daughter of Major Charles Mylne of the Bombay army, whom he had married in Paris on 26 June 1862 and with whom he had two children; she lived at least until 1917. He was buried in the village churchyard at Zermatt; in 1913 he was reinterred in the English church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 49390


Pound, William (bap. 1807, d. 1881), headmaster and religious writer, was the son of Matthew Pound, gentleman. A William Pound, son of Matthew Pound and his wife, Sarah, was baptized at Great Stanmore, Middlesex, on 18 March 1807. After attending Grantham School, Pound entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1829, holding the Newcome exhibition (1829-36) and the Baker exhibition (1832-4), and being admitted Robinson scholar in 1832. He graduated BA as sixth wrangler in 1833, ill health contributing to his failure to achieve the anticipated highest mathematical honours. He was Naden divinity student from 1833 to 1836, when he proceeded MA. Pound was fellow (and sometime librarian) of the college from then until 1839, vacating before his marriage in January 1840 to Charlotte Augusta, fourth daughter of Richard Furley, a wharfinger from Gainsborough. The couple had two sons, Robert William ('b'. 1843) and Alfred John ('b'. 1847), and one daughter, Amelia Dorothena ('b'. 1845). Pound was ordained deacon in 1835, becoming a priest in 1836. In 1839 Archbishop Musgrave appointed him headmaster of Old Malton grammar school, Yorkshire, then in a decayed condition and suffering from local competition. Pound moved the school to Norton, let the old schoolroom, and effectively conducted a private school, although he admitted without payment Malton boys wishing to study classics only. This policy generated local opposition. While at Malton, Pound served as official to the archdeacon of the East Riding, Robert Isaac Wilberforce. 
In the 1850s Pound was a prominent campaigner for the revival of diocesan synods. He helped organize the well-attended synodal consultative meetings held at Derby, London, Gloucester, and Warrington in 1851-2, and wrote much of the literature circulated by the provisional committee, of which he was secretary. Pound also edited and largely wrote the 'Synodicon' (1854-6), in which contemporary issues were considered with reference to synodical action. A high-churchman but not a ritualist, Pound saw the diocesan synod -- 'A whole diocese standing before its king' -- as the heart of an ideal Anglo-Saxon church polity, which had subsequently been debilitated by a combination of papal usurpation and state interference (of which convocation was a manifestation): 'By synodical action within the diocese, in mixed assemblies of clergy and laity, the old Saxon independent action of the Church will be attained, and supply to the state a bulwark of truth to fall back on, when the combined tide of expediency and centralisation shall have recoiled upon the state with irrepressible violence. (Pound, 'Papal Aggression... Repelled by the Revival of Diocesan Synods', 1852, 8)' It was only among his clergy that a bishop exercised his proper authority. Pound developed a scheme for diocesan synods elaborately organized to energize the existing diocesan structure, and with lay participation. He believed such synods would counteract the growth of church party, restore church discipline, and support education. In other writings on this last subject Pound upheld the moral and religious content of education, which he considered to be under threat from government proposals in the late 1860s. Diocesan synods figured here as a means of ensuring the moral content in education and preventing damaging centralization. 
In 1866 Pound transferred his teaching activities to Appuldurcombe House on the Isle of Wight, so saving the ancestral home of the Worsleys from demolition. He remained principal of the school until in 1876 he handed over to his elder son, hoping to devote his remaining years to scriptural researches. A 'complication of maladies' frustrated these plans, but Pound had already produced his most ambitious publication, 'The Gospels in Unity' (1870). This sought to demonstrate the infallibility and inspiration of the evangelists' narratives through an elaborate explanation of apparent inconsistencies in chronology as the result of similar incidents occurring at different times in Christ's life. The 'Literary Churchman' dismissed it as 'a last desperate effort to construct a perfect harmony of the Gospels'. Pound was an active campaigner for the Conservatives on the island, organizing a Conservative association at Ventnor. In 1871 he assumed the duties of lecturer at St Catherine's, Ventnor, in which post he remained until his death at Appuldurcombe on 23 October 1881. He was buried at Godshill. 


@@@@@


doc= 49391


Thorp, Thomas (1797-1877), Church of England clergyman, was born at Pontefract, Yorkshire, on 4 March 1797, the eldest son in the family of three sons and two daughters of Robert William Disney Thorp (1766-1849), medical practitioner and sometime mayor of Leeds, and his wife, Ann Katharine, daughter of Gregory Grant MD. He was educated at Richmond School, Yorkshire, and was admitted a pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in April 1814. He was elected a scholar in 1817 and graduated BA in 1819 as eighth wrangler. In 1818 he was president of the Cambridge Union. He won the chancellor's classical medal in 1819 and was elected a fellow of Trinity in the following year. He graduated MA in 1822 and held a number of college offices, including a tutorship (1833-44) and the vice-mastership (1843-4). He graduated BD in 1824. Thorp had been admitted to the Middle Temple in 1824, but in 1829 was ordained deacon and priest. 
Thorp's name is closely associated with the Cambridge Camden Society, of which he was president for twenty years. Many future members of the society matriculated at Trinity between 1833 and 1841 while he was a tutor. The society, formed by two Trinity men, J. M. Neale and Edward Jacob Boyce, began as a group of friends paying visits to churches. Thorp, recently appointed archdeacon and chancellor of Bristol (1836), was elected president in 1839. Many who joined the society, especially those in senior positions in the church or the university, 'thought that they were merely encouraging an antiquarian and artistic society with a practical interest in church building' (White, 28). Thorp himself was strongly influenced by Romanticism and Wordsworth's appropriation of whatever was 'pure and imaginative, whatever was not merely utilitarian, to the service of both Church and State' (ibid.). 
Thorp himself was a high-churchman, and together with H. J. Rose and W. H. Mill was regarded as a leading preserver of high-church tradition in Cambridge. Influenced by the Oxford Movement, he once said that Wordsworth might be considered among the founders of the society. However, he recognized that allying the society too closely with Tractarianism could be counter-productive. Theological debates were actively discouraged during his time as president. For him, the society's only theological position was 'the recognition and extension of sound principles of Church membership'. He was a moderating influence on the radical voices in the society. 
Thorp published 'A Few Words to Churchwardens on Churches and Church Ornaments' in 1841. J. M. Neale was, in fact, the original author and Thorp toned down his text. He made recommendations about the care and reordering of churches. His arguments against box pews, galleries, and three-decker pulpits, and his support for singing and practices such as the use of candles, were taken up by A. W. N. Pugin, who recommended them to Roman Catholics. It being the year of Newman's 'Tract 90', Thorp was very sensitive to a charge of romanizing and felt that he should have censored the work more heavily before publication. 
In 1841 the Camden Society took over restoration of the Round Church, a medieval church in central Cambridge. Thorp was chair of the restoration committee. In 1843 a row broke out because a stone altar had been erected there, though this was declared legal by a consistory court. Thorp was very concerned by a pamphlet published in 1845 under the society's auspices by S. N. Stokes, who was shortly to convert to Rome, which recommended auricular confession. Bishop Phillpotts of Exeter resigned from the society in disapproval. The committee, under Thorp's leadership, gave serious consideration to dissolving itself. In later years Thorp was less active in the society's affairs, but did not resign as president until 1859, when he claimed pressure of work. 
Thorp's attempts to rebuild his parish church at Kemerton, Gloucestershire, were also controversial. Thorp had been appointed rector in October 1839 by J. H. Monk, bishop of Gloucester, and began to hold daily services in 1844, when he came into residence there. There were more frequent celebrations of holy communion and he introduced a surpliced choir. He engaged Anthony Salvin, who had been the architect on the Round Church project, to advise about the church. Salvin believed that the church needed complete rebuilding, but in the meantime he opened up the chancel, removed the box pews and replaced them with low seats, and lowered the pulpit. Thorp's attempt to pay for rebuilding the church by levying a rate was contested. Objections focused more on the cost than the substance of the proposed changes. After lengthy legal wrangles, the rebuilding was completed in 1849. 
Thorp, who resigned as archdeacon and chancellor of Bristol in 1873, died at Kemerton rectory, Gloucestershire, on 24 February 1877. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 49392


Pinder, John Hothersall (1794-1868), college head, was born on 27 April 1794 in Barbados, the eldest son of Francis Ford Pinder (1767-1843) and his first wife, Elizabeth Christian, 'nee' Maynard (1769-1799). He was educated at Charterhouse and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1816 and MA in 1824. Ordained deacon in 1818 and priest in 1819 in London, he returned to Barbados and served as chaplain of Codrington plantation. There he married, on 16 August 1819, Anne Brathwaite (1795/6-1892), daughter of Scawen Kenrick Gibbons. They had a son who died in infancy in Barbados. 
In 1830 Pinder became first principal of Codrington College, Barbados, founded to train clergy for the diocese of Barbados and the Leeward Islands. In 1834 Pinder appointed Hurrell Froude, a close associate of Keble and Newman, as mathematics tutor. Froude subsequently reported to Newman, 'I have secured the Principal of Codrington College as an ally and he will be able to prejudice several of the clergy who have been through his hands' ('Letters and Diaries of J. H. Newman', ed. T. Gornall, 5, 1981, 12). However, in 1835 Pinder relinquished his post through ill health and returned to England as curate of St Mary's, Lambeth, where George D'Oyly (1778-1846) was rector. Pinder was subsequently principal of Partis College, Bath. 
Froude's claim to have converted Pinder to the views of the Oxford Movement may have been an exaggeration. In lectures delivered at Codrington in 1830 Pinder emphasized that bishops were the successors of the apostles and stressed the mystical nature of the church. All his publications stress the apostolic origins of the three-fold ministry, and the pre-Reformation and primitive origins of the liturgies of the 'Book of Common Prayer'. In his view, because the English church had existed for nearly 600 years before the time of Augustine 'without interference from Rome' it was not bound by papal supremacy. At the Reformation he believed it had rejected the 'errors with which human wickedness or craft had disfigured the work of God'. Such views identify him with the older generation of high-churchmen such as Archbishop Howley of Canterbury and Bishop Kaye of Lincoln. 
In 1839 Pinder was appointed the first principal of Wells Theological College. The college at Wells was established by a small group of mainly high-church clergy and laymen, who included F. H. Dickinson (1812-1890), J. T. Law (1790-1876), W. T. P. Brymer (died 1852), and Lord John Thynne (1798-1881), acting at the suggestion of Henry Manning, archdeacon of Chichester, where a similar institution had been founded. One of the few men in England with experience of training candidates for the clergy, Pinder immediately proved a capable and energetic principal. He restricted recruitment to graduates, and established a one-year course in doctrine, polity, liturgy, and pastoral theology, which included visiting, teaching, and preaching under the supervision of parish clergy. The college had no 'common life'. Students lived in approved lodgings and were required to attend daily morning and evening prayer in the Vicars' Close Chapel. By 1842 there were seventeen students and a vice-principal was appointed. By 1844 there were twenty-eight students. In 1846 Pinder became a residentiary canon and precentor of Wells Cathedral. Despite some suspicions of Tractarianism the college flourished under Pinder and provided an example for Samuel Wilberforce when founding his diocesan college at Cuddesdon in 1854 and for Walter Hamilton in founding his college at Salisbury in 1864. Pinder's success lay in retaining a small but able group of staff, and avoiding extremes of churchmanship. 
Increasingly hindered by deafness, Pinder retired to West Malvern in 1865, and died there on 16 April 1868. On his retirement former students had contributed the then considerable sum from clergy stipends of $2500 to endow the college. 


@@@@@


doc= 49393


Finlayson, James (1772?-1852?), engineer and cotton manufacturer, was probably born on 29 August 1772 in the parish of Penicuik, near Edinburgh. Of his early life in Scotland nothing is known, and it is in St Petersburg in Russia at the end of the eighteenth century that he first makes his appearance, as a master machinist at the Kolpino workshops near that city. According to Finnish sources, he spent twenty years building up the textile industry in St Petersburg, and became acquainted with Tsar Alexander I through a mutual interest in Quakerism. 
However, Finlayson's health began to fail and he had to give up his job as master machinist. On a trip to the grand duchy of Finland in 1819 he saw the potential for hydraulic power in the fierce Tammerkoski rapids between lakes Nasijarvi and Pyhajarvi at Tammerfors (Tampere) and determined to set up his own factory there. With the personal help of the tsar, who actually visited the site in 1819 and shortly afterwards granted Finlayson all the facilities necessary, the factory was duly constructed. 
Finlayson's original plan to manufacture machinery failed, however, and after several other false starts he focused on cotton goods. In 1828 he began to manufacture cotton yarn, but was not to be in charge of manufacturing at Tampere for very long. By the time he had established his factory properly, he was already in late middle age and he and his wife, Margaret, had no children nor, it would seem, any relatives who could inherit. He may also have been in financial difficulties and in 1836 he sold his factory to two St Petersburg financiers. He remained for a further two years as an adviser and in 1838 he returned to Scotland. 
During his time in Russia and Finland, Finlayson first befriended and later corresponded with Daniel Wheeler, a Quaker missionary active in Russia, whose projects were also supported by Tsar Alexander I. Yet although Finlayson attended Quaker worship, he did not actually join the Society of Friends at this time. In 1820, when he left Russia for Finland, he was described in a letter from Wheeler to a friend as a solid man, between forty and fifty years of age. Correspondence between Wheeler and Finlayson provides evidence of the philanthropic work of Finlayson and his wife. In the aftermath of natural disasters, they made efforts to help the local people (Wheeler MS 88). Finlayson also established an asylum for orphaned children, and such actions have caused his name to be remembered in Finland as a philanthropist. 
Little is known about Finlayson's later life in Scotland. He appears to have lived at Govan, Glasgow, until 1846. Quaker records hint at continuing financial difficulties, and also suggest an unstable temperament. He became a member of the Society of Friends in 1846, only to resign. Minutes of a Quaker meeting in 1852 record a letter in which he begs forgiveness for his behaviour, asks to be readmitted to the society, and anticipates his imminent death. Although the date and place of his death are not known with certainty, he may be the James Finlayson who died at 8 Nicolson Square, Edinburgh, on 18 August 1852 and was buried in Newington cemetery. 
Although largely unknown in Scotland, Finlayson's reputation in Finland lives on. A vast factory building in the centre of Tampere carries his name above it, recording his part in the Finnish textile industry. He played a vital role in the creation of Tampere as a major industrial city -- today the largest inland city in Fennoscandia. As a result of Finnish-Scottish co-operation, a bronze plaque to his memory was officially unveiled in Edinburgh in October 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 49394


Stott, George (1835-1889), missionary, was born on 13 April 1835 at Belhelvie, Aberdeenshire, the son of John Stott, crofter, and his wife, Jane Anderson. He worked on the land until at the age of nineteen he injured a knee; after two years, during which he experienced an evangelical conversion and improved his education, his leg had to be amputated. At twenty-two he became schoolmaster of Whitehouse, a village in the Grampians, probably a parish school of the Free Church of Scotland. He lodged with a farmer, James Lamont, and became engaged to his daughter Agnes. 
Early in 1865 Stott heard that James Hudson Taylor, who like himself was nearly thirty, wanted pioneer missionaries for his new non-denominational China Inland Mission (CIM). Since few men with two legs were volunteering, Stott offered to go on his one leg and a crutch. Taylor invited him to London. Warned how badly it could go with a one-legged man in a Chinese riot, Stott retorted cheerfully with a text from 'Isaiah': 'The lame shall take the prey.' Taylor responded 'That's the man for China!' (Broomhall, 3.409), and bought him an artificial leg and a spare. 
James Lamont withdrew his consent to his daughter's marriage, and Stott sailed single, with two other CIM recruits, a newly married couple, on 4 October 1865. They arrived in Shanghai on 6 February 1866. In accordance with the new mission's pioneering principle, they adopted Chinese dress. In November 1867 Taylor took Stott through an archipelago infested by pirates to the beautiful port of Wenchow (Wenzhou) in Chekiang (Zhejiang) province. As the only foreign resident for several years, Stott faced intense suspicion and considerable risk to his life. Nevertheless, he started a school which was soon the basis for a small but growing Christian congregation. In 1869 he proposed by post to Grace Ciggie ['see below'] in Glasgow, whom he had known briefly while preparing for China, and they married on 26 April 1870 at the treaty port of Ningpo (Ningbo), about 300 miles north of Wenchow. They arrived back in Wenchow during violent anti-foreign hostility provoked by the Tianjin massacres, but when calmer times returned the school prospered. Stott ruled it with the paternalism and strict discipline of a Scots dominie, aided by a little homoeopathy. He also rode around the countryside, evangelizing with humour and skill. He was not an easy colleague for younger missionaries, but he laid such strong foundations that even in the late twentieth century the Wenchow church was one of the most flourishing in China. 
In 1884 all was temporarily destroyed during anti-foreign riots. Grace Stott was in Shanghai, but George had to flee Wenchow. The Chinese government offered compensation, but Stott disputed the terms and argued with the directors of the CIM. Although they reached a compromise he was now suffering from cancer, and the Stotts returned to Scotland; they moved on to the south of France as the guests of a supporter of the CIM. Stott died at Cannes, aged fifty-three, on Easter day, 21 April 1889, a one-legged pioneer who had become a legend in China. 
His wife, 
Grace Stott wrote 'Twenty-Six Years of Missionary Work in China' (1897), which ran through three editions in the first two years. She then returned to Wenchow until she retired on medical grounds, in 1907, aged sixty-two. A good speaker and lively conversationalist, she helped to keep China in the public eye. She died in Toronto, Canada, on 24 January 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 49395


Grace Stott (1845-1922), missionary and writer, was born on 12 March 1845 and was brought up in Glasgow by her grandmother. At sixteen she became a deeply committed Christian. In March 1865 she heard Hudson Taylor speak in Glasgow and offered herself for service in China, but she was prevented from going by ill health. Instead she took as her mission field the prostitutes of the Salt Market area in Glasgow, where she worked until she received Stott's proposal of marriage. She landed in Shanghai on her twenty-fifth birthday. A formidable partner in the marriage, in 1875 she founded a girls' school in Wenchow, alongside George's school for boys, so that the baptized youths could marry Christian wives. After George's death she returned to a great welcome in Wenchow in February 1890. Having become, in the manner of the times, effectively the head of the schools and the leader of the church there, she impressed foreigners and Chinese alike by her character and talents. In 1895, after further riots, she was invalided home, escaping the cholera which killed her colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 49396


Hutchison, Sir (William) Kenneth (1903-1989), gas industrialist, was born on 30 October 1903 at Dooria, Assam, India, the third of the five children of William Hutchison (1855-1932), a tea planter, and his wife, Barbara, 'nee' McCormack (1880-1906). On the death of their mother the children were brought up by an aunt near Dumfries; they later moved to Edinburgh. Hutchison was educated at Edinburgh Academy, won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and graduated with first-class honours in chemistry. At the instigation of Harold Hartley, a director of the Gas Light and Coke Company, Hutchison joined the company as a research chemist in 1926, and for the next fifteen years helped to bring more scientific method to the empirical traditions of gas engineering. In 1939 he married Dorothea Marion Eva Bluett ('c'.1905-1987x9); they had one daughter. 
During the war Hutchison was given an opportunity to escape from the laboratory. He was attached to the Air Ministry, where within a couple of years he had become director of hydrogen production for barrage balloons; then, in 1944, he was appointed director responsible for the supply of all compressed gases, especially oxygen, for the British and American air forces. Apart from gaining invaluable direct management experience and learning the ways of Whitehall, he came to meet many senior figures in the gas industry. On his return to Gas Light and Coke he was appointed controller of by-products (coke, tar), and in 1947 became a director of the company. On nationalization in 1949 he was appointed first chairman of the South Eastern Gas Board. 
Hutchison recognized that the gas industry had little control over its raw material costs and could be held to ransom as long as coal was its predominant feedstock. He placed great emphasis on developing new processes to use whatever oil feedstocks were available cheaply and in quantity. As an extension of this policy, he was closely involved in developing new technology for importing liquified natural gas by sea from Algeria. Even before 1964 when the gas tankers entered service, another possibility had been opened up by the discovery of natural gas in the Netherlands. In 1960 Hutchison was appointed deputy chairman of the Gas Council, which co-ordinated the activities of the twelve area gas boards. He foresaw the prospects of huge reserves of natural gas in the British sector of the North Sea, and fought to ensure that the gas industry would participate in the risks of exploration and production (and incidentally gain inside knowledge of the economics of the business) rather than remain a passive customer of the oil industry. 
Making cheaper gas affordable was not enough if customers were abandoning gas for electricity or oil. Hutchison was the driving force behind national publicity campaigns, notably for 'high-speed gas', to persuade customers to buy gas fires and gas central heating. Such strategies, together with improved appliances and the likelihood of markedly cheaper gas, transformed the prospects of the industry. Sales of gas had been falling steadily since the war but they began to expand in 1961; and when Hutchison retired in 1966 they were increasing at 10 per cent a year. Supplies of North Sea gas had not yet started to flow, but Hutchison had already foreseen the way the market might expand and how the industry could accommodate this, both organizationally and technically. 
Hutchison's move from scientist to entrepreneurial general manager came when he had turned forty. Despite this late start, more than any other single person he was the driving force behind the technical, commercial, and organizational changes which transformed the gas industry in the mid-twentieth century. From the fragmented, coal-dependent concerns which had survived from the nineteenth century, gas became a taut, centralized, organized industry, able to deal on equal terms with international oil companies. Lacking statutory powers, Hutchison had the strength of character to impart direction to the activities of the twelve semi-autonomous gas boards; and at the same time Sir Henry Jones, the chairman of the Gas Council, liaised with government and the civil service. 
Hutchison was made a CBE in 1954 and knighted in 1962. He was president of the Institution of Gas Engineers (1955-6) and the Institution of Chemical Engineers (1959-61). In 1966 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Generally taciturn and proud of being a scientist, he found it easier to make friends with lovers of literature. He was a keen golfer and sailor until late in life, and a first-class chef. He died a widower on 28 November 1989, from heart disease, at his home, 2 Arlington Road, St Margaret's, Twickenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 49397


John White (1764-1833), who was born at Monkwearmouth, co. Durham, and began his working life as a cooper in the 1780s. During the French wars White diversified his business activities into shipowning to take advantage of boom conditions in this sector, and by 1814 he had accumulated a fleet of 1300 tons with the high value of $2300. In spite of the prolonged post-war economic downturn and the depreciation of shipping values, White's fleet made profits in all but one year during the period 1818-32. This was achieved through the diverse deployment of his fleet in a range of different trades. In addition he made good use of his strategic position in the coal trade, where he also had mining and fitting interests which enabled him to obtain rapid turn-round for his vessels. On 27 May 1788 White married Jane (1769-1826), daughter of Andrew Young, a local ship's chandler; eight children of the marriage survived into adulthood. 
By the time of his death on 5 July 1833 at Bishopwearmouth, White had become one of Sunderland's most eminent merchants and shipowners. His death occurred in the middle of a major commercial depression, at which time his sworn effects were valued at only $18,000. The business was carried on by two of his sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 49398


Andrew White (1792-1856) and 


@@@@@


doc= 49399


Richard White (b. 1804?), under whose direction it continued to expand and diversify throughout the 1830s. In June 1814 Andrew White married Ophelia, daughter of a local shipowner, Hugh Dixon. Richard White married Mary, daughter of Stephen Watson, a draper, in August 1827. 
The influence of the Whites also extended into local social and political life. John White was renowned for his philanthropy and his support of the Methodist movement. He championed such causes as the building of schools, the abolition of church rates, and winter charity for the poor. Andrew White continued his father's social work and was associated with almost every local charity and benevolent institution, supporting religious nonconformity, temperance, and improvements in education. The family's highly active role in local politics can be seen from the fact that Andrew was closely involved in reviving the ancient corporation of the borough under the 'Municipal Corporations Amendment Act' and was elected the first mayor of the new corporation in 1836. He went on to hold the position two more times. Richard White, too, was mayor on one occasion. Andrew's other local responsibilities included being chief magistrate of the borough, justice of the peace, and deputy lieutenant for the county of Durham. He was also MP for Sunderland between 1837 and 1841. Although he remained on the back benches he spoke up in favour of reform on several occasions. However, reformist principles could still take second place to self-interest; in a debate on the navigation laws in 1840 a fellow MP accused him of abandoning his free-trade beliefs when it came to protection for the shipping industry. 
As devout Christians sincerely concerned about corruption in the Church of England, the Whites reflected their wide reformist outlook in their religious work. Andrew White was involved with various religious groups in Sunderland and, during his time as an MP, with various causes in London, including the Presbyterian Mission, the London Missionary Society, the Religious Tract Society, and the Zion Chapel. He defended his interdenominationalism in a short tract recommending mutual forbearance among religious groups. His reformist beliefs were at odds, however, with the more conservative-minded national Wesleyan leadership, and in 1836 he was one of the leading figures among Sunderland Methodists to break away from the official Methodists to join the Wesleyan Methodist Association. 
In addition to both their philanthropic activities and their own private business interests, the White family were also actively involved in company promotion during the joint-stock boom of the mid-1830s. They played a leading role in the flotation of many local companies, in industries as diverse as railways, banking, soap manufacture, and insurance. Like many contemporary entrepreneurs, they had private and corporate interests which overlapped in a manner that was sometimes mutually beneficial but that on other occasions resulted in a conflict of interest and, frequently, corruption. The collapse of the Sunderland Joint Stock Bank in 1851 led to allegations that the brothers and their associates had used the bank's funds extensively for personal loans without the necessary degree of scrutiny. By the early 1840s the family business was beginning to weaken under the pressure of adverse economic conditions and an over-commitment to social and political activities. In 1846 the firm collapsed and the two brothers were declared bankrupt. Although Andrew White continued in employment as secretary of the Wear and Durham district coal trade committee, his fortunes never recovered significantly from the bankruptcy; when he died a decade later, on 1 October 1856 at Bishopwearmouth, his effects were valued at only $800. The year of Richard White's death is not known. 
The Whites were one of Sunderland's leading business families during the first half of the nineteenth century, and they also played an influential role in local political and religious affairs. Before the collapse of their business Andrew and Richard White had interests stretching across the principal sectors of the local economy, and were involved in banking, shipowning, and the coal and timber trades, as well as metallurgy and engineering. 


@@@@@


doc= 49401


White family (per. 1795-1846), shipowners and merchants of Sunderland, first came to prominence through 


@@@@@


doc= 49402


Margaret Paton (1841-1905), his second wife, was a founder of the Presbyterian Women's Missionary Union; she died on 16 May 1905, and the organization built a church at Vila in the New Hebrides and a hospital in Korea in her memory. John Paton died in Melbourne on 28 January 1907 and was buried near his wife in Boroondara cemetery, Kew, Melbourne. 


@@@@@


doc= 49403


Mitchell, John Murray (1815-1904), missionary and orientalist, was born in Aberdeen on 19 August 1815, the fourth of five sons and three daughters of James Mitchell, burgess of Aberdeen, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Gordon. His brothers James (1808-1884), Gordon (1809-1893), and Alexander (1822-1901) also became ministers of the Church of Scotland. He was educated at the parish school of Kinneff, Kincardineshire, and entered Aberdeen grammar school for a final year before going on to Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1829; he secured the second highest bursary on the strength of his Latin prose. On the completion of his MA in 1833 he began to study for the ministry, first at Aberdeen and then for the 1837-8 session at Edinburgh, where he gained a gold medal offered by Professor Welsh for the best essay on Eusebius. He also returned for a time to Aberdeen grammar school as a teacher at the request of the rector, the Latin scholar James Melvin. 
Much influenced by Alexander Duff, Murray Mitchell would gladly have joined Duff in Calcutta but, after being ordained in Aberdeen in July 1838, he was sent instead to Bombay, where he joined fellow missionaries John Wilson and Robert Nesbit in November of that year. His facility with languages enabled him quickly to master Marathi and he also studied Sanskrit and Zend. He was greatly interested in Marathi literature and in particular the poet Tukaram. At the end of 1842 he was joined by his fiancee Maria Hay Mackenzie Flyter ['see below'], and they were married in Bombay on 22 December. There were no children of the marriage. 
On the Disruption of the Church of Scotland in 1843 Murray Mitchell was one of the many missionaries who opted to join the Free Church of Scotland. In 1844 he accompanied Stephen Hislop on the long and arduous journey to Nagpur in order to establish a new mission station there. He made frequent tours in inland districts, usually in the cool season, and often spoke to his audiences in Marathi from the back of his pony. His wife's illness prompted a return to Scotland and he addressed the church general assembly in 1846, before returning to India alone at the end of the year. His wife did not rejoin him until October 1849 and her health was to remain a source of concern. In 1854 he moved to Poona to relieve another missionary, James Mitchell, and he remained there until Mitchell's return in 1856. His wife's health again took her back to Europe and Murray Mitchell followed in January 1857. He was thus away from India during the time of the mutiny and did not return until November 1859. While in Scotland he was awarded an LLD degree from Marischal College, in December 1858. On his return to India he once again deputized at Poona for James Mitchell until the latter was restored to health. His wife left India in October 1862 and he finally followed from Bombay in April 1863. 
From 1863 to 1867 Murray Mitchell ministered to a Free Church congregation at Broughty Ferry, near Dundee. A crisis in the mission at Calcutta led to his leaving this charge and going out to Bengal in January 1868, where he became principal of Duff College. During his time there he was instrumental in setting up a European congregation, the Simla Union Church, and he also assisted Andrew Campbell in establishing a mission among the Santals, reflecting his interest in aboriginal peoples. In 1873 he returned to Scotland and acted as secretary of his church's foreign mission committee. In 1880, as part of a wider tour, he returned to India for a further two years. He reached his ministerial jubilee in 1888, and thereafter undertook a further ten years in the service of the Scotch Church at Nice in France, thus achieving the unusual distinction of serving his church at home, in the mission field, and on the continent. As the oldest minister of the Free Church, it fell to him to move the adoption of the 'Uniting Act' of 1900 which brought about the union of the Free Church of Scotland with the United Presbyterian church. In spite of his advancing years he gave the Duff lectures in 1903, published posthumously as 'The Great Religions of India' (1905). He died, at his home, 44 Heriot Row, Edinburgh on 14 November 1904 and was buried there, in the Dean cemetery, four days later. 
Murray Mitchell was thoughtful, scholarly, gentle, and guileless, with a gift for languages and exposition which fitted him for his long missionary career. His 'Letters to Indian Youth' passed through many editions, and he published a 'Memoir' (1858) of his missionary colleague Robert Nesbit. His other works included 'Hinduism, Past and Present' (1885), as well as a partial autobiography, 'In Western India' (1899). 
His wife, Maria Hay Mackenzie Mitchell (1820-1907), was born on 5 December 1820, daughter of Alexander Flyter (1782-1866), minister of Alness in Ross-shire, and his wife, Elizabeth Bayne (died 1863). She was naturally obliged to share her husband's calling to an unusual degree but their marriage was recognized as being a true missionary partnership. Repeated and serious ill health did not deter her and she set down her own and their shared experiences in 'A Missionary's Wife among the Wild Tribes of South Bengal' (1871); 'In India' (1876); 'In Southern India' (1885); and 'Sixty Years Ago' (1905). She died on 31 March 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 49405


Hope family (per. c.1700-1813), merchants and merchant bankers, of Amsterdam and London, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 49408


Burginda (fl. 7th-early 8th cent.), author, wrote a letter to an unnamed 'youth', which survives in a unique (non-autograph) copy in a manuscript formerly at St Bertin and now at Boulogne, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 74 (82); the main item is an eighth-century southern English copy of Apponius's 'Commentary on the Song of Songs'. Her name may be a latinization of an unattested Old English name Burgyth. The manuscript may have been written in the diocese of Worcester, to judge by its decoration, and possibly at Bath monastery, whence books seem to have travelled to St Bertin. Burginda herself should perhaps be located in Bath monastery: it is difficult to see why her poor letter would be copied far afield. Despite the weakness of its Latin, Burginda's letter is an important piece of early evidence for female education. In expressing her admiration for the 'illustrious youth' and urging him on to further spiritual endeavours, she shows herself familiar with current epistolary conventions, and quotes or echoes Virgil's 'Aeneid' and 'Georgics', the anonymous 'Carmen ad Flavium Felicem de resurrectione mortuorum et de judicio domini', and the Christian Latin poet Arator. Her reading thus resembles that of Aldhelm of Malmesbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 49409


Byrhtnoth (d. 996), abbot of Ely, spent his entire career in reformed Benedictine abbeys and was responsible for the refoundation of Ely Abbey after the depredations of the viking age. He was one of the original band of monks who had assembled under AEthelwold at Abingdon about 954, where he received a Benedictine training and education; and about 963, when his patron became the bishop of Winchester, he was appointed as the prior of the Old Minster. It has been suggested that he was the son of Byrhtferth and the first cousin of the better-known Byrhtnoth (died 991), ealdorman of Essex. If so, these family connections with the southern Danelaw may have been a factor in his selection as the abbot of Ely in 970. King Edgar granted Byrhtnoth and the monks of Ely authority over the two royal hundreds of the Isle of Ely, which freed the abbey from unwanted diocesan and secular attention, and was the basis of its great immunity in the high middle ages. 
Between 'c.'970 and 'c.'990 Byrhtnoth excelled in the acquisition of relics and land for the abbey. During the night of 8 July 974 he and a party of Ely monks stole the body of St Wihtburh from East Dereham in Norfolk. After placing the saint in their wagon, the monks drove for 20 miles to reach their waiting ship. Although the villagers discovered the theft, they could not stop the Ely ship with its naval armaments sailing past them as they stood armed on the river bank. Byrhtnoth's putative kinsman, Ealdorman Byrhtnoth, became a patron of the abbey, with the result that the monks acquired forty-five estates during the late tenth and early eleventh centuries. When purchasing an estate, Byrhtnoth took a careful interest in the livestock before paying out any cash; and when buying land for the monks, he drove a hard bargain at local assemblies. His boldness, business acumen, and family connections ensured that by the end of the tenth century the abbey regained the prosperity that it had enjoyed in the seventh, thereby laying the foundations for the community's elevation into a bishopric about a hundred years after Byrhtnoth's death. In the early twelfth century the Ely monks invented incidents in Byrhtnoth's life, claiming that he played a vital role in the Maldon campaign of 991, and that he was murdered while seeking to curb the witchcraft of Queen AEthelthryth. According to the 'Liber Eliensis' Byrhtnoth died on 5 May 996 and was buried at Ely. His real achievement was to negotiate his way through the political landscape of the fenland shires for twenty-five years, ensuring that the Ely monks were not overshadowed by their neighbours at Ramsey Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 49410


Ecgburh (fl. c.717), Benedictine nun, is known from her one extant letter, sent to the West Saxon missionary Boniface in Germany between 716 and 718 and preserved in his collected correspondence. 'No day unrolls nor night slips by without some recollection of your teaching. Therefore believe me, as God is my witness, I embrace you with the noblest kind of love' (Tangl, no. 13). Although Ecgburh describes herself as 'the least' of Boniface's pupils, her educational attainment is revealed by her allusions to Virgil and Jerome. She laments that her sister Wehtburh is in prison in Rome, and declares that Boniface has been her spiritual brother since the cruel death of her blood brother Oshere. Her letter includes a postscript by a certain Ealdbeorht, who was later to add a similar postscript to a letter by Tyccea, probably the abbot of that name who (as abbot probably of Glastonbury) in 757 attested a charter of AEthelbald of Mercia, probably in favour of the monastery of Malmesbury. This western orientation supports the suggestion that Ecgburh's brother Oshere was Oshere, king of the Hwicce ['see under 'Hwicce, kings of the (act. c.670-c.780)], the alleged founder of the see of Worcester in 679, who had probably died (or retired) in the 690s or soon after, and certainly by 709. Ecgburh may be the same person as the abbess of Gloucester called Eadburh in later sources, according to which she succeeded Abbess Cyneburh (died after 704), the sister of King Osric (Oshere's predecessor), and was the widow of Wulfhere, king of Mercia (died 674/5). This Ecgburh was buried at St Peter's, Gloucester. The names Ecgburh (or Ecgburg) and Eadburh (or Eadburg) were distinct, but the latter appears as a corruption of the former, as in the case of Ecgburg (miswritten Eadburg), sister of AElfwald, king of the East Angles (died 749). (The identification of the East Anglian Ecgburg with Boniface's correspondent is unlikely.) 


@@@@@


doc= 49411


Stewart family (per. c.1110-c.1350), nobility, traced its descent from 


@@@@@


doc= 49413


Hugeburc (fl. 760-780), Benedictine nun and hagiographer, spent many years at the double monastery of Heidenheim in Germany; she was also known as Huneburc. She was the author of the lives of Willibald and of his brother Winnebald, composed between 778 and 780, and is the first known Englishwoman to have written a full-length literary work. Her identity as the author of the lives was discovered only in 1931 by Bernhard Bischoff; her name was concealed in cipher between the two lives in their oldest manuscript (Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, MS Clm 1086), written about 800. Hugeburc was related in some degree to the two brothers, 'a humble relative' she writes, and to their sister Walburg, but nothing else is known of her except the sketchy information given in her writings. 
Walburg became abbess of Heidenheim in succession to her brother Winnebald, who had founded it as a monastery in 752. When Walburg inherited Heidenheim, it had to become a double monastery and she brought a group of nuns with her to form the only such institution on the continent founded by the Anglo-Saxon mission. Hugeburc may already have been in Germany with Walburg; it seems likely that both women had been summoned to Germany by Boniface at an earlier date. Hugeburc remarks that she came to Heidenheim immediately after Winnebald's death in 761; she witnessed some of the post-mortem miracles which she records in his life. 
Willibald, visiting his sister's monastery, dictated parts of his so-called 'Hodoeporicon' (an account of his life and, most notably, his travels in the Holy Land in the 730s) to Hugeburc on Tuesday 23 June 778. Despite opposition within the monastery, but with the encouragement of Walburg, Hugeburc determined to record the known facts of Willibald's life, fearing lest the verbatim account she had recorded should be lost. Although professing herself inhibited by her sex from writing the lives of the venerable bishop and his brother, she was fired by the importance of the task she set herself. The 'Hodoeporicon''s English translator remarks that 'one can sense her intense curiosity to discover all about the places Willibald had visited' (Talbot, 152). Hugeburc's style is ambitious, with 'exuberantly crammed, complex periods, enhanced by rare words and phrases... bizarre cases and case-endings, tenses and verb-forms' (Dronke, 33), using Sedulius's prelude to his 'Carmen paschale' as a source for certain phrases, borrowing motifs from the life of St Boniface, and adapting a riddle of Aldhelm's. The report that Willibald gave of his travels and the accounts of the miracles of Winnebald are textually distinct, indicating that here Hugeburc was drawing on oral reports and eyewitness accounts. Her style has been compared to that of Hrotsvitha, the later German monastic writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 49414


Mannig (d. 1066), abbot of Evesham and craftsman, was elected abbot at the general synod held in London in 1044 and consecrated on 10 August. In 1058 incurable paralysis struck him, and he was forced to resign the abbacy and retire from active life; he died between 4 and 6 January 1066, reputedly on the same day as Edward the Confessor. The name Mannig is of Old Danish origin, and may point to Anglo-Scandinavian roots; he was also called Wulfmaer. 
The Evesham chronicle portrays Mannig as a holy and upright abbot, restoring estates and refusing to accept the profits of criminal justice, but praises him especially as 'artificiosissimus': he was 'richly imbued both with sacred learning and with many other arts, namely singing, writing and painting; he excelled in knowledge of the goldsmith's art, and was considered the greatest master among virtually all others in this land' ('Chronicon abbatiae de Evesham', 46, 86-8). At his own abbey he rebuilt one of the churches on a larger scale, made a great shrine of gold, silver, and precious stones for St Ecgwine as well as lesser shrines for St Odulf and St Credan, and wrote and illuminated a missal and a great psalter with his own hand. He is also said to have executed works of art at Canterbury, Coventry Abbey, and many other places. The story of a miraculous healing of a goldsmith named Godric, the foreman of 'many artificers' at Evesham, indicates that Mannig supervised a workshop of craftsmen in precious metals based at his abbey. Mannig's career, like that of Spearhafoc, abbot of Abingdon, shows that excellence and versatility in manual skills were esteemed in even the highest-ranking late Anglo-Saxon churchmen. 


@@@@@


doc= 49415


Rodulf (d. 1052), missionary bishop and abbot of Abingdon, came from uncertain origins to proselytize in Scandinavia. He probably began his overseas career in the entourage of Olaf Haraldsson, king of Norway ('r'. 1014-30). He had no specific see, as there were as yet no territorial dioceses in Norway, and he probably combined a life at court with preaching tours, perhaps in Sweden as well as the Norwegian lands. After Olaf's death, Rodulf appears to have transferred to Iceland, as a bishop of that name spent nineteen years there furthering the process of conversion. In 1051, apparently at an advanced age, Rodulf secured the abbacy of Abingdon from Edward the Confessor, a position which he held until his death. According to Adam of Bremen's 'history of the archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen', written in the 1070s, King Olaf's bishop Rodulf, like many of the churchmen in the northern mission field, was from England ('Gesta', 2.57). On his appointment to Abingdon, the Scandinavian missionary was described in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' as a kinsman of King Edward. Later Icelandic tradition, however, identified Rodulf as a native of Rouen. Unless two different men are involved, Rodulf, therefore, may have been not an English relative of the king but related through Edward's Norman mother, Queen Emma; his association with King Olaf consequently may belong not to Olaf's English connection, but to an alliance between the aspiring Norwegian king and the family of Richard II, duke of Normandy (996-1026). Rodulf died in 1052. 


@@@@@


doc= 49416


Spearhafoc (fl. 1047-1051), abbot of Abingdon and craftsman, is first recorded as a monk of Bury St Edmunds. His name, meaning 'sparrowhawk', also occurs in 'Domesday Book' in Suffolk and Nottinghamshire and may represent Anglo-Scandinavian usage. It was almost certainly a byname, even though no other name is recorded for him; perhaps it refers to the craftsman's sharp eyes. 
About 1047 Edward the Confessor made Spearhafoc abbot of Abingdon. The Abingdon chronicle implies that he bribed the worldly Bishop Stigand to further his cause with the king; at all events Edward appointed him to the bishopric of London in 1051. He was, however, disapproved of by Robert of Jumieges, Edward's new archbishop of Canterbury, who had just returned from Rome with his pallium. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' E text recounts that Spearhafoc met Robert 'with the king's writ and seal to the effect that he was to be consecrated bishop of London by the archbishop. But the archbishop refused and said that the pope had forbidden it him. Then the abbot went to the archbishop again about it and asked for ordination as bishop, and the archbishop refused him resolutely and said that the pope had forbidden it him. Then the abbot went back to London and occupied the bishopric that the king had given him; he did this with the king's full permission all that summer and autumn. ('ASC', s.a. 1048, 'recte' 1051, text E)' In the autumn of 1051, immediately after he had banished the rebellious Godwine family, Edward expelled Spearhafoc from the bishopric; Spearhafoc left the country, never to be seen again. 
As abbot and bishop Spearhafoc epitomizes the faults of the late Anglo-Saxon church, but as craftsman he is of much interest. Goscelin of St Bertin calls him 'an exceptional artist outstanding in painting, gold-engraving and goldsmithing', and describes events when Spearhafoc was working at Canterbury at Abbot AElfstan's request (that is, before 1046): as a thank-offering for the miraculous recovery of a precious ring belonging to Queen Eadgyth, he made images 'of enormous size and beauty' of Bishop Liudhard and Queen Bertha (Goscelin, col. 46). It was remembered at Abingdon that he was 'a marvellous worker in the fashioning of gold and silver', and that in 1051 he absconded with a great store of gold and gems which the king had given him to make an 'imperial crown' ('Chronicon monasterii de Abingdon', 1.462-3). It may be that Spearhafoc, like Mannig, abbot of Evesham, supervised a goldsmithing workshop based in his abbey: Abingdon tenants in Edward the Confessor's time included Leofwine 'aurifaber' or 'goldsmith' ('Domesday Book', 1.58'v'). The careers of Spearhafoc and Mannig show that manual skills were esteemed in even the highest-ranking late Anglo-Saxon churchmen, and indeed were a means to advancement: in Spearhafoc's case there is no record of any other qualities that might have commended him to the king. 


@@@@@


doc= 49417


Wulfhild (d. after 996), abbess of Barking and Horton, was the daughter of a nobleman called Wulfhelm. As a girl she was sent to the nunnery of Wilton to be educated and while there attracted the interest of King Edgar (943/4-975). At this time she does not seem to have taken vows as a nun, but had made a personal commitment so that she was not inclined to respond positively to the king's proposals. When her aunt Wenflaed arranged a meeting for them on her estate at Wherwell (Hampshire) Wulfhild feigned illness so that she could retire from the feast and eventually made her escape through a drainage channel. Cornered by the king in the cloisters of Wilton, she fled to the church for sanctuary leaving the king clutching the sleeve of her gown. Finally discouraged, Edgar proposed a union with her cousin Wulfthryth instead. Wulfhild was compensated for her ordeal by being made abbess of the nunneries of Barking (Essex) and Horton (Dorset). Her eleventh-century biographer Goscelin drew parallels between her sufferings and those of virgin martyrs like Thecla and Agatha. He emphasized her renunciation of marriage and earthly pomp as one of the justifications of her subsequent sainthood, though he also added instances of virtues such as humility and charity. After an unspecified number of years as abbess of Barking, Wulfhild was expelled from there through the machinations of AElfthryth, the third wife of King Edgar, though the exact circumstances are not explained. Wulfhild retained her position as abbess of Horton and appears as such in the list of distinguished women in the 'Liber vitae' of New Minster, Winchester. At Barking she was regarded as the legitimate abbess, and after twenty years she was allowed to return, reputedly after St AEthelburh, the first abbess of Barking, appeared to rebuke AElfthryth for her actions. Wulfhild continued as abbess of Barking for another seven years until she died, as she predicted, on 9 September, the eve of the commemoration of the translation of St AEthelwold. The exact year is not known, but it must have been after 996, when the translation of AEthelwold occurred. Wulfhild died in London, where she had gone for safety because of viking attacks, but her body was taken back to Barking for burial in the church. 
Miracles attributed to Wulfhild began to be performed at both Barking and Horton; in one, which emphasized her dual control, a blind and paralysed woman was given back her sight at Horton, but had to crawl to Barking to regain the use of her legs. The translation of Wulfhild's body and official recognition of her saintly status was made thirty years after her death by her successor Leofflaed. One of the nuns, Wulfrunna (Judith), who had been educated by Wulfhild and played a major part in organizing her translation and publicizing the cult, was Goscelin's main informant. Although at Barking Wulfhild was ranked alongside its seventh-century saints, AEthelburh and Hildelith, her cult never seems to have achieved a wider popularity. 


@@@@@


doc= 49418


Douglas family (per. c.1170-c.1300), barons, was of Flemish origin, possibly part of the marked Flemish settlement in upper Clydesdale, found in the reign of Malcolm IV (1153-1165). But William Douglas, the earliest known member of the Douglas family, is attested only in the last quarter of the twelfth century. None the less, he was brother (less probably brother-in-law) of a Freskin of Kerdale, a Moray landowner, and both must have been related to the Freskin who was given land in Moray by David I, confirmed to his son William by Malcolm IV. The recurrence of these names and also of Hugh and Archibald in both families attests to their common ancestry, so that when a branch of the Moray family inherited the lordship of Bothwell in Lanarkshire in the 1240s, their near neighbours, the lords of Douglas, were distant kin. The senior line in Moray presumably procured the nomination of 


@@@@@


doc= 49419


Eadburh (921x4-951x3), Benedictine nun, was a daughter of King Edward the Elder and his third wife, Eadgifu. She entered Nunnaminster, Winchester, which had been founded by her grandmother Queen Ealhswith, at the age of three and remained there until her death in her thirtieth year on 15 June. The main source for her is the Latin life, written by Osbert of Clare in the early twelfth century though probably drawing upon earlier written materials which were utilized by other post-conquest writers such as William of Malmesbury and the anonymous author of a Middle English life. Her activities were concentrated within the confines of Nunnaminster and her claims to sanctity rested on her charity and humility, manifested in such incidents as her rising in the night secretly to clean the shoes of the other sisters or to pray at the nearby church of St Peter, Colebrook Street. Her presence was important for increasing the wealth and endowments of Nunnaminster, and an estate at All Cannings, Wiltshire, which is said to have been obtained from King Edward by her intercession (though her probable dates suggest she would have been too young to do this in person), was one of Nunnaminster's major possessions in 'Domesday Book'. However, an estate at Droxford, Hampshire, granted to her by her half-brother King AEthelstan did not remain in the nunnery's possession; the charter recording the grant is the only record of her outside hagiographical tradition. 
Eadburh's recognition as a saint allowed her patronage on behalf of Nunnaminster to continue after her death. The translation of her body on 18 July from the nunnery cemetery to burial by the high altar in the church cannot be dated precisely, but is likely to have occurred in the 960s. Probably in the following decade, her remains were transferred to a silver shrine, with Bishop AEthelwold of Winchester (died 984) officiating. The occasion of the second translation was probably the rebuilding of the original timber church of Nunnaminster in stone, as revealed by modern excavations. Her cult seems to have enjoyed considerable popularity in Winchester in the later Saxon period and there seems to have been some rivalry with that of Swithun. Pershore Abbey subsequently claimed that it had purchased some of Eadburh's relics from an abbess of Nunnaminster in the late tenth or the eleventh century. But it is possible that the St Eadburh culted at Pershore and at Bicester Priory, which also claimed to possess relics of her, may in fact have been an earlier Mercian saint, or saints, of the same name, who by the twelfth century had become confused with the better-known Eadburh of Nunnaminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 49420


Ealhmund (d. 800), prince and martyr, is the subject of a 'passio' (account of martyrdom) preserved only in the fourteenth-century manuscript in the Gotha Forschungsbibliothek (MS I.81). This text, which is utterly unreliable, presents him as the son of Aldfrith, king of Northumbria, and himself king after the murder of King Osred in 716. After emphasizing his religious inclinations, it describes how he journeyed to what is now Wiltshire to protect some lands he had there against enemies, how the men of Wiltshire were attacked by AEthelmund, ealdorman of Mercia, and how Ealhmund, having failed to mediate a peace, fought on the side of the Wiltshire men and lost his life in assisting them to victory at Kempsford. This account is historically valueless and seems to be based on the 800 entry in the chronicle of John of Worcester, which describes the battle of Kempsford (as in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'), which was indeed fought between the men of Wiltshire and Ealdorman AEthelmund, but which did not involve Ealhmund. The latter's death in 800, however, is recorded at the end of the same annal in John's chronicle, and it appears that the author of the 'passio' has conflated this with the preceding account in order to provide Ealhmund with a spurious history involving the battle, which he has in addition misdated to 822. 
The true history of Ealhmund is given, insofar as it can be known, in what is almost certainly a reliable annal for 800 in the 'Historia regum', which states: 'Some say that Ealhmund, son of King Alchred, was apprehended by King Eardwulf's guards and on his orders was killed along with those who had fled with him' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.63). Ealhmund was thus the son of a former king, Alhred (fl. 765-774) ['see under 'Oswulf], and the brother of another, Osred II, expelled in 790. He would no doubt have been a threat to Eardwulf, who was of another line, and this adequately explains his killing. According to what is probably the ninth-century section of an early eleventh-century list of saints' resting places, 'Secgan be pam godes sanctum pe on Engla lande aerost reston' ('Concerning God's saints who formerly rested in England'), however, his remains were enshrined at Derby. The 'passio' also mentions the translation of his remains from the place of his death (Lilleshall in Shropshire) to Derby, and this information about the localities of his subsequent cult is likely to be reliable. The principal church of Derby was dedicated to him and preserves an impressive late Saxon coffin lid which may possibly come from his shrine. Veneration of him as a royal saint who suffered a violent death is paralleled by that of other saints of this date such as Cynehelm and Wigstan, but it is not easy to explain why he should have been venerated in Mercia. The explanation may lie in the war between Eardwulf and King Cenwulf of Mercia in 801, fought because Eardwulf accused Cenwulf of sheltering his enemies, among whom Ealhmund was no doubt numbered. Tension between the kings continued, for Pope Leo III ('r'. 795-816) blamed Cenwulf for the expulsion of Eardwulf from his kingdom in 807-8. In these circumstances, the Mercian kings may have had an incentive to foster Ealhmund's cult at what was probably the royal church of Derby, as a means of advertising and commemorating Eardwulf's guilt in Ealhmund's murder. 


@@@@@


doc= 49421


Winnebald (c.702-761), abbot of Heidenheim, was the brother of Willibald and Walburg, of a noble Wessex family. He did not follow his elder brother into the monastery of Waltham, but he gladly accompanied Willibald and their father on pilgrimage to Rome in the years 720-21; their father died on the way to Rome, at Lucca, and was buried there. The brothers led a life of monastic asceticism when they finally arrived in Rome. Both were stricken by plague and, perhaps because of lingering illness, Winnebald remained in Rome when Willibald left for the Holy Land in 723. Between 723 and 727 Winnebald acquired his training in theology, living in an ascetic community. He returned once to England, in 727, to encourage yet another brother to the service of God. This unnamed brother returned with Winnebald to Rome, where they must have formed part of the considerable Anglo-Saxon community in that city. 
Boniface summoned Winnebald to Germany in 739; he spent a brief period in the monastery of Ordrop (Ohrdruf), and was ordained in the same year. Until 744 he undertook missionary work in Thuringia, overseeing seven churches there. It was here that, after eighteen years' separation, he was reunited with his brother Willibald, who had also been called by Boniface. From 744 to 747 Winnebald struggled against apostasy and idolatry in the remote and dangerous Nordgau area of Bavaria; in 747 Boniface called him to Mainz, where he was an effective preacher. Here Winnebald became noted for his abstention from wine and refusal to participate in social entertainments. Fearing for his vocation among the looser standards of the city, 'vini opulentia monachicalem frangeret vitae disciplinam' ('lest the abundance of the wine destroy his discipline'; Bauch, 152), Winnebald became anxious to return to a monastic life. Willibald arranged for him to set up the monastery of Heidenheim in 751, clearing the land and building first huts, then more substantial buildings. The battle against apostasy, witchcraft, sexual immorality, superstition, and idolatry was an exhausting one. Winnebald's health had always been poor -- he seems to have suffered from some form of arthritis -- and his last years were overshadowed by illness. He hoped to retire to the monastery of Monte Cassino, but his illness made it impossible. He died on 18 December 761, in the presence of Willibald, and was buried the following day. A number of miracles followed, as attested by Hugeburc of Heidenheim, who wrote a life of Winnebald between 778 and 781. Walburg, Winnebald's sister, inherited the monastery. Willibald arranged for his brother's translation in 777, proclaiming his sanctity. The three siblings were reunited when Winnebald's relics were transferred, along with those of Walburg, to Eichstatt, Willibald's resting place, probably in 879. 


@@@@@


doc= 49422


Wulfsige (d. 1002), abbot of Westminster and bishop of Sherborne, is the subject of a life written by Goscelin of St Bertin in the late eleventh century. A short description of his life was also provided by William of Malmesbury in his 'Gesta pontificum', but both Goscelin and William were writing too long after his death for their information to be necessarily reliable, and William's version in particular is open to question. Even less reliable is the account of Wulfsige's life by the fifteenth-century historian of Westminster Abbey, John Flete, who conflates Goscelin's account with details drawn from forged charters for Westminster. 
According to Goscelin, Wulfsige was born in London and his parents gave him while he was still a child to the community of Westminster. This is plausible: Wulfsige had strong connections with London (one of his posthumous miracles concerned a London woman), he certainly became a member of the community at Westminster and, while Goscelin possibly might, as a Benedictine, have invented the idea of his oblation, none the less entry in childhood into non-monastic communities was just as normal as it was into monastic ones. The date of Wulfsige's birth is unknown. If William of Malmesbury's statement that he became abbot of Westminster while Dunstan was bishop of London (958-61) were to be accepted, it would have to be assumed that he was born no later than 'c'.925. However, it is likely that on this point William misinterpreted Goscelin, who said that Wulfsige (who had previously risen through the clerical grades in due order and been ordained priest when of 'mature age') was made abbot of Westminster by King Edgar ('r'. 959-75, but king of Mercia from 957), who, says Goscelin, was as ever following the advice of Dunstan in all appointments of bishops and abbots. William might have wished to suggest that Wulfsige had been promoted by his diocesan rather than by a secular ruler. On the basis of Goscelin's account the date of birth might lie anywhere between the 920s and the 940s. 
John Flete states that Wulfsige was put in charge of Westminster by Dunstan in 958, but that the latter retained the abbacy until 980, and that it was only at this point that Wulfsige was made abbot. Flete's dates cannot be trusted, but even so it is likely that Dunstan was abbot of Westminster during most if not all of Edgar's reign, and it is noteworthy that, apart from the narrative sources and a spurious charter of Edgar of 966 ('AS chart.', S 741), the earliest occurrences of Wulfsige as abbot of Westminster are in charters of 988 ('AS chart.', S 868) and 989/990 ('AS chart.', S 877). Goscelin attributes to Wulfsige the conversion of Westminster into a Benedictine community, but a charter of Edgar for Westminster surviving in a contemporary though mutilated form ('AS chart.', S 670) shows that Dunstan was responsible. 
Goscelin states that Wulfsige retained the abbacy of Westminster for a while after his elevation to the see of Sherborne in, it has been argued, the summer of 993. He ceased to be abbot in or before 997 when his successor first appears. As bishop of Sherborne, Wulfsige was anxious to spread the ideals of the tenth-century Benedictine reform more widely. Goscelin tells that he converted his cathedral community to monastic observance, probably by 998, the date of the Sherborne foundation charter, issued by AEthelred ('AS chart.', S 895). This charter has some unusual features but is probably genuine; it imposes the Benedictine rule, and lists the estates which were to be specifically attached to the monks. A charter purporting to have been issued by Wulfsige giving the monks permission to inherit the possessions of the clerks they had displaced is, however, a post-conquest forgery ('AS chart.', S 1382). Wulfsige's zeal for Benedictine monasticism also found expression in his instructions to the clergy of his diocese, for whom he commissioned a letter on pastoral care from AElfric of Eynsham. Although addressed to secular clergy, the letter advocates a model of life strongly influenced by the aims of the Benedictine reform, for AElfric tells clerics to be chaste and to live according to a rule (perhaps the enlarged rule of Chrodegang, though this is not specified), and holds out to them monastic obedience to the rule of Benedict as an ideal. Furthermore, he provides detailed instructions about liturgical practice, perhaps the aspect of ecclesiastical life in which tenth-century reformers took most interest. The priests in the diocese of Sherborne were each expected to possess a psalter, a book of epistles, an evangeliary, a missal, antiphonals, a manual, a computus, a passional, a penitential, and a reading-book. AElfric gave detailed instructions for prayer, at least some, if not all, of which may have come from Wulfsige, since there is reference to bishops making decisions at a synod. 
A tangible sign of Wulfsige's influence in liturgical matters is the Sherborne pontifical (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 943), written at Canterbury in the late tenth century and procured for Sherborne, probably by Wulfsige, in or by the early eleventh century. Into this manuscript were entered a letter by an anonymous archbishop to Wulfsige, exhorting him to be a good diocesan, and two letters by Wulfsige concerning penance to be performed by those who had killed close relatives. On 20 June 1001 Wulfsige presided over the translation of Edward the Martyr at Shaftesbury. He died on 8 January, his feast day, almost certainly in 1002, since his successor, AEthelric, first appears in that year. He was buried in a 'porticus' in his cathedral at Sherborne and was translated twelve years later to a position at the right side of the altar. 


@@@@@


doc= 49423


Wulfthryth (d. c.1000), abbess of Wilton, was queen of England, the second consort of King Edgar, for a brief period before her appointment as abbess. Details of Wulfthryth's parentage are not known, but she must have been of noble birth like her cousin Wulfhild, with whom she was educated at Wilton. Edgar (943/4-975) appears to have wanted to marry into their family and Wulfhild was his first choice as a bride; but when she persuaded him she would rather enter a nunnery, he married Wulfthryth. Although there has been some debate about whether Wulfthryth was a full wife or just a concubine, the late eleventh-century hagiographer Goscelin states that she and Edgar were 'bound by indissoluble vows' (Wilmart, 31) and the legitimacy of their daughter Edith is implied by the recognition of her as the 'royal sister' of Edgar's sons Edward and AEthelred. 
Wulfthryth's entrance into a religious house would have provided a pretext for the marriage to be dissolved and must have occurred by 964 when Edgar married AElfthryth. In addition to the position as abbess of Wilton, it is likely that Wulfthryth received a substantial settlement on her separation from Edgar and that this is represented by the six estates in Wiltshire and the Isle of Wight for which the nuns of Wilton were given confirmation of title by the king in 965 and which are described as having been granted formerly to Wulfthryth. By making the estates corporate rather than personal property, Wulfthryth was hoping to ensure that they would be retained by Wilton after her death; other grants of land from Edgar are also recorded. 
Wulfthryth was also able to use her influence at the royal court to protect the interests of Wilton in other ways. According to Goscelin, who in his life of Edith provides some of the main biographical information about Wulfthryth, when Wilton's rights of sanctuary were threatened by royal servants who wanted to remove a thief from the church, she was able to intervene personally with King AEthelred (her stepson) to prevent the violation. On another occasion she was able to secure the release of two Wilton priests who had been imprisoned by the reeve of Wilton. Wulfthryth was also remembered as an 'edificatrix' and is said to have enclosed the nunnery with a stone wall, which would have been in keeping with the aims of the Benedictine reform movement to achieve a stricter separation of monastic and secular life. She used her wealth to build up the relic collection of Wilton. A nail from the crucifixion of Christ was purchased from St Paulinus of Trier with the help of her chaplain Benno, who came from that foundation. She also bought the relics of the Breton saint Iwi which are included in Wilton's entry in the late Saxon list of saints' resting places. But the most important cult which Wulfthryth helped to promote was that of her own daughter Edith, who was translated between 997 and 1000. 
The translation is the last datable point in Wulfthryth's life; she died at Wilton on 21 September, but the year is not known. She was buried before the main altar of the abbey church of St Mary at Wilton, where she was evidently regarded as a saint. Goscelin calls her the 'hidden treasure and light' of the community and his account reflects the affection and respect with which she seems to have been remembered at Wilton (Wilmart, 278). Unlike Edith, Wulfthryth is recorded as performing miracles during her lifetime and these continued to occur after her death; however, her cult never seems to have become more widely established. 


@@@@@


doc= 49425


AElberht (d. 779/80), archbishop of York, was the teacher of Alcuin, whose 'Versus de patribus regibus et sanctis Euboricensis ecclesiae' ('Verses on the Fathers, Kings and Saints of the Church of York') constitute the principal source for his career (Alcuin, ll. 1397-1596). Some details are recorded in the early northern annals preserved in the 'Historia regum' and the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle': the dates of his archiepiscopate; that he received the pallium from Pope Hadrian in 773; that he died at 'Ceastre' (possibly Chester-le-Street, co. Durham); and that Eanbald (I) had been elected as his successor before his death -- Alcuin gives information placing the date as July 778, although 777 is also possible, and explains that Eanbald functioned as his 'associate bishop' (Alcuin, ll. 1565, 1518). He may also have corresponded with Lul, archbishop of Mainz, if (as seems probable) he is the latter's English correspondent who appears in two letters under the name Coena, presumed to be a nickname. This person is described as 'adorned with the insignia of the highest pontificate' so was evidently an archbishop, and, since Lul was asking for works of Bede, almost certainly an archbishop of York (Tangl, nos. 124-5). 
Alcuin provides further details of AElberht's career. A relative and boon companion of Archbishop Ecgberht, himself the brother of King Eadberht of the Northumbrians, he was placed in a monastery in childhood by his family (Alcuin, ll. 1415-29); he was apparently educated at the school of York Minster. Alcuin's account of his work as archbishop is panegyrical in style, a trait given further emphasis because Alcuin seems to have regarded AElberht as a model for later archbishops; but it is clear, nevertheless, that he had a major impact on the development of the church of York in three respects. First, he was responsible for assembling the library, travelling abroad, including to Rome, to collect books for it. By Alcuin's account, it contained a wide range of Latin writers and also Greek writers in Latin translation, and it was certainly of major importance, as is apparent in Alcuin's own training, and in demands for its books made by the continental missionaries Boniface and Lul. Second, AElberht was a teacher of the so-called seven liberal arts, not only the 'trivium' (grammar, rhetoric, dialectic), but also the 'quadrivium' (music, astronomy, geometry, and arithmetic), which led to studies of Holy Scripture; and he also taught compute (the study of fixing the festivals of the church) and natural history. Third, AElberht was a patron of art and architecture at York. According to Alcuin, he endowed the church of St Peter (York Minster) with two altars. The first was dedicated to St Paul and stood on the site of the baptism of the first Christian king of Northumbria, Eadwine. That it was very costly is indicated by Alcuin's describing it as 'covered with gold, silver, and jewels', lit by a chandelier which 'held three great vessels, each of nine tiers', and having on it a cross covered 'entirely with precious metals', the whole weighing 'many pounds in pure silver'. The second altar, dedicated to the martyrs and Holy Cross, was apparently just as rich, and had on it a cruet 'made in pure gold and of great weight' (Alcuin, ll. 1490-1520). AElberht's archiepiscopate also saw the construction and consecration in York of the church of the Beneficent Wisdom (Alma Sophia), which was built under his orders by Eanbald (the future Archbishop Eanbald (I)) and Alcuin. This church is now lost, but, to judge from Alcuin's description, it was an imposing structure comprising many chapels and thirty altars. The dedication is an unusual one and may suggest the influence on AElberht of churches of the Holy Wisdom at Constantinople or Benevento. He was clearly an ambitious prelate, and the choice for his consecration in 767 of 24 April, the feast day of that most ambitious of York ecclesiastics, Wilfrid, may have been a deliberate one in the context of AElberht's aspirations. A reference in one of Alcuin's letters to how the predecessors of Archbishop Eanbald (II) faced hostility from kings and princes (Dummler, no. 232) probably encompasses AElberht. If so, the reasons for this hostility are not known, although Alcuin's observation elsewhere that he 'in justice... did not spare evil kings and nobles' (Alcuin, l. 1479) suggests that it may have been condemnation of royal morals which led to the archbishop's difficulties. His archiepiscopate coincided in any case with a turbulent period of Northumbrian history, encompassing the expulsion of King Alhred in 774 and possibly also that of King AEthelred in 779. AElberht died on 8 November, in either 779 or 780. 


@@@@@


doc= 49426


AEthelric (d. 1034), bishop of Dorchester, was a former monk of Ramsey and a generous patron of his monastery. His election to the see of Dorchester in 1016 perhaps owed something to his family connections, although these are unknown. Given the extent and geographical location of this large see, it was perhaps believed that a local man would prove to be the most effective bishop. During his early years at the monastic school in Ramsey, AEthelric and three more 'noble youths' once climbed up among the bells, and accidentally cracked one. Abbot Eadnoth (993-1006) refused to expel them, arguing that in later years they might be in a position to assist the monastery. 
Bishop AEthelric was concerned that good disciplinary standards should be maintained at Ramsey. When the unpopular Abbot Withman complained of the monks' lack of discipline, AEthelric paid a visit in disguise, and saw for himself that the monks were well-behaved. He censured the abbot for making false allegations about them, but at the same time ordered the monks to be obedient towards Withman. On another occasion, abbot and monks alike were proved to be negligent, but when they humbly submitted to AEthelric's criticisms he granted them some land. Having decided to acquire for Ramsey the relics of St Felix, which were located in the royal manor of Soham, AEthelric obtained the permission of King Cnut for the transfer, and prompted AEthelstan, the abbot of Ramsey, to send a party to Soham by boat, to seize the body. The Ramsey chronicle tells of a miraculous mist which prevented the hostile intervention of a group of monks from Ely. 
AEthelric's episcopate coincided with a wave of Danish settlement in the wake of Cnut's invasion. He brought a court case against the powerful Danish magnate Thorkell the Tall, then regent in England during Cnut's absence, accusing his wife of the murder of her stepson. Only after Cnut's return to England was Thorkell brought to court, where his attempt to clear his wife by swearing on his beard failed when the beard came away in his hand. The stepson's grave was discovered and the wife convicted of murder. Thorkell was judged guilty of perjury, and of flouting the bishop's jurisdiction, and in compensation gave land to AEthelric, who granted it to Ramsey. Rather more apocryphal is a story of AEthelric winning an estate in a bet with a drunken Dane. AEthelric died in 1034 and was buried at Ramsey Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 49427


Denewulf (d. 908), bishop of Winchester, has a bad reputation which does not seem to have been fully deserved. In the period of the tenth-century reformation he was castigated for allowing estates belonging to his cathedral (Old Minster) in Winchester to fall into lay hands. His denigration in Winchester tradition is epitomized by the legend, reported by William of Malmesbury, that he was in origin a swineherd whom Alfred had met in a wood while on the run from the vikings. It is true that a number of Winchester estates were either leased to laymen or lost during Denewulf's episcopate (878/9-908), but it would appear that Denewulf had little choice in the matter and that considerable pressure was placed on him by Alfred and his son and successor, Edward the Elder, to surrender estates to them. When King Edward compelled the community at Old Minster to lease him an estate at Beddington (Surrey), the bishop felt obliged to request that 'you desire no more land of that foundation for it seems to them an unwelcome demand; so that God need blame neither you nor us for the diminishing in our days' ('AS chart.', S 1444). 
Even when Winchester had a seemingly inviolate claim to an estate, the kings could drive a hard bargain. Before Denewulf's episcopacy an estate belonging to Old Minster at Alresford had been leased to the family of a nobleman called Alfred. In the reign of King Alfred this nobleman was found guilty of adultery and his possessions were forfeit to the crown. In spite of Old Minster's prior claim, Denewulf was able to recover Alresford from the king only by payment of the very substantial sum of 120 mancuses of gold. The bishop was also unsuccessful in obtaining lands left to Old Minster in the will of King AEthelwulf, in spite of surrendering another large estate to Alfred to secure the reversion. King Edward subsequently used one of the reversionary estates to endow his foundation of New Minster in Winchester and Old Minster had to take a rather smaller estate instead. Land in Winchester also had to be sold to the king for the new foundation, which was built immediately adjacent to the Old Minster church. However, Denewulf was not always so unfortunate in his dealings with the royal house. An exchange with the king of the episcopal estate at Portchester (probably desired by the king for its defensive potential) for the former monastic site at Bishop's Waltham was a transfer of estates of very similar size and Denewulf received the gift of an estate at Ruishton (Somerset) from King Alfred with no apparent strings attached. 
Of Denewulf's other activities as bishop little is known. He was presumably meant to be included in Alfred's criticisms of his bishops in the preface of his translation to Pope Gregory's 'Pastoral Care', and the absence of any specific benefaction to Denewulf or Winchester in Alfred's will could be seen as another indication that Denewulf was not closely involved with Alfred's reforming policies. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records his death in 908; he presumably died and was buried at Winchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 49428


Frithestan (d. 932/3), bishop of Winchester, held the see from 909 to 931. Soon after his appointment, the two West Saxon bishoprics were divided into five and Winchester lost control of what is now Wiltshire and Berkshire to the new Ramsbury diocese. Frithestan is generally presumed to be the man of that name who witnessed as deacon two charters of 904 in which King Edward granted land to Old Minster, Winchester. An eighth-century manuscript of Sedulius's 'Carmen Paschale', which was bound with the Parker manuscript containing a version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', has the inscription 'Frithestan 'diacon'' on its first page and is generally assumed to have once belonged to the bishop; William of Malmesbury comments that a number of books once owned by Frithestan were known in his day. Also surviving are a stole and maniples which, according to their inscription, were commissioned by Queen AElfflaed, wife of Edward the Elder, for the bishop; these were subsequently presented by King AEthelstan to the shrine of St Cuthbert and are now preserved in Durham. The removal of the vestments from Winchester may have been linked with an apparent breach between Frithestan and Edward the Elder's eldest son and successor, AEthelstan. Frithestan is notable for his absence from the witness lists of AEthelstan's charters from the period of his coronation in 925 until 928, even on occasions when all other bishops were present. The reasons may be found in the succession disputes which followed the death of King Edward. The councillors of Wessex had chosen AElfweard (Edward's eldest son with his second wife, AElfflaed) as king and it was only AElfweard's death a few weeks after his father that had enabled AEthelstan to become king in both Wessex and Mercia. William of Malmesbury records that Winchester was a centre of resistance to AEthelstan and support may have continued there for Edward and AElfflaed's second son, Eadwine, who makes a rare appearance in a New Minster charter. Whatever Frithestan's involvement may have been, he reappears in the witness lists of royal charters in 928, which means that he was attending meetings of the king's councillors from that time, and in 929 he was recorded as a member of the confraternity of the monastery of St Gallen with other members of AEthelstan's court. 
At Winchester Frithestan was remembered for establishing good relations and common regulations between the Old and the New minsters. These included the provision that when a priest of either Old or New Minster died, members of both foundations would take part in the funeral observances. Frithestan's arrangements were continued by Bishop AEthelwold (who was born in Winchester during Frithestan's episcopate) though adapted for monastic use. It was probably in Frithestan's time that a series of lateral chapels were added to the west end of the Old Minster. Frithestan resigned his position as bishop in 931 and died probably the following year, possibly 933, having continued to live in Winchester according to one tradition. He was buried in the Old Minster. There was an attempt to develop a cult of Frithestan in Winchester; he is included among the Old Minster saints in one recension of the list of saints' resting places and in some later Winchester martyrologies. However, the cult does not seem to have become well-established and William of Malmesbury records that in his day the whereabouts of Frithestan's tomb was not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 49429


Leuthere (d. 675/6), bishop of Winchester, was a Frank who was the nephew of Agilbert (d. 679x90), sometime bishop of the West Saxons and later bishop of Paris. Leuthere originated from the Soissons area in Francia, and since his name is a form of Clothar, a name borne by three Frankish kings, it is likely that he was related to the Merovingian royal family. His name is also basically the same as that of the contemporary king of Kent, Hlothhere (died 685), which suggests that Leuthere had family links with the Kentish royal house. Here one is reminded that his uncle, Agilbert, likewise had the Frankish form of a Kentish royal name, AEthelberht. 
According to Bede ('Hist. eccl.' 3.7), in 670 Cenwalh, king of the West Saxons, wished to recall Agilbert to become once more a bishop in his kingdom, but Agilbert declined the offer because he was now bishop of Paris. In his stead he sent his nephew Leuthere, who was already a priest. Leuthere was consecrated bishop by Theodore of Canterbury in 670 and he held the see of Winchester from 670 to 675 or 676. As bishop he attended the Council of Hertford in 672. In 675 he appeared in a charter granting land at Malmesbury for the foundation of a monastery there. The beneficiary of this grant was Aldhelm, later bishop of Sherborne, whom Leuthere may have ordained priest. Leuthere's successor Haedde witnessed the Malmesbury charter as abbot, but later in the same year Haedde appears in another charter as bishop, alongside Leuthere. This may suggest that at least briefly Leuthere ruled Winchester jointly with his successor. In both charters the style of Leuthere's witness reveals use of a so-called Frankish 'humility formula', an observation which supports the argument that it was Frankish, rather than Italian, models which formed the basis of early charter writing in England. The second charter of 675 granted land at Bath for the foundation of a monastery. It is Leuthere's last appearance in the record and he died in that year or the next. 
Interestingly, Bertha, the abbess of the new double monastery at Bath, bore the same name as AEthelberht of Kent's Frankish queen, a name similar to that of Bertila who began her career at the double monastery of Jouarre with which Leuthere had strong family connections. The little that is known about Leuthere therefore strengthens the impression that there was a powerful Frankish influence upon the early development of the church in southern England, and that at the centre of that influence lay the family of Leuthere. 


@@@@@


doc= 49431


Cust, Maria Eleanor Vere (1862/3-1958), first woman fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, was the second daughter of Robert Needham Cust (1821-1909), orientalist, and his first wife, Maria Adelaide Hobart (died 1864), daughter of Henry Lewis Hobart, dean of Windsor. Miss Cust acted for many years as her father's secretary, materially aiding his studies, and also worked for many years as a medical missionary in India. Her father, an active fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, keenly advocated the admission of women as fellows. The society's desire for pre-eminence in sponsoring exploration sat ill with its inability to elect eminent women travellers to its numbers, and its decision to award medals to Lady Franklin and Mary Somerville served only to emphasize how untenable was its more general exclusion of women. After deciding in 1847 that it was 'not deemed expedient at present' (Mill, 57) to consider a suggestion that women be admitted as members, and in 1860 that women should not be admitted as honorary members, the council of the society agreed on 4 July 1892 to the election of women to the fellowship on the same footing as men. On 28 November 1892 fifteen 'well qualified ladies' (Mill, 107) were elected after the approval of a motion by Robert Cust that 'this meeting desires to associate itself with the gracious act of the Council in recognising the right of ladies to the fellowship of the Royal Geographical Society' ('GJ', 1893). The women were to be presented to the president in alphabetical order and, in the absence of Isabella Bird Bishop who was in Tibet, the ceremonial welcome was received by Miss Cust. Opponents ensured that the 1892 election was followed by a long period in which no women were elected and the issue was finally settled only in 1913, since when women have been elected on the same basis as men. Maria Cust's pride in her fellowship was shown by her including it on the title-page of her only published work, 'Lucem sequor' (1906), a collection of her own indifferent verse -- which shows the influence of her religion and the East -- and of her passable translations of Heine, von Eichendorff, Hugo, and others. Miss Cust died at The Hydro, Stansboroughs, Watford, Hertfordshire, on 2 January 1958 at the age of ninety-five, a few days after breaking her leg. Her obituarist wrote: 'knowledgeable and well travelled, she retained to the end of her life... friends of all ages who regarded her as a pioneer of women's activity in a sphere wider than the domestic one' ('GJ', 1958, 146). This is a kind interpretation and she is remembered now chiefly as a symbol of the recognition of women's fitness to engage in public life on the same terms as men. 


@@@@@


doc= 49432


Andrews, Robert (1703-1763), lawyer and property developer, was born in London, probably at Upper John Street, Golden Square, on 3 September 1703, the fifth but second surviving son of Richard Andrews (1664-1734), a scrivener, and his wife, Elizabeth (1664-1749), daughter of Hugh Pigot of Peploe, Shropshire. Richard Andrews was steward or agent of the Grosvenor family's estate in London, and Robert Pigot, his brother-in-law, was steward of the Grosvenors' estate in Cheshire. These connections served the young Andrews well. Little is known of his upbringing and education, but he probably received some training at the hands of Edward Partington, the Grosvenors' attorney in Chester, whom he was later to describe as a good friend. The ties between the two families were further cemented when, on 3 September 1726, his twenty-third birthday, Andrews married his cousin, Margaret Pigot (1703-1774), daughter of Robert Pigot, at Eccleston parish church, Cheshire. They had eleven children, six of whom died in infancy. 
However informal his training may have been, Andrews set up in business as an attorney at the age of eighteen, when, by his own account, 'howsoer uncommon it may appear I had four Clerks under me' (BL, Add. MS 32853, fol. 262). The timing had much to do with the speculative building developments then taking place on the Grosvenors' hundred-acre estate in Mayfair. He took care of most of the legal business spawned by the development, drawing up a large number of building agreements, leases, assignments, mortgages, and the like. After the death of the estate surveyor in 1730, when no successor was appointed he also took over his functions, and, especially after the death of his father in 1734, was virtually solely responsible for the management of the estate. He also acted as a conduit through which mortgage finance could be provided to the builders by small investors, and soon participated directly in the development. In April 1724, when he was still only twenty, he acquired a large parcel of land bordered by Park Lane under a building agreement, and over the next few years arranged for the building of some two dozen terraced houses. Later he took another ten plots on the estate, either singly or in partnership with other developers and builders, and had a hand in the building of over a hundred houses. No builder or developer played a greater role in making the Grosvenors' Mayfair estate a byword for high-quality Georgian housing. He also extended his speculative activities to the Berkeley estate around Berkeley Square, where he also took over the management of the estate, and to St James's Square, where he financed the building of two very substantial town houses. He sold off most of his speculative interests at a handsome profit but the remaining ground rents still provided an annual income of nearly $500 at the time of his death. 
At the same time as Andrews was pursuing these lucrative speculative building activities, he was assiduously building up his legal practice. He acted as the London attorney of the Grosvenor family, and soon attracted other clients including a number of aristocratic families such as the Berkeleys, Comptons, Irbys, and Sackvilles of Knole. He eventually gravitated to the circle of Frederick, prince of Wales, and was appointed to various posts in the administration of the duchy of Cornwall, firstly as remembrancer (in effect attorney) in 1734, and subsequently clerk of the prince's council in 1744, and auditor five years later. Among his duties he looked after the prince's electoral interests in several Cornish boroughs, and although on the prince's sudden death in 1751 Andrews lost his position as auditor, he continued to be heavily embroiled in the intrigues that characterized elections to the unreformed House of Commons. As agent firstly of the prince and later of Thomas Pitt of Boconnoc, one of the more unsavoury borough-mongers of the age, he managed elections in a number of constituencies, including the notorious rotten borough of Old Sarum in Wiltshire, where half a dozen burgage holders (of whom Andrews became one) elected two members of parliament. 
After the prince's death Andrews sought the protection of Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle (1693-1768), who presided at the centre of a vast web of political influence on behalf of the government, by offering to do his best to ensure that government nominees were returned in the seats he controlled. In 1752 a grateful Newcastle appointed him to the lucrative sinecure of comptroller of the cash in the excise. In 1755, when a vacancy occurred at Old Sarum, Andrews proposed himself for election to parliament, but Newcastle decided to use the opportunity to repay a political debt, and Andrews had to be content with a rise in his salary at the excise and other pecuniary embellishments. 
Robert and Margaret Andrews lived initially in Great Russell Street, and, from 1730, in Grosvenor Street, Mayfair. About 1755 Andrews also acquired the lease of East Acton Manor House, a large, detached mansion standing in its own grounds, a short distance to the west of London, and spent an increasing amount of time there. A chronic sufferer from gout, he was always complaining about his health, and, after a last desperate but unavailing journey to take the waters at Bath, he died at East Acton Manor House on 27 August 1763, a few days short of his sixtieth birthday. He was buried on 2 September at Hanwell parish church, Middlesex. His legal practice was taken over by his son-in-law, Thomas Walley Partington, the son of Edward Partington, and has continued under various names and styles and latterly as Boodle Hatfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 49433


Betts, Edward Ladd (1815-1872), railway contractor, was born on 5 June 1815 at Buckland, near Dover, the eldest son of William Betts (died 1867), contractor's agent, of Sandown, Kent, and his first wife, Elizabeth Hayward, daughter of Edward Ladd of Buckland. Betts was apprenticed to Richardson, a builder, at Lincoln, but showed a bent for engineering, for which the emerging 'railway age' was to offer vast scope. 
Under the superintendence of his father, as agent for the great contractor Hugh McIntosh, Betts worked on building the Black Rock lighthouse at Beaumaris, north Wales. Then, when he was only eighteen, he superintended building for McIntosh the Dutton Viaduct on the Grand Junction Railway (Liverpool-Birmingham) under the engineer George Stephenson, a $54,000 undertaking that introduced him to the world of railway construction in which thereafter he was continuously engaged. At first he was working in conjunction with his father and brother as agent for McIntosh, after whose death in 1840 William Betts & Sons operated for about four years, securing contracts on the South Eastern Railway (including the Saltwood Tunnel, 1843), which Betts took over on his own account in 1845. At that time he also won a number of contracts in the Chester area. His work on the South Eastern Railway (his tender for the Tunbridge Wells-Robertsbridge section alone amounting to $270,000 in 1847) adjoined that of Samuel Morton Peto. On 6 July 1843 he married Peto's sister Ann ('b'. 1821), with whom he had six sons and three daughters. After the dissolution of Peto's partnership with Thomas Grissell in 1846, Betts joined Peto in constructing the Great Northern Railway loop line from Peterborough through Boston and Lincoln to Doncaster, as well as its associated East Lincolnshire line from Boston to Louth. A formal partnership was established in 1848, with which his affairs were thereafter inextricably entwined. 
During the early 1850s, a period of railway company consolidation in England, Peto and Betts turned their efforts overseas, undertaking the Danish railway system from 1852. That same year they began working on the formidable enterprise of the Grand Trunk railroad of Canada, linking Quebec with Montreal, Toronto, and Detroit, in which they were stockholders; their contract provided for their being paid in a mixture of cash, shares, and bonds. Betts undertook the actual management of this 539 mile loss-making venture (rescued from collapse by the Canadian government), in which a primary element was the construction of the huge Victoria Bridge across the St Lawrence River. To manufacture the requisite metal parts and rolling-stock, the partners set up the Canada Works in Birkenhead, which subsequently supplied their other worldwide contracts, such as the Buenos Aires-Rosario line, and those from Dunaberg to Vitebsk in Russia (220 miles), and from Algiers to Blida. In Australia their pioneering efforts were performed in collaboration with Thomas Brassey. In the USA Betts was involved in the New York to Chicago and St Louis line. 
In the Crimean War, Betts undertook the organization of a railway from the British base at Balaklava to the front, which Peto had offered to construct, dispatching twenty-three large steamers with engineers, workmen, horses, and stores. Here, as in the partners' other undertakings, Betts's role 'lay in the execution of contracts -- no one had a greater practical knowledge... his eagle eye would fasten on a rivet missing' (Peto, 51). 
At home the partners' close involvement in East Anglian lines led them to undertake the London, Tilbury, and Southend, opened in 1854-6, which they leased as operators for twenty-one years from 1854, a speculation said in 1863 to be losing $24,000 a year. The 'Railway Times' reported (27 September 1856) that Betts 'wielded for a brief season the destinies of the Eastern Counties [railway]', in which he, like Peto and Brassey, had become a shareholder. As chairman in 1851-2 Betts suppressed an engine drivers' strike, but an accident affecting his eyesight forced him to resign. He was also contractor for the Strood and Maidstone line in Kent. This ran close to his 'palatial residence' near Aylesford, Preston Hall, rebuilt in 1850 by John Thomas (Peto's architect) in a dreary Jacobean style, where in 1861 he employed five gardeners, a groom and coachman, and an indoor staff of eight women and three men servants. In 1858 Betts, already a magistrate and deputy lieutenant, became high sheriff of Kent. In the 1865 general election he unsuccessfully contested Maidstone as a Conservative. At his London home, 29 Tavistock Square, in 1851, describing himself as 'engineer', he employed two men servants, five women, and a page; by 1860 he had moved on to Great George Street, Westminster. 
During the 1860s Peto and Betts involved themselves in expensive undertakings in the south-east, where rival lines fought to secure the traffic between London and the ports. It was their involvement in the affairs of the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway Company, for which they were building a metropolitan extension from London Bridge to Victoria (in partnership with Thomas Russell Crampton), that brought disaster. Paid entirely in the company's shares and debentures, entangled in dubious finance-raising schemes, and with their overseas operations hindered by the Danish and Austrian wars, Peto and Betts were forced to stop payment in the banking crisis of 1866. Their partnerships were made insolvent the following year. Their only subsequent contract was for minor alterations on the Metropolitan Railway, to which Betts gave close attention. In 1869 he travelled to Budapest in connection with abortive proposals for improving the navigation of the Danube. 
An obituary speaks of Betts's 'untiring application... and indomitable energy... clear judgment... and vigorous mind that grasped at once the main points of a question, and quickly decided on its merits' ('PICE', 35, 1872, 285-8). A stern rectitude in his dealings was said to be allied to a general benevolence and a warmth of friendship. After his bankruptcy, which necessitated his selling Preston Hall, Betts moved to Bickley, near Bromley, Kent, where he could still maintain a carriage. In 1871 his doctors sent him to winter in Egypt, where he died at Aswan on 21 January 1872, survived by his wife. He was buried at Aylesford. 


@@@@@


doc= 49434


Blake, Charles Henry (1794-1872), property speculator, was born in Calcutta, the son of Benjamin Blake, a sea captain who had been plying the route to India since 1775. Soon after 1794 his father left the sea and became an indigo planter in Bengal, and Blake followed his father into this business. In the 1820s he left India for England, but returned to India about 1830. Later he became a rum and sugar manufacturer, an occupation he continued to pursue until he left India for good in 1842 or 1843, the profits from which, no doubt, provided the basis for his speculations in Notting Hill and Notting Dale in North Kensington. 
Blake's twenty-year career as an active speculator began in 1850 when he bought 25 acres of undeveloped land on the Ladbroke estate and began to grant building leases. Only two years later, however, he sold this still isolated land (probably at a loss) and bought a smaller but more advantageously situated estate at the top of Lansdowne Hill. Here, in Stanley Crescent, Stanley Gardens, and the north side of Kensington Park Gardens, he built some sixty large, stucco-fronted houses, designed in the Italianate manner by Blake's architect, Thomas Allom, and grouped around the communal gardens which were a distinguishing feature of the layout of the Ladbroke estate. Forty of these houses were built by a direct contract for some $64,000 between Blake and a builder, D. A. Ramsay, and the rest under the usual procedure of building leases granted by Blake. 
In 1854, however, the housing boom in North Kensington collapsed, Ramsay was declared bankrupt, and Blake was left with forty unfinished houses on his hands. In 1858 he too was on the verge of insolvency and had to sell his own fine house at 24 Kensington Park Gardens, but he was saved by a revival of the housing market in 1859-60 and soon he was developing other land further north on the west side of Ladbroke Grove. 
In the second phase of Blake's career as a building speculator he made full use of the housing boom of the 1860s and of the impending construction of the Hammersmith and City railway line, which traversed Notting Dale to a junction with the Great Western Railway near Paddington, and of which Blake was the principal promoter and a director. In 1862 he had contracted to buy, for about $838 per acre, some 130 acres of the Portobello estate, part of which would be needed for the line; he and the chairman of the railway company (who also had a share in the deal) demanded $10,000 per acre for the ground needed by the railway. Ultimately the price to be paid by the company was settled at $2105 per acre, but both Blake and the chairman resigned as directors, with heavily tarnished reputations. The railway, opened in 1864, proved an instant commercial success and Blake had no difficulty in developing all of the land on either side of Ladbroke Grove between the railway and Kensal Green. In that area he acted as both ground landlord and speculator, granting building leases, making loans to builders, buying and selling improved ground rents, and also selling vacant land, usually at about double the price which he had himself paid. Many of the houses were of the three-storey terraced variety with basements, the plots being usually only 20 feet wide and 60 feet deep. Some of the streets developed by these means achieved nationwide notoriety in the mid-twentieth century as the scene of some of the worst housing conditions in all London. 
After 1868 Blake lived in semi-retirement at Bournemouth, where he died at his home, 15 Westover Villas, on 22 March 1872. A monument to him (which no longer exists) was erected in St Peter's Church there. He was survived by his wife, Frances (died 1876), and, subject to her life interest, bequeathed his estate to his two sons and two daughters; the elder son (also named Charles Henry), a barrister, continued to manage the estate for some years. At the time of Blake senior's death his principal property consisted of twenty-four freehold houses on Lansdowne Hill and freehold land and ground rents on the Portobello estate. There were also a number of outstanding mortgages and family charges, and the surplus of assets over liabilities amounted to some $120,000, which yielded a gross income of $3905 per annum. This represented a return of only about 3.25 per cent on the capital invested -- not a very high rate for Blake's twenty-two years' assiduous labours, the imminence of ruin in 1859, and a blemished reputation acquired in 1862-4. 


@@@@@


doc= 49435


Blashfield, John Marriott (1811-1882), terracotta manufacturer, was born on 1 November 1811 in the parish of St James, Westminster, one of at least two sons of John and Eleanor Blashfield. No further details are known of his background and his early life and education are similarly obscure. By 1841, and described as an artist, he was living at 1 Upper Stamford Street, Blackfriars, but he first comes to light two years earlier in 1839 laying a Venetian 'pise' (hard scagliola) floor at Deepdene in Surrey, the home of Henry Thomas Hope. Two years later he provided scagliola for Sir Charles Barry's Reform Club. At about that time he entered into partnership with the roman cement makers Wyatt, Parker & Co., and as a result of this he is personally credited with supplying the finest cement for the final phase of the Thames Tunnel (1835-42). 
Blashfield had also been carrying out small scale terracotta experiments, but he was more interested in tessellated pavements, giving them as the reason for entering into the Wyatt Parker partnership. However, a patent taken out in 1840 by Richard Prosser of Birmingham, for making china buttons from hydraulically compressed dry clay, changed his line of thought. He saw in it possibilities for making mosaic tesserae, but unfortunately, Herbert Minton took a half share in Prosser's patent. This was a blow as from then on Blashfield had to use Minton's fired clay tesserae for his own work. In 1843 Blashfield and Minton jointly installed one of their earliest pavements in the Society of Arts at the Adelphi. Despite his dependence on Minton, Blashfield was given great credit by contemporaries for the development of tessellated pavements and for his associated work on encaustic tiles. 
1843-7 saw an unfortunate and financially disastrous period in Blashfield's life. He entered the field of building speculation and attempted to undertake a major part of the development of Kensington Palace Gardens in London. The commissioners of woods and forests (forerunners of the crown estate commissioners) were offering ninety-nine year leases to build thirty-three houses on part of the former kitchen gardens of Kensington Palace. Blashfield tendered for twenty of them, offering a total rent rising to almost $2000 per annum. This was an extremely high rent and Blashfield made his first houses too large for their sites, and so he had difficulty in disposing of them. By 1847, with five houses under construction, he was in severe financial difficulty and was declared bankrupt on 14 May with losses estimated at over $40,000. It is difficult to see how he recovered from this blow. He had been able to direct Wyatt Parker money towards his building speculation, but his bankruptcy caused him to surrender his interests in tessellated pavements and encaustic tiles to Herbert Minton. It is likely that he also handed over premises, as from 1848 onwards Minton's is recorded as occupying a former Wyatt Parker address. 
Whatever the other effects of his bankruptcy, Blashfield was able to continue his cement and scagliola business and in 1851 felt able to expand his Millwall factory into terracotta manufacture. He had a good artistic and technical grounding for this and, additionally, he had been developing valuable contacts over the previous decade with prominent and rising architects, designers, and sculptors. He went to some pains to prove to his peers and the general public the quality of his work. The colossal figures he supplied in 1853 for the resited Crystal Palace at Sydenham included 'Australia' by John Bell, which at 9 feet tall was the largest single piece of terracotta ever fired; also from this period survives a huge Triton fountain in the courtyard of the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford (based on Bernini). Blashfield's works, largely in the classical tradition, began to appear in numerous country house gardens and on several buildings in London: for example, Hampton Court, Kew Gardens, Marlborough House, the duchy of Cornwall office (10 Buckingham Gate), the Sheepshanks Gallery (Victoria and Albert Museum), Chelsea Bridge, and Woolwich barracks. His 'Catalogue of 500 Articles' (1855) and published catalogues of 1857 and 1868 show the range of his work. 
In December 1858 Blashfield moved from London to Stamford in Lincolnshire to be nearer a good source of clay and save money on wages. By this time he was married, but he and his wife, Isabella Mary Ann, had no children. They adopted as son their nephew, Joseph Joiner, who came to work for Blashfield in the Stamford pottery. On coming to Stamford, Blashfield was able to lease an almost new factory from the marquess of Exeter and his kilns were ready for firing by March 1859. It is a measure of Blashfield's success in London that the sale of stock on quitting his Millwall factory brought in undreamed-of prices; this story was repeated two years later when he moved his London showroom. 
The 1860s were Blashfield's most successful years. By 1861 he was employing sixty-five workers and during the decade he received his major commissions. He was an innovative manufacturer and in 1860 patented a muffle kiln that set new standards in terracotta production. He supplied a number of large vases to Buckingham Palace in 1862 and terracotta for the Duke of Cornwall Hotel, Plymouth (1863-5, architect, Charles Forster Hayward). Between 1865 and 1868 he received over $4500 for balustrading, urns, and statuary in Matthew Digby Wyatt's major garden works at Castle Ashby near Northampton, but his largest commission was the new Dulwich College (1866-70), designed by Charles Barry the younger. In 1870 he carried out further work for Digby Wyatt at Lady Alford's new house in Prince's Gate, London. Locally, he built facades for two Stamford buildings, and in 1871 constructed a large boathouse for the marquess of Exeter in Burghley Park. Blashfield also carried out much work abroad, including commissions in New Zealand and, by 1865, completion of the triumphal arch in the Victoria Gardens, Bombay (architects, Scott and McClelland). In the early 1870s he supplied terracotta for his most famous foreign building, the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts (architects, Sturgis and Brigham, dem. 'c'.1906). Illustrative of the sculptural work carried out at this time are twelve relief panels for the facade of the Wedgwood Institute, Burslem (1863-9), depicting the processes in ceramics manufacture, and a large statue of Prince Albert (1865) for a hospital in Bishop's Waltham. 
Though successful artistically, Blashfield showed a remarkable lack of business acumen. Through a series of uneconomic contracts and a lack of capital, he ran into difficulties. Things came to a head in 1872 when he had to turn his pottery into a limited liability company to finance his Boston museum contract. He had been working for over two years to achieve this and the contract was signed and the prospectus for the new company issued within weeks of each other in July. It was a pyrrhic success: the contract was also uneconomic and by 1875 Blashfield went into voluntary liquidation. There was another reason for his downfall. Despite Blashfield's criticisms of the earlier schools of terracotta, he was a part of them and relied on complex clay recipes and extensive retooling after moulding and drying. Varying clay mixes meant shrinkage rates were not constant, causing much wastage. There was also a reaction against the ultra-fine finish of these terracottas in favour of something slightly less refined and more vigorous. During the 1860s the balance between the old and new schools tipped in favour of the latter. The rougher-textured terracotta, straight from the mould, using only single fire clays and grog to control shrinkage rates, found much favour and produced a considerable economy. With fashion and economics against it, the old school was doomed. Two seminal meetings at the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1868, and published in its 'Transactions' for 1867/8 and 1868/9, are a microcosm of the contemporary debate and centre on the work of Barry and Blashfield at Dulwich College. 
Because Blashfield's personal finances became mixed with those of his company his American debts remained outstanding after the failure of the company. As a result he was declared bankrupt for a second time in 1877. He left Stamford in the same year, returning to London. There, over the next few years, he dealt in terracotta in what must have been a very small way. He died on 15 December 1882 at his home, 17 Great College Street, Westminster, leaving just $52. 
Blashfield was a strong-minded and resourceful entrepreneur, respected by his contemporaries. An 1871 photograph shows him to be a large man with receding hair and long half-beard. Though thwarted by circumstance in his original intention to produce tessellated pavements, he was highly successful in his second choice, terracotta. His importance lies in the link he provided between the eighteenth-century school of terracotta of Mrs Coade and the flourishing industry which developed from the 1870s to the 1930s. Blashfield was also indirectly responsible in part for its development in the United States; his nephew, adopted son, and works manager, Joseph Joiner, and senior foreman, James Taylor, both emigrated to the USA in the 1870s and became founding fathers of its terracotta industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 49436


Copland, Alexander (1774-1834), building contractor, was born on 14 May 1774, in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, the only surviving son of Alexander Copland (1736-1793), builder, and his wife, Barbara (1734-17901), daughter of Richard Smirke of Wigton, Cumberland -- probably the grandfather of the architect and artist Robert Smirke (1781-1867) -- and widow of Richard McCartney. 
Copland was educated at a school at Sowerby, near Thirsk, Yorkshire, and in November 1784 bound as an apprentice to Richard Holland, surveyor, at the Stationers' Company. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in November 1788. Apart from small legacies, his father bequeathed him all his leasehold and personal estate, said by Smirke to be worth $10,000. Copland was admitted to the freedom of the Stationers' Company on 5 April 1796, and on 30 April married Lucy (died 1849), only daughter of William Giffard of Turnham Green, Middlesex. They had three sons and one daughter. 
Copland's significance lies in his being the earliest of the great building contractors. He was called on to build barracks, often in country areas, with great rapidity, and based his operations in London, where he largely recruited a workforce of hundreds of men of all trades -- though never more men on a site than could work to advantage -- whom he supplied with tools, in contrast to the tradition by which the artisan supplied his own. He enforced a new degree of labour discipline, ascribing his success in completing work on schedule to his having 'always employed a great many more Superintending Clerks and Foremen than is usual for the number of men, in order to compel the workmen to do their duty' ('Commissioners of military inquiry', 2.47). 
Copland's career progressed through personal contacts. His brother-in-law, Henry Hemsley, a surveyor in the barrack office, gave the crucial impetus when in 1796 he asked him to supply prefabricated barrack buildings for the West Indies. The government then decided, in view of the war with revolutionary France, to build temporary wooden barracks throughout the country, and in August 1796 Copland was employed to build one at Chelmsford, Essex, for 2400 men, in only five weeks. He built another in three weeks at Weymouth for 300 cavalry and officers, prior to the king's visit in 1798. Thereafter he was extensively employed by the barrack-master-general in the Isle of Wight, 1798-1802, where he employed 700 men; in the Channel Islands (1799, for Russian troops evacuated from Holland); and in Weeley (Essex), Winchester, and elsewhere. In all, by 1805 a total of twenty-six barracks at a charge of $1,464,629, were executed by Copland's own firm, save for about $4000 of stonework on the prestigious Windsor barracks. 
These barracks were contracted for on the basis of 'measure and valuation'. So generous were the valuations of the barrack office surveyors that Copland was able to make very large profits; an independent valuation of his Silverhill bill in 1805, allowing a 15 per cent profit margin, reduced it by 48 per cent. Copland's work at Radipole, Dorset, in 1804, was attacked as 'a most glaring instance of imposition' ('Commissioners of military inquiry', 2.52). The rubble foundation of the stables employed mortar made of muddy sand without a proper proportion of lime; repairs estimated at $2600 were required within the year, 'which could not have been the case, had the Builder performed his Contract with common honesty' ('Commissioners of military inquiry', 2.52). 
Barrack building, however, was by no means his only activity. John Sanders of the barrack office was architect of two major contracts, for the Duke of York's Asylum, Chelsea (1801-03), and for the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1807-12), and probably also of a third, the guard house in Hyde Park (1798). The first of these contracts no doubt brought Copland into personal touch with the duke of York, whose town house in Piccadilly, mortgaged to the banker Coutts, he proposed in 1801 to develop as a residential hotel. Eventually Copland paid $37,000 in instalments in 1802-5 to become absolute purchaser of York House. In association with the architect Henry Holland (cousin of Richard), and Holland's nephew, the builder Henry Rowles, Copland converted it into residential chambers known as Albany, erecting also two parallel rows of chambers in the gardens, the first purpose-built residential apartments of their kind. 
In addition, like his father, Copland built houses for the upper end of the London market. From at least 1799 he was also a timber merchant, and about 1806 entered into partnership in that trade with Rowles. In 1807 and 1808 Copland built houses which were let at from $102 to $150 per annum on Rowles's Upper Cadogan Place estate, subsequently selling them on. He also worked on Covent Garden theatre (1809), designed by his cousin, Sir Robert Smirke (but not, as often claimed, on the great hall of Christ's Hospital, where he merely, as a governor, served on the responsible committee). 
Copland leased building sites from Rowles, and from about 1811 joined him in exploiting Westminster Abbey's Tothill Fields estate; in 1827 and again very shortly before his death he invested over $2000 in leases in the neighbourhood of Vincent Square, but probably as a land speculation rather than for building, for both men had retired from contracting by 1821. Their firm (sometimes including the name of Holland), nevertheless continued at Narrow-wall (later Belvedere Road), Lambeth, until Copland's death. By 1808 Copland had acquired, in addition to his residence and premises at 67 St Martin's Lane, a yard in Horseferry Road, Westminster, to which he soon added others in Millbank, on the river. The latter he gave up when in 1812 -- the year in which he also moved from St Martin's Lane to Great George Street -- he established workshops and a house on a 10,000 square yard site in Horseferry Road, which contained also sawpits and brickworks. 
Copland also appears in an 1817 list of architects practising in London, but his only known work is the ornate thatched cottage of 1818 'in the Elizabethan style, built after the manner of one at Virginia Water belonging to... George IV' ('Life and Letters of Captain Marryat', 2.130), on his Langham estate, Norfolk, in the planning of which he was assisted by his son Frank, then a pupil in the office of Sir John Soane (1753-1837). His library was sold at Sothebys in 1837. 
Copland, handsome and self-confident, early used his profits in adopting an aristocratic manner of life, with country seat and town house; he entertained extensively, rode to hounds, and sent his three sons to Eton. In 1801 he purchased for $10,000 the bulk (some 76 acres) of the estate at Gunnersbury, Middlesex, formerly the property of Princess Amelia. He immediately erected a house, enlarged in 1816, where pastimes included cricket and archery. In 1810 he bought a 1000 acre estate at Langham, Norfolk, which in June 1830 he exchanged for Sussex House, Hammersmith, the property of his old friend Captain Marryat, the novelist. He moved in 1812 from St Martin's Lane to a large house, 29 Great George Street, Westminster (subsequently the National Portrait Gallery), where, despite frequent attacks of gout, he entertained liberally, culminating in 1832 in a grand ball. 
Almost as soon as the continent was open to English travellers, in September-October 1814 Copland toured northern France and Belgium. In 1819 he took his family and two servants on a four-month tour of Wales, the Lakes, Scotland, and north-east England, bearing introductions to several noblemen. In 1820-22 he sent his eldest son on an unusually comprehensive European tour, and a family tour in three carriages, accompanied by three servants, through France and Switzerland to Italy, followed between August 1823 and May 1824. Copland was a magistrate for Middlesex but in 1820 paid a fine rather than serve as sheriff of London. On his eldest son's marriage in 1826 he settled $300 a year on him and gave a reception for 350 guests. To a younger son he advanced $6000 to purchase a commission in the Queen's Bays. Copland was also a generous benefactor to hospitals, being elected treasurer of the Charing Cross Hospital. 
His children's travel diaries show Copland to have been keenly interested in the works of both man and nature, alike enthusiastic about visiting Crawshay's Welsh ironworks, Smirke's new Lowther Castle, and Staffa's caves. He was, too, a committed family man, keen that wife and children share such experiences, and visiting his mother's birthplace to enquire into her family. Copland died in his Westminster house, 29 Great George Street, on 12 July 1834, and was buried in the chancel vault of St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 49437


Grissell, Thomas (1801-1874), public works contractor, was born on 4 October 1801 at Stockwell, Surrey, the eldest of the nine children of Thomas De la Garde Grissell (1778-1847) of the East India Company's service, and his wife, Ann (died 1847), daughter of James Peto of Godalming, Surrey. He was educated at St Paul's School, London, with the intention of his entering the medical profession, but in 1815 Grissell was articled to his uncle Henry Peto, perhaps at that time the country's principal public works contractor (his partner having died the previous year). Ten years later, when the collapse of part of his work on the London custom house discredited Peto, Grissell was admitted partner. On his uncle's death in 1830 he succeeded to a half share in the business and estate, together with his cousin Samuel Morton Peto, who married Grissell's sister Mary. In the highly competitive building world of the 1830s their business rapidly secured a position as the leading public works contractor. Grissell's business ethos was summed up in his motto 'Press forward'. 
Grissell and Peto ran a vertically integrated business, controlling all operations from stone quarrying to the provision of fittings for their buildings, and employing a highly disciplined workforce under capable foremen; this enabled them to exploit the advantages of the system of lump-sum contracting then coming into vogue. Grissell claimed to have introduced important innovations in building technique also, such as the use of the 'whole timber' scaffolding, braced and bolted, that could support a travelling crane powered by a steam engine. The partners obtained the commission for Charles Barry's Birmingham grammar school (1833-5), and then in London that for Hungerford market at $42,400, which proved very remunerative. Nelson's Column, the Reform, Conservative, and Oxford and Cambridge clubs, and Clerkenwell Prison followed, as well as a number of churches. They built the Lyceum Theatre in sixteen weeks, and the St James's in ten. The large breweries and fire offices provided regular work, and the partners netted an average $11,000-$12,000 per annum on a capital of $50,000. 
They also engaged in the new field of railway construction, undertaking part of the Great Western Railway, including the Hanwell Viaduct, much of the South Eastern Railway, and extensive works under Robert Stephenson, as well as improvements in the Severn navigation under the civil engineer William Cubitt. However, according to Peto, Grissell 'did not like the risks involved in the large railway undertakings, which needed large capital', so when the partnership was dissolved on 2 March 1846 he took over 'the building business, saw-mills, and premises', and the Severn contract, a stock-in-trade and plant that Peto calculated at $150,000, 'including houses built and building for the firm' (presumably on a speculative basis), 'and, besides, he will have a large and 'abundant' capital in money' (Peto, 13, 16). 
Most notably, however, the firm had won successive contracts for the new Houses of Parliament between 1839 and 1850, work supervised entirely by Grissell, and from 1846 in his sole name. The first two contracts, for the river front, were lump-sum, but subsequently the architect, Charles Barry, recommended that further contracts should be based on a schedule of prices. Grissell leased quarries for Cornish granite and for the Anston stone employed for the facing, and successfully contended with a serious masons' strike in 1841, caused by the relentless regime of his foreman. But in 1845, with more than a thousand of his men on site, he sought to terminate his contract for woodwork because it was financially unsatisfactory: Barry calculated that an upward revision of prices would still yield only eight or nine per cent profit. Signature of the revised contract was to be long delayed because Grissell was unwilling to accept responsibility for fire risk -- a serious consideration since work was being pressed on by candlelight -- and objected to the architect's attempt to control the subcontracting habitual in the traditional craft organization of the industry. (Even Grissell's highly integrated building service could not embrace trades of which he seldom had need, ironwork in particular being subcontracted to his nephew at the Regent's Canal ironworks.) By the end of 1851, Grissell found his prices barely remunerative for the 'most unusual and elaborate work', with its 'extraordinary quality of the workmanship' (TNA: PRO, WORK 11/6/5, fol. 91), but the office of works none the less believed it might be executed more cheaply (and secured a 30 per cent reduction from a new contractor), so that to Grissell's disappointment he was unable to complete the Houses of Parliament. As associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1843 (when he was also elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries), Grissell served on its council in 1845, and in 1846 constructed at cost a lecture room for the institution to T. H. Wyatt's designs. 
Few of the architects who employed him could live on the scale achieved by Grissell. From about 1847 he lived at 19 Kensington Palace Gardens, one of a pair of mansions designed in Barry's office and built by Grissell's own firm using surplus stone from the Houses of Parliament; he employed a domestic staff of nine, including two footmen. In 1850 he bought Norbury Park, a Georgian estate in Surrey (which he was to entail on his descendants), and commenced life as a country gentleman and county magistrate, becoming high sheriff in 1854. He also held a directorate of the Western Life Office. 
Grissell's first wife, Sarah Bensley, whom he married on 8 May 1825, died in childbirth in 1829, leaving two sons surviving; two years later, on 2 April 1831, he married Eliza (1798-1863), daughter of John Marklow and widow of John Sheen, with whom he had four more sons, two of whom died young: Hartwell (1839-1907) became a Roman Catholic and chamberlain of honour to the Pope. Grissell, a keen upholder of his family connections, bequeathed as heirlooms for Norbury Park a number of paintings and sculptures by Italian and English masters, including his own portrait by Henry William Pickersgill. In his last years he altered bequests to some of his children in no fewer than eight codicils to his will. He died at Norbury Park on 26 May 1874 and was buried in Mickleham, Surrey. Among his legacies were $5000 to his nephew Henry Peto (son of his late partner), $1000 for a new Anglican church nearby at West Humble and $250 to the Institute of British Architects to fund a medal for the best set of drawings in constructive architecture by a young architect. 


@@@@@


doc= 49438


Jay, John (1805-1872), building and civil engineering contractor, was born on 22 January 1805 at Buckingham (now Buckenham Parva), Norfolk, the second son and sixth child of John Jay (1765/6-1848), builder and innkeeper, and Susannah, 'nee' Armsby (1767/8-1861). He married Esther Wilson (1806-1888) on 25 May 1826 at St Matthew's, Bethnal Green, where he was then living; they are known to have had three daughters, two of whom, unmarried, survived Jay, and a son who predeceased them. 
Described in earlier London commercial directories as a carpenter, by 1839 Jay was a 'builder' capable of handling a $20,000 railway construction contract (London Viaduct, Eastern Counties Railway), though whence he derived the necessary capital is unknown. In 1842 he won the contract to build Reading gaol but was declared bankrupt before the commission, which passed to George Gilbert Scott, could be undertaken. As a large-scale general contractor, Jay executed both public buildings and railway works during the 1840s. St Michael's Church, Stockwell (1840-41), was followed by the Infant Orphan Asylum, Wanstead (1841-3). In 1847 he put in tenders (unsuccessfully) totalling $700,000 for building the North Kent Railway, and the Ashford-Hastings line. By 1850 he had acquired wharves and premises (rateable value, $557) at Macclesfield Road North, Finsbury, adjoining the Regent's Canal, and undertook the building of 343 houses on the nearby Packington estate leased from the Clothworkers' Company by James Rhodes, land that included brickfields. In 1854 when Jay petitioned that further leases should be made direct to him, the company's clerk observed that 'he is a man of considerable wealth and responsibility' (Clothworkers' Co. MSS, Packington Estate, bundle J). 
In 1849 Jay had secured the contract for building the Great Northern Railway from King's Cross to the southern end of the tunnel under Copenhagen Fields against such experienced railway contractors as Brassey and Peto and Betts, despite the line engineer's warning that it would be 'highly objectionable and hazardous to the completion of the works to accept a tender at the low prices offered by Mr Jay' (TNA: PRO, RAIL 236/271, 201-2). His use of steam engines enabled a thousand cubic yards of soil to be removed from the cutting daily. This contract was quickly followed by those for the 45 acre King's Cross goods station, and for the passenger terminus (1851, $123,500), where he had a thousand men working on two immense sheds 800 ft long, 105 ft wide and 71 ft high, the double-span arched roof then the largest of its kind in the world. Paid in a conventional mix of cash and bonds, Jay insisted that he be allowed the contract price for his brickwork even after the brick excise tax was abolished in 1850. Although not in the international league of railway contractors, Jay, working relatively close to his London base, was a powerful competitor. In 1853 he was appointed contractor for the eastern portion of the Metropolitan underground railway (which was not started until 1860 for lack of capital); he took the largest shareholding ($100,000), from which he sought to be relieved in 1858, implying that his resources were then stretched. It was at this time that he sold the unbuilt parts of his Packington estate holdings. 
Throughout the 1850s Jay had numerous contracts in hand. The King's Cross works completed, in 1852 he secured that for continuing the new houses of parliament (at $152,333), and was building St Olave's Grammar Schools, Southwark (nearly $24,000). Despite a 44 per cent increase in his prices, the basis of his contract, he won the next stage at Westminster ($94,929), as well as large warehouse contracts in the City (where he also rebuilt Clothworkers' Hall, 1856-8, $33,846), and Colchester Station for the Eastern Counties Railway. At Westminster he refused to exchange his prices contract for the more popular lump sum form; he completed the clock and Victoria towers (where the ironwork of the cresting bears his name) -- works involving the most advanced building technology -- together with the Old Palace Yard front. The superior quality of his materials and workmen was commented on, and according to his obituary he was 'widely known as a liberal and considerate employer, and a businessman of uprightness and integrity' ('Islington Gazette'). He won the friendship of the government surveyor, Henry Arthur Hunt, who became one of his executors. About 1860 the Jay family, with four resident servants, moved to Highbury Park House, Islington, standing in its own grounds. 
On completing the structure of the palace at Westminster in 1861, Jay sought more lucrative undertakings. With at least one further substantial contract for City warehouses in his pocket, he took up his long-deferred Metropolitan Railway work, completed in 1863, which proved extremely laborious and cost about $250,000 a mile. His last large contracts embraced both work on the Palmerston government's fortifications programme, including casemented barracks at Portland, and the $600,000 Hither Green-Tonbridge section of the South Eastern Railway. He appears to have retired from business about 1870, and died at his residence, Ashford House, Hornsey, London, on 28 December 1872, 'much esteemed for his social qualities and his genial bearing' ('Islington Gazette'). Jay, his wife, and his son were all buried beneath a richly carved sarcophagus in Abney Park cemetery, Stoke Newington, London; the chapel there, built in 1840, is Jay's first known building. 


@@@@@


doc= 49439


Lucas, Charles Thomas (1820-1895), public works contractor, was born on 26 October 1820 in Greenland Place, Cromer Street, St Pancras, London, the second son and fourth child of James Jonathan Hughes Lucas, a plasterer, said to be of Norfolk and Quaker descent, but born and baptized in the City of London, and his wife, Elizabeth Pearman. After serving articles with Stokes, a London builder, Lucas joined his father; he was soon employed by Samuel Morton Peto (1809-1889) to superintend construction of the Norwich and Brandon Railway. In 1842 he set up his own contracting business in Norwich, where he was joined by his younger brother Thomas ['see below'] in founding Lucas Brothers at Lowestoft; they were extensively involved in the development of the town, the construction of waterworks, and the rebuilding of nearby country houses, including Somerleyton for Peto from 1844, Henham, and Rendlesham. The brothers moved in 1850 to London, where they secured riverside premises at Belvedere Road in Lambeth, aiming from the outset 'to become one of the first firms in London' ('The Builder', 17 Nov 1860, 757). In 1849 they had leased Peto's Somerleyton brickworks; the railway made off-site production profitable, and these became the focus of works that produced the vast quantities of building materials required for their undertakings. In the later 1850s they appeared frequently in 'The Builder''s lists of competitive tenders, but as unsuccessful, suggesting both that they had become one of the 'inevitable' major contractors, and that their amount of work in hand made it generally unnecessary to quote very low prices. 
This picture is confirmed by Lucas's statement, at a dinner to his workmen in the volunteer corps (of which he was a lieutenant-colonel) given in 1860, that they had had the same number of men in their employ 'upwards of ten years, and who had never yet had to work an hour's short time'. They had 'felt it their duty at times to take works at a loss in order to keep their old hands on', but none the less their overall profit had been beyond anything they could have anticipated ('The Builder', 17 Nov 1860, 757). Indeed, the firm obtained a commanding position in the construction of railway termini and vast hotels. Major works included Covent Garden Opera House and Floral Hall (1858, 1860), stations and hotels at Charing Cross, Cannon Street, Liverpool Street (1863-4, 1867, and 1874), and York (1877-8), and other leading hotels in London including the Palace (1860-61), London Bridge (1861, at a cost of $110,000), the Langham (1864, at a cost of $300,000), and De Keyser's (1874). They also built King's College Hospital (1862), the Junior Carlton Club, Pall Mall (1866), the Royal Albert Hall (1867), and Charterhouse School (1872). The country houses they built included Cliveden for Lord Westminster and Normanhurst for Lord Brassey. They undertook in partnership with Kelk the huge building (largely intended to be temporary) at South Kensington to house the 1862 International Exhibition, a $300,000 job. The South Kensington exhibitions of 1867 and 1871 were also their construction. Works for the war department included the reconstruction of Woolwich arsenal and Colchester camp, and contracts at Aldershot and Shorncliffe. In 1861, when they were building the new Blackfriars Bridge, Lucas Brothers were employing about 3000 men. 
In the 1860s the brothers turned to railway contracting on their own account, though often in collaboration with other firms. Kelk and Lucas were contractors for the Metropolitan District Railway, and Lucas joined Brassey and Wythes in the East London Railway, tunnelled under the Thames. Their main railway work for the Great Eastern Railway was in 1865-75. They also worked on the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway, and the West Highland. In 1870 they took John Aird into partnership, forming two new companies, Lucas and Aird, 'one of the largest employers of labour in the country', and John Aird & Sons, to specialize in railway and commercial contracting. 'Heavily engaged in all directions on railways, dock and harbour construction, and gas- and water-works,... besides work for most of the principal railway companies' ('PICE', 149, 1902) they built the Royal Albert and the rival Tilbury docks (1880, 1882-6), and undertook the Suakin-Berber Railway in the Sudan in 1885. 
Lucas married Charlotte Emma, daughter of Charles Tiffin, on 27 April 1842; they had five sons and two daughters. In London he lived at 9 Belgrave Square. Of kindly manner and homely appearance, he nevertheless had a reputation for strength of will and the exercise of great authority, and for utter integrity in his business life. He acquired a country seat at Warnham Court near Horsham, Sussex, and became the complete squire, making large additions to the estate, restoring the church, laying out gardens, and rearing horses, sheep, and cattle, 'his various herds being well known in the agricultural world' ('PICE', 144, 1896, 438). 'A generous landlord and a popular county man' (ibid.), he was a JP, and high sheriff, and also a deputy lieutenant for Sussex. He was a Conservative and was consulted by ministers on labour questions, but declined offers of an unopposed return to parliament because of his business commitments. His wife predeceased him; he provided for three of his younger sons in brewery businesses and left his Sussex estates to his eldest son, with the bulk of his personal property, for the upkeep of Warnham Court, expressing the wish that the estate should descend in the male line. He retired from business about 1891 and died of old age at Warnham Court on 4 December 1895. 
His brother 
Thomas Lucas was twice married, first, in 1845, to Jane Rolfe (died 1849), daughter of Charles Golder, with whom he had one daughter; and second, on 2 June 1852, to Mary Amelia, daughter of Robert Chamberlain of Catton House, Norfolk, with whom he had six sons and four daughters. His principal recreation was the opera. He collected paintings and 'objets d'art' in his mansion at 12A Kensington Palace Gardens, where in 1871 his family was supported by a large resident staff of governess, eight female, and five male servants. He was socially aspirant and was described in the 1871 census as a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Middlesex. He purchased Ashtead House, Surrey, in 1880 but sold it in 1888, although retaining the advowson; instead, Heatherwood, Ascot, Berkshire, became his summer residence. He commonly wintered at Cannes, and was closely involved in establishing St George's Anglican Church there. 
Much richer (and better-looking) than his brother, Sir Thomas Lucas at his death left an estate valued at $775,984; he possessed, in addition to shares in Lloyds Bank, mines and mining companies and the Hull, Barnsley, and West Riding Junction Railway and Dock Company, real estate in Norfolk, Suffolk, Middlesex, Surrey, Berkshire, and elsewhere, which he instructed in his will should be sold. He died on 6 March 1902 at 12A Kensington Palace Gardens, London. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49440


Sir Thomas Lucas, first baronet (1822-1902), public works contractor, was born on 18 July 1822, also in Greenland Place, Cromer Street, St Pancras, London, the third son and fifth child of James and Elizabeth Lucas. About 1844 he joined Charles in establishing Lucas Brothers. Active like his brother in the volunteers, Thomas gave evidence to a War Office committee on the question of reserves and terms of service. In a trifling railway accident he received a blow on the knee that affected him for forty years and ultimately made him a confirmed invalid, leading a retired life. He was keenly interested in politics and a member of the Carlton Club, and was closely concerned with Viscount Cross's schemes for artisans' dwellings. He received a baronetcy from Salisbury's government in 1887, possibly inspired by his building Princess Alexandra's house for female students, South Kensington, at cost. 


@@@@@


doc= 49441


Mouchel, Louis Gustave (1852-1908), promoter of ferroconcrete, was born on 11 January 1852 at 56 rue Corne de Cerf, Cherbourg, third of the four children of Louis Mouchel, wig maker, and his wife, Felicite Duchemin. He had three sisters. Mouchel attended the college at Cherbourg to train as a naval officer but joined the department of highways, taking an engineering course at the Government School of Mines. 
Mouchel spoke English fluently, and in 1875 he moved to Briton Ferry in south Wales, where he initiated a number of business enterprises. He introduced coke making to the area, and formed the Cardiff Washed Coal and Fuel Company, subsequently a client for ferroconcrete. He exported coal and imported ore from mines in Brittany. As French vice-consul, Mouchel was responsible for several south Wales ports and was also a ship broker. He became co-director of various prominent companies, including Eaglesbush colliery, Neath, and the Gwalia Tinplate Company, a modern works 'illuminated with the electric light' (Humphreys, 39). By 1898, when Mouchel became general agent for Hennebique's system of reinforced concrete in the UK, he was a prospering and well-known businessman in south Wales, residing in one of the notable houses in Briton Ferry, a successful entrepreneur with useful contacts. 
As Hennebique's agent, Mouchel effectively established the use of reinforced concrete in Britain, particularly for framed buildings. At this time, when reinforced concrete was developed and marketed by rival patentees, Hennebique was expanding his organization rapidly. Mouchel may have been his first client in Britain, for some house property, but the first built project recorded was a provender mill for William Weaver & Co. in Swansea (1897-8), the first multi-storeyed construction in Britain entirely in reinforced concrete. For this project, workmen and even materials, including high quality sand from the Loire, were shipped from France. 
It may have been while Hennebique was arranging transport that he and Mouchel first met; as consul, the latter organized French ship movements in Swansea harbour. Mouchel accepted the agency, deciding to make the introduction of Hennebique's material into Britain the 'chief object of his professional life' ('Life and work of Louis Gustave Mouchel', 212). He even coined the term 'ferroconcrete' to describe it. His business organization followed Hennebique's model, employing specially trained engineers and licensed contractors, with nationwide expansion based on regional 'commercial-technical' offices. Mouchel himself underwent training in Hennebique's offices and began to execute working drawings. He also patented designs, especially for underground and marine work, modifying Hennebique's system, and published illustrated books of ferroconcrete works. 
Mouchel moved his office to London in 1900, to a new but bare apartment owned by the Great Western Railway Company (itself a client of his). The following year, he moved to his permanent business address, 38 Victoria Street, Westminster, and rapidly established offices throughout the UK. Engineers and draughtsmen from Hennebique's offices in France joined Mouchel. Early clients included the Co-operative Wholesale Society, which had its own building department and obtained a Hennebique licence. 
Mouchel possessed enormous energy, organizational skill, and single-mindedness; contemporaries spoke of great personal charm and a magnetic personality which compelled confidence in himself and in ferroconcrete. His attention to detail ensured an excellent safety record, and his response to a rare failure of a test floor in Manchester in 1902 demonstrated his deep professional commitment. In a twelve-page letter to the client's engineer, presenting a passionate plea for justice in the matter, he wrote: 'if on account of that wretched incomplete test they throw us overboard, I would consider it an iniquity. Because it would be doing us, without justification, the maximum of injury possible and destroying at one stroke... my five years of anxious and arduous work in this country. (Mouchel to Hunter, 1902, L. G. Mouchel & Partners archives)' Mouchel faced considerable prejudice in Britain. The Institution of Civil Engineers showed little interest in ferroconcrete before 1908, and although the Royal Institute of British Architects investigated it earlier, a speaker questioned the sanity of anyone's using such a heterogeneous combination as concrete and steel. Finally, the use of patent systems, particularly by 'pretentious foreigners' ('The progress of reinforced concrete', 'Concrete and Constructional Engineering', 2, 1907, 11), increasingly came under attack. Nevertheless, Mouchel completed more than 130 framed buildings and numerous other structures. 
Mouchel never married and had no hobbies, but 'lived entirely for his work' ('Builders' Journal'). In 1907, suffering from stomach cancer, he formed a company, L. G. Mouchel & Partners Ltd, which was still flourishing almost a century later. Mouchel returned to France and died at 12 rue Vintras, Cherbourg, at his brother-in-law's house on 27 May 1908. He never took British citizenship. 


@@@@@


doc= 49442


Phillips, John (1708/9-1775), carpenter and builder, was one of at least two sons of Matthew Phillips of East Hagbourne, Berkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. His grandfather, another Matthew Phillips, was a builder, and his uncle, 
Thomas Phillips had been apprenticed to Jeremiah Franklin of Oxford, a carpenter, in 1705, but pursued a career in London. He worked as a carpenter (with Benjamin Timbrell) on the churches of St Peter, Vere Street (1721-4), and St Martin-in-the-Fields (1722-6), built a wooden bridge from Fulham to Putney in 1727-9 (replaced by a stone bridge in 1882-6), and was employed by the office of works on several buildings including William Kent's Treasury. He also participated in most of the speculative developments that took place in west London after the Hanoverian succession in 1714, and in 1725 he was appointed to be one of the initial vestrymen chosen to manage the new parish of St George, Hanover Square, where he also assisted in the erection of several parish buildings including the workhouse. He built himself a house in the parish, at 39 Brook Street (later altered by the architect Sir Jeffry Wyatville for his own residence), where he lived from 1723 until his death on 14 August 1736. He was aged forty-seven, according to the inscription on the monumental tomb, which was erected by his widow, Elizabeth, in the churchyard of St Andrew's Church, East Hagbourne. The inscription also praised his 'skill and diligence in his profession joined with great probity in his dealings'. 
John Phillips apparently took over his uncle's business and lived in Thomas Phillips's former house in Brook Street from 1741 until his own death in 1775. Like his uncle, he was an excellent carpenter and joiner, and worked in Oxford on the Radcliffe Library, under James Gibbs (1742-50) and on the library of Christ Church (1752-62). Again following the precedent of his uncle, he built a wooden bridge across the Thames, this time at Battersea, to the designs of Henry Holland (1771-2, demolished 1881). This was the bridge made famous by the paintings and etchings of James McNeill Whistler. 
John Phillips was also a master builder of considerable repute, undertaking both speculative building in London and contracts elsewhere. In the former capacity he worked mostly in Mayfair, where he built three very substantial houses in the vicinity of Park Lane (all since demolished), several houses on the Berkeley estate, mainly in the area of Charles Street, and others on the Curzon estate, further to the south. Major contract work included the rebuilding of Alscott House, Warwickshire (1750-64), and alterations at Audley End (1749) and Aubrey House, Notting Hill (1767-9). Phillips also acted as surveyor to the Royal Society of Arts during the rebuilding of its premises as part of the Adelphi development by Robert and James Adam (1772-4). In both his speculative and contract work he often acted in partnership with George Shakespear (died 1797), who may have been the nephew of that name mentioned in his will. 
In later years John Phillips acquired substantial property holdings in the vicinity of East Hagbourne, including the manors of Blewbury in Berkshire and Culham in Oxfordshire, where he rebuilt Culham House for his own occupation. The terms of his will suggest that he had amassed considerable wealth. He died on 28 December 1775, leaving a widow, Mary, but apparently no issue, and was buried at St Andrew's Church, East Hagbourne, on 3 January 1776. He was sixty-six years old, according to the splendid marble monument which was erected to him in the nave of the church by his nephew, another John Phillips, son of his brother William, and the residuary legatee of much of his property. 


@@@@@


doc= 49443


Moninne (d. 517), nun, was an Irish saint who has been identified with St Modwenna of Burton ['see below']. According to the life of the saint contained in the fourteenth-century 'Codex Salmanticensis', which appears to preserve the earliest account, Moninne, or Darerca, was the daughter of Mochta, a nobleman of the Conailli Muirthemne, an Irish population group settled in the area of modern co. Louth. She took the veil at the hands of St Patrick, founded the monastery of Killevy in south Armagh, and, according to the annals of Ulster, died in 517. 
Moninne's original religious community consisted of eight virgins and a widow, with the widow's child, Luger, later a bishop. This group received instruction, first from a local priest, later from St Ibar, and lived under his tutelage successively in the western islands, at Begerin (Wexford), and at the unidentified 'Ard Conais'. Attracted by the reputation of St Brigit, Moninne and her companions also spent time at her monastery at Kildare. The community eventually returned from Leinster to the north of Ireland, settling first at Faughart, then at Killevy. Here the number of nuns grew to over 150 and here Moninne died on 5 July 517. The miracles attributed to her include the production of food and drink, protection against robbers, prophecy, and converse with angels. According to the life in the 'Codex Salmanticensis', her hoe, spade, rough garments, and comb were preserved in her monastery of Killevy and were brought out as war talismans when invaders threatened the region. The nunnery survived until the Reformation and the annals of Ulster mention the death of a 'coarb [successor] of Moninne' in 1077. 
Another account of Moninne's life, written by Conchubranus (about whom nothing is known except that he wrote prior to 1100), transforms this simple story. Conchubranus introduces more Irish saints, including, in defiance of all chronology, Columba. He transforms Brigit from Moninne's model into one of her early followers, here presumably using statements about the relative status of the two saints to make claims about the relative status of their two churches, Killevy and Kildare. Most significantly, Conchubranus attributes to Moninne a much wider geographical range of activity. In addition to three trips to Rome, the saint is now endowed with a southern Scottish career and also brought to Mercia, the west midlands, where she is tied in with the neighbourhood of Burton upon Trent. Most modern commentators assume, with plausibility, that three separate saints have been conflated in this new career spanning the three kingdoms. 
Conchubranus also elaborates upon Moninne's genealogy, giving the name of her mother as Coman, daughter of King Dallbronach, and depicting her father as an important ruler in Ulster and identifying him as a member of the lineage of 'Hilech' (perhaps Ailech, the seat of the kings of Cenel nEogain, although Dallbronach does not appear in their genealogies). The saint's Scottish activities in this developed version include the founding of numerous churches, including some at such significant 'high status' sites of central Scotland as Dumbarton, Stirling, and Edinburgh. The site of her death is transferred to another of her foundations, 'Lonfortin' (perhaps Luncarty in Perthshire). No Scottish religious house of the later middle ages can be traced back to any of her supposed foundations. 
It is not clear when and how the identification was made between the founder of Killevy, who died in 517, and St Modwenna of Burton (fl. before 12th cent.), whose bones were enshrined in the abbey of Burton upon Trent. Conchubranus's version, in the sole surviving manuscript (a copy made at or for Burton in the early twelfth century), reports that, after the saint had cured Alfred, son of an English king, she came to England and was rewarded by the grant of land in the Forest of Arden. Her bones, according to this account, lay on the island of Andresey, in the Trent by Burton. Local tradition, as represented by the version of the saint's life and miracles written by Geoffrey, abbot of Burton (1114-50), asserted that the saint was translated into the abbey church of Burton in the eleventh century and that her shrine there became the centre of miraculous healing and of miraculous punishments of those who intruded upon Burton's rights and property. Later medieval evidence of the cult at Burton includes a thirteenth-century Anglo-Norman version of Modwenna's life by Geoffrey, a chapel on the island of Andresey, and, within the abbey, an altar and an image, which were removed at the Reformation. 


@@@@@


doc= 49444


Timbrell, Benjamin (c.1683-1754), carpenter and builder, was one of the most noted master builders working in London in the first half of the eighteenth century. He may have been the son of Benjamin and Elizabeth Timbrell, who were living in Westminster in the mid-1680s, but his date and place of birth have not been traced. On 21 December 1707, when he was about twenty-four years old and living in the parish of St James, Piccadilly, he married Mary Salter at St James's Church. They had several children, a number of whom died in infancy. 
Timbrell took part in most of the major developments which led to a vast expansion of west London in the early Georgian period. What tended to set his work apart from that of the generality of speculative builders was the size and splendour of the houses he erected in the vicinity of Hanover Square, on the Grosvenor estate (where he built at least ten very substantial houses including two in Grosvenor Square), in Sackville Street, and on the Burlington estate near Piccadilly, and in St James's Square. 
As a carpenter he worked (with Thomas Phillips) on the construction of St Peter's Church, Vere Street (1721-4) and St Martin-in-the-Fields (1722-6). He was one of the initial vestrymen of the parish of St George, Hanover Square, and helped to erect several buildings for the parish. Like many another master builder, he was perfectly capable of designing a building, as at nos. 1-3 Crown Office Row, Inner Temple (dem.), which he built in 1737-8, and, of the four developers who undertook the construction of the charming Grosvenor Chapel in South Audley Street in 1730-31, he is the most likely to have provided the design. He was also responsible in 1743 for the fitting up of Leicester House, Leicester Square, for the prince of Wales, and in 1750 for alterations to Charterhouse School in Clerkenwell. Although the vast bulk of his work was in London, he is known to have undertaken some work elsewhere, as at Huntingdon, where he built the town hall, possibly to his own designs, in 1745. 
Timbrell lived from 1729 to 1751 at 12 Upper Grosvenor Street, Mayfair, a house built, naturally, by himself. He died on 6 January 1754, and was buried on 25 January, probably at St George's, Hanover Square. His wife had shortly predeceased him, and he had six surviving children. His eldest son, William, followed his father's trade of carpenter and builder. One of his daughters, Martha, who had also married a builder, claimed in a lawsuit that at his death Benjamin Timbrell had owned freehold land and houses to the value of $1000 per annum, and leasehold property (including 'several large and magnificent dwelling houses') and personal effects worth $20,000, but that his executors were defrauding her by pretending that he died in mean and low circumstances (TNA: PRO, C12/356/33). It is likely that he did own a considerable amount of property, but that, as was often the case even with successful builders, it was heavily mortgaged. 


@@@@@


doc= 49445


John of Bridlington (c.1320-1379), prior of Bridlington, was born in the Yorkshire village of Thwing in the Wolds, some 9 miles west of Bridlington, to a distinguished family with extensive landholdings in the East Riding. He showed signs of deep devotion to the church early in life, and took a vow of chastity at the age of twelve. Between the years 1336 and 1339 he studied at Oxford, returning to Yorkshire as tutor in a prominent family. He entered the convent of Augustinian canons at Bridlington in 1340, where he distinguished himself as cellarer and then as prior, the position he held from 'c'.1362 until his death, perhaps of the plague, on 10 October 1379. 
The holiness of John of Bridlington, who was also known as John Thwing, was widely recognized during his own lifetime. A canon named Hugh, who may himself have been a member of the Bridlington community, wrote the first biography of John between 1379 and 1401. A Middle English verse life in the northern dialect by one who claimed to have witnessed Thwing's deeds appeared about the same time. Reports of miracles occurring at his tomb prompted Alexander Neville, archbishop of York, to delegate Robert Dalton, his vicar-general, to interview witnesses to these miracles in 1386. In 1388, 'out of regard for John de Thweng, late Prior', Richard II gave permission to the Bridlington Priory to crenellate its buildings. According to Walsingham, reports of miracles at Thwing's tomb had spread all over England by 1389. Henry Bolingbroke made an offering at Bridlington in 1391 upon returning from a campaign in Prussia and, as King Henry IV, he sent John Guisburn, a canon of Bridlington, to Rome in 1400 to secure Thwing's canonization. In a bull of Boniface IX, dated 24 September 1401, John Thwing was officially canonized. With the aid of a grant from Henry IV, a shrine for his remains was constructed adjacent to the Bridlington Priory. In 1404 Archbishop Scrope and the bishops of Lincoln and Carlisle officiated at the translation of Thwing's body. Henry IV placed his son Prince Henry under the patronage of St John of Bridlington, and the prince made an offering of 5 marks at the shrine in 1407 in fulfilment of a previous vow. The hagiographer John Capgrave's edition of the life of St John of Bridlington added new accounts of miracles to those mentioned in the first biography by Hugh. 
Personally, John of Bridlington impressed his contemporaries with his generosity, compassion, humility, and zeal for the contemplative life. He supported poor students from the monastery's resources, and as prior he slept in the dormitory along with the other members of the community rather than in the prior's more comfortable quarters. The Middle English life mentions his hospitality towards minstrels. Tradition also attributed to John of Bridlington the composition of certain Latin prophetic verses, couched in highly obscure symbolism, and concerned principally with English affairs during the reigns of Edward II and Edward III. These verses circulated in some copies with an elaborate prose commentary that pretended to untangle the dense symbolism of the prophecy. The commentary ('c'.1364) was dedicated to Humphrey (IX) de Bohun, seventh earl of Hereford and twelfth earl of Essex, who assumed his titles in 1361 and died in 1373. Bohun family members were patrons of the Augustinian friars. 
M. R. James demonstrated that the commentary was composed by John Ergome (fl. 1385-1386), Augustinian friar, who became both master regent and prior of the York convent in 1385. Ergome came from a prominent family in the East Riding, studied at Oxford, and was probably the Johannes de Anglia who was admitted to the faculty of theology in Bologna in 1380. He became master of the studium of the Roman curia in 1386, and in the same year served as 'magister antiquus' ('senior master') in the Naples convent. The date of his death is unknown. Ergome's library, which numbered over 220 books, was one of the largest personal collections in England during the middle ages, and included a wide range of classical and medieval authors. It was a collection, unique in size, of mathematical, astronomical, alchemical, and astrological treatises, and prophecies, both secular and religious, some of which were accompanied by commentaries. He also possessed a number of histories, as well as books on civil and canon law and medicine. Two copies of the Bridlington prophecies and an explanation of them (possibly the same as his commentary dedicated to Humphrey de Bohun) were also among Ergome's books. It seems doubtful whether John Thwing had a hand in the composition of these obscure prophecies, although they are attributed to him in some manuscripts. Whether they were composed by Ergome himself has been a topic of debate. Ergome says simply that they were penned by a 'canon regular, according to the common opinion of folk'. A number of the prophecies were cited by the Bridlington chronicler in his 'Gesta Edwardi de Carnarvon' of about 1377, but without identifying the prophet; and about 1370-76 the Kirkstall chronicler cites the prophecies, attributing them simply to 'Bridlington'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49449


Henry Morell Acton (1828-1907), journalist, was born in Exeter in 1827, third child and second son of Henry Acton. From the Presbyterian college, Carmarthen, he entered Manchester New College in 1845, but uncertainty about the ministry led him to resign in 1848. He was recruited by Jeremiah Garnett (1793-1870) to the 'Manchester Guardian', where he became a leader writer. His 'tact and delicacy' were called upon notably in 1871 to make amends when the new editor, C. P. Scott (1846-1932), incautiously appealed to wealthy Mancunians to support physical science at Oxford just as Owens College, in Manchester, was struggling into existence. On 29 July 1863 Acton married Anne Shaw Williamson, daughter of Nathaniel Williamson, sharebroker, of Whalley Range, Lancashire; they had a daughter and a son, Edward Acton, who achieved prominence as a judge. 


@@@@@


doc= 49450


Beales, Hugh Lancelot (1889-1988), economist and social historian, born at Sedbergh, Yorkshire, on 18 February 1889, was the son of William Beales, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Zaida Mary Ann Elizabeth Scantlebury Green. He grew up in a radical political household. He was sent to the Kingswood School, Bath, a Methodist school, and won a scholarship to Manchester University, where he read medieval history under T. F. Tout. He served in the ranks throughout the First World War, refusing any promotion. Like many others, he would not speak of his wartime experiences either to friends or family; but they seemed to give him a lasting sympathy with 'the common soldier', 'the underdog', 'the common man' -- oft-repeated phrases. From army days onwards he was universally known as Lance Beales. 
In 1919 Beales became a lecturer in economic history at Sheffield University, with duties that included extramural teaching -- which remained a lifelong commitment. A strong supporter of the Workers' Educational Association (WEA), he always believed that mature working people were far better able to understand the social effects of industrialization than were the young straight-from-schools. In 1922 he married Gladys Prydderch (1895-1982), with whom he had two sons and a daughter. He was called to the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1926, and became reader in economic history in 1931; but he maintained a northerner's perspective of 'north-south' as well as 'the two nations' all his life. Three or four important scholarly articles in the 'Economic History Review' followed, but that was all at that level. But in 1929 came his 'The Industrial Revolution', a short account written for WEA classes which became almost a bible for the whole adult education movement, and was still in circulation in the 1950s. Some of the Labour Party and trade union leaders emerging from such classes said that it had an influence as great as R. H. Tawney's 'Equality' and his 'Acquisitive Society'. 
The great book on the social preconditions and consequences of the British industrial revolution, long expected, ever promised, from his encyclopaedic knowledge of nineteenth-century economic and social history, never came; but Beales had an extraordinary impact as a lecturer, teacher, and talker. His memory was, like that of Webb, Laski, and Kingsley Martin, almost photographic. So he would lecture without notes, thinking out loud fiercely with his hand on a pile of 'old books' taken (sometimes at random, it seemed) from his vast private collection that seemed to hold up a rambling mid-Victorian house in Finchley. His intellectual strength was to see unexpected connections, but, as he thought as he talked, he would often move back and forth through time and space, and appear to end on a quite different subject matter in a different century from that on which he had begun. To the best students, this was an everlasting stimulus; but to the average student, the pyrotechnic display of historical free association could appear a perplexing muddle. None the less, when the LSE was evacuated to Cambridge in wartime, his lectures drew many auditors from quite different faculties. He and his wife (known as Taff to all) kept open house to LSE students in the evening, but others came too for limited cocoa and biscuits and endless argument. 
What was good in lecturing and discussion, however, was fatal in writing. Beales suffered a social historian's version of Acton's disease: knowing so much, it was difficult to construct a narrative when one thing always reminded him of another. A whiff of Marxism, which he scorned, might have helped; he was untheoretical but not simply an empiricist, because he was forever reminding his listeners of the different perspectives and different interpretations that past writers, whether pamphleteers, factory inspectors, or academics, had put on the same events. However, during the thirty years he taught at LSE it is known that he supervised over 300 PhDs, and when his friend and disciple Oliver McGregor helped in his promotion for an honorary degree at Sheffield in 1971, he counted 160 scholarly works that were either dedicated to Beales or gave him the main thanks. 
Beales's commitment to adult education made him an early broadcaster from Savoy Hill and he wrote a notable series of articles in the 1930s in the 'Political Quarterly' about the policies of the BBC. He shared Reith's educational mission, but had a very different idea of education, which was social, even socialist. He knew Allen Lane and with Krisnan Menon and Tom Williams appeared as joint editor of the early Pelican non-fiction titles. Most of the imagination and input in choosing authors and titles was his. He saw cheap books, drawing on the precedent of Brougham's Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge of the 1830s and 1840s, as the great instrument of social betterment. Apart from some aspects of LSE, he had a hostile view of the neglect by the universities of popular education. 
In 1949 Beales was passed over for the chair at LSE when Tawney retired. One reason could obviously have been his lack of that one major publication, but he had also strained the Christian tolerance of Tawney to the point of anger by his militant and sarcastically provocative atheism, and had angered Lionel Robbins too with his contempt for classical theoretical economics -- only historical explanations of the economy mattered. When the chair next became vacant, it was only a year before compulsory retirement and again, more understandably, he was passed over. Personal chairs were then rare. He left in bitterness. He refused to set foot in LSE again until a great party for his eightieth birthday arranged by former students. But in the meantime he had conducted a come-all-ye seminar each week across the road in a room in the White Horse on Saturday mornings, only later moving on to the slightly more formal auspices of the university's extramural department in Senate House. 
However, Columbia, Harvard, and Washington, Seattle, all honoured Beales with visiting professorships. His mental powers held until a year or two before his end. He would say that 'you can all dance on my grave if I don't finish the book before I go'. Many said they would, so perhaps fortunately he chose cremation. Sadly in his last years he developed an irrational fear of dying in poverty, like so many of his nineteenth-century working-class leaders or writers. So he sold secretively and in small lots his library, dispersing probably the biggest private collection ever gathered of nineteenth-century social history. After his wife's death in 1982, Elizabeth Monkhouse, an extramural lecturer, lived with him and cared for him. He died in his hundredth year, at his home, 16 Denman Drive, Hampstead, London, on 19 April 1988. 


@@@@@


doc= 49451


Cappe, Newcome (1733-1800), Unitarian minister and preacher, was born at Leeds on 21 February 1733. He was the eldest son of Joseph Cappe, minister of Mill Hill Dissenting Chapel in Leeds, and his wife, who was the daughter of Mr Newcome of Waddington, Lincolnshire. From his mother's side of the family he appears to have inherited considerable property. He studied at two of the best dissenting academies -- under John Aikin at Kibworth (1748-9) and under Philip Doddridge at Northampton (1749-52) -- and under William Leechman at Glasgow University (1752-5). 
In 1755 Cappe became co-pastor to the Revd John Hotham at the dissenting chapel in St Saviourgate, York; he was ordained in that city on 26 May 1756 and in the same month became sole minister on Hotham's death. He quickly established himself as one of York's leading citizens, founding a literary club in 1771, taking part in the Yorkshire Association for economical and parliamentary reform in 1779, and helping to distribute material in favour of the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts' in 1787. His large residence in Upper Ousegate became a centre for the local intelligentsia, particularly those of reforming persuasions. He never sought a permanent move from York for, according to William Wood, who preached Cappe's funeral sermon, 'he carried an aversion to public life, and a love of studious retirement, to a somewhat blameable excess. With natural and acquired capacities for extensive usefulness, in the course of five-and-forty years he was seldom absent from this city. (Wood, 18)' This was partly the result of his domestic circumstances. In October 1759 he married Sarah Turner, the daughter of a Hull merchant. They had six children, but she died of consumption in 1773. His second wife was Catharine ['see below'], daughter of an Anglican clergyman, Jeremiah Harrison, vicar of Catterick; the marriage took place at Barwick in Elmet on 19 February 1788. It is due to her subsequent career as a writer that so much about Cappe himself is known. 
Cappe published several biblical commentaries and other religious discourses, together with a number of individual sermons. In 1757 his sermon celebrating the victory of Frederick the Great at Rossbach was well received and rapidly passed through thirteen editions. During the War of American Independence he preached several fast-day sermons which stressed national degeneracy and divine retribution; his tone was distinctly pro-American. Notable among such discourses was his 'Sermon Preached on the Thirteenth of December, the Late Day of National Humiliation, etc' (1776). His 'Discourses on the Providence and Government of God', which was first published in 1795, had reached a third edition by 1818. His theological affinities were unitarian, and he was associated in politics as well as religion with such luminaries of rational dissent as Joseph Priestley and Theophilus Lindsey. Cappe was plagued by poor health and in 1791 suffered a paralytic stroke, followed by others later in the decade. He died at York on 24 December 1800. Two of his sons became medical practitioners; the elder, Joseph Cappe, predeceased his father, and the younger, Robert Cappe, died at sea while travelling to Leghorn in 1802. 

Catharine Cappe (1744-1821) was born on 3 June 1744 at Long Preston, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. On her mother's side she was related to the family of Sir Rowland Winn, bt, of Nostel. She survived a severe attack of smallpox at the age of three. She was educated at York for the purpose, in her own words, of 'attending the dancing school and learning the sort of ornamental needle-work then in fashion' ('Memoirs of the Life', 38). At the age of thirteen she was placed at a boarding-school at York, where there was a French master and where she received an education of a fairly high quality. Her father died on 22 July 1763 and was succeeded as vicar of Catterick by Theophilus Lindsey, with whose family Catharine Harrison became friendly. Lindsey himself was a formative intellectual influence upon her, and his resignation, on theological grounds, from the Church of England in 1773 and his decision to establish a separate Unitarian chapel in London led her from the Anglicanism of her father into rational dissenting circles. Newcome Cappe was a representative of that tradition in York, and after their marriage in 1788 she joined in his literary and theological endeavours, subsequently becoming his memorialist and expositor. They had no children. 
After the death of her husband, Catharine Cappe pursued a literary and philanthropic career of her own. She carried out extensive work for charity schools and published on the subject. She edited and republished several of Newcome Cappe's works and prefaced two of them with memoirs of him, in addition to collecting several of his shorter essays into one volume entitled 'Discourses Chiefly on Devotional Subjects' (1805). Her most important production, however, was her volume of memoirs, first published in 1822, with a third edition in 1826. It presents a valuable account of the experiences and educational opportunities of a woman from a clerical and modestly propertied family in the later eighteenth century and has interesting reflections on the female role. It also contains much helpful biographical information about some of the leading dissenters of the period. Catharine Cappe died suddenly at York on 27 July 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 49452


Smith, George William Duff Assheton (1848-1904), quarry owner and landowner, was born on 17 May 1848 in London, the eldest son of Robert George Duff ('b'. 1819), of Wellington Lodge, Isle of Wight, and Mary Astley (died 1874). He had two brothers, Charles Garden Duff (1851-1914) and Henry Assheton Duff ('b'. 1862), and a sister, Louisa Alice. He assumed the surname Assheton Smith (or Assheton-Smith) in 1859, when the Vaynol estate near Bangor in Caernarvonshire, including Dinorwig quarry, was bequeathed to him for his lifetime under the will of Matilda, widow of his great-uncle, Thomas Assheton Smith (1776-1858). He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford. In 1888 he married Laura Alice Stanhope Jones, daughter of Colin Stanhope Jones; they had one child, Enid. 
Assheton Smith, who had a moustache and a serious countenance, inherited 36,000 acres of land with an annual rental income of $25,000. In his evidence to the royal commission on land in Wales and Monmouthshire in 1893, the agent Captain N. P. Stewart said that there were about 1600 farm tenants and cottagers on the estate and that about 100 cottages had been built in the previous fifteen years. Many quarrymen lived close to the quarry in Llanberis, but accommodation there was scarce and some of the men lodged in the quarry barracks, returning to homes in Anglesey at weekends. Before the introduction of a workers' train in 1895, many of the men travelled on velocipedes, open vehicles operated by foot or hand along the railway. 
Assheton Smith, the squire of Vaynol, took an interest in the improvement of the estate and rarely visited London. He was an animal lover, a keen horseman, and a race-horse owner. He had a menagerie of wild animals in Vaynol Park, but this was given up before his death. His yacht, the 'Pandora', was used for fishing expeditions. He was high sheriff of Anglesey in 1872 and of Caernarvonshire in 1878, and was also a JP and the deputy lieutenant for Caernarvonshire. He supported a branch of the Primrose League in Caernarfon. As one of the wealthiest and largest property owners in Wales, he was an influential figure. The main source of his wealth was Dinorwig quarry, which dated from 1787 and was carved out of the south side of Elidir mountain at Llanberis. 
Dinorwig quarry consisted of the early workings, including Allt Ddu, and the main quarry. Tramways ran along open galleries, which were at vertical intervals of about 75 ft, and there were two principal incline systems. Transport was by the Padarn Railway which superseded the Dinorwig tramway in 1843 and was converted to steam in 1848. Its 7 mile track ran from Gilfach-ddu, where in 1870 large workshops were sited, to Y Felinheli ('Port Dinorwic') on the Menai Strait. This harbour, half way between Bangor and Caernarfon, had a large basin and a dry dock where ship repairs were carried out. In 1852 a private branch connected Y Felinheli via the Bangor-Caernarfon Railway to the main-line system, but in 1882 most of the 90,000 tons of slate produced by the 2700 men at Dinorwig was being sent by sea, and in the 1890s the quarry had its own fleet of four steel-hulled screw-steamers. 
When Assheton Smith took over the quarry in 1869, his quarrymen told him they would be 'quiet, honest and obedient', but in June 1874 all but eleven of them refused to give up membership of the newly created North Wales Quarrymen's Union (NWQU) and 2200 men were locked out for five weeks. Unwilling to lose profits in a buoyant slate market, Assheton Smith accepted trade unionism so long as it did not interfere with the rights of management. However, a depression in the slate industry led to wage cuts and a smaller workforce. The men resented the stricter discipline imposed by the new chief manager, Colonel James Wyatt, and in 1880 Assheton Smith put pressure on them to contract out of the 'Employers' Liability Act'. After Wyatt's death in 1884, his successor, the Hon. W. W. Vivian, joined with the works manager John Davies in implementing new rules, which the quarrymen saw as an infringement of their liberty. In July and October 1885 groups of men were suspended for leaving early, and a mass meeting held in working hours resulted in a lock-out from 31 October. 
When the quarry was reopened on 15 December, the men marched to the quarry and ordered the managers to leave for their own safety. The strikers resisted an appeal from W. J. Parry, the president of the NWQU, to abandon their rebellious attitude, but the exhaustion of their funds and an intervention by John Robinson of Tal-y-sarn quarry in Nantlle led to their surrender in February 1886. The disputed rules remained in force, and 300 men were dismissed. During the dispute Assheton Smith was much criticized by the Welsh radical press, and he incurred further hostility when at Caernarfon assizes in January 1886 he was found guilty of negligence for having accidentally shot and injured N. D. Lambert, a forester, who was acting as a game-beater for a shooting party. The jury rejected the victim's claim for $400 compensation and declared the $30 Assheton Smith had offered to be adequate. 
The end of the dispute led to some improvement in labour relations at Dinorwig quarry. In June 1887 Assheton Smith paid the men's fares to London for the jubilee, and on his marriage in June 1888 he remitted six months of his tenants' rent and paid the fares and expenses of a day trip to Liverpool or Manchester for all his employees. Wages were raised by 5 per cent in 1895. Assheton Smith offered an interest-free loan to his friend Lord Penrhyn, in July 1897, to help him in the Penrhyn quarry dispute, but the offer was declined. In December 1901 Vivian retired and was succeeded by E. Neele. In May 1902 the prince of Wales stayed at Vaynol for his installation in Caernarfon as chancellor of the University of Wales, and the quarrymen were given a day's holiday plus payments of 6's'. to those over twenty and 4's'. to those under. 
Assheton Smith died of heart disease at Vaynol on 22 November 1904 and was buried in the mausoleum in Vaynol Park. He was survived by his wife. The estate passed to his brother Charles Garden Duff, who assumed the surname Assheton Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 49453


Bulmer, Sir Bevis (d. 1613), courtier and mining projector, whose origins are shrouded in mystery, was a close friend of both Queen Elizabeth and James VI and I. Stephen Atkinson, his refiner of ores and a constant companion after 1587, wrote an account of Bulmer's activities in 1619, describing him as an 'ingenious gent' (Atkinson, preface), and elsewhere Bulmer was referred to as 'Bulmer the Projector' (Surtees, pt 2, 78). He is known to have had a son, John, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Prudence. 
Bulmer began his career at a group of mines near Clitheroe in the north of England, but his first major work was at Leadhills in Lanarkshire in 1576. His next project was established at Chewton minery in the Mendip hills, Somerset, in 1586, when Queen Elizabeth was one of his financial backers. The following year a silver-rich lead vein was discovered at Combe Martin in Devon, and Adrian Gilbert, one of the leaseholders and brother of Sir John Gilbert, the navigator, granted Bulmer a moiety of the lease. For the next two years each of the partners was reputed to have received $10,000 profit, but by 1590 this had declined to $1000. Bulmer also refined ore from the Irish mines of the Society of Mines Royal at Combe Martin. 
In 1593 Bulmer began the construction of a horse-driven chain pump at Broken Wharf near St Paul's Cathedral to bring drinking-water from the Thames to the Cheapside area of London. To commemorate the pump's completion in 1595 he presented a tankard made from Combe Martin silver to Sir Richard Martin, master of the mint and lord mayor of London. This was engraved with a portrait of Bulmer and the following verse: '
When waterworks in Broaken Wharf 

At first erected Weare, 

And Bevis Bulmer with his art 

The waters 'gan to reare. 
(Hoyle, 55-6)' This tankard was subsequently melted down, but three other dome-top tankards bearing the inscription 'the gift of Bevis Bullmer' were still in the Mansion House collection in the City of London some 400 years later. 
In 1593 Bulmer obtained letters of recommendation from the queen to the Scottish government, who granted him a patent to search for gold and silver at Leadhills. For the next two years he prospected for alluvial gold in the Lowther hills and built a house at Glengonnar near Leadhills where, according to Atkinson, he lived in great splendour. It is his behaviour here, described by Atkinson, that provides an insight into his attitude to wealth. In Atkinson's words, 'he wasted much himselfe, and gave liberally to many, for to be honoured, praised, and magnified, else he might have bin a rich subject; for the least of these frugalities ['sic'] were able to robb an abbott' (Hoyle, 43). Bulmer later returned to London and presented a porringer made from Lowther gold to Queen Elizabeth, inscribed: '
I dare not give, nor yet present, 

But render parte of that's thine owne 

My minde and hart, shall still invent 

To seeke out treasure, yet unknown. 
(ibid., 43)' This gift endeared him to the queen and he became a regular attender at court. In 1599 he was granted the farm of the duty on all seaborne coal and the duty on import of wines and he unsuccessfully tendered for the right of pre-emption of Cornish tin. He also received royal patents for two of his inventions: one in 1584 for a lighthouse and another in 1588 for a water-powered nail-making machine, which was used in a mill built at Dartford. 
In 1603 King James devised with Bulmer a 'Plott' whereby they were to finance the search for gold in Scotland. The king would reward investors with a knighthood, and they would become one of the 'knights of the golden mines' or 'golden knights'. Unfortunately this scheme fell through owing to the interference of Robert Cecil. However, Bulmer was knighted in 1604, and after receiving $100 as a 'free gift' from the king (Jenkins, 402) along with $200 'to be employed about the gold mines in Scotland' ('CSP dom.', '1603-10', 68) he returned to Scotland to hunt for gold in the Lowther hills. In 1606 he was granted a lease of all gold and silver mines in Scotland and received further gifts of $100 and $500 from the king in 1607 and 1608 respectively. 
In 1608 a silver-rich mine was discovered at Hilderstone near Linlithgow, which the king had purchased from Sir Thomas Hamilton. Sir Bevis was granted $2419 16's'. 10died to finance the works and he was appointed master and surveyor; but after two years the venture proved a financial disaster for James. Bulmer then moved to Ireland and from 1611 to 1612 mined at Kilmore in co. Tipperary. After borrowing $340 from Atkinson he returned to England and died penniless at Randalholme, Alston Moor, Cumberland, in September 1613. 
Despite his ignominious end, Sir Bevis Bulmer was one of the earliest British mining entrepreneurs to acquire a national reputation. His stature was such that he was caricatured in Ben Jonson's 'Staple of News' (1625) in which a character asks: '
Did I not tell you I was bred in the mines 

Under Sir Bevis Bullion? 
(quoted in Hobson, fol. 14)' 



@@@@@


doc= 49454


Clephan, James (1804-1888), journalist, was born on 17 March 1804 in Monkwearmouth, co. Durham, the second son and child of ten children born to Robert Clephan (1777?-1857), a baker, and his wife, Elizabeth Bails (1780?-1851). Robert Clephan had gone to England from Edinburgh and shortly after James's birth moved to Stockton-on-Tees, where his bakery, specializing in ship's biscuits, expanded into ship chandlery. 
Robert and Elizabeth Clephan had belonged to the Church of Scotland, but in Stockton the family joined the Unitarian congregation meeting in the Presbyterian Chapel, High Street. Largely drawn from families of small tradesmen and working men, the congregation had declined from its once flourishing state and indeed was closed in 1817-20 in a dispute with a minister who had returned to orthodoxy and refused to give up the chapel. The Unitarians nevertheless remained a lively force in the culture of Stockton, a place for which James Clephan retained an abiding affection. 
Apprenticed to a Stockton printer, in 1825 Clephan sought work in Edinburgh, where his father's family could offer support and where he greatly improved his skill. He returned to Stockton in 1827 and in October 1828 became a journeyman printer for the 'Leicester Journal', serving also as sub-editor. He was active in the Unitarian congregation at Great Meeting and in the Leicester Mechanics' Institute. In 1838 he was appointed editor of the 'Gateshead Observer', a weekly of recent foundation, which he edited (being as well sub-editor and reporter) until his retirement in 1859. The 'Observer' was already a lively and hard-hitting paper when Clephan joined it, but, in an age when newspapers borrowed heavily from each other, his incisive, witty, and quotable commentary brought it a national reputation. On his retirement his fellow journalists in the area presented him with a silver inkstand and a cheque for $250. 
On 16 July 1832 Clephan married Jane Pringle ('b'. 1801/2) of Stockton, who died on 10 March 1849; there were no children. After his retirement he returned to Stockton, but in 1861 was lured back into newspaper work, freelancing for the 'Newcastle Daily Chronicle' and for the 'Weekly Chronicle', with which he maintained a connection after his second retirement in the mid-1870s. His essays for the 'Chronicle' newspapers drew on his deep literary and antiquarian knowledge and his memories of the social revolution -- from stagecoach to railway and from sail to steam -- through which he had lived. In his later years his friends received privately printed Christmas volumes made up of his essays and poems. A list of his separately published works appears at the end of the sketch in Richard Welford's 'Men of Mark 'twixt Tyne and Tweed' (1895); two series of manuscript letters, which he transcribed and somewhat abridged and which were later deposited in the Northumberland Record Office, offer delightful glimpses into a closely knit family in a provincial town. 
Clephan was a staunch Liberal and reformer. He steadily opposed capital punishment and was a strong advocate of sanitary reform, notably in a series of articles in the 1850s calling attention to three earlier visitations of cholera to Gateshead and reprinted in 'The Three Warnings' (1854). He was a dedicated supporter of the Gateshead Mechanics' Institute and the Gateshead Dispensary, and of the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society, the Newcastle Antiquarian Society, and the Unitarian congregation in Newcastle, meeting first in Hanover Square and later as the Church of the Divine Unity. 
At the beginning of the 1880s Clephan withdrew from all journalistic work, except for occasional articles for the Unitarian 'Christian Life', and thereafter was largely confined by ill health to his room. He remained his charming, congenial self, however, until his death from bronchitis at his home, 9 Picton Place, Newcastle, on 25 February 1888; he was buried in Jesmond old cemetery in Newcastle on 28 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 49455


Cooke, Joseph (1775-1811), religious reformer and founder of the Methodist Unitarian Movement, was born near Dudley, Worcestershire, on 8 May 1775. His parents were poor, and his education was 'not what is generally esteemed a learned one' (Ashworth, 11). In 1799 he married Martha (1772/3-1849); they had three sons and two daughters. 
Converted to Methodism at an early age, Cooke took up local preaching so successfully that he was taken on trial as an itinerant preacher by the Methodist conference meeting in 1795 and was appointed to Redruth in Cornwall, to St Austell in 1796, and in 1798 to Burslem, Staffordshire. In 1799 he was admitted as a full preacher and served acceptably in Brecon and Chester circuits. In August 1803 he went to Rochdale circuit, which was centred on the Union Street Chapel. Constant itinerancy helped secure uniformity, as a preacher did not remain long enough to impress upon the members his particular views or methods. However, Cooke had his own views, and his rational and orderly method of examining the 'Bible' and the tenets of Methodism soon attracted wide and popular attention. 
Two sermons preached at Rochdale early in 1805 caused immediate trouble, and complaints led to Cooke's being called to account at the conference held at Sheffield in August. The sermons centred on justification by faith and the witness of the spirit. John Wesley had taught early in his career that unless a justified sinner felt his sins were forgiven by personal assurance, his way of life was of no avail to salvation; Cooke preached that when someone believed and was penitent, but was not conscious of God's pardon, he was still freely forgiven. Wesley seemed to follow this line later in his life, but Methodists were split on the matter and Cooke had touched a raw nerve. He strongly defended himself, and after much discussion stated that he would leave these matters alone for one year. On this basis he was appointed to the Sunderland circuit. However Cooke did preach on these subjects and published the two controversial sermons in Rochdale only months afterwards, with a contentious preface. 
At the 1806 conference Cooke was expelled with accusations on both sides of bad faith. He returned to Rochdale with a wife and family to support and no income. However, many of his hearers at Union Street Chapel seceded, and in the same year opened Providence Chapel in the High Street in which he could minister. At the opening service he stated: 'This chapel was built and opened, not for the purpose of preaching any system of doctrines taught by man, but for the purpose of communicating those truths, which after a diligent and impartial enquiry, may appear to me to be contained in the 'Scriptures'' (McLachlan, 'Methodist Unitarian Movement', 16-17). Cooke was feeling his way theologically, and 'if he did not arrive at Unitarianism by the time of his death, at least he moved steadily in that direction' (ibid., 16). 
Cooke preached widely in remote parts of Lancashire north of Manchester, and particularly at Newchurch in Rossendale, where a room was opened at Mill End in 1807 by his supporter John Ashworth (1779-1852), another ejected Methodist local preacher. By late 1809 Cooke had developed tuberculosis, and died in Rochdale on 14 March 1811. He was buried in the aisle of Providence Chapel. All his children had died by 1834, and there were no descendants. 
Cooke had started what became known as the Methodist Unitarian Movement (the Cookites), developed in the next decade by Ashworth, James Taylor (died 1856), and James Wilkinson (1787-1858). The Cookites first came to the attention of Unitarians as a result of an article in the 'Monthly Repository' in May 1815. In 1818 the minister of the old Presbyterian congregation in Rochdale stated 'May not Mr Cooke be considered as the father of Unitarianism in the town?' ('Monthly Repository', April 1818, 262). The movement revivified the old Presbyterian chapels in the area, and while by the 1840s it was spent as a separate force, its dynamic had made a significant impact on old dissent in Lancashire. A high proportion of the Rochdale Pioneers who in 1844 laid the basis for the modern co-operative movement were strongly influenced by the distinctive Methodist Unitarian approach to religion. 


@@@@@


doc= 49457


John Gordon (1807-1880), a Unitarian minister. John Gordon was born at Dudley, Worcestershire, on 1 March 1807, the son of Alexander Gordon, who was in business in the town, and his wife, Maria Loxton. Educated at Dudley grammar school, he was to prepare for the Church of England priesthood at Oxford, but he refused to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'; he maintained this libertarian stand throughout his life. He became a Methodist minister, but was in effect repudiated by the Methodist conference in 1835 on the same issue. After joining the Unitarians he was minister at Coseley, Coventry, Edinburgh, Dukinfield, and Evesham, and retired in 1873. He lectured widely and was considered one of the leading Unitarian ministers of his day. His knowledge of literature and history, on which he wrote, was profound, and he was a willing debater. An active religious libertarian, 'he stood complete in his integrity'. He married first Sarah King, daughter of John Mumford, in 1832; she died, leaving a son, the following year. Secondly he married in 1840 Anna Maria, daughter of Thomas Hodgetts of Bristol, who was the mother of Alexander Gordon and three other sons. John Gordon died at Ladyes Hill, Kenilworth, on 24 April 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 49458


Hopps, John Page (1834-1911), Unitarian minister, was born in London on 6 November 1834; nothing is known about his origins and upbringing other than that his father was Cordt Hopps, a stall merchant. After studying at Leicester Baptist college, in 1856 he became minister of a Baptist meeting at Hugglescote, Leicestershire. Doubts having set in, the next year he became an assistant to the Revd George Dawson (1821-1876), the great Birmingham preacher whose migration from the Baptist faith to liberal non-denominationalism was reflected in a succession of assistants making similar pilgrimages. On 13 June 1859 Hopps married Mary Jackson (1838-1902), daughter of Edward Jackson, a farmer; four children were born to the couple. Following his first wife's death, he married Alice Elizabeth Hallawell ('b'. 1876), the daughter of a London merchant, on 13 July 1903. 
In 1860 Hopps became minister at Upperthorpe Chapel, a new Unitarian congregation in Sheffield, moving from there to Old Chapel, Dukinfield, in 1863 and in 1869 to the splendidly idiosyncratic classical chapel in St Vincent's Street, Glasgow, erected in 1856 and demolished in 1982. Known as a compelling preacher and social activist -- in 1874 he was elected to the Glasgow school board, where he was an advocate of secular education -- he was called in 1876 to one of the most prominent Unitarian congregations, Great Meeting, Leicester, at the large stipend of $400. There for a time he was even more successful than in Glasgow, but by 1892 tensions had set in, and he left for the Free Christian church, Croydon, where he remained until 1905, successfully building up a relatively new foundation, though he found metropolitan piety inferior to that in the midlands and the north. He then became minister at Little Portland Street, the chapel identified with the London career of James Martineau (1805-1900). On its closure in 1909 the congregation moved to University Hall in Gordon Square, where Hopps preached his last sermon on the Sunday before his death. 
A slight man with a massive head and rugged face, gifted with a fine voice and a quick sense of humour, Hopps saw the preacher's art as the key to filling churches, repeatedly citing the spell-binding Baptist Charles Haddon Spurgeon (1834-1892) as proof. His buoyant personality is caught in his habit of signing letters 'Heartily yours', even when, during his Leicester troubles, he was reflecting gloomily on the future of Unitarianism. 
An inveterate publisher of sermons, hymns, and manuals for family worship, Hopps also edited two periodicals, 'The Truthseeker' from 1863 to 1887 and the 'Coming Day' from 1891 until his death. But he also advocated less conventional means for spreading the Christian message. Floral Hall, opened in Leicester in 1880 to appeal to unchurched working people through flowers, music, and popular preaching, drew an estimated attendance of 40,000 in the last year of its existence; its sale in 1886, without his consent, began the series of disappointments that led to his leaving Leicester. His later campaign for 'Our Father's Church' sought to transform and transcend his own congregation to unite people from all denominations in spiritual development and social sympathy. 
While honouring the Unitarian contribution to free inquiry and religious liberty, Hopps thought that Unitarian doctrine had outlived its usefulness and welcomed the Free Christian movement promoted by Martineau and his friends in the 1860s. But he moved on to new enthusiasms characteristic of a generation to whom traditional theological questions seemed increasingly irrelevant. Of these, the most remarkable was spiritualism, for which he was prepared by an early exposure to Swedenborgianism and by his mother's spiritualist experiences and to which he turned during a mental crisis in the mid-1860s. His spiritualism was consistent with his all-embracing humanitarianism and an expansive view of God as a spirit, not a person. Rejecting belief in the resurrection of the body, he was an early advocate of cremation. 
Politically, Hopps was an advanced Liberal. In 1886, determined to defend W. E. Gladstone against what he saw as tory abuse, he undertook a hopeless candidacy against Lord Randolph Churchill in Paddington, losing by 2576 votes to 769. He was a strong supporter of Irish home rule -- a position that weakened his standing in his Leicester congregation -- land reform, anti-vivisection, and the peace movement. He frequently wrote for newspapers, among them 'The Times' and the 'Daily News', and his stern criticism of British South African policy early in the new century appeared in the 'New Age', edited from 1902 to 1907 by a Unitarian minister, Harold Rylett (1851-1936). 
Hopps died of heart failure on 6 April 1911 at The Roserie, his house in Broadlands Avenue, Shepperton-on-Thames. The funeral service was held on 11 April at the Woking crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 49459


Johns, John (1801-1847), Unitarian minister and missionary, was born on 17 March 1801 at Northills, Plymouth, the youngest of the five children of Ambrose Bowden Johns (1776-1858), landscape painter, an artist who painted in the style of Turner, and his wife, Rebekah. Johns attended Plymouth grammar school and Edinburgh University, presumably because of its Presbyterian connection. In 1826 he was appointed minister to the congregation of English Presbyterians of Crediton, Devon, at a salary of $30 p.a. Though he dreamed of becoming a poet in the lakeland tradition he nevertheless devoted himself to the active promotion of schemes for popular improvement. He married Caroline Reynell (died 1861), daughter of Henry Reynell of Newton Abbot, on 6 September 1833. They subsequently had eight children, of whom six survived. 
In 1836 Johns was appointed minister to the poor at the Domestic Mission in Liverpool. There he lived in Nile Street (now demolished, but then newly built accommodation for the rising middle class) adjacent to St James's Mount, where the Anglican cathedral now stands. Liverpool was at that time a boom city, the decline of the slave trade having been offset by the rapid development of American and colonial commerce. The demand for labour attracted an influx of poor migrants from neighbouring countries, particularly Ireland, who crowded into slums notorious for lacking any civilized amenity. Poverty of both mind and body on such a scale constituted an enormous problem. Inspired by Tuckerman and Channing, the celebrated American ministers who had pioneered the campaign for a mission to the poor, the Unitarians in Liverpool (as the local Presbyterians were by then denominated) set up the Domestic Mission Society in 1836. If the poor refused to come to the gospel, the gospel must be brought to the poor. This would be no task for the charitable amateur; a man of exceptional commitment and skill would be required. 
The appointment of Johns was a surprising but perceptive choice. He was variously described as a dreamer of dreams, as if he had no skin, and as a practical mystic. He came with no other purpose than to demonstrate the validity of his own conviction that all men were equal and that none was beyond redemption, points of view then the subject of dissension in both religious and political circles. Confronted by people living lives that struck him as barely human, he undertook conventional missionary work, offering such spiritual and material comfort as was at his command. He made a modest contribution to civic affairs, for which he was respected. The poor regarded him with affection. 
Johns achieved no spectacular results. Nevertheless he emerges as a figure of considerable significance. A frustrated poet and an indifferent preacher, he found an alternative outlet in his annual reports to his committee. His skill in the use of words and the sensibility of his powers of observation endow these detailed records with a rare quality of compassion. Issued every year throughout his period of service, the reports constitute a unique running commentary on one man's exploration of the relationship between an urban community and its members, at a point in time when this was undergoing major stress. Johns also published a number of sermons, tracts, and poems. 
Johns's testimony inspired the ongoing programme of environmental reforms on which the nonconformist community focused throughout the following years and on which the tradition of 'Liverpool firsts' is founded (that is, pioneering social policies such as first medical officer of health, and first slum clearance legislation). This was his legacy to those who had sponsored his mission. 
The aftermath of the potato famine in Ireland brought about conditions in Liverpool such as even Johns had never seen before. His faith sorely tried, he toiled on until struck down by typhus while tending the body of a victim whom nobody else -- other than a Catholic priest -- would touch. He died on 23 June 1847 at 147 Mill Street, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, and was buried at St James's cemetery, Liverpool, two days later. He was survived by his wife, who died on 7 March 1861 in Hobart, Tasmania. 


@@@@@


doc= 49460


Latimer, Thomas (1803-1888), journalist, was born in Bristol on 9 August 1803, the son of a merchant's clerk who, some time after 1807, moved his household to London. Following an unrecorded but probably haphazard education, Thomas Latimer was apprenticed to a printer. With like-minded apprentices, among them the future comic writer and playwright Douglas Jerrold (1803-1857), Latimer pursued the self-education possible in a printing office, mastering French and Latin, with some Italian, and was caught up in Byronism and radical enthusiasms. Present in 1823 when Dr George Birkbeck (1776-1841) proposed a mechanics' institution in the capital, Latimer threw himself into the new activity, but soon withdrew and became involved in a nascent gymnastic movement on the German model. 
After completing his apprenticeship Latimer worked briefly for the 'Morning Post' (as a writer of jokes at 6died for seven lines) and then for the radical 'Albion' until the government closed it down. A walking tour of Devon in the summer of 1826 confirmed his dislike of London; settling on Exeter, he married Frances Ann Perry (1807/8-1892) of London, and they served briefly as superintendents of an infant school. Of twelve children born in the marriage, the younger son and four daughters survived him. 
Soon after his arrival in Exeter Latimer was introduced to two leading figures in the Devon County Reform Club who proposed to pay his salary while he was placed with the 'Devon County Chronicle'. Latimer claimed to have been the first shorthand reporter in the county; on one occasion at the Exeter assizes he and Charles Dickens matched skills. The arrangement with the 'Chronicle' collapsed after a year and Latimer was engaged by the 'Plymouth Journal'; in the first six months of 1830 he also edited 'Philo-Danmonian', a literary periodical. 
On his return to Exeter in 1830 Latimer joined the 'Exeter and Plymouth Gazette', where he soon became acting editor. When his hard-hitting leaders, in the mounting excitement over parliamentary reform, provoked his dismissal, he was immediately hired by the less well-established but uncompromisingly radical 'Western Times'. In 1835, realizing his value in a new age of opinion, local liberal leaders bought out the paper and installed him as managing editor. With the collapse of Exeter's ancient textile industry, the plight of the many poor residents engaged Latimer's deepest sympathies, though he had little use for trade unionism as a remedy. He sharply attacked the entrenched leadership of the city, giving point to the motto for the paper, 'Tempora quaeram'. 
Though an Anglican, Latimer found his choicest target in Henry Phillpotts (1788-1869), an uncompromising high-churchman who had become bishop of Exeter in 1831. Phillpotts soon alienated many of his clergy and much of the population of Exeter, especially the dissenters, by his absence from the city for all but a few hours during the cholera epidemic of 1832, by his use of patronage to provide for his family, and by his intolerance of theological difference, the last reaching a climax in the Gorham controversy of 1850. 
Latimer's genius for abuse fully justified his reputation as the Cobbett of the West. When on the scent he was not overscrupulous about fact or language. While notably strait-laced in habit and conversation, his humour and sarcasm led him to focus on personal frailties and to make outrageous play with names: thus, a high-church parson who was among the first to place flowers on the altar was ever after Flower-Pot Smith, and when Phillpotts appointed a son-in-law, the Revd Francis du Boulay, to a living, the unfortunate cleric became the Revd du Bouilli (the Revd Bully-Beef). Very much of its time this slashing style clearly embarrassed late Victorian journalists who were called upon to write otherwise admiring obituaries. 
In the mid-1840s a long-simmering dispute between the duke of Somerset and Phillpotts boiled over. A dozen years earlier the duke had chosen James Shore, an evangelical clergyman, as curate of a chapel built to serve some new housing on the ducal estate. In 1843 a change of vicars gave Phillpotts occasion to refuse a licence to Shore. Somerset thereupon had the chapel licensed as a dissenting place of worship, but when Shore continued to officiate according to the 'Book of Common Prayer' the bishop brought Shore to trial before the court of arches. In a judgment on 20 June 1846, later upheld by the judicial committee of the privy council, the court refused to remove Shore but ordered him admonished and to pay the costs, which led to his imprisonment for debt. 
Shortly after the privy council judgment, Latimer printed a full report of a speech by the duke's son, Lord Seymour, attacking the bishop, and in an editorial Latimer denounced Phillpotts as, among other things, a 'consecrated, careless perverter of facts'. Phillpotts thereupon brought a charge of criminal libel against 'Thomas Latimer, labourer'; overriding the advice of his lawyers Latimer refused to apologize, and the case came to trial on 27 March 1848, when Latimer was brilliantly defended without fee by Alexander Cockburn (1802-1880), later lord chief justice. Phillpotts had not reckoned with the effect of Lord Campbell's act of 1843, which allowed truth to be pleaded against an accusation of libel, and, despite hostile instructions, an overwhelmingly Conservative jury acquitted Latimer, to general rejoicing in Exeter. 
Although Latimer somewhat moderated his editorial tone after mid-century, he remained committed to radicalism as he understood it. He became an overseer of the poor and an improvement commissioner in 1849 and a magistrate in 1851. Physically active and a genial friend, he was handicapped only by increasing deafness, which led him in the late 1860s to turn over editorial duties largely to his son-in-law, while his younger son Hugh (1843-1920) took on the management of the highly successful paper, which had become a daily in 1866. Latimer died at his home, 143 Fore Street, Exeter, of liver cancer on 5 January 1888 and was buried in the old cemetery on 10 January. The commemorative window in the south aisle of the cathedral, like the windows in the lady chapel honouring his old adversary Bishop Phillpotts, was destroyed in an air raid in 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 49461


Morell, John (1775-1840), Unitarian minister and schoolmaster, was born on 16 May 1775 at Maldon, Essex, the second of the four children of Stephen Morell (1727-1815) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' King (1739-1810). His great-grandfather Daniel Morell ('b'. 1666) was a Huguenot from the Champagne area of France who fled to Ireland, and whose son married into the Conte family of similar descent. 
The Morells had close connections with the Independent church at Maldon, and all three sons became ministers of Independent churches. Following removal to London, John and his elder brother Stephen (1773-1852) were sent to Rothwell, Northamptonshire, to prepare for the ministry, and later to the grammar school at Hitchin, where the family then resided. Entry to Homerton College followed, the brothers being Trotman grantees in 1792 and 1793 respectively. Their younger brother Thomas (1781-1840) followed in 1799, having received a grounding in classics from his brothers. 
Morell started his ministry in Independency at Foulmire, Cambridgeshire, then at Blandford, Dorset. In 1796 he took the pulpit formerly occupied by Thomas Belsham at Daventry, where he may have come in contact with Unitarian thinking. For health reasons he moved to a Presbyterian pulpit at Enfield, Middlesex, about 1798. The failure of his voice and his altered religious opinions led to his resignation in 1802. 
Morell successively kept schools in Exeter, Nottingham, and in various places around London until 1816. He married Elizabeth (1779-1852), daughter of Revd John Reynell and his wife, Mary, of Thorverton, Devon, on 5 August 1812; they had two daughters and a son. In 1814 he was awarded a doctor of laws degree, probably from a German university, 'procured for him by his friends, entirely without his knowledge' ('Christian Reformer', May 1840). By this time he was firmly in the Unitarian fold, and during 1816 and 1817 was classical and mathematical tutor at Hackney Academy, run by Revd Robert Aspland for intending ministers of Unitarian congregations. From at least 1815 he wrote regularly for Unitarian journals. 
In January 1818 Morell moved to Brighton, Sussex, where he ran a successful school, as well as becoming Unitarian minister at Cavendish Street Chapel. It was decided to erect a new Unitarian church in New Road on land purchased from the prince regent, and Morell was appointed as first minister. He was charged with the design, which he believed should be classical in style. Opened in 1820, it was based in outline on the Temple of Theseus. Admired by many as elegant, the church was dismissed by the 'Royal Brighton Guide' of 1827 'as built after the manner of a heathen temple'. Its Doric portico was a striking addition to the centre of Brighton. 
Morell's importance lies in the influence he had over his pupils at his school at Hove. These included Isambard Kingdom Brunel, Professor Thomas Solly, Henry Solly, and Henry Acton. The last two were Unitarian ministers, and there were several other men whom Morell influenced to take a similar path by his fine mind, classical learning, and liberal sentiments. Henry Solly writes at length about his time at Morell's school and what was taught: 'The good Dr... had a very kindly heart, large sympathies, and in general a pleasant genial manner' (Solly, 1.93). 
Apart from John, the numerous other Morells who became ministers of religion remained Independent (later Congregationalist). His brother Stephen ministered at Little Baddow, Essex, for over fifty years and was succeeded by his son. Another died at the start of a ministerial career, while the youngest, John Daniel Morell, left the ministry to become the first inspector of schools. Thomas Morell was a leading theological writer and tutor, who at the time of his death in February 1840 was president of Coward College; his only son died at the start of a ministerial career. 
John Morell retired from the Unitarian ministry at Brighton in 1827, passing his school at Hove to his successor in that pulpit, J. P. Malleson. Morell then travelled with his family in Germany, Switzerland, and Italy for the next few years, returning to settle in Bath in 1836, where he died on 11 April 1840. He was buried on 19 April in Lyncombe cemetery near Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 49462


Upton, Charles Barnes (1831-1920), Unitarian minister and tutor, was born on 19 November 1831 at Portsea in Hampshire, son of Henry Upton, a bookbinder. His early education was undertaken by Dr J. R. Beard, his uncle, at his school in Manchester. In September 1853, at the age of twenty-one, Upton was enrolled at Manchester New College, which had just moved from Manchester to Gordon Square in London. Here he studied for the Unitarian ministry, taking his BA degree at the University of London in 1857. The following year he won a Hibbert scholarship which enabled him to continue his studies after completing his ministerial training and to gain a BSc in 1862. On 11 July 1863 he married Louisa, daughter of Charles Elcock, a captain in the merchant navy. Although they had no children, they enjoyed thirty-four years of happily married life. In 1867 he received an invitation to become the minister of the Ancient Chapel at Toxteth Park in Liverpool, where he remained until 1875, when he was invited back to his old college as professor of philosophy to work alongside James Martineau, the principal. When Manchester College was relocated to Oxford in 1889 he moved with it, and remained on the staff until his retirement in 1903. 
Upton was not an original philosopher, but he was a competent teacher and perceptive reviewer, whose main achievement was to popularize the philosophy of James Martineau, his former tutor and colleague. His major work was his contribution to the 'Life and Letters of James Martineau' (1902), which he wrote with James Drummond. Upton's section of this book was later published separately under the title 'Dr Martineau's Philosophy' (1905). This was an able work which did justice to a complex philosopher. His other major work was the publication of his Hibbert lectures delivered in 1893, 'The Bases of Religious Belief'. Here again he acknowledged his dependence upon Martineau and dedicated the book to him. He strongly argued in this work for the doctrine of human freedom, which was a theme constantly found in his lectures and other writings. 
Upton was a gentle and quiet man, who read widely and spent much time as a conscientious teacher, a preacher in the college chapel, and a writer of reviews for 'The Inquirer', the Unitarian newspaper. He was a sociable person who enjoyed company and receiving guests, both friends and former students, at his home, St George's, Littlemore, which had been the residence of John Henry Newman after he resigned from the living of St Mary's. Upton died in his home on 21 November 1920. His chief interest outside his academic work was the cultivation of fruit trees in his garden at Littlemore. There is a fine portrait of him by Leslie Brooke in the small dining-room at Manchester College, which captures something of his unselfish and loving character. There is also a memorial plaque to him in the college chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 49463


Wicksteed, Charles (1810-1885), Unitarian minister, was born in Shrewsbury on 10 June 1810, the seventh son and eighth child (of eleven) of John Wicksteed (1774-1837), a starch manufacturer and, after business reverses, manager of a gasworks. Through his mother, Bithia Wicksteed (1775-1819), daughter of John Swanwick of Wem, Shropshire, his descent could be traced from the great dissenting preacher Philip Henry (1631-1707). 
In 1818 Wicksteed entered Shrewsbury School, where in time he was admitted to the small group taught directly by the headmaster, Samuel Butler (1774-1839). He thought Butler deficient in the humane side of scholarship, but the classical training was technically superior, and in 1828, assisted financially by the Shrewsbury Chapel and Dr Williams's trust, he entered the University of Glasgow, graduating BA in 1831. 
In that year Wicksteed became minister of the Ancient Chapel, Toxteth Park, Liverpool, succeeding John Hamilton Thom (1810-1894), who had moved to Renshaw Street Chapel in the city. In 1835 he became minister at Mill Hill Chapel, Leeds. In 1837 he married Jane Lupton (1815?-1902), daughter of Arthur Lupton of the Leeds mercantile dynasty; they had five sons, including Philip Henry Wicksteed (1844-1927), and four daughters, one of whom died in infancy. 
The theological and literary collaboration forged in Liverpool with Thom, James Martineau (1805-1900) of Paradise Street Chapel, and John James Tayler (1796-1869) of Upper Brook Street Chapel, Manchester, reached its apogee in the joint editorship of the 'Prospective Review' in 1845-54, the influential voice of the 'new school' of English Unitarianism, as against the older tradition of eighteenth-century Priestleyanism. Wicksteed published less and exercised a smaller role in the denomination than his friends. He was, however, an erudite and thoughtful man and a popular and important preacher: the 'joyous juvenility' noted by Henry Crabb Robinson (1775-1867) in his travel diary (22 Oct 1849, DWL) may have been a more important portent of later Victorian pulpit style than the rigour and austerity that characterized the preaching of his colleagues in the quadrumvirate. 
Wicksteed's health was delicate, and his outward joviality belied deep uncertainties, stemming in part from the loss of his brilliant and adored elder brother Joseph Hartley Wicksteed ('b'. 1803) in a swimming accident in Scotland in 1824. He retired from Leeds for ill health in 1854 and settled in north Wales, where from 1856 he operated a farm, Hafod-y-coed, in the Vale of Clywd. He attended the parish church -- but never the morning service, some parts of which Unitarians found offensive -- while impressing Unitarian principles on his children. In 1861-3 he supplied the pulpit at Hope Street Church, Liverpool, and in the latter year began a joint ministry with Alexander Gordon (1841-1931); on resigning in 1872 he was enabled by an annuity furnished by friends to become 'minister at large', lecturing around the country until 1881. He had given up the farm in 1875 and in 1877 moved to Croydon, where he died of a stroke on 19 April 1885. He was buried in Norwood cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49469


Thomas, David (1794-1882), iron manufacturer, was born at Tyllwyd farm, Cadoxton, Glamorgan, on 3 November 1794, the only son of David Thomas and his wife, Jane, farmers. His father, the son of a dissenter, held the office of churchwarden in the established church, and served as overseer of the poor for sixteen years. A precocious lad, David Thomas received the best education available in the district, attending schools at Allt-wen, near Pontardawe, and Neath. Farming held no interest for him and, aged seventeen, he entered employment at the Neath Abbey ironworks, one of the largest manufacturers of mining machinery and Cornish pumping engines. Here he acquired technical training in the machine shops and foundry. In 1817 Richard Parsons, owner of the Ynyscedwyn ironworks at Ystradgynlais, hired him as general superintendent of the company's furnaces and iron mines, a position he held for the next twenty-two years. George Crane acquired control of Ynyscedwyn in 1820 and supported Thomas's experiments with anthracite to smelt iron. 
Crane's business acumen and Thomas's technical expertise created a dynamic combination. Ynyscedwyn sat on Wales's anthracite basin, and yet was hauling bituminous coal to the works from a distance of fourteen miles. If anthracite could be used successfully costs would be significantly reduced. Experiments in 1826 and 1832 failed, but Thomas finally succeeded in smelting iron after adopting the hot-blast method patented in 1828 by James Neilson of Glasgow. According to an account by Edward D. Roberts, who had a long association with Crane and Thomas, 'the origin of the successful application of the hot-blast in making iron with anthracite' occurred in Crane's library. Using the bellows to heat coals in the fireplace, Thomas observed that 'if we only had Neilson's hot-blast here, the anthracite would burn like pine' ('Red Dragon', 1883). Both immediately recognized that this was an idea worth exploring. Thomas returned from his visit to Neilson in Scotland with a licence to experiment with the technology and a skilled mechanic to construct the hot-blast ovens that would heat the air to be forced into the furnace. By spring 1837 the new hot-blast proved successful in increasing the temperature sufficiently to ignite anthracite coal. Thereafter that was the only fuel used at Ynyscedwyn until it ceased operation in 1877. This technical breakthrough required the ironmaster not only to adapt the hot-blast and blowing machine to anthracite, but also to experiment with the optimum size and shape of the furnace and mixture of the raw materials. 
Experiments with anthracite iron also were under way in Pennsylvania, where the major deposits of anthracite coal in the United States were located. Entrepreneurs were busy trying to discover the secret of anthracite-smelted iron, none more so than managers of the Lehigh Coal and Navigation Company (LCNC). One of company's agents, Solomon W. Roberts, was inspecting rails at the Dowlais ironworks in Merthyr Tudful when he learned of Thomas's successful experiment. Roberts visited Ynyscedwyn, and then sent an enthusiastic report to his uncle Josiah White, an official with the LCNC. Erskine Hazard, a member of the LCNC board of managers who was travelling to England on business, was assigned to visit Ynyscedwyn to discuss transferring the technology to Pennsylvania. Crane recommended that Hazard employ David Thomas as ironmaster, and in December 1838 Thomas signed a lucrative agreement with LCNC to supervise the company's construction of a new hot-blast anthracite furnace at a location on the Lehigh River that became Catasauqua. Although reluctant to leave his ageing mother, his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Hopkins (1794-1888), who spoke only Welsh, overcame his resistance by arguing that their three sons, Samuel, John, and David, would have a better future in America. George Crane stood to profit since the patent was in his name, and he actively encouraged Thomas to accept the offer. 
The Thomas family boarded the clipper 'Roscius' at Liverpool in May 1839 for the three-week voyage to New York. Thomas contracted a fever during the passage and was quarantined in a New York hospital for his first month in America. Once he recovered the family travelled on to Pennsylvania and on 9 July reached Allentown, where they resided for the next four months while their house was built near the new ironworks site. Thomas laid out the works and directed the construction of the furnace following the same plans used at Ynyscedwyn with hot-blast ovens separate from the furnace, and a waterwheel to drive the blast machinery. There were many obstacles to be overcome, but finally the anthracite furnace went into blast in July 1840. Four additional furnaces were built at Catasauqua by 1850 making the now renamed Lehigh Crane Iron Company the most impressive furnace group in America. The Catasauqua works is closely identified with the beginning of the industrial revolution in America, and was exceeded only by the complex that Thomas created in 1855 at Hokendauqua, about a mile from Catasauqua, for the Thomas Iron Company. The company was organized in 1854 by local capitalists and named in honour of David Thomas. Thomas was a major investor in the company, but his son Samuel Thomas (1828-1906) served as its superintendent. 
While he is best known as an iron-furnace innovator Thomas's talents were far-reaching. He developed the first anthracite furnace to use heat from the furnace to heat the steam boilers, worked out how to use steam engines to drive the blowing machinery instead of the waterwheel, found a way to use gases escaping the furnace stack to develop a new refining method similar to what became the puddling furnace, and also developed a mechanical system to replace animal power for handling raw materials. The practices and innovations developed by David Thomas spread throughout the nineteenth-century American iron industry, diffused by ironmasters who came to Catasauqua to learn from Thomas and use his famous technical library, and then moved on to manage new works opening elsewhere in industrializing America. William R. (Captain Bill) Jones, Andrew Carnegie's legendary superintendent of the Edgar Thomson works in Pittsburgh, is perhaps the most famous of many. Giles Edwards (1824-1892), another influential ironmaster who was trained by David Thomas, also born in Glamorgan, played an instrumental role in establishing the iron industry first in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and then in Birmingham, Alabama, the 'Pittsburgh of the South'. 
David Thomas returned to Wales only once, in 1866. By then he had branched out into numerous other businesses, but his reputation as an ironmaster was pre-eminent throughout his lifetime. His national influence was recognized when, aged eighty, he was elected president of the Ironmasters' Convention meeting in Philadelphia. At Catasauqua he held civic office when the town was incorporated in 1853, and founded the Presbyterian church there. He died at his home in Catasauqua on 20 June 1882. At his funeral 900 furnace workers from the Thomas Iron Company led a procession of sixty-four carriages conveying the Lehigh Valley elite. He was buried at the Fairview cemetery, West Catasauqua. David Thomas was not an inventor, but rather a great technological innovator who smelted the first commercially successful anthracite iron. Through him the British industrial knowledge and experience that would spark America's emergence as an industrial power was transferred to the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 49470


Alexander, Walter (1879-1959), bus operator, was born on 2 May 1879 at Bonnybridge, Falkirk, son of Robert Alexander, a carter, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Stirling. In 1902 the family opened a general store at Camelon, near Falkirk, which also sold, hired, and repaired bicycles. In 1913 Walter bought a chain-driven Belhaven lorry, which was used in the cartage business during the week and, by substituting a charabanc body, carried passengers at the weekend. A second Belhaven was acquired in 1916. 
Alexander married Isabella Daly in 1898 at Falkirk. They had at least one son, also called Walter. 
The family shop was sold in 1921, and by the time the business was incorporated in 1924 the two men were in full partnership. They were more like brothers than father and son. By 1928 the fleet had grown to more than 100 vehicles, and services reached Glasgow and Aberdeen, with a co-ordination agreement with the Scottish Motor Traction company (SMT) between Perth and Dundee. A coach building works was established at Stirling (removed to Falkirk in 1959). 
After the main-line railway companies obtained road powers in 1928 a considerable consolidation of bus company ownership took place in Scotland. The London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) and the London Midland and Scottish Railway (LMS), invested in SMT, which, while remaining an operator, became a holding company, among its interests being a two-thirds share in W. Alexander & Sons Ltd. In the more settled market of the 1930s the Alexanders were able to expand further (taking over some SMT services in the process), and when the SMT group was sold to the British Transport Commission in January 1949 roughly half its fleet of more than 5000 vehicles were in Alexander's 'Bluebird' livery; a famous emblem in Scotland, still to be seen there. 
Father and son Alexander continued to serve on the board of Scottish Omnibuses Ltd, the state-owned holding company, the older man until his death. His son joined the board of the successor Scottish Transport Group in 1969, and retired in 1971. They were not alone among the founders of the Scottish bus industry in making this transition to public ownership while remaining in control. They bought out the coach building side of the business in 1948, and formed Walter Alexander & Co. (Coachbuilders) Ltd, which became one of the largest bodybuilding firms in the UK. 
Walter Alexander, senior, was a JP, and a football enthusiast, becoming chairman of Falkirk FC in 1951. After the death of his first wife he married on 2 October 1936 Clarissa May Brookes and thirdly, on 12 December 1953, Anne Cooper Elder, or Strachan, who survived him. He died of heart failure at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary on 19 June 1959. His son, who had married Katherine Mary Turnbull, died after a stroke at the family home, Solsgirth House, near Dollar, on 5 March 1979. There is no doubt that the contribution of the two men, through what remained almost a family business for so long, was of outstanding value to travellers in Scotland, from the midlands to Inverness. 


@@@@@


doc= 49471


Coppack, Thomas (1895-1981), shipowner, was born on 14 August 1895, at East View, High Street, Connah's Quay, Flintshire, the fourth child and second son of Thomas Coppack ('c'.1867-1940), shipowner, of Connah's Quay, and Elizabeth Ann Butler (died 1956) of Burton Stather, Lincolnshire, daughter of a shipbuilder. He was always known as Tom. The family had its origins in Norway, and Coppack is a corruption of the Norwegian name Kopeck. It was a maritime family in a maritime community, long settled on the Dee. Connah's Quay was one of the many busy ports which were concerned with the important coastal trade. Coppack's paternal grandfather, Captain John Coppack, had retired from the sea to become a shipowner about 1860. His firm, using the extensive development of the local brick, tile, and coal industries, found good business for its schooners, and also undertook the agency work for other vessels which they loaded. To this they added ship chandlery and ship repairing in association with members of the Butler family from Burton Stather. In the 1880s Captain Coppack ventured successfully into small steam coasters, whose higher cost made it much more important to keep them busy. Captain Coppack retired in the 1890s, and was succeeded by his second son, Thomas, and, for a time, the captain's brothers. Many other relatives were also seafarers. In 1910 the firm owned six steamers, seven sailing vessels, and a tug. 
Coppack had his only formal education at St Mark's church school, Connah's Quay, although the family attended the Methodist chapel; later they moved to the Anglican church. However, his father's recurrent asthma meant that he started in the firm's office when he was eight years old. He had expected to go to sea, and he did make a number of voyages in the firm's ships, but his father's illness, and probably his own aptitude, brought him increasingly into management together with his eldest brother, John William (who died in the 1960s and with whom he shared membership of freemasonry). Between 1916 and 1919, Coppack served in the Royal Navy as a signalman, mostly with convoy commodores. On his return, he married Elsie, daughter of John Jones, a builder, of Shotton, near Connah's Quay. They had two daughters. 
His early practical experience gave Coppack a thorough knowledge of the coasting trade, where owners needed to know the characteristics of the many ports, the different types of cargo, the vessels employed, as well as the capacities of the men in their employ. His father was a hard driver of both his ships and his men, but in 1926 ill health finally compelled him to retire and Coppack and his elder brother became the principals of the firm, buying out three other brothers. They maintained the strict regime which had given Coppacks such a good name for reliable service in such ventures as the potato trade from western France to England, where quick delivery of perishable cargoes was necessary. Coppack, with great aptitude for the complex calculations and judgements involved in arranging satisfactory charters, dealt with that department. 
The First World War ended the era of commercial sail on the coast, and the Coppacks sold their last schooner in 1922. Henceforth they owned nothing but the smaller type of steam coaster with a single hatch, usually having four or five at any given time. The firm still traded in many familiar Irish sea passages, such as Connah's Quay bricks and tiles or Point of Ayr coal to all parts of Ireland, and stone from the north Wales quarries to Liverpool and elsewhere; but coasters, like deep sea tramps, were always open to the charter taking them further afield and so they still participated in the spring fruit and potato business from the Channel Islands and Brittany. Attention to the cleanliness of holds also gained them regular china clay cargoes from Cornwall to Grimsby. 
Between the wars was a difficult period with boom and slump, and a collapse of rates but not of expenses, a pattern repeated after 1945. The coasting business in general gradually contracted: although the agency business remained active, the local industries no longer had such extensive connections and cargoes became very local, while the disadvantages of Connah's Quay became too evident. However, the firm had many regular shippers and the business remained viable. The Coppacks kept trading until 1965 when Tom Coppack retired in favour of his nephew and niece. 
Coppack was slim, about 5 feet 8 inches tall, with dark, wavy hair. He had a quick mind, and there was usually a twinkle in his eye. His equable personality and unremitting attention to detail could get the best out of men. Although the firm never sought a national place, Coppack was a coasting shipowner of much repute. In retirement he wrote a fascinating autobiography, 'A Lifetime with Ships' (1973), which charts a vanished era of maritime history. He lived at or near Connah's Quay all his working life, but after the death of his wife he moved about 1980 to Sheffield to live with his surviving daughter. He died in Nether Edge Hospital, Sheffield, from bronchopneumonia and cerebrovascular problems on 23 November 1981. 


@@@@@


doc= 49472


Munro, Sir Hugh Thomas, of Lindertis, fourth baronet (1856-1919), mountaineer and landowner, was born on 16 October 1856 at 27 Eaton Place, London, the eldest of the nine children of Sir Campbell Munro of Lindertis, third baronet (1823-1913), and his wife, Henrietta Maria (died 1912), daughter of John Drummond. Munro enjoyed a privileged childhood at the family residence in London and at their Scottish country estate near Kirriemuir, Forfarshire. The climbing career for which he gained posthumous fame began at the age of seventeen when, having travelled to Stuttgart to learn German, he first holidayed in the Alps. This trip also marked the beginning of a lifetime punctuated by foreign travel and interwoven with the martial and diplomatic networks of the British empire. As a young man Munro's training for a career in business was placed on hold after he found in military service a more obvious means to satisfy this wanderlust. Having spent several years abroad serving as an aide-de-camp, he travelled to the Cape of Good Hope in 1880. While this trip was initially restorative following an attack of pleurisy, an opportunist streak helped him secure a post as private secretary to Sir George Pomeroy Pomeroy-Colley, the governor of Natal. With the outbreak of hostilities in the Basuto War, Munro volunteered for active service and was given a posting as a courier in Landrey's Horse, an irregular cavalry corps. Much later in life his appointment as a king's messenger of foreign dispatches would revive these field skills, although in the rather more luxurious circumstances which international diplomacy afforded. 
Following his return to Britain from southern Africa, Munro's attention turned north to the ancestral seat in Forfarshire. First as estate manager and heir apparent, then, following his father's death in 1913, as laird and fourth baronet, Lindertis was the focus for family life and a base for local activism on behalf of the Conservative Party. A member of the central council of the Conservative Party in Scotland, he stood unsuccessfully as a parliamentary candidate for Kirkaldy district of burghs at the general election of 1885, but was subsequently elected a member of Forfarshire county council. He married Selina Dorothea, the daughter of Major-General Thomas Edmond Byrne, on 29 August 1892; the couple had a son and three daughters before the premature death of Selina in May 1902. Although he had a predictable enthusiasm for field sports and highland dress, family memories also reveal a less conventional dimension to Munro's establishment image. An idiosyncratic vein of natural mysticism was evidenced by a belief in the supernatural, his abilities as a water diviner, and the existence of heavenly music. That he had experienced the last of these atmospheric phenomena in the Scottish mountains is entirely appropriate. It was here, scaling the heights, that Munro was in his element. 
Permanently bearded, compact, and wiry of stature, Munro was renowned among the membership of the Scottish Mountaineering Club for powers of endurance and resourcefulness, and for his redoubtable character on even the most demanding expeditions. Despite this muscular image, combined with a pair of feet small and nimble enough to secure his reputation as a skilled highland dancer, Munro was no mountain gymnast. He would happily skirt precipitous rock faces in favour of the simplest route leading to any mountain peak. Such an approach aligned him with the 'salvationist' tendency of the Scottish Mountaineering Club, as opposed to the rope-bound 'ultramontane' with whom they enjoyed a jocular, very masculine rivalry. A near permanent fixture at early outings and social gatherings, Munro's 'clubbable' nature led to his election as honorary president in 1894. He was equally comfortable walking alone. Equipped with compass, aneroid barometer, maps, thermometer, and measuring poles, he navigated his way across entire hill ranges, covering prodigious daily distances. The many published accounts of these arduous solo expeditions are functional and factual in character rather than effusive. However, they do attest to an enduring fascination with topographical survey techniques, and an obvious frustration with the still flawed 1-inch maps being produced by the Ordnance Survey. Thus his progress on any route was punctuated by regular stops to take aneroid readings, measure distances between prominent landscape features, fix summit heights, and scribble detailed notes on visible montane panoramas. It is tempting to see this enthusiasm for recorded fact and classificatory order as an extension of a boyhood yen for natural history, indulged in collections of butterflies, birds' eggs, shells, and fossils. 
While measuring Scotland's 'mountains' was at first Munro's private passion, this pedestrian odyssey was to be afforded official sanction by the Scottish Mountaineering Club in 1889. His commission, to assemble an accurate list of all summits rising to heights of 3000 feet or above, clearly reflected the club's constitutional objective of furthering scientific study in the mountains. The completion of the project consumed Munro for three years. With a tenacity verging on fanaticism he even undertook some of the necessary field expeditions under cover of darkness in winter conditions. These clandestine operations were deemed the most effective means to respect the claims to privacy made by fellow sporting landowners. The results of these labours originally appeared in the club's journal of 1891. 'Munro's tables', as they would soon become known, listed some 283 mountains by name, height, grid reference number, and according to seventeen geographical areas. This did not mark an end to his efforts. Munro remained committed to the continual revision and refinement of the tables for the remainder of his life. Indeed, when he succumbed to pneumonia on 19 March 1919 at the Red Cross canteen which he had helped establish in Tarascon, southern France, a second edition of his treasured tables was very close to completion. 
Steeped in the traditions of Victorian field science and imperial exploration, Hugh Munro's schema for mountain classification has since become a key influence on the popular understanding and experience of Scotland's geography. Thousands of 'Munro-baggers' devote their weekends to collecting the country's summits, with the long-term objective of 'compleating'. Ironically Munro, having failed to climb three peaks, was not the first to accomplish this feat. For active 'Munroists', and those now confined to the armchair, this discovery is emblematic of a contested and intriguing legacy. Munro's specific criteria for the award of mountain status were far from transparent. Although he relied heavily on repeatable scientific practice, this was combined with value judgements on the relative merits of different landscapes. Thus while certain shapely peaks were considered deserving of inclusion in the tables, less distinctive points of the required height were assigned the more lowly status of a 'top'. Although revised metric maps produced by the Ordnance Survey, depicting the 3000 feet contour with greater accuracy, have led to the discovery and deletion of Munros, other amendments have been made by the Scottish Mountaineering Club on less obviously objective grounds. That ultimate sanction for these decisions still lies with just one organization means that the whole question of promotion to, and deletion from, the tables remains highly contentious among the climbing community. The debates show few signs of subsiding. 
Munro was buried near Lindertis on 2 April 1919. From his graveside several 'mountains' are in view. 


@@@@@


doc= 49474


Murray, Charles Thomas McKinnon (1919-1985), comedian and actor, was born on 6 November 1919 at 26 Duncan Street, Greenock, the only surviving child of William Irvine Murray (1879-1933), railway goods checker, and his wife, Isabella Forrest McKinnon (1882-1958). He left school at Greenock in 1934 when he was fifteen and obtained an apprenticeship at Kincaid's marine engineering works. A few years later he formed a musical act with workmates and friends which had a fair amount of local success especially during the war years. 
Murray married Maidie Dickson ('b'. 1922), daughter of Hugh Beaton Dickson, maintenance engineer, and Anne Sinclair, on 28 April 1945. She was an established Scottish variety performer and persuaded Chic to leave his job as a marine engineer to form a comedy/musical double act. On stage Chic at 6 feet 2 inches towered over his partner's petite 5 feet nothing. From the beginning he was determined not to be just another Scottish comic. He was a storyteller, something many audiences were slow to appreciate. Describing in detail apparently mundane activities like going downstairs and leaving the house, he made them seem extraordinary. Standing almost stationary centre stage he spoke to the audience in quiet, deadpan tones without any gestures that might deflect attention from the words. Journalist Jack House described him as 'a complete original, who turned familiar words and phrases into something out of this world' (House, 81). 
Signed by the Bernard Delfont agency in 1955 the duo climbed steadily to top billing at the major variety theatres in Britain and on television but Chic was left to go solo when Maidie retired in the early 1960s. Unlike other top comics he failed to secure a regular television series as variety theatres closed and, although still busy, he allowed his career to drift. His links to the Delfont agency loosened and he was looking after his own affairs. Self-management was not his strong point and both his career and his health suffered from lack of proper attention. In 1972 he and his wife divorced. 
Chic Murray played cameo roles in a number of films beginning with the spoof James Bond film 'Casino Royale' (1967). He gained particular praise and welcome favourable publicity as the headmaster in 'Gregory's Girl' (1981) and the bank manager in the television film drama 'Saigon -- Year of the Cat' (1983). His economical style suited the camera and from a low point his career seemed to be taking off in a new direction. Somehow, perhaps due to ill health as well as ill luck, it never happened. There was one final acting success when in 1984 he played the former Liverpool Football Club manager Bill Shankly in the musical play 'You'll Never Walk Alone' at the Everyman Theatre, Liverpool. He died on 29 January 1985 at 7 Bruntsfield Crescent, Edinburgh, from a perforated duodenal ulcer. His funeral service was on 1 February at Mortonhall crematorium in the city. 
Chic Murray was successful in variety, television, cabaret, film, and on radio and was one of the most impersonated performers in show business, in itself a tribute to his unique talent. He was a major influence on younger comedians such as Billy Connolly who declared him 'the funniest man on earth', the artist who set the standard to which he aspired (Yule, 269). 


@@@@@


doc= 49475


Murray, Thomas Blackwood (1871-1929), engineer, was born at Heaviside, Biggar, Lanarkshire, on 22 April 1871, the son of John Lamb Murray and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Findlay. His father was an autodidact architect and engineer who acted as factor to estates in the area, and whose interests included designing and installing electric generation and water-power plant. The young boy revelled in his father's engineering pursuits and became skilled at repairing clocks. After being sent to George Watson's College in Edinburgh, he graduated with a BSc in engineering from the University of Edinburgh in 1890. In the year of his graduation he patented a water turbine speed governor that was to be widely adopted. He went on to serve time with King Brown & Co. of Edinburgh and then with Rankin, Kennedy & Co. of Glasgow before briefly joining his father as a consultant engineer. After visiting a German engineering works he joined Mavor and Coulson in Glasgow, pioneers in electrical engineering, where he met the engineer George Johnston. 
In 1895 Murray collaborated with Johnston and Norman Osborne Fulton ['see below'] to design and build motor cars in a workshop at Johnston's father's manse, at Mosesfield. The three formed the Mo-Car syndicate in 1896 to build the motorized dog carts, and also designed improvements in tramcars. 
Murray and Fulton considered Johnston to be an ineffective businessman, and in 1899 established their own company, the Albion Motor Car Company, with financial backing from Murray's father and works in the former Clan Line repair shop in Finnieston Street, Glasgow. On 5 December 1900, at St Andrews, Fife, Murray married Henrietta Wilhemena, daughter of William Rusack, hotel keeper; her family owned Rusack's Hotel in St Andrews. They had at least three sons and one daughter. Following Johnston's example and no doubt to his annoyance the Albion Company began building dog carts. By 1902 they had built almost sixty 8 and 10 horsepower cars. In that year Albion moved to a purpose-built factory in Scotstoun and lorries were added to the product range. The partnership was converted into a limited company with an injection of new capital from James Francis Henderson (1875-1941), who had a degree in engineering from the University of Glasgow. Henderson was an experienced electrical engineer which he put to good effect in devising new starter motors for Albion engines. He became joint managing director with Fulton, while Murray acted as chairman. 
The Albion Motor Car Company went from strength to strength, winning medals at international exhibitions and building an extensive export market. Recognizing that it was impossible to compete with the larger car manufacturers in England, from 1913 the company concentrated solely on building lorries. This was a providential decision. During the First World War 6000 Albion 3-ton lorries were supplied to the Ministry of Munitions, probably more than by any other supplier. Vickers, the armaments manufacturers, selected Albion as their preferred supplier of vehicles during the conflict. Despite the onset of tuberculosis, Murray visited France several times during the war to see his lorries in service. The firm also delivered over 60,000 shells. Murray designed a lubricator for the Dragonfly aero-engine that was being produced by William Beardmore & Co. and his own Chorlton-Murray-Albion aero-engine. He gained a DSc degree from the University of Edinburgh in 1917 and was a member of the institutes of civil, electrical, and mechanical engineering. In 1919-20 he was president of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland. 
Ill health forced Murray to seek a gentler climate and after the war he purchased an estate at Conford Park, Liphook, in Hampshire, leaving Fulton and Henderson in day-to-day charge of the works, though he remained as chairman until his death. After the war Albion could claim to have supplied more vans than any other manufacturer and advertised their hydraulic tipping lorries as being ideal for reconstruction work. The company also began building charabancs to take advantage of the fast growing demand for buses and promoted their vehicles heavily in the press. Albion weathered the post-war recession well, expanding the market for its products both in the United Kingdom and overseas and regularly introducing new models. By the mid-1920s all of its public service vehicles were equipped with pneumatic tyres. Murray was an evangelical in religion and a prominent Freemason, serving as the youngest master mason in Scotland. He died at Monthey, Switzerland, on 11 June 1929 and was buried at Biggar. 
Murray's partner in the Albion Motor Car Company, Norman Osborne Fulton (1872-1935), engineer, was born at 1 Grafton Square, Glasgow, on 3 June 1872, the son of Hugh Fulton, a wholesale provision merchant in Glasgow, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Wilson. The motor car maker George Johnston was his cousin. After schooling at Allan Glens's Institution, Glasgow, he served an engineering apprenticeship with Kesson and Campbell of Shettleston, manufacturers of pithead machinery. He went on to take jobs with four different west of Scotland engineering firms before joining Murray and Johnston in the Mo-Car syndicate. 
After leaving the syndicate Fulton went to the United States on what was in effect an industrial espionage mission. He worked for a year in two automobile factories, sending back a stream of technical reports, before returning to join Murray in the Albion Motor Company in 1899. At Biggar, on 6 July 1904, he married Murray's sister, Margaret Anne Murray. 
During Murray's increasing absences from the Albion Company works at Scotstoun, Fulton oversaw the production side of the business. In 1915 the Clyde workers' committee called a strike over the question of the dilution of skilled labour and targeted Beardmores and Albion, where one of their leaders, Willie Gallacher, was an employee. There was further industrial action in 1919 and 1922. Unlike Murray, Fulton was no autocrat and set up an employees' benevolent fund. As an evangelical churchman he was involved in charitable and social work. He succeeded Murray as chairman, a position he held until his death. Fulton died at his home, St Edmunds, Milngavie, Dunbartonshire, on 27 July 1935. He was survived by his wife and two sons. Fulton and Murray possessed business acumen, and access to capital, that their former partner Johnston lacked, and both died wealthy men. 


@@@@@


doc= 49478


Necker, Louis Albert (1786-1861), geologist, was born on 10 April 1786 in Geneva, eldest son of Jacques Necker (died 1825), professor of botany and magistrate in Geneva, and Albertine (1764-1841), daughter of Horace Benedict de Saussure (1740-1799). As well as the famous alpine geologist and naturalist as grandfather on his mother's side, Necker's family included several other distinguished members, notably the famous novelist and authoress Madame de Stael. Geneva provided a fertile, highly cultured background for his early education, his schooldays finishing in 1800. He then pursued a course of higher studies for four years, probably at the academy in Geneva. In July 1803, with his father, he made his first journey into the Alps. 
Already conversant with mineralogy and geology, Necker arrived in Scotland, aged twenty, in 1806 in order to continue his studies at the University of Edinburgh. He thus became one of several visiting students, including Richard Griffith (1784-1878), from Dublin, to attend the classes of Robert Jameson (1774-1854), professor of natural history from 1804. Jameson had studied briefly under A. G. Werner in Freiburg and established the Wernerian Natural History Society in Edinburgh in 1808, to promulgate Werner's teaching on the classification and origin of rocks. 
The young, sociable Louis Necker was soon introduced to many of the leading figures in Edinburgh society at that time -- such as John Playfair, Sir James Hall, Lord Webb Seymour, and others who had been associated with James Hutton (1726-1797) in the Royal Society of Edinburgh, founded in 1783. Hutton had first communicated his theory of the earth to that society in 1785 and thus Necker was ideally placed to take full advantage of the opposing Huttonian (Plutonist) and Wernerian (Neptunist) schools of thought in Edinburgh. The energetic Necker embarked on a series of tours throughout Scotland while based in Edinburgh. Beginning in the winter of 1806-7, he explored the coast of Fife, the islands of the Forth, and the coast of Berwickshire as far as St Abb's Head. In May 1807 he spent some time in Arran, being persuaded by the field evidence of Hutton's ideas on the origin of granite, namely that granite had crystallized out of a fluid state by means of fusion. In August that year he travelled as far as Staffa and first visited the Isle of Skye, to which he was later to return permanently. 
On 9 April 1808 Jameson read a paper to his newly formed society in Edinburgh, 'On colouring geognostical maps'. No evidence exists that Jameson himself ever made such maps; Hutton, in his extensive travels, amassed a collection of specimens but made no geological map, although his friend John Clerk of Eldin illustrated the localities they visited together. Necker's unique achievement, based largely on his own tours, was to construct the earliest known geological map of the whole of Scotland. This he presented to the newly formed Geological Society of London on 4 November 1808. Hand-coloured and based on Thomas Kitchin's 1778 map of Scotland at about 121/2 miles to the inch, the 'Explanation' of the rock divisions used employs both Huttonian and Wernerian principles. Unfortunately, the accompanying memoir has not survived and the map itself lay in almost complete obscurity until 1939 when it was printed in colour and published for the Edinburgh Geological Society. Although riddled with errors and omissions, it is nevertheless a remarkable document. 
Necker returned to Geneva to occupy the chair of mineralogy and geology from 1810. The journal of his Scottish tours was eventually published there in three volumes in 1821, as 'Voyage en Ecosse et aux Iles Hebrides'. He continued making extensive tours and published several other works. In 1832, Necker accompanied J. D. Forbes (1809-1868), the pioneer Scottish glaciologist, on his first alpine tour, the two becoming close friends. Necker had never married, and the death of his mother on 13 April 1841 affected him deeply. He settled in Portree on the Isle of Skye for the last twenty years of his life, maintaining his wide range of scientific interests, especially in making barometrical observations. He died on 20 November 1861, aged seventy-five, at Portree, and was buried in the old churchyard there. 


@@@@@


doc= 49479


Newbery, Francis Henry (1855-1946), art educationist and painter, was born on 15 May 1855 in Membury, Devon, the second son and third of the six children of William Newbery ('c'.1824-1897), a shoemaker born in Stockland, Devon, and his wife, Mary Elliot ('c'.1820-1888), of Bridport, Dorset. The family moved about 1858 to Bridport. Newbery attended Bridport general school from 1860 to 1874, where he qualified as a teacher. From 1871/2 to 1875 he studied at the Bridport School of Art, where he became a certificated art master. The same year he obtained a post as art master at the City Corporation Middle Class School, Cowper Street, London, then from 1877 to 1881 he taught at the Grocers' Company's School in Hackney Downs. Newbery enrolled as a general student at the National Art Training School at South Kensington in 1877, and in 1881 he won a scholarship as a full-time 'Art Master in Training'. 
In 1885 Newbery was appointed as headmaster of the Glasgow School of Art, where he established himself as a first-class pedagogue and organizer. His educational philosophy emphasized the importance of a thorough technical training, an immersion in artistic tradition, and the need for students to discover their own artistic individuality. He sought to employ artists as teachers, rather than the certificated art masters approved by the Department of Science and Art. Through the Glasgow School of Art Club, which he initiated in 1885, he encouraged a broader approach to art than that prescribed by the department's national course of instruction, and by 1897 Newbery's school was consistently gaining more awards in the department's annual national competitions than other schools of art. 
In 1893 Newbery had taken advantage of additional funding made available through the 'Technical Instruction Acts' (1887-1892) and opened a series of craft workshops. His encouragement of collaboration between four students, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868-1928), Herbert McNair (1868-1953), Frances Macdonald (1873-1921) ['see under 'Mackintosh, Margaret Macdonald], and Margaret Macdonald Mackintosh (1864-1933), and his promotion of their and other students' work in British and continental exhibitions, won the school an international reputation. This was further aided by exposure of students' work in British and continental art periodicals such as 'The Studio', for which Newbery also wrote. His organization of the Scottish section at the international Exhibition of Modern Decorative Art at Turin (1902) gained Newbery the title of 'cavalliere ufficiale dell'ordine della corona d'Italia'. 
Newbery played a part in the selection of Charles Rennie Mackintosh as the architect of the Glasgow School of Art's new premises and between 1897 and 1909 collaborated closely with him over the details of its design and building. 
In 1901 the Glasgow School of Art became the first central institution for art under the Scottish education department, with control over its own curriculum and increased funding, enabling Newbery to make prestigious international appointments to his staff. The teaching, especially that in architecture, was reorganized largely on the continental 'beaux arts' model. Of the crafts which were taught in the school, probably the most distinctive was embroidery, carrying the Glasgow decorative art style well into the twentieth century. Newbery's school was unusual in employing large numbers of women, many of whom, like Newbery's wife, Jessie Wylie Rowat (1864-1948) ['see 'Newbery, Jessie Wylie, 'under' Glasgow Girls], whom he married on 28 September 1889, had previously been students. 
As a painter Newbery was closely allied with the Glasgow Boys, with whom he exhibited internationally. Like several of them he often chose field workers and fishermen as subjects, as well as children -- primarily his two daughters, Margaret Elliot ('b'. 1890) and Mary Arbuckle ('b'. 1892). Many of his paintings were produced at Walberswick in Suffolk, which he visited from 1883 to 1915, including 'Sole a levante e luna a ponente' ('c'.1901; Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Turin) and 'The Warden of the Marshes' ('c'.1899; Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Santiago, Chile). After his retirement in 1917 Newbery settled in Corfe Castle, Dorset, where he continued to paint until 1932. His most important late works were decorative schemes for Bridport town hall (1923-7) and at the church of the Holy Ghost and St Edward, Swanage (1924-30). Newbery died at his home, Eastgate, East Street, Corfe Castle, on 18 December 1946 and was buried there in the West Street cemetery. Examples of his paintings are held in the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh, and the Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery, University of Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 49481


Niven, Frederick John (1878-1944), novelist, was born on 31 March 1878 in Valparaiso, Chile, the youngest of the three children of John Niven, originally a sewed muslin manufacturer in Glasgow though temporarily in the British consular service, and his wife, Jane, daughter of George Barclay, a Baptist preacher. When Niven was five years old the family returned to Glasgow, where he was educated at Hutchesons' Boys' Grammar School. 
His parents opposed Niven's wish to become a painter, and as a compromise he enrolled for evening classes in Glasgow School of Art while beginning an apprenticeship in a soft goods manufacturing warehouse. He later wrote in his autobiography: 'I was not enthusiastic about manufacturing... it was Charlie Maclean, head of the wincey department, who informed me, gazing at me solemnly one day, 'Freddy, the plain fact is that ye dinna gie a spittle for your work' ' (Niven, 26-7). He left for more congenial employment with MacLehose & Son, librarians and booksellers in Glasgow. 
In 1899, because of lung trouble, Niven travelled to British Columbia, Canada, where he regained his health and led an energetic outdoor life. On his return to Glasgow he began a career in journalism. He moved to England and his first novel, 'The Lost Cabin Mine', appeared in 1908. In 1911 he married Mary Pauline Thorne-Quelch (died 1968), who, as his editor's daughter, had typed his manuscripts. 'Justice of the Peace', his best-known novel, was published in 1914 and attracted critical praise, not least for its affectionate and detailed picture of Glasgow. 
Found unfit for military service, Niven spent the First World War in London, working for a time in the War Office under the novelist John Buchan. In 1920 he returned to Canada with his wife to settle on the shores of Kootenay Lake, near Nelson, British Columbia, and became a full-time novelist. He produced a number of 'potboiler' westerns and historical novels set in North America, but became respected as a Canadian novelist with the publication of his 'prairie trilogy', 'The Flying Years' (1935), 'Mine Inheritance' (1940), and 'The Transplanted' (1944), which describe the opening up of the Canadian west through the eyes of expatriate Scots. 
However, Niven also continued to write the realistic novels of Scottish urban life for which he is better known in Britain. Autobiographical elements can be traced in many of these, with their recurrent themes of Calvinism and maternal influence. 'Justice of the Peace' is the story of a young man apprenticed in his father's textile warehouse but determined to become a painter. The father-son relationship is well handled, though the portrait of the forbidding, neurotic mother has elements of melodrama. The eponymous mother in 'Mrs Barry' (1933), in contrast, is perhaps implausibly good and heroic. Niven retained clear memories of his youth in Glasgow and returned to a warehouse setting for 'The Staff at Simson's' (1937), a near-documentary novel which follows characters over twenty years. 
Although he expressed great affection for Scotland, Niven remained in Canada for the rest of his life. After a series of heart attacks he died in hospital in Vancouver on 30 January 1944. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 49482


Everard, Frederick Thomas (1858/9-1929), shipowner, was of German origins, beginning life with the surname Eberhardt, which he prudently changed in the First World War. He became foreman shipwright for A. H. Keep, a barge builder at Greenhithe, in Swanscombe, Kent, after a period in its Battersea yard. He was so successful that by 1880 he was yard manager, and bought the site to operate it himself. About a decade later he moved into barge owning, though not with one of his own construction, but perhaps as payment for a debt from the cement makers Knight and Bevan. 
The fleet was built up until, by his death in 1929, it numbered about fifty vessels. Although Everard started with sailing barges, and throughout his life retained a strong belief in their utility and profitability, he was not immune from changes around him and encouraged the shift to powered craft, which Everards began just before the First World War. The firm went into both steam and motor coasters. Interestingly, given the criticisms usually levelled at British shipowners for being slow to adopt diesel technology, Everards owned a motorship before it did a steam-engined vessel, and operated more motorships than steamers throughout the inter-war period. By 1939 its fleet comprised nearly forty motor coasters as against about ten steamships and twenty-five sailing ships. Thus the firm was able to compete against the Dutch motor coasters which began to appear in the British coastal trade. 
Everard married Susan Ann Spooner (1862-1944), daughter of William Martin Spooner, mariner, on 8 March 1885. They had three sons and one daughter, all of whom were encouraged to take an interest in the firm. Everard ensured his two eldest sons received a thorough technical training at the Greenhithe yard and in the shipyard of Fellows at Great Yarmouth. His youngest son was trained as an engineer at the firm of Plenty & Son at Newbury, which made marine diesel engines, and which was acquired by Everards in 1932. His daughter, Alice Ethel, the eldest of the four children, also helped with the business, especially on the bookkeeping and office management side, remaining undistracted by marriage. By the First World War all four children were playing an active part in the firm with William taking the lead in strategy and the operational side, Frederick in the construction and repair of barges. When the private firm was converted to a limited liability company in 1922 Everard was governing director, and the other four directors were his children; the shares were split equally among these five. 
One of Everards' strengths in the 1920s was its enterprise. Apart from being among the first British firms to operate diesel ships, it also sought and found new trades, such as coastal tankers with steam heating coils, which allowed it to carry edible fish and vegetable oils at the correct temperature for easy pumping. It also spread its risks by operating in a wide range of trades such as coal, clay for cement making, china clay, and grains. The firm was also good at fostering a spirit of friendly rivalry among its skippers, encouraging them to make fast passages and paying them a form of piece rate -- on shares -- to ensure the minimum time spent in harbour. The founder was also careful with the finances, ensuring profits were ploughed back into more vessels, and employing external sources of finance, such as the Midland Bank, using the fleet as collateral. During the First World War the firm received 'financial help' (Wilson, 173) from Van den Berghs in return for carrying oils to the Netherlands and margarine back to the UK. The association lasted into the Unilever era and beyond the Second World War. 
Everards has been described as 'a paternalistic company demanding acquiescence, in return for which they looked after their own' (Durham, 111). At times this meant the skippers were driven to improve productivity or were subject to sarcastic comment if they were slow on a passage. The good side was small unexplained gifts and thoughtfulness to the crews, and the provision of over fifty houses in Greenhithe for the crews' occupation, appropriately in Port and Starboard Avenues. Everards also used barge racing as a method of motivating its crews and advertising its services. The founder of the firm was a keen supporter of the Thames and Medway races, and his sons kept up this tradition until well into the 1960s. Although never as large scale as the largest barge owners, such as E. and J. Goldsmith of Grays or the London and Rochester Trading Company of Kent, Everards was built on stronger foundations and endured. 
Everard has been described as calm and restrained, a gentleman of the old school, genuinely concerned for his crews. He was active in the local community, presenting a flagstaff to celebrate the relief of Mafeking in 1900 to St Mary's Greenhithe, the local parish church, of which he was a churchwarden from 1909 to 1920. In 1925 he donated land on which to build a rectory. He was widely liked and respected. He died on 8 June 1929, aged seventy, at his house, The Warren, High Street, Greenhithe, and was probably buried in St Mary's. 


@@@@@


doc= 49483


Rothery, Mary Catherine Hume- (1824-1885), campaigner for medical reform and author, was born on 14 December 1824 at Bryanston Square, London, the youngest daughter of Joseph Hume (1777-1855) MP and his wife, Maria ('b'. 1786), daughter of Hardin Burnley, a proprietor of the East India Company. Mary Catherine married the Revd William Rothery (died 1888), who was curate of Hexham, Northumberland, from 1862 to 1864 and assumed the additional name of Hume by deed poll on 1 January 1866. They had at least one child, a son. 
Through the influence of a close friend and colleague of her father, Charles Augustus Tulk (1786-1849), Mary Hume-Rothery became a Swedenborgian. In 1850 she published an account of Tulk's life addressed to members of the New Church, the sect founded in 1787 to promote Swedenborg's teachings in Britain (of which Tulk had not been a member). In it she outlined Tulk's interpretation of what he had held to be Swedenborg's core doctrine, the 'law of correspondence', that all the objects of the senses were representations of human will and intellect. Like many Swedenborgians, Tulk had a strong interest in popular sciences and unorthodox medical movements, including phrenology and mesmerism. Linking an 'alternative' medical ethos to a liberal-radical perception of the state, Hume-Rothery went on to campaign against the growing authority of the medical profession in Victorian Britain. 
In a published essay of 1871, 'Women and Doctors, or, Medical Despotism in England', Hume-Rothery described herself and her like-minded associates as 'medical dissenters' who aimed at 'the complete and entire disestablishment and disendowment of the State-chartered medical autocracy' (Hume-Rothery, 'Women and Doctors', 15). She opposed the medical registration bills which endowed allopathic practitioners with the sanction of the state at the expense of homoeopaths, hydropaths, herbalists, and the like, who were often preferred by working-class people. The exploitation of women by male doctors roused her indignation: she strongly denounced male midwifery and the conducting of gynaecological examinations by male doctors, while she supported proposals to admit women to the medical profession and advocated health education for all women. 
Two causes attracted Hume-Rothery's particular commitment from the early 1870s: the women's campaigns for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and against compulsory vaccination. She was a prominent speaker for Josephine Butler's Ladies' National Association, a separatist organization founded in 1869, which challenged the double standard of morality embodied in the 'Contagious Diseases Acts' and insisted that prostitution was a consequence of poverty rather than of depravity. In 'A Letter Addressed to the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone' (1870) Hume-Rothery argued that nothing less than the complete legal equality of women and men, including the suffrage, would avail to redress women's grievances against the medical profession on this and other issues. 
Mary Hume-Rothery, in partnership with her husband, played a nationally significant role in the allied movement against compulsory vaccination, which sought the repeal of a number of acts passed from the 1850s to the 1870s compelling parents to have their children immunized against smallpox. Based in Cheltenham, in 1874 the Hume-Rotherys founded the National Anti-Compulsory Vaccination League, with William as president and Mary as honorary secretary. The Cheltenham league soon became the national centre of the movement, the previously established Manchester- and London-based leagues being weak at this time. Mary Hume-Rothery edited the 'National Anti-Compulsory Vaccination League Occasional Circular' (1874-6) and its successor, the 'National Anti-Compulsory Vaccination Reporter' (1876-84). 
The tactics of the Cheltenham league were comparatively militant: it organized a nationwide series of demonstrations and lecture tours, and encouraged parents to defy the law. While it was successful in extending the movement to the rural middle class, the existing urban working-class supporters in the north-west of England remained aloof from the (mainly middle-class) Cheltenham leadership, which failed in its aim to amalgamate the various leagues around the country. In the early 1880s the Cheltenham league was eclipsed by the London Society for the Abolition of Compulsory Vaccination (founded in 1880), which succeeded in co-ordinating provincial activities and gaining the support of a number of MPs. 
Mary Hume-Rothery died on 14 February 1885 at The Pines, Tivoli, Cheltenham. In addition to religious and political works, she had published a novel and several volumes of poetry and children's stories. 


@@@@@


doc= 49484


Henman, Philip Sydney (1899-1986), transport entrepreneur, was born on 21 December 1899 at Haddon Villas, Yalding, near Maidstone, Kent, the second son and third child of seven children of the Revd Sydney James Henman, Baptist minister at Yalding, and his wife, Ellen Gertrude, 'nee' Brine. Philip attended several schools, including Caterham School and later Shoreham grammar school. Rheumatic fever thwarted his early ambition to go to college and into the Christian ministry. At seventeen he joined a firm of Lloyd's insurance brokers, Alexander Howden & Co. Conscripted in 1917, he joined the King's Royal Rifle Corps and was demobilized as a sergeant in 1921. Having studied some accounting, in 1922 he got a job as accountant to the General Lighterage Company, operating two barges from Hay's wharf. He became managing director in 1929, and began acquiring companies in wharfage, warehousing, road haulage, and other ancillary services, as well as barges and tugs. By 1939 he was chairman of the General Lighterage Company, and bought out Colonel Edgar Richard Hatfield, the firm's founder. 
Henman survived the nationalization of the road haulage industry in 1947 by confining his business to short distance work. In 1950 he formed a public holding company, General Lighterage (Holdings) Ltd, to run sixteen subsidiaries, which together offered a 'package' service, from ship to inland customer. Troubled labour relations in the docks and new methods of conveying commodities from ship to shore (such as pipelines and, later, containers) pointed to new directions, especially after the denationalization of long distance road services in 1953. He expanded his business by buying out smaller, often family, firms. Henman's success came from his rigorous cost-accounting, and from his style of management, which allowed his companies to retain their individual characters. When he retired in 1969 his group comprised over eighty operating subsidiaries in Britain, three in South Africa and Rhodesia, three in Australia, and seven in Europe. Turnover of the whole group stood at $50 million, compared to under $1 million in 1950. The group, renamed the Transport Development Group when it became a public company in 1957, operated over 4500 lorries, compared to 150 in 1950. Henman's other major business enterprise was the Square Grip Reinforcement Company, formed in 1934 by his elder brother, Frank Espinett Henman, to make twisted high tensile steel for the construction industry. 
Henman married Jessie Mary 'nee' Nairn (1898-1976), daughter of the manager of the London branch of the Scottish Provident Life Association, in 1931. They had one daughter, Mary Jessie. Among the many Christian causes Henman supported were the London Bible College (which John William Laing and he were instrumental in founding), Inter Varsity Fellowship (of which he became chairman), the British and Foreign Bible Society, and the Africa Inland Mission (whose home council he chaired). He was elected a patron of the Royal College of Surgeons and a benefactor of the Royal Society of Medicine in recognition of his large gifts to them. He became chairman, and later vice-president, of the council of the London chamber of commerce; vice-president of the Institute of Transport; member of the grand council of the CBI, and chairman of its transport committee; member of three city livery companies, the Paviors, Farmers, and Watermen and Lightermen; honorary doctor of the University of Surrey; high sheriff of Surrey (1971-2), and deputy lieutenant of Surrey. For relaxation he took up farming in Surrey and in Scotland. He died on 8 November 1986, at Sundridge Hospital, Sundridge, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 49485


Hickmott, Harold Edward (1881-1947), motor bus operator, was born on 8 May 1881 at Marden, Moorgate Grove, Rotherham, Yorkshire, the son of Edward Hickmott, master grocer, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Dawes. Nothing else is known about his early life; but Hickmott trained as an engineer at the Vickers naval dockyard, Barrow in Furness, before moving to Brighton to join the management of Southdown Motor Services, in the fledgeling motor omnibus industry. During the First World War, Hickmott served in the Royal Flying Corps, becoming a major, a rank he was unwilling to relinquish during his subsequent civilian career. 
Hickmott left the forces in 1919, hoping to make a big splash in the passenger transport business. With the assistance of two friends from Yorkshire, Hickmott acquired James Hodson's suburban bus service in Preston, Lancashire, and founded Ribble Motor Services Ltd in June 1919, a company with an initial capital of $20,000. Britain stood on the brink of a bus mania. New bus routes spilled out from the towns into the countryside, where buses competed with the railways, while in urban areas private bus operators sought to challenge the municipal tramways. British Automobile Traction, an offshoot of the country's largest private sector tramways company, British Electric Traction, purchased Ribble in 1920. Hickmott could afford to be satisfied with this new arrangement as he retained managerial control. He was managing director of Ribble from 1920 until 1944, and finally retired from the board in 1946. 
As a subsidiary of British Automobile Traction, Ribble could draw upon a large reservoir of capital, providing the company with a significant advantage over most of its neighbours. Commanding forces befitting a general, Major Hickmott surveyed the map of north-west England, and planned his attack. Hickmott's victims among the region's small bus firms were offered fair terms, but those who resisted being taken over faced a ruinous fare-cutting war. These tactics did not work against stronger rivals, such as the London Midland and Scottish Railway (LMS), and the corporation transport departments, such as Liverpool, Wigan, and Preston, whose networks had a degree of legal protection. Hickmott entered into collusive agreements with LMS and the corporations, and in the 1930s he was a staunch advocate of co-ordination between road and rail services, and private and public sector transport undertakings. One of Hickmott's greatest coups was a market sharing agreement, commencing in 1931, between the railways, municipal tramways, and major bus companies on Merseyside. Ribble's territory in the 1930s stretched from Liverpool to Carlisle, and the company became Britain's largest operator of express coach services. In 1939 Ribble owned 1055 vehicles, and its issued capital was $1,400,000. 
Hickmott was called Hicky by those not required to call him major. In a photograph taken in 1939 he comes across as square-jawed, tight-lipped, and bespectacled; keeping a firm grip on his drink, he exudes a steely determination. Another photograph shows him sporting a military moustache, and staring piercingly, but not coldly, into the camera (his eyes were blue). The managing director of Crosville Motor Services described Hickmott in his prime as a 'large cockerel scratching vigorously in the bran' (Crosland-Taylor, 282), and later in life as an elderly viking. Hickmott was regarded with respect and affection by his equals. Less is known about the attitude of his inferiors, although Ribble had a reputation as a paternalistic employer. Ribble was a disciplined, but overly bureaucratic, organization in Hickmott's day. The senior staff corridor at head office in Preston was known as the quarterdeck, and loyalty was rewarded more liberally than efficiency, as was the norm in transport undertakings. 
Determination and good fortune were the twin secrets of Hickmott's rise to fame in the world of the omnibus. Following its takeover by British Automobile Traction, Ribble's destiny was virtually assured. At the very least, however, Hickmott had the ability to make the most of a winning hand, and his contemporaries believed him to be one of the sharpest thinkers in the passenger transport industry. Hickmott retired to the Sherwood House Hotel, Newton St Cyres, Devon, where, following a stroke, he died on 19 August 1947. He was buried in Newton St Cyres. 


@@@@@


doc= 49486


Hooley, Edgar Purnell (1860-1942), surveyor and road builder, was born on 5 June 1860 at Brunswick Street, Swansea, the son of Charles Hooley, commercial traveller, and his wife, Elizabeth Phillips, 'nee' Purnell. Nothing is known about his education, but following a short period in the office of the surveyor to the Neath (south Wales) highway board, Hooley was articled in 1876 to James Craik, civil engineer and surveyor, Bristol. He spent a further year, 1879-80, as an assistant, before returning to Neath, and entering a general partnership with Francis Lean. In 1881, he became surveyor to the Stow on the Wold highway board, and took a similar position with the rural sanitary authority for Maidstone in Kent, in 1884, where he was also responsible for the design of water and sewerage schemes, as well as for roads and bridges. In a tract published by the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1892, 'Sanitary Work in Rural Districts', Hooley wrote of how outbreaks of disease caused by the poor drainage of such districts might excite less public interest, but proportionately they were just as commonplace as in urban areas. 
Hooley was appointed surveyor and architect to the newly established Nottinghamshire county council in 1889. Together with his chief assistant, he designed and built between 1896 and 1902 the county asylum, at a cost of $147,000. Drawing heavily on his experience at Maidstone, he put into effect a bookkeeping and contractual system for the maintenance of the county's main roads. An outline of the system, which he gave to the newly empowered district councils, was later published as a book, 'Management of Highways' (1894). In 1902, Hooley took the further position of road engineer for the Kesteven county council of Lincolnshire. However, the work of the two counties, together with private practice, led to a breakdown in his health, and his resignation from the Kesteven position. He later served as acting county surveyor for Oxfordshire, and as consulting county surveyor for Buckinghamshire. 
Hooley was keenly interested in the materials used in road construction and maintenance. During his time at Maidstone, he had substituted granite for local stone. Although more expensive to purchase, and import to the county, its hard-wearing qualities brought longer term savings. His priority in the early 1890s was to remedy damage wrought by earlier short-term economies. Roads had been 'starved' of materials to the point where their foundations showed through. Again, there were significant, long-term savings to be made from large-scale and immediate expenditure. The increasing number of heavy traction engines placed further demands on road construction and maintenance. Even where the foundations were sound, and the traditional water-based macadam surface well maintained, the 'sucking-up' action of the pneumatic tyres of the rapidly growing number of motor cars created a crisis in road management. Not only was there public outcry over the dust and mud nuisance, but the road surface disintegrated even more rapidly. 
Convinced that the future lay with the car -- it made less dirt, and was quicker and more convenient than either the horse or traction engine -- Hooley saw no alternative but to design an entirely new road surface. There had been numerous trials with various forms of tarmacadam. Hooley is generally credited with being the first to discover ways of mixing tar with slag mechanically at the blast furnace in such a way as to produce an impervious and hard-wearing surfacing material. The re-formation of a 5 mile length of the Radcliffe Road, south of Nottingham, and its covering with tarmac, demonstrated what such investment could achieve in terms of a dust- and mud-free surface, that lasted considerably longer than conventional surfaces. Hooley obtained a patent in 1902, and registered a company to exploit it in June 1903. The venture was secured, however, only by the intervention of Sir Alfred Hickman MP (the owner of a blast furnace), who became chairman, in 1905, of the company which now called itself Tarmac. 
Hooley was elected to the Incorporated Association of Municipal and County Engineers in 1884, was a contributor to its journal, and its president in 1908-9. He was elected an associate member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in December 1886, and member in January 1906. For many years, he was an outstanding figure as an expert witness in the committee room of the House of Commons, in the law courts, and at Local Government Board inquiries. He served as a member of the advisory committee of the roads board. 
Hooley resigned as county surveyor in January 1915, after he had offered his professional services to the Sherwood Foresters. Never one to tolerate ill-informed criticism of his profession, Hooley was described as immensely popular with all who knew him. He died at home in Oxford, at Greyroofs, 16 Davenant Road, on 26 January 1942. He was survived by his wife, Matilda Fanny, two daughters, and two sons. He was cremated on 28 January 1942. 


@@@@@


doc= 49487


Long, Sidney Selden (1863-1940), army officer and transport entrepreneur, was born on 31 March 1863, the fifth son of James Long, commissary-general, and his wife, Anna, daughter of Andrew Kirkwood, of Clongoonah, Ireland. Educated privately, Long followed his father into a military career, eventually in what would now be termed logistics, entering via the militia, from which he moved to the Durham light infantry in 1884. Five years later he transferred to the Army Service Corps (ASC, later the Royal Army Service Corps, RASC), a move possibly influenced by his father's example. His career was now set in the path it would follow through military into civilian life. Service in south China as deputy assistant adjutant-general (DAAG), 1896-9, was followed by distinguished service in the South African War (1899-1902). He became DAAG (later assistant adjutant-general) for transport, commandant of the ASC training establishment, Aldershot (1908-9), assistant director of supplies (1909-12), and director of supplies and quartering (1913-14). For the first half of the First World War (1914-16) he was director of supplies and transport at the War Office. He was made a companion in the Order of the Bath in 1914. 
Long's background and career experience thus led him to, and fitted him for, a key post in the first major war mechanized on any scale; and this, in turn, opened the way for a pioneering role in commercial road transport and distribution. The official history of the RASC describes Long's role as director of supplies and transport as 'to initiate upon the right lines the gigantic task of expanding a force of 500 officers and 6000 men (the pre-war RASC) into one which ultimately reached... 12,000 officers and 320,000 men'. To achieve this, Long had to organize 'the training of all ranks in all descriptions of the work of transport and supply', and 'the provision of motor vehicles and... all that was needful for vast armies scattered all over the world' (Reader, 15-16). Long's origins in the protestant ascendancy and his military experience and success helped to create a personality described as 'direct, impetuous, even irascible' (Reader, 16). His military career effectively came to an end in May 1915, when he stood out against Lloyd George's plan, implemented through Sir Eric Geddes, to take over motor vehicle production and the supply of motors for the army. Long resisted the loss of the army's independence in procurement for some time, but resigned in March 1916, with the rank of major-general. 
Long had apparently served on an official committee with Sir William Lever (later first Baron Leverhulme) in the early part of 1916. At this time Lever, who, years before, had shown an appreciation of the motor vehicle in its infancy, was concerned with improving the efficiency of group transport operations. In consequence, Long joined Lever Brothers in late 1916; by the summer of 1917 he was advocating the establishment of a separate transport company within the group, replacing the independent operations of the individual manufacturing companies. It took more than six months for Long's views to prevail, and then he was successful only in part -- achieving the centralized distribution of finished products, crucial for both soap and margarine, but not the collection of raw materials. SPD Ltd (the initials derived from 'speedy prompt delivery') was incorporated in July 1918, and Long was its first chairman (as well as a director of Lever Brothers, which changed its name to Unilever in 1929), serving with SPD until the end of 1931. He spent his first years as a Lever director at Port Sunlight, where he and his wife 'took an active interest in the life of the village and its institutions' (Leverhulme, 14). He was given an appreciative profile in the Unilever house journal on his retirement, yet he did not record his civilian career in 'Who's Who'. His service with SPD was not without controversy, probably attributable not only to his strong personality, but also to intra-group rivalries and genuine, if unfounded, fears about the common transport of foodstuffs and cleaning materials. 
In addition to his work for SPD, Long was a member of the Commercial Motor Users' Association, and also served as its president. Between the wars Long played an important role in national transport bodies. During the 1920s he was an assiduous chairman of the transport committee of the Federation of British Industries, retiring at the end of 1931. Little is known about his private life, but it is known that he married Augusta Elizabeth, daughter of Colonel T. G. Glover, and they had one son. Long's wife predeceased him in 1938, and he died on 31 January 1940 at 16 Fitzroy Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49490


Rhodes, Thomas (1789-1868), civil engineer, was born on 7 March 1789 at Apperley Bridge, near Bradford, Yorkshire, one of at least four sons and two daughters of the millwright and carpenter James Rhodes. He attended Calverley School and was then apprenticed to his elder brother William, who carried on their father's business. In 1810 Thomas was employed briefly on the Glasgow and Paisley Canal before obtaining his first important engineering post, on the Caledonian Canal, of which Thomas Telford had overall charge. 
Rhodes made three principal contributions to the Caledonian Canal. He designed the lock-gates, originally made from oak, and later from cast iron; he also devised, and built, the equipment for hanging them. It was Rhodes's task to organize the assembly of two of the first steam bucket dredgers in 1816. The parts had been made at Butterley ironworks, and were put together by Rhodes, and his carpenters, on the shores of Loch Oich. During an interval in this work he took charge of the insertion of caissons, and the centering of arches on the Bonar Bridge over the Dornoch Firth. 
On leaving Scotland in 1822 Rhodes was immediately engaged by Telford to assist in the building of the Menai and Conwy road bridges in north Wales. His main responsibility was the assembly of the chains for the high-level suspension bridge, at that time the longest ever attempted. The links were manufactured at the Coleham works in Shropshire, and assembled on site. Rhodes observed, from the top of a tower, with Telford and two others, the successful slinging of the first suspension chain across the straits in April 1825. When the bridge was opened in January 1826 he was in the first party to cross by road. Only a week later it was Rhodes's duty to report to Telford the damage caused by a spectacular gale. The introduction of transverse bracings made the bridge safe. 
Soon afterwards came a large dock development in London. Telford had been commissioned by the St Katherine's Dock Company, and installed Rhodes as his resident engineer. This scheme was successfully completed (apart from the eastern basin) between May 1826 and October 1828. Telford, always safety conscious, protested against excessive haste. A major novelty of the plan was the provision of two basins within the 10 acre site, and the use of six pumps to draw water through a long culvert from the middle of the river. During his engagement at St Katherine's, Rhodes designed an interlocking-arch swivel bridge, the model for one he later used on the Shannon. 
In 1832-3 Rhodes produced major reports on improvements to the River Shannon in the west of Ireland. By 1835 he was one of the Shannon commissioners, who had been given statutory charge over the whole river, with a view to implementing his proposals. The chief purpose was to relieve unemployment, and also to promote passenger transport by steamboat. Much of the work was carried out, especially in the middle sections of the river between Killaloe and Battlebridge. Rhodes was also active in Yorkshire, completing a major survey of the River Ouse in January 1834, which led to many essential repairs. Rhodes was responsible for the twin-bascule bridge, opened in 1840, which carried the Hull-Selby railway over the Ouse. In 1837 he surveyed the River Derwent for Earl Fitzwilliam, and recommended effective improvements. 
Rhodes had a wife called Lucy, but little else is known about his private life. More modest, and less celebrated, than several of his contemporaries, Rhodes nevertheless established a sound and well-deserved reputation. He was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1828. Telford praised his 'dexterity as a mechanic, his superior skill and unremitting attention' (A. Gibb, 185). These skills found outlets in all four countries of the United Kingdom. The period 1849 to 1860 was spent as resident engineer in charge of two harbours in the Channel Islands. After eight years of retirement, Rhodes died at Paignton, Devon, on 6 June 1868. 


@@@@@


doc= 49491


Russell, Robert (1757-1822), carrier, was baptized on 8 November 1757 at Burstock, near Beaminster, Dorset, the fifth of the six children of Robert Russell. His father died at Boomer, near North Petherton, Somerset, in 1775 or 1778. His uncle Thomas Russell (1730-1799) became, in the 1760s, a partner in a firm of carriers by horse-drawn wagon between Exeter and London. This firm was thenceforth managed by four generations of Russells, and the name Russell became synonymous with west country carrying. Thomas Russell ran the firm from Andover, but appears to have taken on Robert Russell as his partner at Exeter by 1780. Robert married Sarah Lathbury ('c'.1754-1816) there on 29 April 1780. In 1785 the partners took over the other Exeter carrying firm, which made them the dominant carriers in the area. 
When Thomas Russell retired in 1792, Robert Russell took over as sole proprietor, which he remained for the next twenty-four years, running the business from the former Bear inn, South Street, Exeter. The firm had about 220 horses, up to thirty wagons, and sixty or seventy staff, spread out along more than 300 miles of road. There were daily services between Exeter and London, with wagons drawn by teams of eight horses, travelling day and night, and carrying up to 6 tons of goods, and less frequent services with smaller wagons and teams between Exeter and Plymouth and Falmouth. At each intermediate place the firm had premises and staff. 
Russell's was probably the largest carrying firm ever under the control of one man, apart from Pickfords under Joseph Baxendale in the 1820s and 1830s. It is clear that he prospered, as he purchased property in several counties, rebuilt the firm's Exeter headquarters and other premises, and was one of the founders of the Devon County Bank in 1807, contributing $5000 to its stock. His success was helped by the weakness of carrying competition in the west country, war with France (which discouraged the use of coastal vessels), the East India Company's demand for west country cloth (which it exported from London), and a virtual monopoly in conveying to London the bullion brought to Falmouth by the Post Office packet boats. In 1806 Russell was described as a person of 'loyalty, patriotism and respectability' ('Select committee... highways', 2.304). 
However, Russell's grip on the concern slackened in the last years of his ownership, by which time he was spending only three or four days a week at Exeter, and the remainder at his house at Exmouth. His retirement from carrying, at the end of June 1816, was probably an acknowledgement that he could no longer provide the unremitting attention required by a large carrying firm. The firm was sold to a partnership of eight men, mostly employees but including Russell's only surviving son, Thomas (1783-1841), who became one of the firm's Exeter partners, and after whom the firm was now named. However, Thomas Russell was sightseeing in Naples at the time (he was once described as 'a young art dilettante' (Lefebure, 436)), and did not return until 1818, so his father continued to play a part in the carrying business on his behalf. 
Sarah Russell died on 29 October 1816. In 1819 Robert Russell married Anne Browne Crosse (died 1831), whose property in the parish of Llanbrynmair, Montgomeryshire, was, in the late twentieth century, still occupied by his descendants. He died on 23 September 1822 at Exmouth, aged sixty-four, leaving one son and three daughters. His widow died in April 1831, aged seventy-nine. 
Thomas Russell remained a partner in the carrying firm until 1837, when a new partnership took over, including his own son, Robert Henry Russell ('b'. 1811) who gave his name to the firm. This partnership was broken up in consequence of the actions of the Great Western Railway in 1843, when the Russell connection with carrying ended. 


@@@@@


doc= 49494


Searle, Frank (1875-1948), transport entrepreneur, was born at 43 High Street, Worthing, on 15 July 1875, the son of George Searle, an iron-founder, and his wife, Charlotte ('nee' Knight). Searle was originally trained as a locomotive engineer but, displaying early commercial sense, realized that road transport, which began to be mechanized with money-making possibilities from the later 1890s, offered more rewarding prospects, especially as steam power was an obvious early contender. Searle came to realize, however, that the petrol engine, then being developed in France with earlier German patents, offered a much more favourable power-to-weight ratio. He set about mastering the new technology, and courageously set up on his own as a consulting engineer in the West End of London. 
In 1905 Searle went to Paris, and arranged to represent Turgan and Lacoste-Battman, several of whose chassis he was able to sell to the London and District Motor Omnibus Company, one of the stock exchange speculations of the time, which ran the Arrow fleet of vehicles. They kept breaking down, however, and the final part of the order had to be cancelled. Thus Searle was obliged to abandon his consultancy; but such was his reputation as a motor engineer that Arrow engaged him as an employee to keep their other vehicles on the road. 
None of these early motor buses was sturdy enough to withstand the constant jolting in London traffic. All the moving parts worked loose, and horse buses were able to withstand the new competition, even though the rivalry was soon so severe that few businesses made any profit. In these circumstances the older established, and better funded, London General Omnibus Company (known as the General), which experimented very cautiously with the new motors, managed to maintain a sounder financial position. 
The General appointed Searle superintendent of its Mortlake garage at $350 a year in early 1907. Within three months he was transferred to the chief garage at Cricklewood in place of the manager of the motor department, an electrical engineer and former tramway man, who was unable to cope with the twenty-five different models then being tried out from there. On 18 May 1907 Searle was chosen from a shortlist of five as the General's chief motor engineer at a salary of $450 a year, raised to $500 a year at the beginning of 1908. So fierce had competition become by then that other companies fell into the General's grasp, and Searle found himself in charge of a motley collection of about 600 vehicles, none of which could survive the punishment of operating for long in London traffic. He persuaded the General to allow him to design and build a motor chassis which would survive. 
'We cribbed shamelessly', Searle later recalled as he remembered the way in which they incorporated the best features of all the existing models. The result was known as the X-type, the prototype of which was completed on 12 August 1909, but given a police licence to run in service only just before Christmas. The real winner was a lighter, 31/2 ton vehicle. This, the vastly improved B-type, was first produced on 7 October 1910, and quickly licensed for service a mere eleven days later. By the end of October 1911 the General had replaced all its 343 horse buses. The B-type enabled it to regain its unchallenged dominance over all upstart rivals. 
There were, however, other manufacturers who had, by then, developed more satisfactory motor buses, and they were anxious to acquire a share, however small, of Britain's main motor bus market. Notable among them was the midlands firm of BSA-Daimler. It launched the Premier Motor Bus Company with this objective and, at the beginning of May 1911, it was rumoured that Searle had been offered a senior management position with Premier. The General reacted strongly. Searle was ordered to appear before the directors. His salary was increased from $1000 to $1250 a year, subject to his undertaking to devote his whole time to the company's service and not to make reports, or do any other service, for any other person or company. He asked for time to consider these new arrangements. When he appeared before the board again, on 4 May 1911, his salary was increased to $2000 provided he immediately signed a new contract. This he refused to do on the spot. He was thereupon curtly dismissed, given three months' salary in lieu of notice, and went to work for Daimler. During the First World War he served in the tank corps and was mentioned in dispatches. He received the DSO in 1918 and CBE the following year. 
Searle returned to Daimler after the war in charge of its hire-car division. When BSA bought into Air Transport and Travel in 1920 he became managing director and in 1922 took the same role with Daimler Airways, which flew first to Paris, then to Amsterdam instead, and eventually on to Berlin; an internal route was also developed between London and Manchester. In April 1924, when Daimler and the two other British companies were merged to form the Imperial Air Transport Company (later Imperial Airways) with a tapered, ten year, $1 million government subsidy, Searle became managing director. 
Frank Searle was married, and he and his wife, Alice, had at least one son. Searle died at his home, 6 Dunbar Road, Bournemouth, on 4 April 1948, and was cremated in Bournemouth crematorium four days later. His death went almost unnoticed by 'The Times', which after reporting the deaths of a former chief inspector of lifeboats, and a prominent figure in South African shipping, added rather as an afterthought: 'We also announce with regret the death of Colonel Frank Searle, CBE, DSO' ('The Times', 6 April 1948). 


@@@@@


doc= 49496


Sword, John Cuthill (1892-1960), road and air transport manager, was born on 17 April 1892 at Groveside Cottage, Alexander Street, Airdrie, Lanarkshire, the son of William Sword, baker, and his wife, Jeanie Russell Cuthill. He attended elementary school at Airdrie and then started work with his father at the age of fourteen, before setting up in a bakery business on his own account. However, the First World War provided him, like many others, with an opportunity to broaden his horizons and change his career. Service in the Royal Flying Corps developed in Sword a passionate interest in motor vehicles and aviation. 
Returning to Airdrie after demobilization, Sword married Christina Gillespie Taylor in 1918, daughter of another master baker. He then went into road haulage using war-surplus vehicles, and subsequently expanded into running bus services around Glasgow. His Midland Bus Services Ltd, established in Airdrie during 1924, rapidly extended its operations throughout south-west Scotland, and pioneered express coach services from Glasgow to Blackpool and London. 
Sword was involved in a complex series of mergers and take-overs from 1929 to 1932 with four other Scottish bus operators and the London Midland and Scottish (LMS) and London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) companies, out of which he emerged as managing director of Western SMT Ltd, a division of Scottish Motor Traction of Edinburgh, on the main board of which he also sat. From its base in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, Western SMT operated chiefly in south-west Scotland, though it continued to develop long-distance coach services, in spite of the fact that these competed with the railway companies, which controlled both Western SMT and its Edinburgh parent. 
While managing Western SMT during the 1930s, Sword also diversified into several other businesses on his own account. These included farming, perhaps inspired by his passion for horses, and also the manufacture of potato crisps in Airdrie, Manchester, and Reading. Sword became an active director of the Scottish Amicable Building Society of Edinburgh, and had other business interests in London and Liverpool. But his greatest efforts were directed towards the development of civil aviation in the early 1930s. His instrument was Midland and Scottish Air Ferries Ltd, a private company incorporated in March 1933 with a nominal capital of $20,000, held entirely by Sword and his wife. Based at Renfrew aerodrome near Glasgow, Sword's airline developed its first scheduled services in England, between Hooton in Cheshire, and Birmingham. This was followed by services linking Glasgow with Islay and Belfast, and Liverpool with Dublin. A London to Liverpool service was then set up, with onward connections to the Isle of Man and Belfast. Such was Sword's enthusiasm for the development of air travel that when a newly established rival lost the use of its sole aircraft as a result of an accident, Sword lent one of his to maintain its services. Sword also pioneered the air ambulance service between Renfrew and the Western Isles, and was a founder of the Scottish Flying Club. 
The development of air services competing with their trunk routes was not popular with the railways, whose influence over Sword's core activity, Western SMT, was very powerful. They made determined efforts to stifle this competition. Travel agents who sold railway tickets were dissuaded from handling airline bookings; then the railways set up their own air services as a spoiling tactic. Eventually, the railway aviation interests and those of the pioneering private airlines were reconciled through a series of amalgamations, of which Sword's airline was an early casualty. His masters in LMS accused him of neglecting his responsibilities at Western SMT to run it, and they insisted he should sell it off. The airline was not profitable (nor were his farming or crisp manufacturing activities), whereas Western SMT provided Sword's main income, so he had no choice but to agree. Sword was compensated financially by SMT for sacrificing his airline, but seems to have resented the treatment he had received at the hands of the LMS, against which he appears to have borne a lasting grudge. 
With the ending of his commercial aviation commitments in October 1934, Sword concentrated on running Western SMT, which was a very successful undertaking. His stewardship provided him with a handsome income, with which to subsidize his continuing unprofitable interests in farming and food-processing. With the nationalization of the railways by the Labour government in 1947, their subsidiary SMT metamorphosed into the state-owned Scottish Omnibuses group, of which Western SMT became a part. Sword ceased to be its general manager and became instead a director of Scottish Omnibuses. 
As a business leader, Sword enjoyed the great gift of being able to delegate, while also following the course of the business. His early success was due in part to developing influential contacts with the air minister, Lord Londonderry. Both the air minister and the prime minister were guests at the launching of Sword's scheduled services between London and Belfast in April 1934. 
After nationalization, Sword was able to devote more time to his family (he had four sons and a daughter) and to his private pursuits. As well as overseeing the work of his five Ayrshire dairy farms, he was also a noted horse breeder (at one time president of the British Hackney Horse Society) and collected paintings, clocks, railway models, and, above all, veteran and vintage cars. Some 250 such vehicles were housed at his farm, Balgray, near Irvine, Ayrshire, by the time of his death, and these were subsequently put on display in the Scottish Transport Museum in Glasgow. Sword died at Craigweil, Ayrshire, on 27 March 1960. His wife had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 49497


Pinkerton, Allan (1819-1884), private detective, was born on 21 July 1819 in a tenement flat in Muirhead Street, the Gorbals, Glasgow, eldest son of William Pinkerton (1767-1827/1828?), a former hand-loom weaver who worked in Glasgow city gaol, and Isabella McQueen (1779?-1854), a spinning-mill worker. He had three brothers, four elder half-brothers, and three elder half-sisters. Although christened by a Baptist minister in the Gorbals (25 August 1819), he had a churchless upbringing and was a lifelong atheist. His schooling ended at the age of about eight when his father died. A pattern-making shop in the Gorbals provided his first job. Living with his mother, to whom he was devoted, he endured extreme poverty in boyhood before working as a tramp cooper making barrels, kegs, and casks (1837-8). 
Pinkerton became an ardent Chartist in 1839, and was nominated as the Glasgow coopers' representative at the Chartist convention in Birmingham. He participated in the Chartist march on Monmouth Castle in 1839 and advocated force to obtain their objectives. When young his qualities included energy, muscularity, earnestness, and ambition; less prepossessingly, he was also narrow, opinionated, violent, and puritanical. His chief pleasure in this period was as a member of singing clubs. The drunken degradation of the Gorbals made him a convinced teetotaller (although later, when working under cover, he necessarily broke this rule). 
When a police warrant was issued for Pinkerton's arrest as a Chartist he went into hiding. Shortly afterwards, on 13 March 1842, he married, in Glasgow Cathedral, Joan Carfrae (1827-1886), a bookbinder's apprentice, daughter of John Carfrae, of Neilston, Paisley. His wife was aged just fifteen at the time of the marriage, although she claimed to be eighteen. They had two sons, William (1846-1923) and Robert (1848-1907), who both followed their father into Pinkerton's Agency, and four daughters (three of whom died young). Working his passage as a ship's cooper, Pinkerton crossed the Atlantic with his bride and was wrecked off Nova Scotia (April 1842). In 1843 he built a cabin in the small Scottish settlement of Dundee, 50 miles north-east of Chicago, and set up as a cooper. He was an archetypal barefoot immigrant. 
While collecting lumber for his cooperage in 1847 Pinkerton discovered the hide-out of a gang of counterfeiters and horse thieves. Together with the sheriff, he led a posse which captured the malefactors. After this incident he was asked by a shopkeeper to ensnare a man circulating forged banknotes, and became deputy sheriff of Kane county. His forthright advocacy of the abolition of slavery made him unpopular, and he was tried for atheism by the Baptist church in Dundee. As a result, about 1848, he left to become a deputy to the sheriff of Cook county. In 1849 he was appointed by the mayor as the first detective in Chicago, but resigned after a year because of political interference. He was next appointed as special United States mail agent to solve post-office thefts and robberies in Chicago. 
Pinkerton formed the North-Western Police Agency, soon better known as Pinkerton's Agency, for the purpose of conducting detective work in Illinois, Wisconsin, Michigan, and Indiana (initially in partnership with a local attorney). The date of 1850, usually given for the agency's foundation, may be too early. Pinkerton's private police force could pursue criminals across local or state boundaries more effectively than bounty hunters, marshals, sheriffs, and deputies in country districts, and was both better resourced and less corruptible than city police departments. He recruited an extensive staff to protect property, pursue criminals, trace missing persons, and investigate crimes including murder. He always refused divorce work and investigations of sexual conduct. Employing both uniformed guards and undercover detectives (whom he tutored in disguises and techniques such as shadowing), he was a strict disciplinarian. He was a tenacious detective with organizational talents and a mastery of detail. As early as the 1850s he began accumulating photographs of miscreants; this rogues' gallery was imitated by other police forces. By 1854 Pinkerton had a contract to guard the rolling-stock of the Illinois Central Railway with a yearly retainer of $10,000, and his business soon prospered far beyond the mid-western states. Offices were opened in New York (1866) and Philadelphia (1867). 
Pinkerton was a convinced abolitionist who befriended John Brown and aided the escape of fugitive slaves. As a sequel to his employment by the Philadelphia, Wilmington, and Baltimore Railway to investigate threats against its property by Southern sympathizers, he and his informants protected Abraham Lincoln from a Baltimore assassination plot in April 1861. After the outbreak of the American Civil War he organized a secret service department for the Union army, sending scouts to the enemy lines and spies behind those lines. Although he helped to break a Confederate spy ring in Washington, DC, in 1861-2, he was less competent at military intelligence than in detective work. He adulated both Lincoln and General George B. McClellan, the chief engineer of the Illinois Central Railway, who became a major-general in the Union army. 
Pinkerton was involved in combating new forms of criminal activity after the civil war: the Reno gang from Indiana, shortly followed by Jesse James's gang from Missouri, inaugurated the armed hold-up of trains in 1866; wire-tapping of telegraphic lines, whether to manipulate the New York stock market or for other motives, became common. Perhaps his most sensational achievement was his remorseless hunting down of the thieves who stole $700,000 from a secure railroad car of the Adams Express Company travelling from New York to Boston in 1866. In 1869 Pinkerton suffered a paralytic stroke which left him unable to talk until 1871. His mobility was also destroyed, but with agonizing perseverance he gradually resumed walking, though he was henceforth crippled down one side of his body. In 1873-7 his agency was involved in Philadelphian mining districts combating the lawless and intimidatory Irish-American militants known as Molly Maguires. 

'Eugene Aram' (1832) by Edward Bulwer-Lytton was, so Pinkerton averred, the greatest novel in history; this romantic tale of human frailty, murder, remorse, and incrimination satisfied the great detective's imaginative needs in frequent rereadings. He himself gave his name to eighteen volumes of detective memoirs which popularized the Pinkerton's man as a familiar figure of American culture. These were mostly ghosted, often unreliably, and were usually lurid and melodramatic. The earliest were 'The Bankers, their Vaults and the Burglars' (1873) and 'The Expressman and the Detective' (1874). 'The Molly Maguires and the Detective' (1877) and 'The Spy of the Rebellion' (1883) are reasonably trustworthy; 'Strikers, Communists, Tramps and Detectives' (1878) is of atmospheric interest, while others such as 'Professional Thieves and Detectives' (1890) are thoroughly unreliable. The slogan of Pinkerton's Agency was 'the eye that never sleeps': Allan Pinkerton came to be known as 'Eye', and from this sobriquet derives the phrase 'private eye'. 
About 1871 Pinkerton acquired a country property near Onarga in Illinois. Importing a shipload of larch trees from his native Scotland, he named his house The Larches, and laid out a model estate where he entertained millionaires and politicians. Self-willed, stubborn, domineering, and bombastic, his tendencies to self-pity and pettiness were aggravated by his long years as an invalid. After 1881 he suffered further strokes. He died of gangrene and septicaemia, having bitten his tongue in a fall, on 1 July 1884, in Chicago, and was buried in Gracelands cemetery, Chicago. His widow died on 13 May 1886. 


@@@@@


doc= 49501


Rhind, David (1808-1883), architect, was born in the parish of St Giles, Edinburgh, on 11 January 1808, the son of John Rhind, writer (lawyer), cashier to the Edinburgh Friendly Insurance Company of Scotland, and his wife, Marion Anderson. On his father's death in 1826 his brother succeeded as cashier of the company, and a family trust was established to look after the elder Rhind's property interests in Leith. Rhind was thus embedded into the mercantile milieu of Edinburgh and Leith, and a reasonable inheritance and financial security (as well as a propensity to litigation) may explain the curious lack of urgency in his architectural output. Some eighty projects divided equally between banks, public buildings and churches, and residential projects were evenly spread throughout an almost fifty-year career -- an average of under two known projects per year. Other Rhind projects probably remain unidentified, for during his tenure as Commercial Bank architect, that bank constructed some fifty-six branches; and drawings for several unidentified pleasant houses in Rhind's characteristic hand are in the Rowand Anderson Collection, University of Edinburgh. 
Although classified as an 'outsider' (Gow), Rhind was at the heart of the establishment between 1835 and 1860. He was architect to the Commercial Bank, to the county prison board of Edinburgh, and to the established Church of Scotland. He was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1836), a founder member of the Institute of the Architects of Scotland in 1840, fellow (1849), convenor of the premises committee and occasional chairman of the Architectural Institute of Scotland (to which he gave a paper on the designer of George Heriot's Hospital, displaying considerable scholarship and research), and mason. His particular interest in sculpture -- exemplified in the outsize Miller mausoleum (1848), Craigentinny, Edinburgh, with sculptured panels by Alfred Gatley -- was the inspiration for his presidential address to the Royal Scottish Society of Arts in 1855, on the 'practical improvement of all that is requisite for proper construction of our buildings, and such information on art and art-manufacture as is required by the workman for the tasteful execution of his work' ('Building Chronicle', 1 Jan 1855, 129). Yet by comparison with his near contemporary William Playfair, his few drawings (generally characterized by pale blue roofs, cream walls, orange timberwork, and brown floor plans) display scant interest in construction and detail. 
Rhind may have trained with A. C. Pugin in London in the 1820s (when he became firm friends with Charles Barry) and then with George Smith, a former clerk of William Burn, in Edinburgh. That he had visited Italy was emphasized in the strong cosmopolitanism of his principal designs. He was established by 1834 as architect at his mother's address of 6 Forres Street, Edinburgh, but is thought already to have completed two plain late classical Commercial Bank projects: Wick (1829) and Falkirk (1830). In 1834 he designed the plinth for John Greenshields's statue of Sir Walter Scott in George Square, Glasgow. The bulk of his designs were for banks or sheriff courts. Many of the former were routinely Italianate (although some -- Banff and Perth -- were grand-manner 'palazzi'), and his later baronial sheriff courts lacked the vigorous conviction of his contemporaries. His feuing plans (for Merchiston and Pollok, for example) were unremarkable. There was a distinct tailing-off after 1860. Rhind had married Emily Shoubridge on 16 September 1840, and, after her premature death, Mary Jane Sackville Pearson on 24 April 1845. Five of his children predeceased him (two of them in 1856). 
Yet between 1843 and 1856 Rhind -- or perhaps his award-winning assistants John Alexander Hamilton (who also assisted William Playfair with his later works), Robert Morham, and Hippolyte Blanc -- completed a small number of truly monumental buildings that demonstrate grandeur, flamboyance, and romanticism in a variety of architectural languages. In 1843 he won a competition for the Commercial Bank in George Street, Edinburgh, for which he produced an extraordinarily powerful colour perspective. This Roman classical, Playfair-influenced bank became the outstanding building of George Street, and its success led the trustees of Daniel Stewart's to appoint him for their new hospital/school in 1848. Requesting designs in three styles, they selected what they (and he) called Elizabethan but which was, rather, a flamboyant Scottish Jacobean -- a riot of George Heriot's Hospital-style detailing. That this may have been Rhind's own preference is indicated by its choice for his unsuccessful entry for the architectural competition for a design for the Houses of Parliament. 
Rhind's design for the Commercial Bank's other principal office, in Gordon Street, Glasgow (1854), took the dignified form of a massively detailed, rusticated Renaissance 'palazzo' like a contemporary London club. Through most of the 1850s he was engaged on the troubled refacing of the Life Association headquarters in Princes Street, Edinburgh. It became the most sumptuous three-dimensional facade on the street, a Venetian 'palazzo' coruscating with carvings and capped by finials. By contrast, an intriguingly personal romantic reinvention of Scottish historic architecture informed his mid-career houses such as Knockdolian, Ayrshire ('c'.1840), Carlowrie, Linlithgowshire (1851), and probably the nearby, contemporary Champfleurie (attributed to Rhind). 
Rhind's office was reputed to have been a good one to train in, but his architecture left the 'Builder' obituarist puzzled, as never being in 'the true spirit' of Gothic. The latter concluded, rather unfairly, that Rhind had been an early Victorian classicist at heart, both unable to adapt and more interested in 'facade effects' than in the intricacies of interior planning. Yet the powerful theatricality of his principal monuments was judged by Lord Cockburn a principal adornment of mid-nineteenth-century Edinburgh. Rhind died at 12 Selwood Terrace, Onslow Gardens, London, on 4 April 1883, and was buried in the combined family tomb, which he had designed in 1834, in St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh; he was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49502


Robertson, Fyfe (1902-1987), journalist and broadcaster, was born on 19 August 1902 at 35 Shandon Crescent, Edinburgh, one of the six children of James Robertson, a miner who became a United Free Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Jane Dunlop. He was born James Robertson but later adopted the forename Fyfe. He grew up in poverty in Glasgow, and was educated at Glasgow High School for Boys before studying medicine at Glasgow University. He met his wife Elizabeth (Betty) Smith (1905-1973) when he was eighteen and she was fifteen. They married in 1928, and had two daughters: one, Elizabeth, became a singer and married the tenor Richard Lewis. After giving up medicine Robertson went into journalism, working for Scottish newspapers including the 'Glasgow Herald', before moving to London to work for the 'Daily Herald', the 'Daily Express', and the 'Sunday Express'. 
In 1943 Robertson joined 'Picture Post' as picture editor, and became a feature writer. He was a serious investigative journalist, campaigning for better medicine, healthier and organic farming, and his most famous article, 'We investigate the groundnut scandal', appeared in November 1949. This followed a three-week trip to Tanganyika, where the British government had invested millions since 1947 in an attempt to clear 5000 square miles of bush and devote it to the mechanical cultivation of peanuts, in order to alleviate the post-war shortage of oils and fats in Britain. In the article he exposed the lack of planning, the failure of the expensive and unsuitable machinery brought from England, and the lack of proper accounting, calling it 'a shocking case of top-level tomfoolery almost wrecking a worthwhile job' ('Picture Post', 19 Nov 1949). The article was referred to in the debate on the scheme in parliament on 21 November 1949, and by helping to turn the failure of the scheme into a political issue it may have hastened the fall of the Attlee government. Robertson thought that his best work was done in 'Picture Post'. 
When 'Picture Post' stopped publication in 1957, Fyfe Robertson, by now assistant editor, was one of several of its best writers and photographers to move to the new BBC television programme 'Tonight', a current-affairs programme presented five nights a week from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m. It was intended for people who might be coming and going, and might switch on at any time, and was conceived as a continuous programme of short items, held together by a permanent staff of comperes, interviewers, and reporters. It presented a mixture of film reports and studio interviews, and ranged from the serious to the merely bizarre. A completely new approach to current-affairs broadcasting, it was produced by Donald Baverstock and Alasdair Milne. Compered by Cliff Michelmore, 'Tonight' ran until 1965. Described by Alasdair Milne as a television natural, Fyfe Robertson did his first film report in May 1957. With his Scottish accent, his slow, over-emphatic voice, his deerstalker hat, and his goatee beard, he soon became one of the programme's most popular reporters. Under long-term contract to the BBC from 1959 to produce reports for 'Tonight', he often made as many as twelve film reports a month. Although many of his stories were funny, ranging from 'Inchaquin Bachelors' (about an Irish island populated entirely by shy bachelors), 'Deckchairs' (in which he discovered the man who claimed to fold up deckchairs faster than anyone else in the country), to his favourite, 'The great pie of Denby Dale' (a village pie that had to be made bigger every year, contained whole sheep and cows, and took thirty-six hours to cook), he also covered serious topical subjects. He made his first foreign trip for 'Tonight' in 1960, when he made nine reports in central Africa, and after this he made many trips with a camera crew to places such as Israel, Cyprus, the Caribbean, and the United States. He made longer documentaries, too, including 'Old Man of the Mountains', filmed in California in 1963, six programmes on museums in 1964, and 'Will Shakespeare -- Gent', also in 1964. 

'Tonight' was succeeded by 'Twenty-Four Hours', a late-night current-affairs programme, in 1965. Robertson joined its reporting team, and continued to make documentary reports on topics such as children in mental hospitals and gang warfare in Glasgow, and he visited Russia in 1967 for the programme. He was also making longer films, including a special fifty-minute report on Aberfan and its aftermath, 'What Happened to Pity?', in 1966, and 'Animal Dealers', three programmes on the use of animals for medical research, the pet trade, and zoos, in 1968. For 'Collector's World' he interviewed a collector of door knockers, and a collector of razor blades. He also began to contribute to the new current-affairs programme, 'Nationwide', in 1969. 
Although no longer under long-term contract to the BBC, Fyfe Robertson continued to make documentaries in the 1970s, including a series of films commemorating the 300th anniversary of the Greenwich Royal Observatory (1975). In 'Around the World in 80 Hours' (1976) he flew round the world in Concorde. In 1975 he presented his first full-length weekly series of his own, 'Robbie', in which he looked back over the changes in human experience during his lifetime, and aired some of his prejudices, as in a programme about modern art, when he described the 1977 Hayward Gallery exhibition of contemporary art as 'phony art' or 'phart'. There were three series altogether, ending in 1977. 
Robertson remarried in 1978. His second wife was Vera, a singer, widow of Harold Ford, a Methodist minister. After this he made only a few more television appearances; his last documentary was 'The World of Peat' in 1981. He wrote one book, a travel guide, 'Visit California with Fyfe Robertson' (1981). Although he had socialist sympathies, he prided himself on never having voted. An atheist, despite his upbringing, he described himself as a humanist radical. 
Fyfe Robertson suffered a heart attack after appearing in a special Christmas edition of 'This is your Life' in 1986, when the subject was Cliff Michelmore. He died on 4 February 1987 in a nursing home in Eastbourne, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 49503


Justice, James Norval Harald Robertson (1907-1975), actor, was born at 39 Baring Road, Lee, Lewisham, on 15 June 1907, the son of James Norval Justice, mining engineer, and his wife, Edith Burgess. He was educated at Marlborough College and went on to the University of Bonn, where he was awarded a PhD. Intended (by his parents at least) for a career in the diplomatic service, Robertson Justice joined Reuters as a young journalist and was sent out to Canada in 1927. Over the next ten years he found work around the globe variously as a reporter, a schoolmaster, an insurance salesman, a lorry driver, a sailor, and the manager of an ice rink. He had a great facility with languages: said to speak ten, he himself admitted to French, German, Italian, Dutch, and Gaelic. 
Robertson Justice was called up into the Royal Navy at the outbreak of the Second World War. After the war he drifted into acting, and was appearing as the chairman in music-hall at the Players Theatre Club when Harry Watt, the film director, spotted his talent and gave him a role in his film 'Fiddlers Three' (1944), followed by other films produced at Ealing Studios. He made notable screen appearances in Peter Ustinov's 'Vice Versa' (1947), as Commander Evans in 'Scott of the Antarctic' (1948), and in 'Whisky Galore' (1948). 
In 1951 James Robertson Justice went to Hollywood, where he appeared in 'David and Bathsheba' (1951), and also in 'Land of the Pharaohs' (1955) and 'Moby Dick' (1956). A Second World War drama for British Lion was 'Orders to Kill' (1958). However, his career changed decisively when he played the irascible surgeon Sir Lancelot Spratt in the sequence of film comedies which started in 1954 with 'Doctor in the House'. 
An actor of more than 20 stone in weight, with a grizzled, once red beard, and the voice of an educated foghorn, Robertson Justice was typecast as 'the heavy' in countless films, as 'a peppery doctor, professional lawyer, sailor, senior spy' ('The Times'). 
Seldom tempted towards the stage or radio or television, James Robertson Justice spent thirty years or so in regular film work, which he seemed to find of diminishing interest. His real concerns were ornithology, ecology, and conservation, and his passion was falconry; he published learned papers on all these subjects, and noted proudly that he had invented a rocket-propelled net method of catching wildfowl for marking purposes. 
Robertson Justice lived for many years in his beloved highlands, contesting North Angus and Mearns unsuccessfully as a Labour candidate in 1950. He had rather better luck at Edinburgh University, where students elected him their rector in both 1957 and 1963; he served a total of six years and was rewarded with an honorary doctorate. 
In later life Robertson Justice took to compering opera and ballet programmes for BBC television, but unnerved colleagues by occasionally appearing on the set with a remarkably tame eagle tethered to his wrist. A difficult man, loyal to the Scottish nationalist cause long before Sean Connery made that position fashionable, he was a rich and rare addition to the gallery of great British character-acting eccentrics. 
Robertson Justice lived in his later years with the former actress Baroness Irina Margarethe Pauline Isabelle Caecilie von Meyendorff. Their long-standing relationship was responsible in 1968 for his divorce from his first wife, Dillys. Robertson Justice and Irina married on 29 June 1975, only a few days before his death. He died on 2 July 1975 at his home, Top House, Ashley, Stockbridge, Hampshire, from heart failure. He was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 49504


Roughead, William (1870-1952), writer on Scottish criminal trials, was born at 61 South Clerk Street, Edinburgh, on 13 February 1870, the only child of John Carfrae Roughead (1837-1887), a hosier, outfitter, and draper, and his wife, Amelia Shaw Nicol (1842-1907). The family business had been founded in or about 1825 at premises in Princes Street, Edinburgh, by William Roughead's paternal grandfather, William Roughead (1795-1868), whose firm held a number of royal warrants. John Carfrae Roughead succeeded to the family business in 1868, but (with one of his brothers) he was drowned when the steamship 'Demerara' was lost, south of the Scilly Isles, in December 1887. His estate was valued at $7736 and William Roughead & Son was sold to assistants who had been working for the firm. 
William Roughead was educated at Miss M. O. Cunningham's dame-school, 5 Duncan Street, Edinburgh, and Craigmount House School, Dick Place, Grange. In 1889 he enrolled at the arts faculty of Edinburgh University to study rhetoric and English language, but within a year he had changed to law. He successfully completed the first three years of his legal studies, but left in 1892 without completing the fourth and final year of his degree. Having already obtained articles with T. S. Maclaren and William Traquair, jun., at 11 Hill Street, Edinburgh, in 1893 Roughead used his inheritance to set himself up as a lawyer at 122 George Street, Edinburgh. However, because of his private means he never sought, or needed to seek, clients; and he had time to pursue his real interest. 
While still at university Roughead had attended murder trials at the High Court of Justiciary in Edinburgh. The first of these was that of a baby farmer, Jessie King, in February 1889. He recollected this trial in his essay 'My First Murder', published in his book 'In Queer Street' in 1932. In November 1889 he attended the trial of John Watson Laurie for the 'Arran murder'. In July 1893 Roughead qualified as a Scottish lawyer by being admitted as a writer to the signet. Between 1889 and 1949 he attended almost all the significant murder trials in the Edinburgh High Court. He himself felt that he had missed only one: that of William Laurie King, for matricide, in 1924 when Roughead had been on holiday on the Isle of Arran. (He seldom travelled any farther and never went abroad.) Roughead was provided with his own reserved place and desk in the High Court, only once needing to don his gown to obtain admission -- to the trial of Alfred John Monson in 1893. He became 'the murderer's albatross' (Whittington-Egan, 10) and 'the greatest living exponent of the Calvinist attitude to evil' (Bridie, ix). 
On 18 July 1900 Roughead married Janey Thomson More (1871/2-1940), eldest daughter of Francis More, chartered accountant of Edinburgh. They had one daughter, Winifred (a Down's syndrome child, to whom Roughead was devoted). She died in 1929 aged twenty-eight. There were also three sons, one of whom, Frank, died from injuries received in a train crash, returning from visiting his father in 1947, thus embittering Roughead's final years. 
Roughead's first book was a collection of light-hearted verses written for his friends: 'Rhyme without Reason' (1901). It was not until 1906 that he took the first step in his career as the 'recording angel of Scottish matters criminous' (Goodman, 147). The initiative came from Harry Hodge, who had inherited the firm of William Hodge & Co., a firm of legal publishers which he wanted to render more profitable. After his plan to publish an account of the trial of John Watson Laurie had encountered objections from Laurie's relatives he launched his series 'Notable Scottish Trials' with the 'Trial of Dr Pritchard', a man for whom no relative -- even if still surviving -- could have felt any pity. Edward Pritchard (1825-1865) had been found guilty of murdering his wife and his mother-in-law by poison, and he was the last person to be publicly executed in Glasgow. As with the proposed volume of the trial of Laurie, Roughead was chosen to be the editor. The volume separated fact from opinion by keeping the transcript of the trial separate from the editor's introduction. This format, which made the series much sought after among criminal lawyers and students of crime throughout the English-speaking world, allowed the reader to lose himself in the unfolding process of the trial. 
Roughead went on to edit nine further volumes in the 'Notable Scottish Trials' series, and the 'Notable English Trials' series (both known as the 'Notable British Trials' series after 1915). These were the cases of Deacon Brodie (1788, published in 1906); Captain Porteous (1736, published in 1909); Oscar Slater (1909, first published in 1910); Mrs McLachlan (1862, published in 1911; Roughead's favourite work); Mary Blandy (1752, published in 1914); Burke and Hare (1828, published in 1921); Katherine Nairn (1765, published in 1926); John Donald Merrett (1927, published in 1929); and John Watson Laurie (1889, published, at last, in 1932). 
Roughead published 'Twelve Scots Trials' in 1913. This was a collection of essays, including his first published account of the Arran murder. In the same year he began a long association with the 'Juridical Review'. He published a total of seventy-five essays in the same journal over a period of twenty-eight years. Collections of these essays were published as books, the first appearing in 1919. 
Three of the volumes edited by Roughead in the 'Notable British Trials' series recorded trials which he had attended. Two of them, Oscar Slater in 1909 and John Donald Merrett in 1927, involved investigations which had been incompetently handled by the police. Roughead was the first to expose this misconduct and to subject it to the wintry irony which was his own characteristic form of wit. Roughead was one of those who gave evidence in 1928 when the newly established Scottish court of criminal appeal upheld Slater's appeal. In the case of John Donald Merrett (1908-1954), the cavalier investigation by the Edinburgh police into Mrs Merrett's death (unconvincingly explained by her son as a suicide) led to relevant evidence's being lost or overlooked. The jury at Merrett's trial for the murder of his mother returned a verdict of 'not proven' (although they unanimously convicted him of forging his mother's cheques). Roughead believed that Merrett owed his 'not proven' verdict to the incompetence of the police and to the brilliance of his defence team (lead by Roughead's personal friend Craigie Aitchison). Writing in 1935 (in 'Knave's Looking Glass') he predicted that, although the public had not heard from Merrett for several years, 'We may do so yet'. In 1954 Merrett (using the alias Chesney) murdered his wife and her mother and then committed suicide. 
Roughead's wife died in 1940. His own death occurred on 11 May 1952 at Queen Mary Nursing Home, 27-33 Chalmers Street, Edinburgh, of cerebral haemorrhage and pneumonia; he never regained consciousness after a fall down stairs five days earlier, at 12 Belgrave Crescent, Edinburgh, his home since 1922. His body was cremated free of charge at Warriston crematorium (where he had been a director) on 15 May. His ashes were buried at Grange cemetery, where Dr Pritchard's victims lay. 
Roughead was a man of Pickwickian appearance, sensitive to any references to his baldness, and easily hurt by any unattributed reliance on his work. He excelled as a writer in that peculiarly Scottish province of the kingdom of letters, the recounting of criminal trials, not as a criminologist, still less as a psychologist, but, like Robert Louis Stevenson, as a 'Tusitala', a teller of tales. Writing in 1950 James Bridie observed that Roughead was 'a student of the bad', whose subjects 'would be 'nane the waur o a hangin'.... [But] he has no indignation against his specimens. They are damned and cannot help it' (Bridie, xi-xii). 


@@@@@


doc= 49507


Milner, William (1662-1740), woollen cloth merchant, was born on 29 November 1662 at Leeds, the third and youngest son of William Milner of Leeds, a merchant. Of dissenting stock, he recalled towards the end of his long life that he had enjoyed a 'pious upbringing' and 'tolerable schole learning'. In the late 1670s and early 1680s he spent five years in the Netherlands gaining a thorough knowledge of business and accounts. On his return he married, in 1685, Mary (died 1745), the daughter of Joshua Ibbetson, a merchant, and mayor of the town in that same year, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Christopher Breary, lord mayor of York in 1666. 
Milner maintained that he started life as a cloth merchant in Leeds from 'no very great beginnings', although it is clear that his expensive training abroad and marriage into one of the leading merchant dynasties in Leeds thrust him into the front ranks of the town's merchant elite. Certainly he was a man of enormous drive and shrewdness. In 1707 he recounted his success in exporting cloth to Hamburg to a cousin, the diarist and antiquary Ralph Thoresby, who noted: '[I] was mightily pleased with some remarkable providences that have attended this worthy magistrate who is of good family... yet began the world with little, being the youngest son... [he], with a thankful heart to God recounted to me the various stages of his growth, the first year he had commissions for $5000; the second for $10,000; the third for $15,000; the fourth for $20 or 25,000 pounds; and has now dealt for $80,000 per annum. ('Diary of Ralph Thoresby', 1.429-30)' There is an implausibility about this mathematical progression, but there is no doubt that Milner enjoyed more than fifty years of profitable foreign trading in cloth from the West Riding. It was, he maintained in 1736, 'such success as few ever had'. Thoresby and the coterie of antiquarians who surrounded him knew Milner as 'Alderman Million, the Bashaw of Pannopolis'. 
The most tangible evidence of Milner's claim to be one of the most successful provincial merchants of the period 1680-1740 was his purchase for $17,000 in 1707 of the 2800-acre Nun Appleton estate, some 17 miles east of Leeds, from the impoverished Fairfax family. He immediately set about rebuilding the great ramshackle house in which Lord Fairfax and General Monck had planned Charles II's return. In 1716 he gave the property to his son William (created a baronet the following year) on his marriage to a daughter of the archbishop of York, Sir William Dawes. 
Milner himself always lived in Simpson's Fold, Leeds, close by the River Aire, and traded to the end. He was mayor of Leeds in 1697-8 and was instrumental in securing an act of parliament (1699) to improve the rivers Aire and Calder, opening up to water carriage the great inland cloth markets of Leeds and Wakefield to Hull. It was perhaps the most notable river navigation improvement of the eighteenth century. Milner was the driving force in the first three decades of its history and largely responsible for raising the capital stock of $26,700 to effect improvement in the difficult first twenty-five years of the venture. It was a superb investment for his family, providing his great-great-grandson with an income of $9494 per annum by 1817. 
Milner was also prominent in financial matters. He was deputy receiver of the land tax in Yorkshire, Northumberland, and Durham from 1697 to 1717. By the 1720s he was lending large sums of money to the Irwins of Temple Newsham, who were placed in considerable financial difficulties by the deaths, in quick succession, of the third, fourth, and fifth viscounts. He was a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire. In 1713, to establish the questionable patriotism of the low-church party in Leeds, he commissioned a white marble statue of Queen Anne (still to be seen in the City Art Gallery), which was erected in front of the town's Moot Hall. A convert to the established church, he was a noted benefactor in Leeds. 'What should I render to the Lord for all his benefitts?' asked Milner shortly before his death. His will revealed that he had left $20 per annum to the poor, $10 yearly for repairs to Holy Trinity Church (built in the 1720s), and $20 a year for a clergyman to read prayers each evening in the parish church. Few provincial merchants were more pious or prosperous than Milner; none straddled more easily the worlds of trade and landownership in the early eighteenth century. He died at his home on 23 December 1740, leaving a widow, his son, Sir William Milner, bt, MP for York (1722-34), and four daughters. He was buried in Leeds parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 49509


Ibbetson, Sir Henry, first baronet (1708-1761), cloth merchant, was born in Leeds, the third surviving son of James Ibbetson (1674-1739) and his wife, Elizabeth, the coheir of Dr John Nicholson, York's premier medical practitioner in the late seventeenth century. Ibbetson was a fourth-generation cloth merchant and a member of one of the town's leading merchant dynasties. His father had made a large fortune in exporting West Riding cloth; he was also a considerable buyer of land in the county, and in 1717 purchased the 2000 acre Denton Hall estate, near Ilkley, from the Fairfax family. Nothing is known of either Henry's education or his training; in both cases it was likely to have been expensive. On 23 December 1736 he married Catherine (1717-1740), the fourth daughter of Francis Foljambe of Aldwarke, a prominent Yorkshire landowner. She died childless within four years of the marriage, and on 6 October 1741 he married Isabella (died 1757), the elder daughter of Ralph Carr of Cocken Hall, co. Durham. They quickly produced a family of ten children, four sons and six daughters, of whom three failed to survive infancy. 
James Ibbetson was a ruthlessly successful man, and when he died in 1739 he passed on to his favourite and, by then, younger son, a great deal of scattered property in Leeds and the West Riding, which produced more than $1000 per annum, as well as one of the leading merchant houses in Leeds. Henry lacked his father's cutting edge, and his career developed in a variety of not entirely reconcilable directions. Clearly, extending the family fortunes to support and launch a large family with landowning connections and pretensions was uppermost in his mind. The export house in Leeds was continued until his death in 1761, for the last thirteen years of its existence with the aid of an active German partner, John Koster. A letter-book survives for the 1750s showing the firm to be one of high repute and tradition, dealing with importers in Germany, Flanders, and the western Mediterranean. By this stage it was probably past its zenith, for Ibbetson became increasingly involved in coalmining ventures and, after 1758, with a fellow merchant, Peter Birt, in farming the extremely lucrative Aire and Calder navigation tolls. He had long been handling the remittances of the East and West Riding land tax receivers, an activity which meshed well with his merchanting activities. 
Although Ibbetson never lived at Denton, it became clear that it would pass to him, or his eldest son, since his elder brother, a barrister, produced no male heir. Certainly by the 1750s he was buying further land at Denton from the proceeds of property sales in Leeds and elsewhere. His ambition to launch his eldest son as a major West Riding landowner was fuelled by a baronetcy bestowed on him in 1748 as a reward for zealously raising a hundred men at his own expense in the Jacobite rising of 1745 and serving as high sheriff of Yorkshire two years later. But Ibbetson appears never to have lived elsewhere than in Leeds, either in villas on its edge or in the family's town house in Kirkgate, which John Carr (it was one of his earliest commissions) extended in 1752. He was mayor of Leeds in 1753 -- a record promotion, since he had served only three months on the corporation -- and he also acted as a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for the West Riding of Yorkshire. He died on 22 June 1761 in York (while consulting a doctor there) after a protracted illness, and was buried in Leeds parish church. The firm's letter-book records his earlier visits to Bath and London in search of a medical cure. His wife had predeceased him four years earlier. Ibbetson's ambitions were realized within a decade of his death when his son James (1746-1795), the second baronet, inherited Denton (where Carr built the Ibbetsons a splendid new house in the 1770s) in 1768, the same year in which he married Jenny Caygill, the heir of a Halifax merchant with an estate in Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 49510


Denison, William (1713/14-1782), merchant, born in Leeds, was the eldest son of John Denison of Old Hall, Great Woodhouse, near Leeds. He was a member of a prolific cloth-making and merchanting clan which produced four of the wealthiest commercial dynasties in late Georgian Yorkshire. Indeed the Denisons were so numerous in Leeds that compilers of genealogies and biographical notes thoroughly confused their origins and relationships. Taylor wrote despairingly (although it induced little caution): 'even to the present time the name of Denison is nearly as common about Leeds, as Smith in London, or Jones in Wales, or Campbell in Scotland, though it is rarely met with in other parts of her Majesty's dominions' (Taylor, 231). William and his two brothers, Robert (1719/20-1785) and Matthew (1725-1758), also merchants in Leeds, were the descendants of a long line of Great Woodhouse cloth makers, although their father had probably become a merchant. Certainly they boasted more prosperous kinsmen: Sir Thomas Denison (1699-1765), justice of the king's bench, and the merchant brothers Thomas (1687-1757) and Robert Denison (1689-1766), the latter mayor of Leeds in 1727 and 1737. 
Almost all the evidence about William Denison's extraordinary success in becoming the senior partner of the largest and most prosperous merchant house in Georgian Leeds comes from the end of his life and is derived from two letter-books covering the years 1779-81 and the testamentary papers of him and his brothers. His schooling and early career are obscure. He was probably educated at Leeds grammar school and doubtless served an apprenticeship in the Leeds cloth trade. He first came to prominence in the 1750s, when he refused to serve the office of mayor of Leeds on no fewer than four occasions (he had been elected to the corporation in 1750). The corporation brought a case at York assizes in 1759, settled on condition that Denison agree to pay its costs and his brother Robert act in his place. The correspondence of his last years reveal him to have been an awkward, outspoken, and influential man, immensely shrewd, immensely proud of his vast wealth and northernness. His fortune, largely self-made, appears to have been based on the export of Yorkshire cloth primarily to the Italian market. Clearly it was already substantial by the late 1750s, when he began to buy land on a large scale, a passion which by the 1770s left him with many thousands of acres scattered across Yorkshire, Durham, Lincolnshire, and Nottinghamshire. 
Certainly Denison's interests were never confined to the cloth export trade. A reference in the 'Leeds Intelligencer' (3 October 1773) suggests he joined Sir George Colebrooke, the well-known London banker, MP, and chairman of the East India Company, along with Josiah Smith, in a city merchant partnership. However, since Colebrooke was on the verge of bankruptcy, his affairs stretched by well-published raw material speculations, it seems unlikely that Denison would have been unwise enough to make any attempt to rescue him. If he did join him in 1773, he emerged unscathed. By the end of the 1770s, when the Mediterranean trade was at a standstill, he was dealing extensively (and unprofitably) in annuities for some of the more extravagant members of the aristocracy, buying government stock (grumbling mightily about Lord North and those government insiders who scaled down his sizeable applications -- $12,000 in 1780, $20,000 in the following year), and threatening to sell some of his landed property because the returns on it were inferior to those he could make in the funds. 
In 1779 Denison served office as high sheriff of Nottinghamshire with great reluctance, claiming he never spent more than a fortnight a year on his Ossington estate. On all his properties he was an exacting landlord and a keen agricultural improver, revealing a good knowledge of up-to-date farming practices and woodland management. Although he appears to have visited them each year, he was firmly based in Kirkgate, Leeds, in a house surrounded by the bustle of an industrial town, with his work and packing shops crowded into the yard behind. Short on public spirit, he was generous to the poor. In the winter of 1775-6 he provided the poor of Kirkgate with thirty loads of corn and 400 corves of coal. 
Denison's brother Robert seems to have possessed a more civilized veneer. He furnished Ossington from the best London cabinet-makers; he entertained smart shooting parties there; he was painted by Francis Coates for a life-size portrait. Neither William nor Robert Denison married, and when the latter died in 1785 their enormous fortunes -- the Leeds newspapers estimated William's to have been in the range of $500,000-$700,000 -- passed principally to their young nephew John Wilkinson, the son of their only sister, Anne. Her husband, also John, is variously described as a dyer, packer, and London factor. His direct involvement in the Leeds firm is unclear, although he clearly benefited enormously from the fortunes of his Denison brothers-in-law, and sat to Gainsborough for a full-length portrait. The younger John Wilkinson happily changed his name to Denison in 1785, settled at Ossington, brought up a large family, and sent his nine sons to Eton. They were a byword in Victorian England for their achievements -- a speaker of the House of Commons (Viscount Ossington), a bishop of Salisbury, a governor-general of Australia (Sir William Thomas Denison), and 'three others, first-class men at Oxford' (Taylor, 230). 
William Denison died at Bath on 11 April 1782 and was buried at Ossington. Under the terms of his brother's will, two superb life-size statues of them both were erected in Ossington church (built by Robert to John Carr's designs). They were carved by England's leading sculptor, John Nollekens, at the enormous cost of $921. The base of William's statue is a fine relief with a ship, wool bales, and sheep -- a fitting allusion to his life and riches. 


@@@@@


doc= 49512


Harald Smooth-Tongue (d. 1131) and 


@@@@@


doc= 49513


Train, George Francis (1829-1904), promoter of the horse tramway, was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on 24 March 1829, the son of a merchant, Oliver Train. His father's last traceable act was to send him back alone by sea to England at the age of four after his mother had died of yellow fever in New Orleans. He was brought up by his grandmother on her farm at Waltham. 
Train became a grocer's boy at the age of fourteen but then, when he was sixteen, he got a job as shipping clerk with his uncle, Enoch Train. Five years later he was sent to manage the Liverpool end of his uncle's very successful White Diamond shipping line and concurrently seems to have obtained a financial interest in shipping out of California during the Australian gold rush. He was in Melbourne from 1853 to 1855. When Enoch Train's business got into difficulties in 1856-7, his nephew went back to America. On 5 October 1851 he married Wilhelmina Wilkinson Davis (died 1879) at Louisville, Kentucky, USA; they had four children. 
Horse-drawn street railways, known for decades in New York, were then attracting greater attention from entrepreneurs in other cities, some lines being built on the tongue-and-groove system, flush with the road surface, and others using L-shaped rails, along which the cars could run on ordinary wheels; the latter system had the great disadvantage that the vertical part of the 'L' protruded above the road surface and interfered with all other traffic. Whichever system was used, however, the reduced rolling resistance on smooth rails meant that two horses could pull a much larger vehicle, capable of seating forty-eight fare-paying passengers in greater comfort -- twenty-four inside and twenty-four more out in the open on top -- twice as many as the competing two-horse omnibus. 
A self-confident salesman, Train was hired to secure franchises for street railways of the L-type, first in the United States and then in Europe. Here the 'chemin de fer americain' had been demonstrated by Alphonse Loubat from 1853 in Paris, where it had been seen by the English engineer William Joseph Curtis while visiting the international exhibition there in 1855. In the following year Curtis took out a patent for a tramcar with two sets of wheels which could be lowered independently, one set flanged to run on grooved lines and one flat to run on paved roads. Vehicles of this adaptable sort were already being run on the busy dock road in Liverpool in 1859 before Train's arrival there. His proposal to operate at lower fares was turned down by the dock board on 3 February 1860. 
Having produced a fifty-page publicity pamphlet, Train tried his luck on the other side of the River Mersey with the road authority at Birkenhead. He obtained its consent and managed to get local financial support for the Birkenhead Street Railway Company Ltd, incorporated on 7 May 1860, to lay an L-shaped track from Woodside Ferry to Birkenhead Park, about 11/4 miles away. This took six weeks to lay and was opened on 30 August 1860. Train himself contributed only a quarter of the capital and had nothing to do with the actual construction of the line. The double-deck tramcar was made by Robert Main, a local coach builder. This tramway managed to survive, but no thanks to Train; the main local shareholder soon replaced the objectionable protruding rails. 
Train then turned his attention to London, where Curtis already had a tramway running in Islington and where the London General Omnibus Company had been showing an interest in tramways for three years. Train showered all the road authorities with his pamphlet and also with applications to run demonstration stretches of line. Only three were successful. As at Birkenhead they were all financed and engineered by others but, unlike at Birkenhead, only single-deckers were used and all the rails soon had to be removed. The Bayswater line, running less than a mile west of Marble Arch, down Bayswater Road, was opened on 25 March 1861 but closed before the end of September. The Victoria Street line was laid for a short distance down the road towards the new Victoria Station from Westminster Abbey, and opened on 15 May 1861, but was removed on 7 March 1862. The Surrey Side Tramway, from the south side of Westminster Bridge to Kennington Gate, opened on 15 August 1861 and was removed on 21 June 1862. 
Three other tramways were embarked upon in the provinces before the full extent of failure in London was appreciated. One ran for about a mile from the Liverpool borough boundary along the Prescot turnpike to the Old Swan: opened on 2 July 1861, it closed before the end of May 1862, when the track began to be removed. A short and ill-located line was opened in Darlington on 1 January 1862 but closed before November 1865, when the tramway company went into liquidation. The third line ran in the Potteries from Foundry Street, Hanley, to Burslem. It was opened on 13 January 1862 but survived, as at Birkenhead, only after the leading shareholder replaced the protruding step rails. 
Train returned to the United States in 1862. The rest of his flamboyant life was concerned mainly with the financing of railway land grants in America, travelling the world, writing, and lecturing, though much of the year 1868 he spent involuntarily in Ireland, in prison for debts owed to English creditors. Egotist to the last, he dictated 'My Life in many States and Foreign Lands' in 1902 and died from heart failure on 19 January 1904 at Mills Hotel, New York, which the 'Times' correspondent there, in the briefest of obituary dispatches, described as a cheap lodging-house. 


@@@@@


doc= 49514


Wiltshire, Walter (1718/19-1799), carrier, is of obscure origins; little is known about his early life, except that he had one brother. The Wiltshires came from the north Somerset countryside, but by the early eighteenth century men of that name were at work in Bath as cordwainers and pack-saddle makers. By the mid-1730s 'Wiltshire's Flying Waggons' were making weekly return journeys between Bath and London. 
The Wiltshire family had a long and lucrative interest in the eponymous Wiltshire's Assembly Rooms in Bath, the lease of which was taken over on the death of their parents in the mid-eighteenth century by Walter's brother John. Walter himself took charge of the waggons, and from at least 1755 the carrying trade to London was operated from a warehouse in Bristol as well as Bath, with a continuity, and degree of activity, unrivalled in the region. Walter married Charity, daughter of the Bath maltster John Dallamore; they had at least six children between 1756 and her death in 1763. 
Walter Wiltshire made a substantial fortune from the carrying trade, but his business interests no doubt also benefited from the attention he gave to public affairs. A member of the common council of Bath from 1746, he was also a trustee of the Bath Turnpike Roads from their reorganization in 1757, and a member of the Bath improvement commission from its inception in 1789. These duties gave him influence in practical matters such as the improvement of the roads in and around Bath, and a financial freedom that came from his handling of the funds of the Bath Trust for much of the second half of the eighteenth century. 
By the mid-eighteenth century the family had begun to acquire property east of Bath, especially at Shockerwick in the parish of Bathford. This was consolidated, after the death of his brother in 1762, by Walter's acquisition of more land, and by his commissioning of the architect, John Palmer, to design a grand mansion to replace the derelict manor house. Shockerwick House was completed about 1775. From then until his death, Walter Wiltshire enjoyed the dignity of being a JP for Somerset, despite the fact that the estate continued to be supported by the profits of the carrying trade. The goods carried included many paintings by his friend, Thomas Gainsborough, some of which were rolled up for the journey to London. As a cultured man Wiltshire enjoyed payment in kind, especially of paintings like 'The Harvest Waggon' (presented to Wiltshire in 1774 by the painter) which showed family members in familiar scenery. Of the carrier himself no portrait survives, but he was included with other worthies in a satirical etching of 1763 known as 'The Knights of Baythe', with a totem road waggon for a head. 
Wiltshire died on 13 October 1799, in his eighty-first year. Like his wife, he was buried at Woolley church, near Bath, on 25 October. After his death the Shockerwick estate remained in the hands of his family for the next hundred years, in the course of which they made an informal assumption of the right to hold arms. Their crest, showing the white head of a horse with crimson bridle over a blue and white wreath, though held improperly, paid a fitting tribute to the source of the wealth amassed so successfully by Walter Wiltshire. 


