@@@@@


doc= 49515


Yerkes, Charles Tyson (1837-1905), financier of urban transport systems, was born on 28 June 1837 at Philadelphia, son of Charles Tyson Yerkes, who became president of a local bank, and his wife, Elizabeth Link, 'nee' Broom. A Quaker by upbringing, he left the Central High School, Philadelphia, at seventeen, and soon gained a good reputation as an investor of other people's money, due in no small part to his abilities on the local stock exchange. He made a small fortune by the age of thirty, lost it when, overextended, he was unable to meet his commitments in the panic of 1871, served a short prison sentence, and then made another quick fortune. He married Susanna Guttridge Gamble on 22 December 1862. She subsequently divorced him. He then married, on 23 September 1881, Mary Adelaide Moore. 
Earlier writers have dwelt upon Yerkes's sharp financial practices and loose private morals, but more recent critics prefer to concentrate upon his achievements in developing urban transport in the rapidly growing city of Chicago, after moving there in 1881. America took the world lead in the great technical changes in urban transport in and after the later 1880s, and Yerkes, who mastered all the money-raising, cost, and other problems involved, made much money for himself, and his business associates. This, however, did not endear him to the travelling public, other residents, or the local press, who were usually hostile to the newcomer, despite his contribution to their city. He sold out very advantageously at the end of the century. 
While in Chicago, Yerkes had been keeping an eye on developments in Europe. He paid visits to London and learned of plans to electrify the existing steam-operated underground and horse-drawn tramways. Electric traction also made possible the operation of railways in tubes, driven easily through the London clay. Yerkes was almost certainly the 'typical Yankee', whom Henrietta Barnett recalled meeting in 1896, who kept talking about 'a proposal... to convey all London about in tunnels'. He certainly came to inspect the steam-operated Metropolitan District Railway, part of the existing underground, in 1898. It is not known when he and Edgar Speyer, head of the London section of an international banking concern, which also had a branch in New York, were first in touch with each other. The house of Speyer was heavily involved in railway investment in general, and the electrification of the Metropolitan District in particular. Electric traction was slow to be adopted in London because the first stretch of electric tube, the City and South London (1890), paid all the penalties of the pioneer. It was built too small, and produced poor financial results. The Central London Railway, however, opened from Shepherd's Bush under the busy road leading to the City, benefited from earlier experience, and was an instant success. It started to run in June 1900. By October of that year the world's leading expert on the financing, route planning, and day-to-day operation of urban railways had arrived in London, though whether on his own initiative, or summoned by friends, is unknown. 
One of Yerkes's associates was Robert William Perks, formerly solicitor for the Metropolitan Railway (the other part of the existing steam underground), who had unrivalled knowledge of parliamentary procedure, and other relevant legal matters. Yerkes, Perks, and Speyer formed a powerful trio to bring to life various tube proposals which had gained parliamentary sanction, and another tube, partly built but abandoned because of the failure of its promoters. Yerkes lost no time in setting up a traction company, capitalized at $1 million, to electrify the Metropolitan District, and then turned his attention to the tubes. The traction company acquired the partly built Baker Street and Waterloo Railway, on which $675,000 had been spent, for $180,000. Having studied the capital's main traffic flows along routes for which tubes had been authorized, Yerkes abandoned a proposal to build the line under the Metropolitan District (intended to provide an express service into the City), and diverted it, using other franchises, from South Kensington via Piccadilly Circus to Finsbury Park. He secured additional parliamentary powers to extent a third tube, already authorized from Charing Cross to Hampstead, to a surface terminus at Golders Green, encouraging suburban growth in that area, especially in what became Henrietta Barnett's planned Hampstead Garden Suburb. He secured further powers for a branch from Camden Town to Archway. All these proposals involved greatly increasing the traction company's $1 million. Underground Electric Railways of London Ltd (UERL), capitalized at $5 million, was therefore floated in 1902 to operate the whole undertaking as a network which, as Yerkes (who became its chairman) claimed, could not but be profitable. Much more capital was needed and all Yerkes's skills in manipulating commercial paper -- including the issuing of profit-sharing notes -- were called for. The British were relatively unresponsive, for construction costs, as usual, exceeded budget and traffic predictions remained uncertain. Foreign investors, and especially Americans, however, believed Yerkes's sanguine forecasts. The necessary capital, about $15 million in all, was forthcoming, some of it in the end still unallocated by Speyer Brothers. Electric trains began to run on the Metropolitan District from July 1905, and the three tubes were opened between March 1906 and June 1907. Londoners benefited enormously, but at the expense of the investors, for the forecast revenues were not forthcoming. UERL had the greatest difficulty in surviving. 
Yerkes, however, did not live to see this debacle. He died at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York (not at his own home in 5th Avenue where his wife lived) on 29 December 1905, the cause of death being said to be Bright's disease. His personal fortune suffered with the rest and his valuable art collection had subsequently to be sold by auction. 'This is one of the ordinary hazards of the modern world' commented his obituary writer, 'in which speculators make money, buy art treasures lavishly, and die in debt' ('The Times', 30 Dec 1905). 


@@@@@


doc= 49516


Salvesen, (Salve) Christian Fredrik (1827-1911), shipowner and whaling entrepreneur, was born on 8 March 1827 at Mandal, Norway, the eighth of nine children of Thomas Salvesen, merchant shipowner, and Johanna Ross. He was trained as a shipbroker in Stettin and Glasgow before joining his father's firm in 1846. Five years later, he married Amalie Georgina Salome Andorsen, daughter of Gulow Andorsen, a leading Mandal shipbuilder, and they had four sons and three daughters. Salvesen then moved to Leith, where his brother Theodor, a broker in nearby Grangemouth, financed a partnership (Turnbull and Salvesen, 1853-1872) with George Turnbull, whose sister Jane married a third brother, now running the Mandal firm. After a slow start in broking, they prospered, importing timber from Salvesen's extended family and exporting coal from Turnbull's Scottish connections. 
Shipbroking was also interwoven with part ownership of vessels (chiefly German) and ship management. Their first ship, 'Syria', was purchased in 1855, with support from Norway, where tramp shipowning was developing rapidly. Like his compatriots, Salvesen bought cheap wooden vessels, though it was a dispute over losses incurred with a more valuable ship trading to Australia that ended the partnership. Salvesen, trading alone (Christian Salvesen & Co.), began buying steamers seriously in the 1880s, and in 1886 started a line to Stavanger. Its success was followed by runs along the Norwegian coast and to the Mediterranean; in the early twentieth century Salvesen owned sixteen vessels of assorted size and type. 
Christian Salvesen, though cautious about trading ventures which might upset his agency customers, always used his family connections to find new ways of feeding his agency and filling his ships. He bought shares in Finnish forests, Norwegian copper, and Lofoten coal. The failure of his Paraffin Oil Company to process coal in Mandal led to promising oil exports from Scotland in 1866, when he travelled the Norwegian coast adding oil to his coal distribution network. However, oil exports turned to imports two years later when Svend Foyn established the modern whaling industry in Finnmark, and Salvesen, who supplied his coal, became the leading Scottish agent for his and subsequent whalers' oil. 
In 1883 Salvesen, though still in control until his health failed in his eighties, delegated management of shipping operations to his eldest sons, Thomas Johan and Frederick Gulov, both trained in Germany, as partners. The third son, Edward Theodore Salvesen, became a distinguished maritime lawyer and judge (Lord Salvesen), but a new dynamism entered the firm in 1889 with the fourth son, Theodore Emile, educated in Norway and trained in Hamburg and Paris, who took on the timber and oil trades. It was Theodore who persuaded Christian to risk oil agency business by going into whaling in 1906, with Norwegian-type shore stations in Faeroe, Iceland, and especially Olna Firth in Shetland, where the company began total carcass utilization, which raised profitability and became a Salvesen hallmark. As interest moved to the Antarctic, work began in 1909 on Leith harbour in South Georgia, which cost over $118,000 and produced $35,000 profit in 1911, the year in which Christian died. 
Although based in Britain, Salvesen and his family spoke -- and ate -- Norwegian at home and spent much time in Norway, maintaining those cordial family connections on which their success depended as their two countries grew closer in economic and social interdependence. Before his sons joined him, Christian Salvesen worked long hours in his office; but in later life he had time for public service in Leith and served the Dock commission and chamber of commerce. In 1859 he became a naturalized British citizen. However, he was made a knight of St Olav (first class) for public services in Norway, in 1891. He began his career indebted to his brother Theodor but, branching out on his own, founded a successful business, and expanded it through flexible entrepreneurship and careful innovation. By the time of his death Christian Salvesen & Co. was the largest whaling company in the world, and for the next half century was best known as the leading single operator in Antarctic whaling. 
Salvesen died on 15 January 1911 at his home, Mayfield House, East Trinity Road, Leith. His wife predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 49517


Emery, Josiah (bap. 1725, d. 1794), watchmaker, was baptized on 11 November 1725 at Etagnieres, north-west of Lausanne in the pays de Vaud, Switzerland, the son of Jacques and Suzanne-Marie Gammeter-Emery, one of nine children (three boys and six girls). He was probably trained in Geneva and by the time he was in his thirties he had emigrated to London; on 22 April 1762 he was appointed one of the elders of the consistory of the new Swiss church in Endell Street, London (led by watchmaker Justin Vulliamy) and he remained active in that church for the rest of his life. 
On 4 July 1762 Emery married, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Charing Cross, Ann (died 1769), daughter of John Jacob and his wife, Ann, a member of the great Courtauld family of goldsmiths (and later textile manufacturers). They had four daughters. In February 1769 Ann died and on 24 January 1771 Emery married the 25-year-old Susannah Smith at St George's, Hanover Square. There were four daughters and two sons from this marriage, including John Claudius, who also became a watchmaker. 
Emery's home and business was at 2 Cockspur Street (his trade card described it as opposite Hedge Lane), Charing Cross, and in the course of his career he gained a reputation as one of the top makers in London (and thus worldwide), supplying the nobility and, at least on one occasion, the king. The great French chronometer maker Louis Berthoud wrote that Emery's work contained: 'a profound understanding of the causes of regularity and irregularity in watches; a highly finished execution in the essential parts; nothing luxurious that is extraneous to the main objective; but every care that absolute precision demands -- all this, I think, we find in the products of Emery, which should make them precious to those well informed people who own them. (Clutton, 399)' Ostensibly a watchmaker -- his total production during the course of his career was about 1400 watches -- Emery did also sell clocks and regulators, and one turret clock is known, dated 1787 and signed by him although made to order by Thwaites of Clerkenwell. In 1772 he made a precision timekeeper, no. 615 (now preserved in the Musee des Arts et Metiers in Paris) which had similarities to John Harrison's mould-breaking 'H4' and was clearly influenced by it. In 1788 an Emery watch answering this exact description (almost certainly the same watch) was tested by Count F. S. van Bylandt in longitude experiments. In the mid-1770s Emery was asked by Count von Bruhl, ambassador to Britain for the court of Saxony and a close friend and champion of the great watchmaker Thomas Mudge, to make parts of the temperature compensation mechanism for Mudge's timekeepers 'Green' and 'Blue' and in these very special parts Emery incorporated a new alloy of his own invention. 
Emery was one of a large group of watchmakers, all working outside the city boundaries, who met as an informal professional group at the Devil tavern. On 15 September 1780, they met to discuss the increasing problem of cheap, foreign imports (somewhat ironically, as a number of them were, like Emery, first generation immigrants themselves) and to organize a petition to the Worshipful Company of Clockmakers. In their petition they offered to join the company and pay quarterage if the company would take positive steps to curb illegal imports of clocks and watches to London. Fifty-four makers signed the original petition, and, in 1781, many, including Emery, were made honorary freemen of the company. Some then continued paying quarterage and formally took part in the company, but Emery appears to have lost interest immediately and failed to pay any quarterage thereafter. 
Since the mid-1770s Count von Bruhl had been trying to persuade Emery to make copies of Thomas Mudge's precision watch, with Mudge's new lever escapement, made for George III and given to Queen Charlotte (1769); Mudge himself had begun work on his marine timekeepers (those of 1774 and 1777) of a different construction and had no time to develop this very important element of watchwork. For several years Emery resisted von Bruhl's proposals, saying Mudge was the best person to make his own designs, besides which, he complained, they were very difficult to construct on a small scale (watch no. 661 made by Emery 'c'.1775 with an early, crude lever escapement is extant and suggests Emery secretly tried out the ideas von Bruhl had described to him). However, in 1780 he finally agreed to make some copies and was given by von Bruhl a large model made by Mudge of his escapement. The series of watches which resulted were the first to incorporate Mudge's lever escapement, and they proved to be of immense historical significance; Mudge's escapement was to be the central feature of the majority of all watches made up to the introduction of quartz technology in the early 1970s. Emery did not really know Mudge (he said that in his life he only ever spoke three words to him) and did not see Mudge's original watch until some years later, during an audience he had with the king. Therefore he applied this escapement to a watch of his own design, using a number of his own features and incorporating the 'Double S' compensation balance patented by John Arnold in 1782, presumably with Arnold's permission. It was the combination of Mudge's escapement with Arnold's balance which was the secret of the design's success and Emery can take the credit for this. About thirty-five of these watches were signed and sold by him, costing between 100 and 150 guineas. They were thus very expensive and were chiefly bought by the nobility and the scientifically minded. (No doubt their high quality explains the relatively high survival rate; at least twenty-two are extant.) According to Thomas Mudge junior, the majority were constructed for Emery by Richard Pendleton of Pentonville, but this probably refers to the escapements of the watches only. In 1792, the Spanish watchmaker Cayetano Sanchez was sent by the Spanish government to Emery for training (Sanchez having previously spent three years with Ferdinand Berthoud in Paris). Within a year his training was complete and Emery was given $200 for his trouble, along with an undertaking that Sanchez would not set up a manufactory in France. Nevertheless, Emery's lever watches were soon imported into France and makers such as Robert Robin and Abraham Louis Breguet in Paris began to make watches based on their design. In the same year, when Thomas Mudge junior was petitioning the board of longitude and parliament for reward for his father's achievements, Emery was one of a number of specialists who gave evidence at the parliamentary select committee. In contrast to some of the answers given by others, his replies to the questions of the board were both modest and very fair. 
About 1785 Emery decided to compete for reward from the board of longitude by designing a new marine timekeeper. By March 1791 two such timekeepers were ready and, after a trial with von Bruhl and George Gilpin, the board agreed to have them tried at Greenwich. The trial lasted from 8 July 1793 to 27 February 1794 but the timekeepers unfortunately did not excel. (One of them, marked 'no. 1', is now preserved in the collection of the Clockmakers' Company at the Guildhall in London.) On 7 June 1794, Emery asked the board to try two more of his timekeepers at Greenwich, to which it consented; these promised a much better performance. (Of these, the 'no. 4' is now preserved in the collection of the Mariners' Museum, Newport News, Virginia.) However, on 2 July 1794 Emery suddenly fell ill and, on his deathbed in Chelsea (probably at the house of his friend Francis David Pittonet), wrote his will (in French), leaving everything to his wife, Susannah, save $10 to his 'eldest daughter', Elizabeth. Emery died later the same day. A notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' gives the cause as 'a mortification in his bowels' (probably bowel cancer) and remarks 'a man much respected'. He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 7 July and the will was proved on 16 July. 
Emery's brother Salomon, who had been employed by him and who lived at Cockspur Street, appears to have continued the business as an employee of Josiah's widow, but he too died less than a year later. From his will we learn that he and Josiah had shares in the family's Swiss estate which had recently been sold. In 1795 Susannah Emery sold the Cockspur Street business to Louis Recordon and William Dupont. On 1 May 1796 she petitioned the board of longitude for financial reward for her husband's efforts in making timekeepers, complaining that she had incurred heavy losses in 'extricating herself from the business' and 'with a family of six children' was now 'in very limited circumstances' (CUL, Board of Longitude MSS, RGO 14/11, 171), but the board was unable to help. 


@@@@@


doc= 49518


Powell, Hugh (1798-1883), maker of optical instruments, was born on 21 November 1798 in St Marylebone, Middlesex, the son of Thomas and Elizabeth Powell. Nothing is known of his education or apprenticeship. On 3 June 1824 he married Elizabeth Lealand; they had three children, Elizabeth Jane ('b'. 1827), Thomas ('b'. 1834), and Hugh Peter ('b'. 1838). During the 1830s, Powell was making microscopes for certain retailers in London, and traded as mathematical, optical, and philosophical instrument maker, offering microscopes and achromatic object glasses from 24 Clarendon Street, Somers Town. By 1840 he was signing his microscopes Hugh Powell, and he began in 1840 to date his instruments, a practice that was continued by him, and then his son, into the twentieth century. With the exception of one known telescope and one crystal goniometer, the sole product of the firm was microscopes. In 1841 he took into partnership his brother-in-law, Peter H. Lealand, and in December 1841 the names of Powell and Lealand were linked in the account of a new design of mounting for a microscope. Subsequent instruments were signed 'Powell & Lealand'. 
The first innovation under the name of Hugh Powell was the design of a fine adjustment acting on the stage of a microscope, for which he received, in 1834, a silver medal of the Society of Arts. In this design a wedge was advanced under the stage by a micrometer screw, but this was not a satisfactory method because the illumination of the specimen was thereby altered. Powell was producing microscopes that were derived from the late eighteenth-century form of instrument, where the body tube was not held rigidly. The new design of achromatic objective produced to the specification of Joseph Jackson Lister (1786-1869), which was published in 1830, meant that the resolving power of the instrument became much greater, and in consequence it could become a truly scientific instrument, provided the stand were redesigned. A prototype Powell microscope in the Museum of the History of Science at Oxford showed clearly the transition from the old to the new form of stand, which Powell exploited from 1841. He was awarded the silver medal of the Society of Arts in 1841 'for his mode of mounting the body of a microscope'. 
The Microscopical Society of London (from 1866 the Royal Microscopical Society), which was founded in September 1839, ordered the best microscopes then obtainable from the three leading makers, Powell, Ross, and Smith. Powell delivered his microscope in December 1841; the massive stand, with six achromatic objectives, including one of 1/16 inch, cost the society $94 10's'., and became part of the society's collection at Oxford. 
In November 1843 there was published in the 'London Physiological Journal' a description of 'Powell and Lealand's new microscope'. This was a radically new design, which became the basis of the firm's instruments for over sixty years. There is a true tripod support carrying the body on trunnions, which gave the necessary stability and ease of manipulation when the user was seated. The Powell tripod was adopted by other makers from the later nineteenth century well into the twentieth. In the 1860s the model became 'the large compound microscope', popularly known as the 'P & L No. 1 stand'. Four models were sold: the No. 1, which had all possible refinements to the highest possible standard of craftsmanship; the No. 2, which was less fully equipped, and therefore less costly; the No. 3, which was a smaller version; and the No. 4, a portable model similar to the No. 3. Two simpler stands were the No. 5, which was mainly for the use of students and did not have a fine adjustment, and the No. 6, a cheaper student's microscope. 
Powell was the pioneer of very high powers in objectives. The first high-powered achromatic objective by a British manufacturer was Powell's of 1/16 inch as early as 1840. With his eldest son, Thomas, he made one of 1/25 inch in 1860, and four years later one of 1/50 inch. The first of the latter design was made for Lionel Smith Beale, and is dated 15 October 1864. This high resolution objective had a numerical aperture of 0.97, very close to the theoretical limit of 1.0 for a non-immersion lens, and cost $31 10's'. In 1869 the firm was also the first to produce in Britain a water immersion objective of 1/16 inch with a numerical aperture of 1.22. Medals for these objectives were awarded at international exhibitions in London (1862) and Moscow (1872). The high opinion of the firm's products was expressed in 1878 by the Belgian professor Henri van Heurck: 'Messrs Powell & Lealand occupy quite a unique position in the microscopic world. Their workshops are very small, the number of instruments which they produce are few, but every piece of apparatus, marked with their name, is an artistic production, perfect in all its details. Moreover, both instruments and objectives of these makers are in the greatest request, and are used in England by all serious microscopists. (van Heurck, 163)' Powell died at his home, 170 Euston Road, Somers Town, London, on 14 November 1883. His son Thomas took over the business, which effectively faded out of existence by 1914. The workshop was from 1832 to 1846 at 24 Clarendon Street, and from 1846 to 1901 at 170 Euston Road, which was named 4 Seymour Place, Euston Square, before 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 49519


Massey family (per. c.1760-1891), makers of clocks, watches, and nautical instruments, had as its most important member 


@@@@@


doc= 49522


Prujean, John (c.1630-1706), maker of mathematical instruments, was first apprenticed for eight years to Thomas Alcock in the Clockmakers' Company on 6 May 1646, then turned over to Elias Allen, the foremost London instrument maker of the period. There is no record that Prujean took his freedom, but on 11 March 1664 he matriculated as a 'privilegiatus' (a non-academic member of the University of Oxford), thus acquiring the right to trade in the city as a mathematical instrument maker. He remained there for the rest of his life, living in New College Lane in the parish of St Peter-in-the-East, an area which was particularly favoured by craftsmen and tradesmen with strong university connections. From there he worked both for the university, its colleges and buildings, and for the mathematics tutors in the colleges. Publications by Oxford mathematicians such as Richard Holland and Thomas Edwards carried advertisements for Prujean, and the small number of surviving instruments by him include several made of printed paper pasted on wood, suggesting that they were designed to appeal to the undergraduate and 'poor scholar' market. 
In 1685 Prujean prepared a plan of the duke of Monmouth's march at Sedgemoor which he presented to Arthur Charlett. In 1688 he was paid 8's'. for his part in the restoration of the dial of the church of St Mary the Virgin, and in 1689, with Henry Wildgoose, he repaired 'gratis' the dial of his parish church. To accompany the instruments he sold, Prujean printed a number of instruction sheets, of which the few surviving examples have been listed by Bryden (266), and in 1701 he issued a 'Catalogue' of his production. This very short, slightly old-fashioned list is historically important as the earliest example of such a record known from outside London. Despite this gently innovative activity, the instruments Prujean offered related strictly to the traditional mathematical arts and he does not seem to have prospered from them. He died in Oxford in 1706, being at that time, according to Hearne (3.347), 'very poor, wanting bread'. His nameless widow, despite the efforts of Edmond Halley and others, was refused a place in Crosse's Hospital, Ampthill, Bedfordshire. He was buried in Oxford on 10 September 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 49523


Tuttell, Thomas (c.1674-1702), maker of mathematical instruments, was the son of William Tuttell, a member of the Cordwainers' Company of London. He was apprenticed to Henry Wynne of the Clockmakers' Company on 2 April 1688 and freed seven years later, on 1 July 1695. The same year he set up a workshop at the sign of the King's Arms and Globe at Charing Cross, and began making and selling mathematical instruments in his own right. He advertised a full range of navigational, calculational, astronomical, and surveying instruments, and also sold globes and barometers. Between June 1697 and August 1699 he took three apprentices. 
Tuttell's position as one of the foremost makers was soon established. Shortly after gaining his freedom he secured the patronage of Colonel William Parsons of the foot guards, and by 1698 his business was strong enough to have opened a new shop beside the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. More importantly, he had also received a royal appointment as mathematical instrument maker to the king. 
In 1698 Tuttell published a short book, entitled 'The Description and Uses of a New Contriv'd Eliptical Double Dial', in which he described a form of analemmatic sundial which he had recently devised. While concentrating on explaining this dial (which consisted of a horizontal dial and an elliptical projection of the equatorial dial into the plane of the horizon), the book also contains a description of the universal equinoctial ring dial. Both were carefully explained by Tuttell and, as an aid to the user, he included a table of towns with their latitudes as an appendix. 
In the introduction to this work, Tuttell declared his intention of writing a further book which would explain the uses of the various mathematical instruments then in use, and which he felt were not sufficiently covered in contemporary mathematical texts. This project was realized in a collaboration with James Moxon, son of the mathematician Joseph Moxon. In the 1701 edition of Joseph Moxon's 'Mathematical Dictionary' James Moxon and Tuttell appended a short lexicon of mathematical instruments. Not only were the instruments described in some detail, but many of them were illustrated on a plate, very similar in style to Tuttell's later trade cards. The instruments also appeared on a set of playing cards which Tuttell issued in 1701 and which included an advertisement on the king of clubs. 
At some point in 1700 Tuttell was appointed as hydrographer to the king, and during the following year he carried out surveys on the west coast of England. He was in the process of surveying the Thames when he was drowned in that river on 22 January 1702. His widow placed a notice in the 'Post Boy', describing him as being 'of Middle Stature, fair light Hair but his Head newly shaved' and requesting his body to be returned to her if it was found ('Post Boy'). 
Despite his very early death, Tuttell held an important position among the makers of mathematical instruments. He was versatile enough to work not only in brass and silver, but also in wood and ivory. Those instruments of his which survive show evidence of the high quality of his workmanship. However, Tuttell was not only an instrument maker: he designed instruments and taught their use, was an able surveyor, and a competent author on mathematical subjects. In just seven years he established himself as a central figure in the mathematical community of which he was a part. 


@@@@@


doc= 49524


Horner, Frances Jane, Lady Horner (1854/5-1940), hostess and patron of the arts, the fourth daughter and sixth of the eight children of William Graham (1818-1885), MP, India merchant, and art patron, and Jane Catherine, daughter of John Lowndes of Renfrewshire, was educated by governesses in her evangelical, Presbyterian family home at Langley Hall, near Manchester, and then at 54 Lowndes Square, London. Excluded from fashionable life by her father's connections with trade, Frances Graham initially owed her position in society to friendship with the Tennant sisters (whose father was also in business and also a Liberal MP for Glasgow), to friendship with the Gladstone-Lyttelton circle, and, most importantly, to her connections with the artist Edward Burne-Jones. 
William Graham, a patron of modern British painting, introduced his daughter at an early age to the studios of his proteges, including Rossetti and Burne-Jones through whom she also became acquainted with John Ruskin. Burne-Jones developed a passion for Frances Graham, designed 'Sirens for her girdle, Heavens and Paradises for her prayer-books' (Burne-Jones, 2.130-31), wrote to her constantly, and included her likeness in a number of his pictures, including 'The Golden Staircase' (1880) and 'The Spirit of the Downs' (1883). Occasioning despair in the married Burne-Jones (who commented, 'she has gone and married a market gardener'; ibid.), she married into an unexceptionable English county family in the person of John Francis Fortescue Horner (1842-1927), barrister, of Mells Park, Frome, Somerset, on 18 January 1883; her husband was knighted in 1907. Of their four children, the eldest son, Edward, was killed in 1917, and the younger, Mark, died at sixteen in 1908. Their younger daughter, Katharine, married Raymond Asquith, son of Herbert Henry Asquith; he also was killed in the war. 
At Mells, Frances Horner continued to play host to the artistic and intellectual friends who had surrounded her in London, where she had been one of the first young unmarried women to entertain her own guests. Both she and her husband were part of the informal aristocratic group, the Souls, who shared her artistic interests and dislike of the 'sporting set'. Edwin Lutyens described her as 'a political intriguer', but commented that 'her bias [was] born of friends and not conviction' ('Letters of Edwin Lutyens', 218-19). For H. H. Asquith she acted as confidante, and throughout the 1890s he corresponded with her regularly. R. B. Haldane, whom she had introduced to upper-class society, attributed his acceptance of the War Office in 1905 to her decisive influence. 
A needlewoman of considerable skill -- one of her embroideries, executed to a design by Burne-Jones, hangs in St Andrew's Church, Mells -- Frances Horner contributed mainly to the arts as a patron. She was principally responsible for several significant memorial commissions in the village and church at Mells, by Burne-Jones, Alfred Munnings, Eric Gill, William Nicholson, and, most importantly, Edwin Lutyens. The latter's design for the memorial to Edward Horner, an equestrian statue by Munnings atop a Lutyens plinth, has been described as 'one of Lutyens's best and most moving tributes to the waste of life in the Great War' ('Letters of Edwin Lutyens', 371-2). 
Widowed in 1927, Lady Horner lived on at the Manor House, Mells, with her daughter, Katharine Asquith, until 1940, when she died on 1 March at the age of eighty-five. She had been appointed OBE in 1919, and for a time was a JP. In 1933 she published a volume of memoirs under the title 'Time Remembered'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49525


Liddell, Adolphus George Charles (1846-1920), society figure and lawyer, was born at Bramham House, near Tadcaster, on 29 June 1846, the elder of the two sons of the Hon. Sir Adolphus Frederick Octavius Liddell (1818-1885), under-secretary at the Home Office, eighth son of the first Baron Ravensworth, and Frederica Elizabeth Lane-Fox (died 1867). He had four sisters. Educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford, he was called to the bar in 1871 and practised on the north-eastern circuit. Through his father's influence he served as secretary to three royal commissions. He developed a profound distaste for the practice of the law and welcomed his appointment in 1886 as chief clerk to the crown office in chancery. He became assistant secretary in the Lord Chancellor's Department in 1888, which office he held until his retirement in 1919. He also served as private secretary to the lord chancellor from 1909 to 1915. 
An unremarkable official career was enlivened by his social connections and a complex personal life. 'Doll' Liddell belonged to the set known as the Souls, through whom he met both of the women he hoped to marry, Laura Tennant (1862-1886) ['see under 'Lyttelton, Alfred] and Edith Balfour (died 1948), and the man who married them, Alfred Lyttelton (1857-1913). Captivated by Laura Tennant's 'mixture of innocence and mischief' (Liddell, 225), he enjoyed a passionate and physical (if unconsummated) affair with her from their first meeting in 1884 until some time after her engagement to Alfred Lyttelton was announced in January 1885. Three years later he became involved with Edith Balfour, a more conventional young woman, who also declined to marry him despite a shared physical attraction, and subsequently married Lyttelton, who had been widowed in 1886. Liddell, who remained unmarried, published a volume of closely observed recollections in 1911 under the title 'Notes from the Life of an Ordinary Mortal'. He died on 12 August 1920, at his home, 6 Seville Street, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49527


Manners, (Marion Margaret) Violet, duchess of Rutland (1856-1937), artist, was born on 7 March 1856, the second daughter of Charles Hugh Lindsay (1816-1889), son of the twenty-fourth earl of Crawford, soldier and courtier, and Emilia Anne Browne (died 1873), the daughter of the dean of Lismore. Two of her four brothers and both of her sisters died in infancy or childhood. She was educated privately. Her early interest in art was fostered by her family -- the aesthete Sir Coutts Lindsay was a distant cousin -- and by a lengthy visit to Italy, although she had no formal training. Sir Coutts opened his Grosvenor Gallery in 1877, and Violet Lindsay was among the early exhibitors of both drawings and sculptures. Her many drawings of the men and women of her social circle, in silver-point or pencil, constituted her most successful work, and she exhibited extensively throughout her life at all the major British galleries (including the Fine Art Society, the Royal Academy, and the New Gallery) and in France and the United States. 'Her style', commented a reviewer of an exhibition of her drawings at the Brook Street Art Galleries, London, in 1925, 'is particularly suited to the interpretation of feminine beauty and elegance, but she usually achieves considerable success in her delineations of men' ('The Connoisseur', 188). A selection of her portraits was published in 1900 as 'Portraits of Men and Women'. 
On 25 November 1882 Violet Lindsay married, at St George's, Hanover Square, London, Henry John Brinsley Manners (1852-1925), who in 1888 became marquess of Granby, and in 1906 succeeded his father as eighth duke of Rutland. Manners, who was conventionally handsome, politically Conservative, and aristocratically philistine, had little in common with his radiant, bohemian wife. Having provided her husband with a daughter and two sons to ensure the legitimate succession of the peerage, Violet proceeded to amuse herself without him: her second daughter, Violet (Letty), was apparently fathered by Disraeli's former private secretary, Montague Corry, Baron Rowton (1838-1903), and the third, Diana, by Harry Cust ['see 'Cust, Henry John Cockayne (1861-1917)]. Socially, Lady Granby (as she became in 1888, the year of her liaison with Rowton) moved in very different circles from those of her husband, whose tastes favoured the hunting field and the chorus line at the theatre. She was one of the central figures of the Souls, the group of aristocratic friends which formed around A. J. Balfour and the Tennant sisters in the last decades of the nineteenth century. The Souls prided themselves on their intellectual interests, their avant-garde artistic taste, and their cultural sophistication, and Violet Granby, as the most talented practical artist among them, enjoyed special status. Her beauty, captured in portraits by many hands, including those of G. F. Watts, J. J. Shannon, and her own, was of the type most admired by the Souls. Her auburn hair, pale complexion, hooded eyes, and very slim figure were invariably set off by her Aesthetic-style clothes of faded colours and soft drapings: Mrs Patrick Campbell once described her as 'the most beautiful thing I ever saw' (Lambert, 79). 
The death of her eldest son, Lord Haddon, in 1894 at the age of nine, devastated Violet Granby, who poured all her grief into sculpting his tomb. She considered the plaster of his recumbent figure on an elaborate base decorated with relief portraits of her family to be her finest work, and kept it in her London house until a month before her death in 1937 it was accepted by the Tate Gallery. Lady Granby (who became duchess of Rutland in 1906) was entirely serious about her art, considering herself a professional, but her reputation undoubtedly suffered because of her rank. At a time when few women were able to make names for themselves as artists, she laboured under the dual handicap of gender and a title: if women could not aspire to 'genius', how much less so could a woman who, because of her social position, was inevitably viewed as a dilettante. 
The duchess of Rutland's other passion was for the theatre. Among her closest friends were the actor-manager Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree and his wife and three daughters, and she encouraged her own daughters to take walk-on parts in his productions. Entirely at home with actors and in the theatre, Violet Rutland pushed the boundaries of acceptable bohemianism, even among the Souls. Her unconventionality was mirrored by that of her youngest daughter, leader of the younger generation of Souls who styled themselves the Corrupt Coterie; she eventually married to become Lady Diana Cooper. 
The duchess was spared some of the tragedy of the First World War which decimated the ranks of the children of the Souls: her only surviving son was kept away from the fighting front, married into another Souls family, and lived. But her second daughter, Letty, lost her husband, Lord Elcho, in the Egyptian campaign of 1916, while Diana Manners saw most of her friends and suitors killed on the western front. The duchess converted 16 Arlington Street into a hospital for the duration of the war. After the death of her husband in 1925, she sold the Arlington Street house and moved to 34 Chapel Street, Belgrave Square, London, where she had a new studio built and continued to work. She exhibited throughout the 1920s and 1930s, holding her last exhibition in November 1937. She retained the vestiges of her looks, as Chips Channon observed at a ball at Belvoir, Leicestershire, in 1935: 'I thought that old Violet Duchess looked the best, tired, eighty, and in white; she was a romantic, rather triste figure in a castle where she had reigned so long' (Abdy and Gere, 53). Violet Rutland died at her Chapel Street home on 22 December 1937 following an operation, and was buried at Belvoir, Leicestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 49530


Simpson, William Douglas (1896-1968), archaeologist and historian, was born at 80 Hamilton Place, Aberdeen, on 2 August 1896, the younger son of Henry Fyfe Morland Simpson (1859?-1920), rector of Aberdeen grammar school, and his wife, Jenny Fridericke Simpson, 'nee' Dohm (1866?-1949). He was educated at the grammar school and at Aberdeen University, where his studies were interrupted by the First World War. Having been discharged from the army for medical reasons, he spent his war service on coast-watching duties and in work for the Ministry of National Service. He then completed his degree with first-class honours in history, being awarded the Caithness prize and Forbes gold medal. 
For a year after graduation in 1919 Simpson was assistant to Charles Sanford Terry, professor of history, and then became lecturer in history at Aberdeen University. In 1926 he was appointed university librarian, a post he held until 1966. His interest in the archaeology of castles was already well developed, and over the next thirty years he directed excavations at Kildrummy, Coull, Kindrochit, Esslemont, Dundarg, and Finavon castles, and at the Doune of Invernochty. He published a succession of books, papers, and guides, including many for the office of works and its successors, on these sites and many others in Scotland, England, and Wales. For his book 'The Castle of Kildrummy' (1923) the university awarded him the degree of DLitt. 
Other books dealt with wider questions of archaeology and history. 'The Province of Mar' (1943) and 'The Earldom of Mar' (1949) pursued Simpson's studies of north-east Scotland. 'The Castle of Bergen and the Bishop's Palace at Kirkwall' (1961), together with his edition of the proceedings of the Viking Congress held at Lerwick in 1950 (1954) and a series of papers on castles of the Teutonic knights in East Prussia, extended his interests further afield. He edited 'The Fusion of 1860' (1963) -- the volume which commemorated the centenary of the union of King's and Marischal colleges, Aberdeen -- and as secretary of the Third Spalding Club supervised the publication of its numerous volumes. The Lincoln Record Society's 'Building Accounts of Tattershall Castle' (1960) was published under remarkable difficulties, the manuscript being badly damaged by a monkey which made its way into the editor's house after escaping from a travelling circus. Of his numerous books intended for the general reader, the most widely known was 'The Ancient Stones of Scotland' (1965). 

'The Origins of Christianity in Aberdeenshire' (1925), 'The Historical St Columba' (1927), 'The Celtic Church in Scotland' (1935), and 'St Ninian and the Origins of the Christian Church in Scotland' (1940) were regarded by Simpson as an important part of his work. His methodology, however, and the conclusions which he drew from the archaeological evidence, were criticized from the start, and later opinion appears to have agreed that the criticisms were well founded. 
Many developments took place in Aberdeen University Library during the forty years in which Simpson was its librarian. Some of his far-sighted proposals were not accepted; even so strong a personality as Simpson had less influence in the university than certain members of his library committee, and he was never a member of senate. In his later years, as his health deteriorated, much of the library's administration and development was handled by others. 
When Simpson began his work on Scottish history, the subject tended to be professionally neglected; he was therefore a pioneer. Much of the practical excavation of his sites was done by his faithful boy scouts; he himself was not a trained archaeologist. Some of his conclusions have not stood the test of time, for example those concerning 'bastard feudalism' and the design of later medieval castles. His lasting achievement is to be found in his detailed studies of individual buildings, and the widespread interest in the archaeology and history of Scotland which he generated through his books and lectures. His enthusiasm, fluent delivery, and ebullient personality made him an immensely successful lecturer both in the lecture room and in the field. For many years his extramural classes were crowded with students of all ages and from all walks of life; his successors in the university library long continued to receive enquiries from Scottish exiles on topics of local history and archaeology. 
Simpson married on 12 August 1935 Ellen Dorothy Mason (1901-1984), a bank clerk of Dundee, daughter of Joseph Reed Mason, a house furnishing buyer, and Emily Annie Mason of Dundee. They had one daughter. Simpson was appointed OBE in 1954, and CBE in 1962. He was chairman of the Ancient Monuments Board for Scotland, a member of the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, and president of the Scottish History Society. For most of his life he was an enthusiastic scout and he was a lay reader of the Episcopal Church of Scotland. He died of a coronary thrombosis in King's College Library, Aberdeen, on 9 October 1968, and was buried in Springbank cemetery, Aberdeen, on 12 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 49532


Smith, Norman Kemp (1872-1958), philosopher, was born Norman Duncan Smith in Dundee on 5 May 1872. He did not use his middle name (his mother's maiden name) but after his marriage in 1910 to Amy Kemp (died 1936), a schoolteacher, daughter of Francis Kemp, banker, of Manchester, he adopted her maiden name, and thereafter was always known as Norman Kemp Smith. He was the youngest of six children of Andrew Watson Smith, cabinet-maker, and the only one in his family to have a university education. He was educated at Dundee high school and Harris Academy, Dundee, and entered the University of St Andrews in 1888, where he studied classics and philosophy under such teachers as Lewis Campbell, John Burnet, Andrew Seth, William Knight, and Henry Jones. After graduating MA with first-class honours in mental philosophy and winning the Ramsey and later Ferguson scholarships, he spent a year in Jena before becoming assistant to Sir Henry Jones in moral philosophy in Glasgow. After further study in Germany, he returned to Glasgow as assistant to Professor Robert Adamson in logic and rhetoric. Adamson, a Kantian scholar and critical philosopher, was to have a great influence on him. In 1902 Smith published 'Studies in the Cartesian Philosophy', which gained him the DPhil degree from St Andrews. In 1906 he went as professor of psychology to Princeton, and in 1914 was elected McCosh professor of philosophy there. In 1916 he returned, on leave, to Britain, where, until the end of the war, he served in the Ministry of Information. His 'Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason'' appeared in 1918, and in the following year he was appointed to the chair of logic and metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh, a post he held until his retirement in 1945. 
In 1924 Kemp Smith published his 'Prolegomena to an Idealist Theory of Knowledge'. In 1934 his translation of Kant's first 'Critique' appeared, and some said that even German scholars found it easier to read Kant in Kemp Smith's translation than in the original German. In 1935 he edited, with a lengthy introduction, Hume's 'Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion' (2nd edn, 1947), followed, in 1941, by his great work, 'The Philosophy of David Hume'. This seemed to have completed his major published work, whose power and consistency establish him as one of the greatest Scottish philosophers of the twentieth century. However, he returned to the subject of his doctoral thesis and, at the age of eighty produced a new volume, 'New Studies in the Cartesian Philosophy' (1952). Only in one of his published works is he presenting his own thought. In all of the others he is developing it in critical appreciation of earlier philosophers. Yet of his book on Hume it could be said: 'The resulting critical account of Hume's philosophy is no less modern a contribution to thought than any other book of our age' (J. Keay and J. Keay, eds., 'Collins's Encyclopaedia of Scotland', 1994, 774). In 1967 three of his former students (A. J. D. Porteous, R. D. Maclennan, and G. E. Davie) edited and contributed to a memorial volume of his collected papers, 'The Credibility of Divine Existence'. 
In 1917 Kemp Smith attended in London a lecture by Baron Friedrich von Hugel entitled 'Religion and illusion', which became the starting point for a remarkable friendship and correspondence between the Scottish philosopher, whose religious background was Presbyterian and Calvinist, and the Roman Catholic layman, twenty years his senior. The correspondence continued until von Hugel's death in 1925, and has been edited by Lawrence F. Barmann as 'The Letters of Baron Friedrich von Hugel and Professor Norman Kemp Smith' (1981). The spiritual character of his quest for truth is evident in these letters, as is his respect for Calvin and his view of sin. Yet he remained outside the church. In part this was due to his understanding that a professor of philosophy has a responsibility not to seem to commend a particular religious viewpoint. 
The 'Prolegomena to an Idealist Theory of Knowledge' (1924) attempted, as Kemp Smith put it, 'the formulation of an idealist theory of knowledge on realist lines' (preface, ix). 'Idealist' in the title is used in a particular sense, as opposed to 'naturalist' that is, it holds that 'spiritual values have a determining voice in the ordering of the Universe' and do not simply emerge with evolution (p. 1). Kemp Smith's epistemology was not idealist in the more normal sense. He developed it, as he himself said, 'on realist lines'. He rejected the doctrine of representative perception and the subjectivism of both Descartes and Berkeley. He has been described as 'critico-realist'. Knowledge is not accumulated by adding fact to fact. It develops and changes as we learn to criticize our illusions, our assumptions, in the light of new evidence or experience. In the same way, the history of ideas is not an inevitable progression. As his pupil and friend Professor G. E. Davie has suggested, the depth of his thought came from the Calvinist doctrine of original sin in contrast to the shallow optimism of the idea of progress (Davie, 46-61). He saw that to understand and interpret other philosophers one must see them in their historical context. His own interpretations of Descartes, Kant, and especially Hume showed that his critical method could bring them to contemporary life, and throw fresh light on old difficulties. He had little patience with those who reduced philosophy to 'language games'. 
Kemp Smith was a powerful force in the struggle of the Scottish universities in the 1920s to maintain a general, philosophical base to university education against pressure towards early specialization on the English model. Following the Scottish tradition he taught his own general class and each year hundreds of students learned the excitement of philosophical thinking from his rapid-fire lectures and dictated notes. He fired them with his own enthusiasm, and with many it lasted through life. With his honours classes, on the other hand, he preferred the seminar, where he was the listener to their weekly papers, gently disciplining their thought and encouraging them to follow where their ideas led. When A. E. Taylor was ill, and for a term he took the moral philosophy honours class as well as his own, he produced Reinhold Niebuhr's 'An Interpretation of Christian Ethics' and had the class study and criticize that. 
Although a large presence, Kemp Smith was a shy man with little small talk ('Kemp Smith does not converse, he discourses', said one student after having tea with him). Yet he became close to his honours students, who all revered him, as did his assistants and lecturers. He kept finding new things in literature as well as in philosophy and shared his enthusiasm for a new book with students and friends. 'Sell your bed and buy it!', he would say. He learned to drive a car at the age of sixty-six, and one of his students remembers the engine almost stalling on a steep hill while the distinguished philosopher encouraged it by rocking back and forward behind the steering wheel instead of engaging a lower gear. The sudden death of his wife on 16 December 1936 was a great grief. Although she did not share all his intellectual interests, theirs was a deeply affectionate partnership. Their only daughter, Janet, was very close to her father, and it was a joy to him when, in 1938, she married Dr Martin Ludlam, a member of a Quaker family. From 1940 to 1946 they were in India, but after their return, to Carlisle, he was able to take pleasure also in his grandchildren. 
In 1920 Kemp Smith received the honorary degree of LLD from St Andrews, and in 1930 he was made honorary DLitt of Durham. Glasgow conferred its honorary degree of LLD on him in 1951. In 1921 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1924 became a fellow of the British Academy. 
In 1957 Kemp Smith experienced a black-out and spent some time in hospital. The problem later recurred, and his last months were spent at 41 Drummond Place, an Edinburgh nursing home, where he died on 3 September 1958. He was cremated at Warriston crematorium, Edinburgh, on 6 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 49533


Smith, Ronald Gregor (1913-1968), theologian, was born in Edinburgh on 17 April 1913, the second son of George Henry Smith, marine biologist, and his wife, Helen Wilson, 'nee' Dea. Educated at George Heriot's School, Edinburgh, he studied English literature at Edinburgh University from 1930 to 1934, when he graduated MA with first-class honours. Along with a love of poetry (many were later to say he was as much a poet as a theologian) his student days were marked by an earnest evangelicalism, and while he soon discarded this form of piety the relationship of faith to a love of humanistic culture remained a lifelong source of fascination and challenge for him. Another allurement was Germany: having already acquired a command of the language he spent the year 1934-5 studying philosophy and literature in Munich, and while there met and fell in love with a doctoral student in English literature, Katherina (Kathe) Wittlake (1905-1999), his future wife. 
Gregor Smith (Gregor was incorporated into his surname in adult life) had long intended to enter the ministry of the Church of Scotland, and in 1935-8 took the divinity course at New College, Edinburgh, where his influential teachers included Professor John Baillie, and among his student peers were others destined for eminence such as T. F. Torrance. He graduated BD in 1938, again with prize distinction, but his outstanding achievement while still a student was to make the first English translation of 'Ich und Du', the seminal work of the Jewish philosopher Martin Buber, which appeared as 'I and Thou' in 1937. There followed a year in Denmark at the University of Copenhagen, studying Soren Kierkegaard, and in Germany attending the lectures of Rudolf Bultmann at the University of Marburg. 
In 1939 war put an end to plans for further such studies (and immediate marriage) and Gregor Smith undertook the parish ministry at Lawson Memorial Church, Selkirk. This nevertheless enabled him to cultivate his ideal of being a modern version of the poet-priest George Herbert, touched by Buber's sense of the divine presence in 'I-Thou' relations, Kierkegaard's discomforting stress on faith as costly decision, and T. S. Eliot's contemplative use of language. He wrote prolifically for religious and theological journals as well as producing his first book, 'Still Point', under the pseudonym Ronald Maxwell, in 1943. In 1944, however, he abandoned the seclusion of his study for an army chaplaincy with the Scots Guards. With another officer he wrote an account, both reflective and witty, of army life, 'Back from the Front', under the pseudonym Sam Browne (1946). 
In 1946 Gregor Smith joined the Allied Control Commission in Germany as education officer at Bonn University and so was engaged in re-establishing academic life on a non-Nazi basis. Karl Barth, protestantism's most eminent theologian, returned to Bonn as a visiting lecturer during this period and in 1947 among other duties conducted the service for the marriage of Gregor Smith and his fiancee, Kathe Wittlake, reunited after nearly eight years' separation. There were no children of the marriage. 
In 1947 Gregor Smith was appointed associate editor of the Student Christian Movement (SCM) Press in London, and in 1950 succeeded Hugh Martin as managing director and editor. Here Gregor Smith was in his element: the opportunity and need to keep abreast of the latest theological writing (especially German) and translating many such works himself; meeting (and dining with) prospective authors; and not only seeing into print but advocating through articles and radio broadcasts what he perceived to be the most significant voices of the hour. Under his editorship SCM Press rapidly grew from being a rather church-focused, if liberal, concern into the foremost British publishing house for serious academic theology of that time. Buber and Kierkegaard continued to feature in his own studies and translations, joined by the enigmatic figure of J. G. Hamann, a precursor of the Romantic movement and Kierkegaard's existentialism. 
It was to two modern German theologians that Gregor Smith increasingly turned: Rudolf Bultmann, who was now shaking the protestant world with his proposal to strip the 'New Testament' message of its first-century miraculous framework in favour of a 'demythologized' proclamation of the word of God's grace; and Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the Lutheran pastor executed by the Nazis in 1945, whose prison writings, posthumously published in Germany, included the startling call for theology to recognize that the world had 'come of age' and no longer needed 'God' as traditionally taught, and who proposed instead the working out of a 'non-religious Christianity'. Gregor Smith became a foremost promoter of Bonhoeffer in the English-speaking world and saw into print the first translation of his now famous prison letters. While he became a personal friend of Bultmann, confessing that he found his own thinking very difficult to distinguish from Bultmann's, a still closer friendship grew between the Gregor Smiths and Eberhard Bethge, Bonhoeffer's friend and biographer, and his wife, Renate, Bonhoeffer's niece, from 1953, when Bethge came to be pastor of Bonhoeffer's former German congregation in London. 
Gregor Smith's own theological explorations bore fruit in 'The New Man: Christianity and Man's Coming of Age', a series of lectures given in Australia in 1955 and published in 1956. Slim and deftly written, while drawing much on Bultmann and Bonhoeffer (and Paul Tillich) its originality lay in its emphasis upon 'this-worldly transcendence': history, not some realm beyond history, is where God in Christ meets humankind and is in turn the sphere into which faith leads the believer in full responsibility for society. It foreshadowed, but was more insightful and nuanced than, much of the 'secular theology' of the 1960s. 
Moreover 1956 saw Gregor Smith's appointment as primarius professor of divinity at Glasgow University. He provoked controversy on arrival by denying the right of the kirk to ratify his appointment, going to court to confirm that this was indeed a secular, not ecclesiastical, academic post. Glasgow's reputation as a centre for radical and existentialist theology, greatly enhanced by Gregor Smith's own interests, was soon attracting postgraduate students from as far afield as the USA and Australia. In turn Gregor Smith was in demand as a visiting lecturer in the USA and in Germany, and addressed a wide variety of gatherings, from ecumenical conferences of the World Council of Churches to meetings of industrial chaplains. Acquiring a reputation as something of a maverick and a radical as regards both theology and church, he was nevertheless aware that many of his students were ordinands and in his lectures he sought to show the bearing of the doctrinal tradition on a contemporary understanding of humanity and society. A refined and sensitive soul with a Kierkegaardian aversion to the 'brutish mass', Gregor Smith was nevertheless quietly sociable. He and Kathe belonged to a discussion circle of academics, psychiatrists, writers, and artists in Glasgow, while a crofter's cottage by Loch Lomond was their favoured retreat for much of the year. 
Gregor Smith's own central concern remained the meaning of faith in the context of secularization, resulting in his most substantial book, 'Secular Christianity' (1966). While the title suggests merely yet another version of the 'secular' or 'death of God' theology then being popularized, its central thrust is in fact a critique of contemporary secularism which he distinguishes from the proper 'secularity' of faith. 'Modern secularism is not secular enough', he argued, for it denies any sense of transcendence, which alone can engender both freedom and responsibility for historical life ('Secular Christianity', 172). How to conceive of this 'transcendence' as the reality of God yet met 'within' this world of human experience was the challenge Gregor Smith set himself in preparing his Warfield lectures to be given at Princeton in 1969. It is, he suggested, in the interhuman realm, the 'between' where encounter of person with person takes place, that we are touched by what truly transcends yet enfolds us as 'spirit'. The writing was still incomplete on 26 September 1968 when, after returning with Kathe from vacation on the continent, he collapsed in Hull with a heart attack and died in the Royal Infirmary. He was buried in Balmaha churchyard. 
Gregor Smith's death at fifty-five deprived British theology of one of its most creative figures just when his thought seemed to be coming to fullest flower. As translator and theological interpreter his mediation of so many leading continental thinkers was itself an immense contribution, as recognized by the honorary doctorates given him by the universities of Marburg and Edinburgh in 1963. The material from his Warfield lectures was later edited and published as 'The Doctrine of God' (1970). Unlike some would-be radical theologians he maintained a respect for the doctrinal tradition while believing that something quite new has to be said arising out of it, together with a recognition of the mystery of a God who is present yet hidden. His attitude is well expressed by a statement in 'The Doctrine of God': 'The real audacity does not consist in declaring that God is dead, but in daring at all to take that name upon our lips' ('Doctrine of God', 22). One of his Australian doctoral students said that what above all he gained from Ronald Gregor Smith was the example of a life lived in faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 49536


Soutar, William (1898-1943), poet and diarist, was born on 28 April 1898 at 2 South Inch Terrace, Perth, the only child of John Soutar (1871-1958), master joiner, and his wife, Margaret Smith (1870-1954), who were both Scottish. Soutar's mother wrote poetry, and her athletic, handsome son followed suit, regularly composing verses while still a schoolboy. He attended the Southern District School, Perth, from 1903 to 1912 and Perth Academy from 1912 to 1916. 
Soutar joined the Royal Navy in 1916, and spent the next two years with the North Atlantic Fleet. The life was taxing, but it was a stimulating challenge. He enjoyed the rough comradeship of fellow sailors but became increasingly aware of the politics of war and the human suffering that it caused. The experience developed his democratic instincts and his doubts about the values of empire, conquest, and class-ridden society. He was demobilized in November 1918, but at that time of rejoicing was ill and unable to walk, due to an unidentifiable ailment. In 1919 he had recovered sufficiently to begin a course in medicine, which he did not enjoy, before switching to honours English at Edinburgh University, but he never regained full mobility. 
Soutar's university career was undistinguished. Anglo-Saxon bored him, and he challenged the university establishment and distinguished Donne scholar Herbert Grierson, his professor, asserting its irrelevance to his future career. He dressed in a dandified fashion, alienating his peers, many of whom were prejudiced against former forces students. He graduated in 1923 with a third-class degree, which he was lucky to get, having been perversely arrogant throughout, refusing for example to study the novel. 'I'm not a 'Varsity bird' -- one is apt to get cobwebs on one's wings', he commented on the years when he: '
walked with stiffening bones 

among the academic stones. 

' Continuing, however, to write English poetry, he contributed to the magazine 'The Student'. His first book, 'Gleanings by an Undergraduate' (1923), was produced, like most of his subsequent slim volumes, at his father's expense. On 18 April 1919 he also began his lifelong practice of keeping a daily dairy: 'Carpe Diem!' heralded that commitment, followed the next day with 'Remember to seize every opportunity. Reverence Truth: Chastity and Love'. A belief that his thoughts might have wider relevance and significance is already implicit in those words. 
During this period Soutar made contact with Hugh MacDiarmid (C. M. Grieve), at that time a journalist in Montrose, and Ezra Pound, among others. His letters indicate determined ambitions as a poet and contempt for the fashionable poetry of the day. MacDiarmid was abandoning writing poetry in English in favour of 'synthetic Scots', eclectically gleaned from old Scots, especially the medieval 'makars' Henrysoun and Dunbar, and all current dialects. This evolved into the Scottish literary renaissance, its aim to revitalize Scottish culture by replacing dominant stereotypes, mostly distorted caricatures, with genuine images and concepts rooted in, but not bound by, genuine Scottish traditions and connecting with the European modernist mainstream. Soutar initially disagreed with the linguistic spearhead of MacDiarmid's agenda but became increasingly excited by the possibilities of Scots. He had an effortless grasp of the language, having grown up in a Scots-speaking environment. By 1930 he was fervently writing Scots poetry for adults as well as his superb 'bairnrhymes' for children, believing that 'if the Doric is to come back alive, it will come on a cock-horse' (letter to C. M. Grieve, 1931). 
Unfortunately for Soutar his mysterious illness advanced during his university career; his hopes of becoming a journalist with 'The Scotsman' were dashed. He began teacher training in October 1924 but had to return to Perth to undergo medical treatment for his now diagnosed ankylosing spondylitis. His parents were happy to keep him, but from 1924 he became increasingly stiff and paralysed, and in 1930 finally bedridden. One bright spot in this darkening picture was his parents' adoption of an orphaned Australian cousin, Evelyn, aged six. Soutar doted on her, and she inspired his bairnrhymes. 
From 26 November 1930, and the onset of permanent invalidity, to his death, thirteen years later, Soutar's life entailed predictable routine. Lovingly looked after, with his bedroom and bed always immaculate, he was a dandy to the last, dressing with care and bravado in velvet jacket and bow tie, his black hair fanned out on the supporting pillows. Nature had always been his great passion, and the window of his long room was enlarged so that he could observe the outside world: the garden, the sycamore tree at its foot, and Craigie Hill beyond, wrenchingly nostalgic for memories of his previous active life, the hill being a natural haven for courting couples. Eventually Soutar couldn't move even his head; his father furnished the room with bookshelves and an elaborate system of mirrors so that he could identify to a mobile helper the books that he required. 
October 1924 had witnessed a poignant moment when Soutar, walking one lovely evening in Edinburgh and contemplating the prospect of his future, restricted life, stopped under the pillars of St George's West Church and said to himself: 'Now, I can be a poet'. Throughout his bedridden years he set himself a strict daily routine of writing poetry, adding to his diary, and making many other jottings: commonplace books for noting (often humorously) trivial events; journals for more extensive, philosophical explorations; dream books; and letters. He read voraciously, believing that 'the poet should know everything', at one point setting himself to read the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' -- a task that he accomplished. 
The invalid's room became a magnet for visitors: family, friends, local worthies, well-intending sick-visitors. Soutar was always cheery and welcoming to his uninvited guests but secretly was irritated and frustrated when hours each week were inevitably passed in 'mindless conversation'. He was also sexually frustrated and often fantasized about women who might somehow provide relief. His parents' strict religious views rendered any such satisfaction out of the question. One of his finest poems, 'The Tryst', takes the form of a haunting fantasy about receiving a nubile, willing night visitor. Many literary figures also called: Hugh MacDiarmid, George Bruce, Tom Scott, William Montgomery, Helen B. Cruickshank, the artist and school friend Jim Finlayson, and others. With them he could relish real conversation. 
Though brought up in the Free Church of Scotland (Auld Lichters) Soutar departed from the strict beliefs of his parents and became virtually an atheist. He became more nationalistic and socialist, and his own predicament combined with his outgoing nature and love of life to generate in him a passionate pacifism. The Spanish Civil War horrified him, especially the bombing of Guernica, inspiration for his outstanding poem 'The Children'. As the Second World War proceeded he was increasingly weakened by tuberculosis, first contracted in 1929. His decline in energy and well-being from 1942 onwards is noticeable in all his writings, and he knew by July 1943 that his condition was terminal. It was then that he began a special diary, 'The Diary of a Dying Man', to document that last journey. It is a masterpiece. 
William Soutar died on 15 October 1943 at his home -- 27 Wilson Street, Perth -- and was buried at Jeanfield cemetery, Perth. There is a tendency still for the Scottish literary orthodoxy to dismiss him as a poetic miniaturist whose best achievement was a few Scots poems and the bairnrhymes, and as an old-fashioned figure in the male-dominated literary renaissance. His poetic achievement, however, extends to many fine poems in English, and even a large proportion of his Scots writing still goes ignored. After Soutar's death Hugh MacDiarmid edited his 'Collected Poems' (1948) but, perhaps because he felt Soutar essentially a rival and threat, he left out many fine pieces. W. R. Aitken edited 'Poems in Scots and English' in 1961, but not until 1988 was there a substantial edition, 'Poems of William Soutar: a New Selection', also edited by Aitken, who decided, misguidedly, that Soutar would not be best served by a proper edition of the complete poems. Soutar's diaries must also be considered in any assessment. In 1954 Alexander Scott published a small selection from the diaries of 1930 to 1943, unfortunately entitling it 'Diaries of a Dying Man', virtually appropriating the title of that unique, last diary. It was thanks to American diarist scholar Thomas Mallon, moved by the tragic story of the diaries and amazed at their literary quality and Soutar's obscurity, that a process began that brought 'Diaries of a Dying Man' back into print in 1988. 
A biographical television film, 'The Garden Beyond', was broadcast in 1977 but a real awakening of interest in Soutar did not occur until the late 1980s, with an article in the 'Scots Magazine'. A selection from 'Diaries of a Dying Man' was broadcast on BBC Radio Scotland in 1987, and in 1989 Soutar House, bequeathed by Soutar's father to the town as a memorial to his son, was refurbished, designated a listed building, and a writer in residence installed. In 1990 Perth Theatre produced a play about Soutar's life, 'Gang doun wi' a Sang'. But the fact that in his centenary year, 1998, none of his poems was in print shows that the unique achievement of his contribution is not yet properly appreciated, in Scotland or internationally. 
Soutar as a literary figure must be examined in his entirety: the poetry in Scots and English, the diaries, the letters, and other writings, mostly still unpublished. His literary output must be seen against the background of his life story and the suffering that he endured, his courage, and the sheer sensitive intelligence that he brought to everything. At its best the poetry exhibits a perfection and lyrical resonance that few poets achieve, while the intellectual power and insight represented by the diaries is of international significance. Seen in this context Soutar is a major figure in Scottish literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 49538


Sir (Alexander) Murray Stephen (1892-1974). Born at Linnwood, Dowanhill Gardens, Glasgow, on 11 September 1892, Murray Stephen was educated at Cargil Field and Fettes schools. He then went up to King's College, Cambridge, graduating there in 1914 with first-class honours in the mechanical tripos. After service in France, where he was awarded the Military Cross, Murray Stephen finally entered the family business in 1919. He became a director of the firm in 1922. In that year he married Kathrene Paton, daughter of Alexander Moncrieff Mitchell, a lawyer. The couple had two sons and a daughter. 
The troubled circumstances of the early 1930s forced Murray Stephen to take tough and determined action, and it was he who regained the Inchcape shares and negotiated the liquidation of the family holdings in the Steel Company of Scotland, while retaining a seat on the board. He also represented his company on the board of the shipbuilding rationalization company, National Shipbuilders' Security Ltd, and by 1937 he was president of the Clyde Shipbuilders' Association; the following year he also became president of the Shipbuilding Employers' Federation. The next step for him was presidency of the Shipbuilding Conference, the industry commercial agency, and he held that demanding position from 1941 to 1948. These roles, and his wartime service on the Ministry of Transport and Shipbuilding committee, brought him a knighthood in 1946; he was also a member of the post-war shipbuilding advisory committee established in 1946. 
After the war Murray Stephen was an advocate of radical change in the shipbuilding industry, notably pioneering the use of welding and advocating the adoption of prefabrication. He also tried to tackle the ingrained over-manning and restrictive work practices in the shipyards, setting up at Linthouse the first shipyard joint council in which labour and management met monthly to discuss the business and any issues of concern. He also tried to accelerate and secure technical change and improve practice by establishing two apprentice training schools within the yard, staffed by professional teachers. While all of this was progressive, the net achievement and benefit for the Stephens was slender; the problems were too deep-seated for a single yard to resolve. Nevertheless, Murray Stephen remained strongly committed to technical change and progress and continued to advocate this for the industry through his chairmanship of the council of the British Shipbuilding Research Association between 1948 and 1950. He undertook wider public service in 1948 when he became a member of the University Grants Committee, and he received an honorary degree of LLD from Glasgow University in 1952. Among many honours he was a lord lieutenant of the county of Lanarkshire, honorary president of the Scottish Conservative Association, and in Glasgow a director of the chamber of commerce, deacon of the Incorporation of Hammermen, and a director of the Victoria Infirmary. When he retired in 1965 his yard at Linthouse was in deep difficulty, in common with other yards on the Clyde and in Britain generally. Sir Murray Stephen died at Bon Secours Hospital, Glasgow, on 17 December 1974. His wife survived him. 
The firm of Alexander Stephen & Sons of Linthouse was to pay no dividends after 1965 and the seventh generation of Stephens, James and Alexander, inherited the family firm in its declining years. Family control was finally lost in 1968 when Linthouse was merged into the new Upper Clyde Shipbuilders Ltd, and the yard was closed in 1969, ending a century of building there. The engineering side of the business remained in family hands, but it too closed in 1976, ending more than 200 years of shipbuilding by the Stephens of Burghead, Aberdeen, Arbroath, Dundee, and Linthouse. 


@@@@@


doc= 49539


Stephenson, Elsie (1916-1967), nurse and relief worker, the youngest of four children and only daughter of Henry Walker Stephenson (died 1918), a farmer, and his wife, Ethel Watson, was born at Crawleas Farm, Merrington, in Bishop Auckland, co. Durham, on 22 January 1916. After her father's death two years later in the influenza pandemic that swept through Europe, the family relocated to Newmarket, where her brothers found employment in the racing stables; one became a jockey. Elsie was educated at Newmarket grammar school (1926-33) but did not distinguish herself academically. After helping her mother with 'home duties', she started general nurse training at the West Suffolk Hospital, Bury St Edmunds. This was followed by midwifery training at Queen Charlotte's Maternity Hospital, London, and she then took a fever nursing certificate at the Ipswich Isolation Hospital. By 1941 she had moved to Newcastle upon Tyne to undertake a health visitor's course. On completion of this, she was very well qualified professionally and had found her true vocation in the field of public health. She returned to Suffolk to practise as a health visitor from 1942 to 1944. 
Elsie had been a member of the British Red Cross Society (BRCS) since her schooldays, and it was with the BRCS that she took a different career path in the closing years of the Second World War. Her contribution to the war effort took the form of civil relief work. By the spring of 1944 she had been posted to Cairo, where the BRCS, along with its American and Greek counterparts, the Egyptian Red Crescent, and the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, had teams of workers standing by to assuage the sufferings of the thousands of refugees who had fled their homelands of Italy, Greece, and Yugoslavia as the German army retreated and the allies advanced. Between 1944 and 1945 Elsie was posted to various camps in Egypt, Italy, and Yugoslavia. Whether in hutted hospitals or under canvas she gave nursing care, set up mother and child welfare clinics, and taught mothercraft and hygiene, often in circumstances far from ideal. Meeting the needs of polyglot groups from differing cultures presented a considerable challenge. From these experiences she gained an insight into humankind under duress, from which in turn she developed a breadth of vision that widened her perception of human nature. For her services Elsie was awarded the Italian star and the defence medal, and was admitted to the order of St John of Jerusalem as a serving sister. 
Following the cessation of hostilities in Europe in 1945, Elsie went home for a brief respite but was soon off again, having joined the mobile hospital no. 5 BRCS as a senior sister in November of that year. Further relief work at Bad Munden in Germany followed. The post-war objectives of the BRCS and other agencies included the relief of famine and the provision of shelter and clean water supplies, in addition to the immediate care of patients suffering from the effects of extreme deprivation. This was a harrowing period, as many of the patients had been either concentration-camp inmates or prisoners of war. Nevertheless Elsie fulfilled her obligations with her usual warmth and aplomb. Later, on the invitation of Civilian Relief Overseas, she joined a child welfare team in Berlin. The purpose of this team was to contribute to the city's rehabilitation by aiding mothers and children, thereby helping to stabilize an environment in which food was scarce and diseases such as typhoid were rife. This ten-week tour of duty in Berlin was, however, only a partial success, the project being hampered in its efforts by conflicting directives issued by the four occupying powers (the United States, Britain, France, and the USSR). 
By Christmas 1946 Elsie was home for rest and recuperation. Early in 1947 she was awarded a Florence Nightingale International Foundation scholarship to study at the University of Toronto, and she was awarded a certificate in advanced public health nursing in June that year. Her first in-depth experience of academic life provided opportunities to deepen her knowledge and at the same time forge further international friendships. During her stay in Toronto she took note of the fact that the university had offered a bachelor of science degree in nursing since 1942. While degree courses for nurses were then unknown in Britain, they had been well established in the United States and Canada since the 1920s. The Toronto degree for nurses made a profound impression on her and was to have implications for the future. 
Links with the BRCS were maintained in the interim. In 1947 Elsie was again travelling on its behalf, this time as a senior nurse consultant. She moved from Germany to the Middle and Far East, advising on welfare organization, disease prevention, general hygiene, and midwifery teaching. This tour culminated in her attendance at the International Red Cross Conference held in Stockholm in August 1948. Overall, she added to her already vast stock of knowledge of health-care matters and was able to hone her communication and negotiating skills. 
Elsie returned home in 1948 to take charge of health visiting in east Suffolk under the new National Health Service. By 1950 she had returned to a similar post in Newcastle. Here she became involved in a major research project, published in 1956 as the Jameson report and entitled 'An Inquiry into Health Visiting'. This report ultimately paved the way for reform of health visiting. 
Elsie's next career move was the surprising transition from public health into academia. In 1955, in agreement with the Scottish Department of Health, the General Nursing Council for Scotland, and the Royal College of Nursing Scottish board, supported by a grant of $30,000 from the Rockefeller Foundation New York, the University of Edinburgh established a department of nursing studies, the first of its kind in Europe. Elsie was appointed director and began work in her new post in June 1956. The reasons why she left public health remain obscure; possibly she felt that nurses should be better educated in order to keep abreast of changes in health care and that this was an area in which she could lead -- and there is no doubt that at this juncture Elsie Stephenson emerged as a leader among nurses. During her period of tenure, the position of the department of nursing studies was secured and developed. The first courses offered were certificates in nursing education and administration (both at advanced level) for nurse tutors and aspiring matrons. In 1964 a first degree-course in nursing was established, and in the same year an international school for overseas students was also set up, supported by the World Health Organization, which funded scholarships for nurses from over the globe. Elsie was keen to promote research, which was part of the agreement with the Rockefeller Foundation. The first PhD graduates successfully defended their theses in 1959. 
On 14 November 1964 Elsie married a widower, William Henry Gardner (1895-1977), son of William John Gardner, a printer. Her husband was a retired assistant under-secretary in the War Office, whom she had met at the Stockholm Red Cross conference. In addition to her Red Cross connections, Elsie was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Health in 1956 and was an editor of the 'International Journal of Nursing Studies'. She died from lung cancer in the City Hospital, Edinburgh, on 16 July 1967. Her body was bequeathed to medical research and the final remains were interred at Walthamstow. Her name is commemorated by the Elsie Stephenson memorial lecture, hosted by the department of nursing studies in the University of Edinburgh. 
It is apparent that among Elsie Stephenson's characteristics was an outstanding ability to embrace change, to face stiff opposition with courage, and to reconcile seemingly implacable forces: 'Conflicts are inevitable... Do not be afraid of them. What matters is how one deals with them' (Allan, 152-3). She combined her political skills with a deep Christian faith, warmth, and enthusiasm for the task in hand. If her boundless panache was occasionally overwhelming she may be forgiven in the light of all that she achieved. 


@@@@@


doc= 49540


Sutton, Henry (c.1624-1665), maker of mathematical instruments, whose parentage is unknown and whose birth date depends upon the assumption that he was apprenticed at the age of fourteen, was bound to Thomas Browne, mathematical instrument maker, in the Joiners' Company on 18 August 1638. He was made free of the company in August 1648 and became a liveryman in 1657. He booked five apprentices in the company, one of whom, John Marke (free 1664), succeeded him. 
Sutton, who lived and worked in Threadneedle Street behind the Royal Exchange, London, was quickly integrated into the circle of superior craftsmen, mathematical practitioners, and savants of mid-century London, which included men such as John Collins, Thomas Harvey, Samuel Morland, and Euclid Speidell. In the 'Sector on a Quadrant' (1658), a work written by John Collins at Sutton's request, and of which the latter was joint publisher, Henry Sutton shares an advertisement for 'All manner of Mathematical Instruments, either for Sea or Land... in Wood or Brass' with William Sutton (free of the Joiners' Company 2 February 1656); as William's father was also a Henry, it is likely that they were related, as both may also have been to the instrument maker Baptist Sutton ('fl'. 1636-1653). 
Sutton was a prolific maker, more than thirty of whose instruments are known to have survived, and he also exploited the possibilities of printing and publishing to advance his career. Many of his instruments were cheap, popular sundials printed on paper from copper plates which he had engraved, and he was noted for the accuracy of his scale division. On 6 December 1653 he was paid $20 2's'. for instruments supplied for 'the service of the publique in Ireland', and in 1654 he provided the graph paper for Petty's 'down survey'. Sutton's first wife, Susan, was buried on 20 October 1658. He quickly married again on 22 February 1659, but his new wife, Jane, soon followed her predecessor to the grave. She was interred on 26 November 1659. 
Instruments signed and dated by Sutton cover the whole of his active career from 1648 to 1664, and those known to have been made for clients such as Samuel Morland and William Rook attest to his contacts with the learned world. Sutton also maintained creative collaboration with other craftsmen, in particular with John Browne, son of Thomas Browne, Sutton's master, for whom he was joint publisher of two books, and with the clockmaker Samuel Knibb, cousin of the clockmakers Joseph and John Knibb. Sutton collaborated with Samuel Knibb in the making of Samuel Morland's trigonometrical machine of 1664, and John Knibb was apprenticed to William Sutton in the same year. Henry Sutton's connection with Morland can be shown to go back to the 1650s: some of the earliest examples of a perpetual calendar invented by Morland are to be found on quadrants by Sutton dated 1658. On 8 August 1663 Sutton, who, as John Collins had noted, was not without knowledge of the mathematical sciences, observed a lunar eclipse in company with Thomas Streete and Robert Anderson. 
Sutton died of the plague and was buried at St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, on 21 September 1665, soon to be followed by his two surviving children. His early death robbed the scientific community of London of a highly talented craftsman who was clearly only just beginning to realize his full potential. In 1669, R. Morden reissued a single sheet 'Description and Use of a Large Quadrant' by Sutton, and in the next century his quadrants could still be described by Edmund Stone as 'the finest divided instruments in the World, and the Regularity and Exactness of the vast Number of Circles drawn upon them is highly delightful to behold' (Bion, suppl.). 


@@@@@


doc= 49541


White, James (bap. 1824, d. 1884), maker of scientific instruments, was baptized on 23 November 1824 in the parish of Kildalton in Islay, Argyll, the son of William White and his wife, Margaret Adam. His father subsequently moved to Glasgow, where he traded as a yarn merchant. The young White was apprenticed about 1839 to Gardner & Co., mathematical, optical, and philosophical instrument makers. He probably worked for the firm as a journeyman until he was about twenty-five, when he set up on his own with $160, partly borrowed from friends, at 14 Renfield Street, Glasgow, in March 1850. 
White received early encouragement from William Thomson, professor of natural philosophy at Glasgow University, for whose laboratory he supplied materials and experimental teaching apparatus from 1854 onwards. Sometimes Thomson's scientific curiosity made unusual demands of the instrument maker. One day in 1868 he hurried White to a hairdresser's shop near his workshop in Buchanan Street to see a rubber drive-belt which was used for a rotatory hairbrush. He requested White to get one put up in the classroom immediately, and used it to demonstrate to students and colleagues the principle of kinetic rigidity by forcing it into kinks by hitting it with a stick. White helped to equip Thomson's pioneering new laboratory at Gilmorehill in 1870, and was appointed optician and philosophical instrument maker to the university. Although the two men formed a close relationship as instrument maker and inventor, they were not business partners; only after White's death did Thomson become a partner in the firm. 
White's earliest known partner was John Haddin Barr, with whom he traded as White and Barr from 1857 until the dissolution of their partnership in the autumn of 1859, apparently because of Barr's emigration to New Zealand. Within two years a deficit of over $1600 forced White to petition for sequestration, in August 1861. He attributed his losses to 'various unprofitable contracts' and a patent connected with an improved sextant. His business as revealed by the bankruptcy papers was a broadly based retailing operation, involving the purchase of instruments and other items from many of the leading British wholesalers and manufacturers. His stock, by then including photographic apparatus, was thus similar to that of other contemporary instrument firms. After satisfying his creditors by December 1861, he resumed business, and later entered into partnership with Robert McCracken, a dentist; this was dissolved in December 1876. 
White's business first became distinguished because of his crucial part in the development of Thomson's pioneering electrical instruments, particularly electrometers and electrical balances, from 1854. Thomson designed, and in 1858 patented, the mirror galvanometer for the Atlantic telegraph project, crediting White with the innovative substitution of lightweight silvered microscope glass for the usual metal mirror. Thomson's attachment to White as a maker was later attributed to the galvanometer's success in enabling the first transatlantic telegraphic contact. The firm also manufactured considerable numbers of the siphon recorder, which followed the galvanometer in 1867, and of other electrical instruments stemming from Thomson's twenty-four patents relating to electrical circuits. White also made specially commissioned instruments such as the portable electrometers which were constructed to Thomson's design for the German scientist J. F. G. Dellman in 1862-3, and those for Lieutenant Alfred Parr and Lieutenant William May's Arctic expedition to measure atmospheric electricity in 1875. 
White was an elder of St Matthew's Free Church, Glasgow, and was elected a member of the Glasgow Philosophical Society in 1876. On 5 September 1877 he married Jane Reid, sister of David Hay Reid, muslin manufacturer. There were no surviving children. By 1885 electrical apparatus accounted for less than one third of his company's sales income, which mostly derived from the production of Thomson's patented compasses after 1876, and to a lesser extent from his other marine instruments, including sounding machines. As well as entrusting White with the sole manufacture of almost all his instruments, Thomson relied on his craftsmanship and patience during the demanding stages of design as they refined successive versions of an instrument, from what often began as a rough sketch. Thomson closely supervised production, latterly helped by one of the earliest telephone lines in Britain, which linked his classroom to the workshop. He held the instrument maker in high esteem; after he allowed his tide predictor to be made by Lege in 1872-3, he regretted he had not used White, with 'his genius to help' (Wilson, 'Correspondence', 2.454). According to one of Thomson's pupils, while White was 'no doubt a most skilful mechanic, he had further a singular aptitude in grasping Thomson's ideas and giving them practical shape'. In his lecture room Thomson 'often spoke of and praised the excellence and exactness of White's work' (Murray, 137). 
Before an expansion into larger workshops in 1883 White had taken as partners his assistants Mathew Edwards and David Reid (unrelated to his wife). They continued the firm after White's death at 20 Hamilton Drive, Glasgow, on 15 August 1884. The death certificate described the cause as a 'softening of the brain', from which he had suffered since 1880. White left $5244 to his widow as his share of a successful business. In describing him as Sir William Thomson's 'highly-skilled coadjutor', his obituarist ('Engineering') caught the essence of his talent and achievement as a scientific instrument maker. 


@@@@@


doc= 49542


Dicas, Mary (fl. 1800-1815), maker of scientific instruments, was the elder daughter of John Dicas, a Liverpool wine and brandy merchant, who married Alice Edmonton at Holy Trinity Church, Chester, on 9 July 1777. No record of her birth or baptism has been found, although her brother, Robert, was baptized at St Nicholas's, Liverpool, on 29 May 1787. He does not appear to have survived to maturity. 
John Dicas, noted in local directories from 1774, invented an improved hydrometer for measuring the specific gravity of alcoholic liquids, particularly useful in his line of business, as those in use all had a number of disadvantages. He also invented a saccharometer (for measuring sugar content of liquids) and a lactometer (for measuring the strength of milk). He patented the hydrometer in 1780, and ten years later it was adopted by the United States government as their standard instrument for assessing import duty. John Dicas had, however, died by 1802 when the board of inquiry of the Royal Society was advertising in local newspapers throughout the United Kingdom, inviting instrument makers to bring forward hydrometers which could be tested for adoption by the customs and excise for taxation purposes. His name had been replaced in the local directories by that of Mary Dicas from 1800: if she was born in the year after her parents' marriage, she would by then have been in her early twenties. She took examples of her father's instruments and travelled to London, where she was among ten makers who explained their use before the board of inquiry. However, her bid was unsuccessful, and the excise adopted the hydrometer devised by Bartholomew Sikes. 
By 1807 Mary Dicas was in partnership with George Arstall, a scale-beam maker who had his own business at Temple Court, while the Dicas manufactory was based on the north side of the Old Dock. At some point they married, and four children were baptized at St Peter's Church, Liverpool, between 1810 and 1815. The eldest, Frederick Dicas Arstall, in due course became a scale maker, working in Manchester from 1838, and returning to Liverpool in 1851. With the redevelopment of the Old Dock from about 1812, the manufacture of the Dicas hydrometer moved to Temple Court, from which most of the instruments (which were illegal for taxation purposes in the United Kingdom) were exported to the United States. It is difficult to estimate the numbers of these that were made, but by the time the firm was being run by Mary's sister Ann, from 1818, and subsequently by Ann's husband, Benjamin Gammage, from 1823, the hydrometers, now marked 'Gammage late Dicas' bore numbers higher than 5599. The date and circumstances of Mary Arstall's death are unknown. 
In the 1806 edition of 'Directions for using the patent saccharometer for brewing ale and beer... invented by the late J. Dicas, and made and sold by his successor, M. Dicas', Mary's involvement was not spelt out, but by the 1814 edition, it was clarified as 'invented by the late' 'John Dicas'', and for upwards of sixteen years, made only by his daughter and successor, Mary Arstall, late Mary Dicas, mathematical instrument maker, Liverpool: the only proprietor of the patent, who, for some time previous to the decease of her father, assisted in making the above instruments'. A manuscript note, added to one copy of this, states 'now made by Ann Dicas, successor to M. Arstall'. Benjamin Gammage appeared in the Liverpool directories as a hydrometer maker until 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 49543


Taylor, Janet (1804-1870), teacher of navigation and supplier of nautical instruments, was born on 13 May 1804 at Wolsingham, co. Durham, the sixth of eight children of the Revd Peter Ionn (1762-1821), master of Wolsingham Free Grammar School, and his wife, Jane Deighton. She attributed her knowledge of navigation to the fact that it was taught by her father and her education probably began at his school. She then attended a small school in London under the patronage of Queen Charlotte, who is said personally to have waived the minimum entry age for her. In 1829 she was in London; on 30 January 1830, at the British ambassador's residence at The Hague, she married George Taylor Jane (1792-1853), a widower with three children. The couple adopted the surname Taylor. She had a small inheritance from her father and spent 'several thousand pounds' on the publication of her early books. The first of these, 'Luni-Solar and Horary Tables', published in 1833, was hastily prepared and critically reviewed. However, in 1835 she earned recognition for her simplified lunar distance method, with pecuniary rewards from the Admiralty, Trinity House, and later the East India Company, and gold medals from the kings of Holland and Prussia. Her principal works were 'Lunar Tables' (1834), with seven editions to 1854, and 'An Epitome of Navigation' (1842), a general textbook, with twelve editions to 1859. Her 'mariner's calculator' for solving navigational problems mechanically, patented in 1834, was unsuccessful and soon abandoned. 
From 1833 to 1835 the Taylors lived at 6 East Street, Red Lion Square, in Holborn, London, and Janet almost certainly already had pupils for instruction in navigation. In early 1835 she was teaching navigation at 1 Fen Court, Fenchurch Street, and later that year opened a nautical academy and navigation warehouse selling charts and instruments, at 103 Minories. Although the business was listed under her husband's name she took the lead in it. She had the sole agency for Dent's chronometers and offered instrument repairs, and, from 1843, compass adjustment. In 1845 the business, now under her own name, moved to 104 Minories and she hired instrument makers and began manufacturing instruments on the premises. Octants, a sextant, compass, barometers, and a telescope with her name are known and she exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and International Exhibition of 1862. The navigation school expanded steadily as nautical education was gradually formalized. 
Janet Taylor had eight children of whom six survived infancy. Her husband died in 1853. He had supported her activities and published some of her books, but he had no settled career and she claimed to be the family breadwinner. She found life difficult without him and in 1860, in recognition of this and her work for seafarers, she was awarded a civil-list pension of $50 per annum. About the same time she gave up sole control of her business and by 1868 had retired completely. As a woman Janet Taylor was unique in reaching such prominence in the nautical world. This was achieved not only by competence but also by exceptional determination, particularly in the bold promotion of her work in the highest quarters. She died of bronchitis on 26 January 1870 at her sister's house in St Helen's, Auckland, co. Durham, where she was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 49546


Widmore, Richard (bap. 1681, d. 1764), historian and librarian, was baptized on 27 June 1681 at St Michael's, Warfield, Berkshire, the son of Christopher Widmore, a bailiff, of Kingsclere in Hampshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. He attended Sedbergh School from about 1693 until 1698 when he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge. He graduated BA in 1702, MA in 1708. 
Widmore was ordained priest by the bishop of London in September 1705 and served as curate at St James's, Dukes Place, in the City of London. By 1711 he was serving as curate of St Margaret's, Westminster, and it was doubtless at this period that he first became familiar with the monastic archive of Westminster Abbey and with its chapter library. In December 1731 the abbey's librarian, Thomas Moore, who had held office for over forty years, was given leave to appoint Widmore as his deputy, doubtless with an understanding that the latter would succeed him. Moore died two years later and Widmore's appointment as librarian was confirmed by the dean and chapter in February 1734. For the next twenty-five years Widmore devoted his efforts to the study of the abbey's history and to the care of its books and records. Hitherto the dean and chapter's library had grown almost exclusively by donation and bequest, but Widmore began to purchase books too, making substantial and important additions to the collections in the course of his custodianship. 
About 1735 Widmore began to examine and sort the abbey's records, compiling a catalogue which was finally completed in 1741. From this labour emerged his two publications, both significant contributions to the historiography of Westminster and the first printed accounts to draw their conclusions directly from the original sources. 'An Enquiry into the Time of the First Foundation of Westminster Abbey' appeared in 1743 and refuted the then widely held notion that Westminster owed its foundation to King Sebert in the early seventh century. In 'An History of the Church of St. Peter, Westminster', published by subscription in 1751, Widmore provided a more substantial history of the institution, carried down to his own time. An appendix contained transcribed documents and lists of officials. 
Widmore also devoted much time to the salvaged collections of the Cotton Library which were still stored at Westminster following the fire at Ashburnham House in 1731. He paid particular attention to the charters, and his reports were heavily relied upon by the committee of trustees of the newly formed British Museum when it surveyed the collections in 1754. The following year, at the request of the trustees, he spent four months cataloguing the 3800 volumes bequeathed to the Cottonian Library by Arthur Edwards (died 1743). In 1756 Widmore was recommended to be one of the librarians of the new museum, but he was never appointed to that office. 
Widmore corresponded with the antiquarian Browne Willis and with the biographer John Ward, sending to the latter amendments for a second edition of 'Lives of the Professors of Gresham College'. In spite of these and other scholarly connections he was never a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and his letters (which survive in the British Library) convey little impression of his character beyond that of a studious man, generous with information gleaned from the records in his care. 
On 12 May 1760 Widmore preached at the first of two services for the bicentenary of Westminster's foundation as a collegiate church. In the same year he was appointed rector of Lasham in Hampshire where he lived quietly in retirement though retaining both his post and his house at Westminster. He was unmarried. He died at Lasham on 9 November 1764 and was buried there, probably in the chancel, on 15 November. The church at Lasham was completely rebuilt in the nineteenth century and no gravestone or monument has survived. In his will Widmore bequeathed more than forty books to the library at Westminster and there appears to be no foundation for John Nichols's assertion that his private library was sold in 1765. 


@@@@@


doc= 49549


Abbatt, (Norah) Marjorie (1899-1991), promoter of toy design and businesswoman, was born on 18 March 1899 in Surbiton, Surrey, daughter of a well-to-do fur broker. She was educated at Roedean School, Brighton, and at Somerville College, Oxford; but her postgraduate studies at University College, London, intended to combine psychoanalysis and speech therapy, were interrupted by marriage to (Cyril) Paul Abbatt in December 1930. Paul Abbatt had been born on 19 July 1899 in Bromley Cross near Bolton, son of a Quaker family, and educated in Quaker schools and Trinity Hall, Cambridge (natural sciences), following which he had taught at another Quaker school, Sidcot, from 1922. From 1932, when their toy company was registered, they were known in the progressive education world as Paul and Marjorie Abbatt. 
Marjorie Abbatt was a romantic idealist with a highly pragmatic centre; she respected Paul for his ideas and principles, but saw herself as getting on with the practicalities of their life together. Paul had been deeply influenced by the order of Woodcraft Chivalry (which had established a lodge at Sidcot), and they first met at the yearly folkmoot -- to which Marjorie had been taken by a friend -- in the scented pinewoods of Godshill, Hampshire, where Paul had been working for a term in the order's newly established forest school. Marjorie in her eighties described the experience as 'ecstatic'. Both were inspired by the order's educational ideal of children 'learning by doing'; determined to start a progressive school themselves, they set off on a year's 'honeymoon' to Vienna and Russia, armed only with a letter of introduction from Sir Charles Trevelyan (then president of the Board of Education), to study kindergarten methods. In Vienna especially they were impressed by the way children's play was taken seriously as a valid form of 'work', and by the innovative educationist Professor Cizek at the Vienna School of Arts and Crafts. They returned with a collection of experiential toys and were ready to be inspired still further by Susan Isaacs, writing of her experimental school in Cambridge: 'We see no reason to let the school and its conventions stand between the child and the real situations in the world' (S. Isaacs, 'Intellectual growth in young children', 1930, 21). 
The couple's focus now changed, away from starting their own school and towards the toys themselves. They visited workshops and small factories at home and abroad to discover craftspeople in wood, and held a six-week exhibition (1932) in their flat in Bloomsbury, London, to test interest. Encouraged, they started a mail-order business in a room rented from the New Education Fellowship, produced a catalogue illustrated by the sculptor John Skeaping, and registered as 'designers, manufacturers and retailers of toys, educational materials etc'. From the beginning, the principles and coherence of design were clearly set out in their catalogues, as well as in occasional lectures, linked to the psychology of play. In both 1933 and 1934 their toys filled the nursery sections of exhibitions of British industrial art for the Design and Industries Association, associating them with important architects such as Erno Goldfinger; and in 1938 Goldfinger himself designed their shop-front and interior at 94 Wimpole Street, London, emphasizing the validity of a marriage between imaginative play and functional design. 
The shop itself was never a runaway commercial success: indeed, Marjorie late in life lamented that they had never even drawn salaries from it, living on her inherited money; but it was always the ideas it represented that were important to the Abbatts. They worked nationally and internationally to produce bibliographies on toys and play and to establish accepted standards for toy design, later to include design for children with special needs. At the time of Paul's death, Marjorie was president of the International Council for Children's Play and had established the Children's Play Activities Trust to 'extend the understanding of play... promote the design of good toys, and encourage safe and adequate provision for children's play' (trust deed; priv. coll.). The trust still exists as a charitable fund with the same objectives, and was especially active during Marjorie's eighties and nineties, when she delighted in the schemes funded through her generosity: 'I am so happy about how many 'different' things we do nowadays!' (personal knowledge). 
The Abbatt climbing frame, designed in the early thirties, won the Observer design award in 1969. Marjorie Abbatt was made an honorary MA in her eighties by Nottingham University in recognition of her contribution to the study of children's play (1981); and in 1989 the Bethnal Green Museum of Childhood mounted 'A tribute to Marjorie Abbatt' as part of its 'Themes from the thirties' exhibition. The British Toymakers' Guild awards a prize every year, named in her honour, for the toy most likely to encourage imaginative play. Paul died in June 1971, after a two-year illness in which he lost his capacity for speech; Marjorie continued active to the age of ninety-two, and died at her home, 39 Diamond Court, Moreton Road, Summertown, Oxford, on 10 November 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49551


Agar, Eileen Forrester (1899-1991), artist, was born on 1 December 1899 at Quinta la Lila, Flores, a suburb of Buenos Aires, Argentina, the second of three daughters of James Senior Agar (1860-1925), businessman, and his wife, Mary (Mamie), 'nee' Bagley (1875-1943), whose family came from Maine, New England. The Agars were one of the many Scottish families who emigrated to Argentina to make their fortunes, a feat James Agar achieved by becoming head of the family firm of Agar Cross. Agar was brought up in considerable style and comfort first in Argentina and then in England, to which the family repaired after her father's retirement in 1911. Showing an early aptitude for art, she was encouraged at school by Lucy Kemp-Welch. Her formal training began in 1918 when she attended weekly classes at the Byam Shaw School of Drawing and Painting. After a period at the sculptor Leon Underwood's Brook Green School at Hammersmith, London (1920-21), where she met Henry Moore, Gertrude Hermes, and Rodney Thomas, she studied part-time at the Slade School of Fine Art (1921-4) under Henry Tonks. 
Striking out on her own, Agar set up home and studio in Chelsea, but destroyed most of her early work. A woman of considerable beauty, she was never short of admirers. On 4 November 1925 she married her fellow Slade student Robert Arthur (Robin) Bartlett (1900-1976) and lived for periods in France. The relationship was not a success. Agar dated what she called her emotional nativity to 1926 when she met the man who was to be her companion for fifty years and who eventually became her second husband, on 29 February 1940. This was Joseph Bard (1892-1975), a Hungarian writer then married to the American journalist Dorothy Thompson. Agar and Bard took a flat together in London, where Agar painted 'Self-Portrait' (1927), which she considered her first successful work. Over the next three years the pair travelled much abroad, living for a time in Portofino, Italy, where Ezra Pound befriended them, and Paris, where Agar studied under the Czech cubist Frantisek Foltyn. In 1930 Agar and Bard settled in a pair of flats in the same London block, which was to remain their base until 1958. Their friend Rodney Thomas, the architect, designed innovatively curving furniture for both studio and flats. In 1931 Bard, in collaboration with Leon Underwood, launched a quarterly arts magazine called 'The Island', which lasted for only four numbers but published contributions from Henry Moore, Naomi Mitchison, and C. R. W. Nevinson. Agar wrote a seminal piece in the fourth number (December 1931) entitled 'Religion and the artistic imagination', in which she expounded her theory of 'womb-magic', stressing the creative importance of the unconscious and the feminine imagination. 
Agar's own work was developing rapidly and in 1933 she mounted her first solo exhibition, at the Bloomsbury Gallery in London. A retrospective of seven years' work, it included her early realist portraits, her Foltyn-influenced abstracts, and her latest imaginative paintings which attempted to combine the two in a new way. She began experimenting seriously with collage and sculpture, particularly after meeting the artist Paul Nash at Swanage in 1935. Nash was to play a crucial role in Agar's life until his death in 1946, both as lover and as artistic mentor. In 1936, somewhat to her surprise, Agar was selected to exhibit in the International Surrealist Exhibition in London, showing three oils and five objects. Her brand of lyrical and imaginative painting was in fact quite independent of surrealism, but Agar thoroughly enjoyed being part of a movement with which she had so much in common, and which was also taking Europe by storm. She remained loyal to surrealism even when it went out of fashion in the post-war years, but she lived long enough to see its popularity return fifty years later in the mid-1980s. 
Agar's principal artistic output was as draughtsman, painter, collagist, and maker of objects. She was an infrequent printmaker but enjoyed a very active period of taking photographs in the 1930s, which resulted in a number of telling images. Her first serious photos were taken of the rocks at Ploumanach in Brittany when on holiday there in 1936; subsequent snapshots record a magical holiday in 1937 at Mougins in the south of France with Picasso, Eluard (with whom she had a brief affair), and Man Ray. Meanwhile Agar exhibited with the surrealists in England and New York. 
The Second World War disrupted Agar's life and art. Although she continued to exhibit and painted a number of watercolour landscapes in the Lake District, she felt her work was to some extent on hold. Only when she travelled to Tenerife to stay with friends in the early 1950s was her imagination fully released once more. So began a middle period of consistent productivity, of highly coloured, imaginative, and lyrical paintings mixing myth and nature, that became even brighter when she turned to acrylic paints in 1965. In 1971 she was given a retrospective exhibition at the Commonwealth Institute in London. Although she continued to paint until 1986, when she completed a series of paintings of the Ploumanach Rocks she had photographed half a century before, and after that concentrated on collages, much of her time in the late 1970s and early 1980s was taken up with a book to commemorate her second husband, who died in 1975. This eventually metamorphosed into her autobiography, entitled 'A Look at my Life', published in 1988. Two highly successful commercial exhibitions, a host of surrealist group shows, and a television documentary, 'Five Women Painters' (Channel 4, 1989), rendered her last years triumphant. She died at her home, Flat E, 47 Melbury Road, London, of heart failure, on 17 November 1991, and was buried with her second husband, Joseph Bard, in Gunnersbury cemetery, London, on 26 November. She had no children. Examples of her work are in the Tate. 


@@@@@


doc= 49552


Campbell, Lorne Maclaine, of Airds (1902-1991), army officer and wine merchant, was born at The Airds, Argyll, Scotland, on 22 July 1902, the eldest of the three sons of Colonel (Ian) Maxwell Campbell of Airds (1870-1954), army officer and wine merchant, and his wife, Hilda Mary, 'nee' Wade. He came from a family steeped in military service: he was the eleventh, with one exception, in a line of army officers. His great-great-grandfather had raised the grenadier company of the 98th, later the 91st, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. His father served with the 8th battalion Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders throughout the First World War, commanding it as a Territorial Army unit thereafter. His uncle Vice-Admiral Gordon Campbell won the VC in 1917 for sinking a U-boat from a badly damaged Q-ship; he was later Conservative MP for Burnley from 1931 to 1935. 
Campbell was educated at Dulwich College, where he was captain of school in 1920-21. From there he went as a postmaster (scholar) to Merton College, Oxford. He excelled in sports, and was awarded a half-blue for athletics. He missed a rugby blue through injury. He graduated with a second in 'literae humaniores' in 1925. Meanwhile he had joined the 8th battalion Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders (then under his father's command) as a Territorial Army officer, in 1921. After leaving Oxford he joined the family firm of wine shippers. It was said of him that 'he had the finest palate for wine in Britain' ('The Independent'). On 27 December 1935 he married (Amy) Muriel Jordan Campbell (1905-1950), only daughter and second of the four children of Alastair Magnus Campbell of Auchendarroch. They had two sons. 
By the outbreak of the Second World War, Campbell was second-in-command of the 8th battalion Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. The battalion was sent to France in 51st Highland division as part of the British expeditionary force. When the Germans launched their blitzkrieg in May 1940, the 51st were ordered to move across France to recapture the Somme bridgeheads from the Germans, but the overwhelming success of the German army on all fronts made this task impracticable. The Argylls, with the rest of 51st division, were ordered to make their way to Le Havre and, under French command, launch counter-attacks. Conflicting orders in the face of a relentless German onslaught led to much confusion. Nevertheless Campbell managed to reach Le Havre with two companies of his highlanders, without losing a single man. The rest of 51st division were taken prisoner at St Valery-en-Caux. Campbell was awarded a DSO for his conduct during the campaign. 
Evacuated from Le Havre, Campbell was given command of the 7th/10th battalion in the newly formed 51st Highland division, which he took to north Africa to fight in the western desert. He was awarded a bar to his DSO at the battle of El Alamein in October-November 1942. When the British Eighth Army advanced to Tunisia, his battalion was given the task of crossing an enemy minefield and an anti-tank ditch at Wadi Akarit in order to form a bridgehead. After forming up in darkness and traversing an offshoot of the wadi (a dry, rocky watercourse) in order to attack, they accomplished their objective and took 600 prisoners. The following day Campbell's position was under constant heavy bombardment but, although wounded in the neck by shrapnel, he inspired his men to such an extent that all attacks were repulsed and the bridgehead held. Exposed in full view of the enemy he rallied his men and, although painfully wounded, he stood in the open to direct the fight under close fire from German infantry. His VC citation concluded with the words: 'It is the opinion of the Army Council that in all the long and glorious annals of the British Army the conduct of this officer has seldom been equalled and never surpassed' ('The Independent'). 
In 1943 Campbell was promoted brigadier, and was given command of the 13th infantry brigade, which he then led through Sicily, the Anzio landings, and much of the Italian campaign. During the absence of the general officer commanding, he commanded 5th division for several weeks. He was then posted to the British army staff in Washington (1944-5), where he was made an officer of the US Legion of Merit. At the end of the war he was sent to Germany on an official mission to report on the possibilities of establishing the Boy Scout movement there, to replace the unwholesome ideology of the Hitler youth movement. He had always been an enthusiast for scouting, although later he declined the offer of high office in the organization. 
Following demobilization Campbell returned to the wine trade, becoming a liveryman of the Vintners' Company, and eventually its master. He served on the committees selecting wine for the royal cellars and for official hospitality, and was instrumental in setting up the qualification 'master of wine'. For his services on official bodies he was made an OBE in 1968. 
Although much of his life had been lived in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, Campbell's final years were spent in Scotland, where his recreations were fishing and gardening. An exceptionally modest man, he declined prestigious appointments and the possibility of a seat in parliament. He was religious, gentle, sociable, and unselfish. A fellow officer described him as the 'nicest man in Scotland' ('The Independent'). He died at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Edinburgh, on 25 May 1991, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his two sons, his wife, Muriel, having predeceased him in 1950. A memorial service was held on 21 June 1991 at Canongate Kirk, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 49553


Aldred, Cyril (1914-1991), Egyptologist and art historian, was born on 19 February 1914 at 41 Beltran Road, Fulham, London, the fifth of the six children of Frederick Aldred, a civil servant, and his wife, Lilian Ethel Underwood. Educated at the Sloane School, Chelsea, he then read English for a year at King's College, London, and art history at the Courtauld Institute of Art. He took his BA degree in 1936. In the following year he was appointed an assistant keeper in the Royal Scottish Museum, Edinburgh, where he remained until his retirement in 1974, apart from the years of the Second World War when he served in the RAF. He was keeper of art and archaeology from 1961 to 1974. On 28 May 1938 he married Jessie Kennedy Morton ('b'. 1908/9), masseuse, with whom he had a daughter. 
In 1949 Aldred published a small popular monograph, 'Old Kingdom Art in Ancient Egypt', a seemingly modest survey of the first important period of Egyptian art. Two subsequent volumes on the art of the middle kingdom and the new kingdom (1950, 1952) established him as an art historian of significant potential. His interest in Egypt dated back to his schooldays. Meetings with Howard Carter, discoverer of the tomb of Tutankhamun, in 1933 led to an invitation to spend a season with him in Egypt. Carter wrote: 'I have found him to have a very fair knowledge of Egyptological subjects especially that of Egyptian Art' (priv. coll.). 
Aldred did not take up Carter's offer, but he retained his interest in Egyptian art and began to develop it seriously when he returned to Edinburgh in 1946. The Egyptian collection in the Royal Scottish Museum was small but diverse, containing some important pieces which gave Aldred the scope to mount unusually good exhibitions. He took a special interest in materials and technologies, and was invited to write chapters on fine woodwork and furniture in the Oxford 'History of Technology' (2 vols., 1954-6), significant and innovative studies, based on a close examination of original Egyptian material. His later 'Jewels of the Pharaohs' (1971), although written for a popular readership, contained an authoritative examination of materials, techniques, and designs which was again based on close study of originals, especially those in Cairo and New York, and on his own experience as a practical jeweller. 
By establishing friendly and fruitful contacts with colleagues throughout the Egyptological world Aldred was able to pursue vigorously his developing sculptural studies, at the same time enhancing his international standing. In 1955 he accepted an invitation to spend a year as an associate curator in the department of Egyptian art in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. There he had the opportunity to enlarge his experience of Egyptian antiquities in one of the best Egyptian collections in the world, with a fine library and very congenial colleagues. William C. Hayes, the departmental curator, had hopes that Aldred might be groomed as his successor, but the latter's attachment to Edinburgh drew him back to Scotland in 1956, a substantially more mature scholar with particular interests in Egyptian sculpture and in the controversial Amarna period, the reign of the so-called heretic king Akhenaten. 
It was in Egyptian sculpture that Cyril Aldred made his most enduring contributions to Egyptian art history. His articles were well argued and elegantly written, but it is a matter of great regret that he never wrote a comprehensive work on Egyptian statuary. His 'Egyptian Art' (1980) was a popular account with little room for close argument. Essays on Egyptian sculpture in the three Egyptian volumes of Andre Malraux's 'L'univers des formes' (1978, 1979, 1980) represent his most complete exposition of the subject. But his most important art-historical writing is contained in 'Akhenaten and Nefertiti', the volume which accompanied an exhibition in the Brooklyn Museum in 1973. Here he brought a systematization to a confused subject, Amarna art, and in so doing contributed substantially to the elucidation of many of the historical problems of that vexed period. 
The Amarna period engrossed Aldred's scholarly attention for much of his active career. Particular aspects of the period and its protagonist Akhenaten were explored in articles and in 'Akhenaten, Pharaoh of Egypt' (1968): the pathology of Akhenaten, family relationships, and the question of coregency. His views were restated with vigour in his last work, 'Akhenaten, King of Egypt' (1988). 
Beyond Egyptology and his duties in the Royal Scottish Museum, Cyril Aldred pursued many private interests, not least of which was the writing of occasional light verse, much of it composed for meetings of the Monks of St Giles, an Edinburgh dining club. He did not enjoy conventional lecturing, but excelled in less formal presentations, as on Nile cruises on which, as guest lecturer, he delighted his fellow travellers with his witty and well-informed talks. His distinction in Scottish intellectual life was recognized in 1978 when he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. A volume of essays, 'Chief of Seers' (1997), written for him by colleagues, was published some years after his death. Cyril Aldred died at his home, 4A Polwarth Terrace, Edinburgh, on 23 June 1991, survived by his wife and their daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 49561


Ayrton, Elisabeth Evelyn (1910-1991), novelist and writer on cookery, was born on 2 February 1910 at Littlefield Farm, Worplesdon, Surrey, the eldest child of Douglas Thomas George Walshe (1880-1952) and his first wife, Phyllis Sydney, 'nee' Johnson ('c'.1882-1929). Both her parents were journalists; Douglas Walshe also wrote light-hearted and extremely popular romantic novels, allowing his family a comfortable life in the large house in Worplesdon, where Elisabeth grew up with her brother, William (1914-1981), and much younger sister, Veryan ('b'. 1921). 
Elisabeth Walshe attended Sherborne School and Sutton high school, matriculating at seventeen and determined on university. In 1929 she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, reading English in part one and archaeology and anthropology in part two of her degree. She married fellow graduate Nigel Marlin Balchin (1908-1970) on 21 January 1933 and taught English at an exclusive London school until the birth of her daughter Prudence in 1934. A second daughter, Penelope, followed in 1937. During the war she joined Maurice Buckmaster's Special Operations Executive, selecting and screening agents for undercover work in Europe. 
A third daughter, Freja, was born in December 1944, and in 1947 the family moved to a house near Canterbury, where Balchin, now a successful novelist, could write undisturbed. Elisabeth, too, was writing poetry and short stories, but he was dismissive, and she remained uncertain of their merit. Frustrated and isolated, her marriage effectively ended in 1948 when she fell in love with a friend of Balchin, the young painter Michael Ayrton (1921-1975). They married on 28 November 1952, a year after her divorce. It was only then, in her early forties, that she began to take her writing seriously: encouraged by Ayrton, she sent stories to 'Vogue' and 'Harper's Bazaar'; her poetry was read on the BBC's Third Programme, and she made extensive contributions to 'Woman's Hour'. She also wrote her first novel, 'The Cook's Tale' (1957). A love story with recipes, it is set in the south of France, ranging in time from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. All the recipes were tested in her own kitchen. 
Living with Ayrton, Elisabeth had become interested in cooking, from which came 'Good Simple Cookery' (1958), a book for housewives suddenly cooking for themselves, and bewildered by the new diversity of ingredients. It became a classic, and remains among the best basic cookery books. Her next book was very different: a photographic volume, 'Doric Temples' (1961), for which she provided a text informed by her archaeological interests. She and Ayrton travelled extensively in Greece from 1957, especially in Crete, the background for her second novel, 'The Cretan' (1963), an atmospheric, sometimes brutal account of deafness, peasant life, and smuggled antiquities. 
1967 brought another practical cookery book, 'Time is of the Essence', but it was her next books which united her various passions in a virtually new genre, the historical cookery book. 'Royal Favourites' (1971) explored the origins of famous dishes from royal kitchens, with updated recipes, while 'The Cookery of England' (1974) set concise, easy-to-follow recipes against a cultural background stretching from the fifteenth century to the present day, meticulously researched and engagingly presented. 
In addition to work, there were many demands on Elisabeth's time. At Bradfields, the sprawling Essex farmhouse where the Ayrtons arrived in 1952, she played hostess to a wide circle of friends while managing and maintaining house, garden, and workaholic husband, and remaining in close contact with her daughters. Yet she never lost sight of her own need to write: she completed her third novel, 'Two Years in my Afternoon', in 1972, and an expedition to Kenya in 1973 left her planning a fourth. 
Michael Ayrton's health, never robust, gradually deteriorated; his early death in November 1975 was a blow from which Elisabeth found it difficult to recover. She moved to Gloucestershire, where with her extended family she struggled to begin life again. Her Kenyan novel, 'Day Eight' (1978), was followed by several cookery books, including 'English Provincial Cooking' (1980) and an early response to the growing vegetarian movement, 'The Pleasure of Vegetables' (1983). Her last book, 'Traditional British Cooking' (1985), written with Theodora Fitzgibbon, continued the marriage of history and good food, celebrating British cooking during a period when its culinary traditions were generally despised. She created another splendid garden, and, with two of her daughters, ran a small antiques business, while also overseeing the continuing exhibitions of Michael Ayrton's work. Her appetite for travel remained prodigious, supported by health which remained good until almost the end of her life. Of middle height and build, fair-skinned with striking auburn hair, brown eyes, and a tendency to freckle which she deplored, Elisabeth Ayrton never looked her age. Her energy, common sense, and efficiency hid a shyness and lack of self-confidence which only those closest to her recognized. She could be alarmingly aloof on occasion, especially when inwardly intimidated; but when at ease she was warm, charming, and profoundly interested in people. She was an atheist and a lifelong socialist, with a firm belief that people should have what they needed; she was also unstintingly generous, and always preferred giving to receiving. She could, perhaps, have written more, but her diverse life, thoroughly enjoyed, enriched others as much as herself. 
Elisabeth Ayrton died on 15 November 1991 at her home, the Maze House, Rockhampton, after a brief battle with cancer, and was buried with Michael Ayrton at St Botolph's Church, Hadstock, Essex, on 20 November. Her fifth novel, 'The Echoing Voyage', remained unfinished. 


@@@@@


doc= 49570


Bardsley, Cuthbert Killick Norman (1907-1991), bishop of Coventry, was born on 28 March 1907 at Ulverston rectory, Ulverston, Lancashire, the youngest of the six children of the Revd Canon Norman Joseph Udall Bardsley (1869-1928), rector of Ulverston, and from 1907 to 1928 vicar of Lancaster, and his wife, Mabel Annie (1872-1939), daughter of William Killick, a Liverpool merchant. His father was from a line of twenty-eight clergy, including two bishops. His education at Summerfields preparatory school, Oxford, Eton College, and New College, Oxford (from where he graduated with a fourth-class degree in politics, philosophy, and economics in 1929), was unremarkable. But from his family heritage he received his large frame, large heart, immense enthusiasm; and, underlyingly, his acute instinct for the right creative spiritual initiative. It was this instinct which drew him at university to join Frank Buchman's Oxford Group, then to work full time with it (from 1935 to 1939), but later also to leave it. It also attracted him to a curacy with Tubby Clayton (Toc H), which first linked him with people at the workplace (1932-4). 
The same instinct empowered Bardsley when he became rector of Woolwich on the eve of the blitz. There (1940-44) and also when he was summoned to be provost of Southwark (1944-7), all his gifts came into play, of cherishing people and convincing them that they mattered infinitely, of selecting good colleagues, forming a central worshipping group on which he could draw, preaching memorably with alliterative points and stories punched home with passion, producing grand central occasions at which he enjoyed performing, and getting alongside people in shelters or rubble as the bombs rained down, or supremely in factories where they worked. The cathedral expanded his mission. The central occasions were now lectures or concerts, or large-scale diocesan events. The outreach included nearby office workers. Post-war visits to the armed services in Europe, at the archbishop of Canterbury's instigation, to raise morale by rekindling faith, led to the summons to leave his vibrant cathedral to become suffragan bishop of Croydon (1947-56) and of the forces, to repeat and develop his success. He conveyed spiritual reality, combining evangelical and catholic, stressing sacraments 'and' 'Bible', and this worked. 
Bardsley was enthroned in Coventry in the ruins of the old cathedral in May 1956. He soon set about preparing for the new, 'a consecrated people for a consecrated Cathedral' (a phrase from one of the new cathedral team he boldly appointed in 1958). He visited every deanery and clergyman, orchestrated diocesan-wide prayer and study groups, led a mission, speaking to 20,000 people, and finally after a Cross of Nails from the ruins had been carried from parish to parish, bore it up to the new high altar on the eve of the consecration. The central point of his whole life and work was the consecration of Coventry's renewed cathedral, on 25 May 1962, in the presence of the queen and representatives of many nations. As Bardsley's towering figure, in a brilliant yellow cope and mitre, moved purposefully from one focal point to another, calling upon the spirit in his huge voice, 'Be here! Be here!', he caught the imagination of a widespread television audience. 
In the following years Bardsley never lost this creative instinct. People might criticize his preaching for being stronger in style than in content, and some found his fervour uncongenial. His enthusiasm sometimes clouded his judgement. His sudden impulses tested his colleagues. But at the heart of his zest for dramatic occasions there was an utterly genuine humility, a depth of prayer and holiness. He was universally loved (people never forgot his parish visits). And these qualities, combined with that brilliant flair for spotting growth points, gave him his greatness. 
Bardsley was involved in founding the University of Warwick, to which he gave its name. He inaugurated the Arthur Rank Centre, a Christian presence at the Royal Agricultural Show. He encouraged industrial mission. His influence was felt in many places, among business people, farmers, or as president of Coventry City Football Club. He engaged in many other initiatives, including the Lee Abbey movement, the ministry of healing, especially at Burrswood, the Church of England Men's Society, and countless missions. He married surprisingly and quite late (on 1 August 1972) but intensely happily Ellen Edith Mitchell ('b'. 1910), a former secretary and Warwickshire county councillor, a long-standing friend of his sister, and a pillar of the diocese. 
Bardsley's retirement as bishop of Coventry in 1976 was the end not only of a great episcopate but of an era. Clergy were invited to come and choose a book from his library and one of the pictures painted by him. These latter were surely symbols of that phenomenal presence, which many years later still made its impress felt on the diocese, and they conveyed something of his essence. Lashings of paint and vibrant colour depicted scenes from a larger than life world, strong in the brush strokes, lacking in detail and complexity, but forever fresh and vivid. After a long, active retirement Bardsley died of cancer at his home, Grey Walls, Berkeley Road, Cirencester, Gloucestershire, on 9 January 1991. He was survived by his wife. His ashes were, fittingly, interred behind the high altar of Coventry Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 49571


Barker, George Granville (1913-1991), poet, was born on 26 February 1913 at 106 Forest Road, Loughton, Essex, the first son and fourth of the five children of George Barker (1879-1965) and his wife, Marion Frances, 'nee' Taaffe (1881-1953). His father, a former batman in the British army, had served under Kitchener; he had subsequently become a butler in a private household and was at the time of George's birth a temporary police constable; after a period as an insurance clerk he later became a much respected butler to Gray's Inn. His mother came from an old Catholic family in Drogheda, Ireland, where her father had been a pilot in the port. Because of insecure employment in the post-war years, the Barker family lived in relative poverty at a number of addresses around Chelsea and Fulham, where George attended Marlborough Road elementary school as well as taking instruction at the London Oratory. 
Having acquired a love of verse but little else, Barker left school aged fourteen and briefly attended the Regent Street Polytechnic where, as a series of early notebooks attests, his determined purpose was already to be a professional writer. His chance came in 1932 when, encouraged by an elder sister, he sent the typescript of a recent journal, later published in fictionalized form as 'Alanna Autumnal' (1933), to John Middleton Murry, editor of 'The Adelphi'. Murry gave Barker reviewing work and an introduction to that Maecenas of 1930s poets Michael Roberts. At Roberts's suggestion he entered the bohemian circle which then frequented the Parton Street bookshop in Bloomsbury run by the generously disposed, though feckless, David Archer. By the age of twenty Barker was contributing to the 'Twentieth Century', a radical journal issued by the Promethean Society which had offices above the shop; in the same year Archer issued his 'Thirty Preliminary Poems' at the Parton Press. On the strength of this success on 18 November 1933 Barker married his childhood sweetheart Jessie Winifred Theresa (Jessica) Woodward (1909-1989); they moved to a cottage overlooking the rugged coastline at Worth Matravers, Dorset, the first of several west country addresses. 
It was while gazing down from the nearby St Aldhelm's Head that Barker had an idea for the vertiginous 'Daedalus', first item in successive 'Collected Poems'; he sent the poem to Walter de la Mare; de la Mare forwarded it to T. S. Eliot at Faber and Faber, who promptly commissioned a volume. His action was the making of Barker, who for several years came to rely on Eliot for advice and, to some extent, for financial assistance. Eliot soon organized a temporary and anonymous fund to support his protege; he also proposed the contents and running order for 'Poems' (1935), the volume that brought the young poet to the attention of W. B. Yeats. Yeats thought him the most promising of all the up-and-coming generation of British poets. Despite such praise, Barker spent the rest of the decade finding a consistent voice. A second volume of fiction, 'Janus' (1935), and the long surrealistic poem 'Calamiterror' (1937) did little to enhance his reputation. It was not until 'Lament and Triumph' (1940) was published shortly after the outbreak of war that Barker's individual blend of muscular rhythm, euphonious vowels, and medieval and Rilkean echoes attracted widespread respect. 
By the time of its appearance, Barker and his wife had departed for Japan, where he had taken up a lectureship at the Imperial Tohoku University, Sendai, vacated by the British poet Ralph Hodgson. The appointment was not a success: Barker felt ill at ease as an academic and, more to the point, Japan was gradually being drawn into the ambit of the axis powers. Realizing the danger he was in, Barker wrote to Elizabeth Smart (1913-1986), a Canadian writer who had been collecting his manuscripts since 1937. She arranged for passages for Barker and his wife to Vancouver, from where they joined her at an artists' commune near Big Sur in California. Barker's subsequent affair with Smart was to be the subject of her novel 'By Grand Central Station I Sat Down and Wept' (1945). The book conveys her point of view of a relationship that, from Barker's own, was both rewarding and disruptive. By the time he left the United States to return to Britain in the summer of 1943, he had fathered a daughter with Smart and twins with his wife, whom he left behind in New York. He settled with Smart in the Cotswolds where their second child, a boy, was born; they were to have one more son and daughter. Barker was rejected for war work, made one more attempt to rebuild his marriage by revisiting New York in 1946, and then spent a wretched winter with Smart in Galway before fleeing to London in February 1947. 
The 1950s were to be a creative decade for Barker, but his circumstances were no more settled than before. He continued to see Smart at her cottage at Tilty Mill, Essex, but in the meantime took up with the film-maker Betty (Cashenden) Cass ('b'. 1924?), with whom he travelled to Collioure in France, Zennor in Cornwall, and around Italy before renting a woodcutter's cottage near Haslemere. In Cornwall, Barker became the mentor and unofficial teacher of the younger poets John Heath-Stubbs and David Wright, who had moved there to be near him; in Italy his companions were the raucous painterly duo Robert Colquhoun and Robert MacBryde. In England his social life consisted of crowded weekends at Tilty Mill, and regular forays to the pubs and clubs of Soho, where he swapped drinks and witticisms with the painter John Minton, the photographer John Deakin, and a host of young admirers. 
As Barker's personality grew gregarious and florid, his work generally became more limpid. The lyrics of 'Eros in Dogma' (1944) and 'News of the World' (1950) demonstrate an increasing control and beauty of line. It was when he attempted more lurid effects -- in the extended Villon-inspired ballade 'The True Confession of George Barker' (1950) or 'The Dead Seagull', a novella of the same year intended as a riposte to Smart -- that Barker lapsed into marginality. Eliot rejected the former; the latter remains a cult book. A dramatic turning point in Barker's life occurred in August 1957, when Cass left him for an alternative life (she was eventually to settle in San Francisco). He spent a year in Manhattan renewing former contacts and mixing with Allen Ginsberg and the beats. After a short interlude back in London, he then took up residence in Rome with Dede Farrelly, former wife of his friend the American writer and critic John Farrelly; with her he had three sons. Rome was to inspire 'The View from a Blind I' (1962), among his most atmospheric volumes of verse, as well as the second, slightly disappointing, part of the 'True Confession' (1964). After the first had been voted joint winner of the Guinness prize, Barker revisited London where at Smart's Westbourne Terrace flat in March 1963 he met the young Scottish writer Elizabeth Langlands ('b'. 1940), always known as Elspeth. Their long relationship and eventual marriage was to provide Barker with the most stable environment that he had ever known. With Elspeth he was to have five children; in 1967 they moved to Bintry House, a National Trust property in north Norfolk where -- with the exception of semesters spent teaching at Buffalo, Wisconsin, and Florida -- he spent the rest of his life, producing a volume of verse every few years, of which the most distinguished are 'In Memory of David Archer' (1973) and 'Villa Stellar' (1978). 
Three tendencies are especially marked in Barker's later work: a vocal delight in rural and family life; an increasing assurance in the composition of elegies through which he lamented the gradual demise of his generation; and strenuous meditation on his own lapsed Catholicism. All of these elements come together in what many consider to be his masterpiece: 'Anno Domini' (1983), a rhetorical prayer to the absent God of post-Christian Europe at once fervent, humorous, and informal. A 'Collected Poems' was issued in 1987, replacing an earlier edition of 1957. 
From his Irish mother Barker inherited a direct blue gaze, above which was set that noble ridge of bone known as the 'bar of Michelangelo'. Tall and darkly handsome in youth, he early learned to stoop. In middle age, devoted to cars and roguish headgear, he reminded his friend the photographer Bruce Bernard of 'a Bohemian motorist' (Fraser, 232). In his very last years, even if using a wheelchair, he resembled some suave erudite pirate. 
After suffering from emphysema for some years Barker died at Bintry House on 27 October 1991. He was buried on 2 November in Itteringham churchyard, just a few yards from his last home. 
The volume 'Street Ballads' (1992) was published posthumously as was a 'Selected Poems' (1995). As to Barker's place in twentieth-century British verse, opinions are still divided. When he wrote with discipline he was without doubt one of the most plangent and witty voices in modern literature; idiosyncrasy and excess, however, mar his weaker work. In 'Calamiterror', Barker described himself as a 'minor bird on the bough'. It was a typically risky pun, but also a self-estimate with which even his most ardent supporter would probably now concur. 


@@@@@


doc= 49574


Bastin, Clifford Sidney (1912-1991), footballer, was born on 14 March 1912 at 40 New North Road, Exeter, the son of Sidney Henry Bastin, dairyman, and his wife, Maud, 'nee' Butt. He was educated at Ladysmith Road elementary school, where he showed a precocious talent for football. He was soon playing for Exeter Boys, and was capped for England Schoolboys against Wales when he was fourteen. After turning out for local recreational teams St Mark's and St James's, and starting training as an electrician, he was signed for Exeter City, then in the third division south; he made his first team debut on 14 April 1928, at the remarkably early age of sixteen years and one month. 
Not long after his professional debut, Bastin was spotted playing against Watford by the Arsenal manager Herbert Chapman. Chapman had gone to look at Tommy Barnett, a member of the Watford team, but was more impressed by the neat, stocky young man with fair hair and the fashionable down-the-middle parting who was playing inside left for Exeter. It was not so much what 'Boy' Bastin did as the cool, mature way in which he did it that persuaded Chapman to sign him in May 1929. The fee was $2000. Alex James was also signed from Preston a few weeks later and though eleven years older than Bastin formed a left-wing partnership with him which became a major attacking feature of the Arsenal side that dominated English football in the 1930s. At first it seemed that both would be competing for the inside left position but at the end of 1929 Chapman persuaded Bastin that he was really an outside left and in the early months of 1930 the partnership was born. 
Bastin made his Arsenal debut away at Everton on 5 October 1929 and scored his first goal for the team in a home match against Sheffield Wednesday at the beginning of January 1930. Later that month he scored his first goal in an FA cup fixture by converting a cross from Joe Hulme on the right in a match against Chelsea. It was the first of the 26 he scored in the FA cup; his total of 178 goals for the club in 396 games remained an Arsenal record until 1997 and was a remarkable total for a winger. Cool and intelligent, he could shoot well with either foot and was always looking for goalmouth opportunities. In 1930 he was the youngest player to date to appear in the cup final (only Howard Kendall was younger, in 1964), and he supplied the pass for James to score the crucial first goal. When Arsenal won the first division championship for the first time in 1930-31, Bastin scored 28 goals; he scored 33 when they repeated the feat two seasons later. He played twenty-one times for England between 1931 and 1938, and scored the goal which gave them a draw against Italy in Rome in 1933; on this occasion the home crowd chanted 'Basta Bastin' ('enough of Bastin'). 
Not surprisingly, Bastin greatly admired the management skills of Herbert Chapman, whom he thought might have been prime minister if circumstances had been different. Chapman reciprocated, seeing Bastin as a model professional, modest, loyal, and respectable. Alex James, on the other hand, was more independent and argumentative. Bastin was devastated when Chapman died suddenly in January 1934. 
Bastin's form declined in the late 1930s as he suffered increasingly from deafness after a bout of influenza led to an infection of the middle ear in 1936. By the early 1940s he could not hear the roar of the crowd. He was still able to play 241 wartime games and score 70 wartime goals but he later admitted that his loss of hearing had undermined his footballing effectiveness. During the war he was declared unfit for military service and managed an ARP post on the top of the main stand at Highbury. 
Bastin retired from football in September 1946, his last appearance for Arsenal being against Manchester United. He and his wife, Joan Lilian, 'nee' Shaul ('b'. 1915/16) -- she was the daughter of Stanley George Shaul, provision merchant, and they had married on 24 June 1939 -- ran a cafe on the North Circular Road for a time. He also wrote a football column for the 'Sunday Pictorial'. In 1950 he was one of the first footballers to publish a ghosted autobiography. 'Cliff Bastin Remembers' was the first book by the young Brian Glanville, some of whose comments provoked contemporary controversy in football circles. Later Bastin returned to Exeter, where he became landlord of the Horse and Groom pub, from which he retired in 1977. He died in the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Wonford, Exeter, on 3 December 1991, of myelofibrosis and renal failure; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49576


Beattie, David Wilson (1938-1991), venture capitalist, was born on 30 September 1938 at Tir-na-Nog, Carleton Road, Carlisle, Cumberland, the elder son and second child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Ronald Joseph Edward Beattie and his wife, Margaret Knott, 'nee' Christie. His father was a stonemason, working for the family business making tombstones and monuments. He was educated at Carlisle grammar school, and graduated from Manchester University in 1960 with an upper second class degree in mathematics, statistics, and aerodynamics. His first job was as a statistical assistant with Cadbury Brothers, the chocolate manufacturers, and at the same time he qualified as a cost and management accountant. On 8 June 1963 he married Pauline Holloway, a secretary, daughter of William Ralph Holloway, a civil engineer; they had two daughters, one of whom died in childhood. After a year with Johnson and Johnson, Beattie was invited back to Cadbury in 1964 to be development director of McVitie Cadbury Cakes, and was then appointed financial planning manager for Cadbury Schweppes (Overseas), and finally managing director of the speciality foods division. 
In 1974 Beattie left Cadbury to join the National Enterprise Board (NEB), set up in 1974 by the Labour government. One of its roles was to encourage industry by investing government money into smaller companies that were finding it difficult to attract capital, and Beattie was appointed director of the smaller companies division, defined as companies with fewer than 1000 employees. By 1978 the public accounts committee was reporting that of the nineteen companies in which the NEB had invested, only ten had made a profit, but the NEB argued that a few more years were needed before these companies could show a substantial return on government capital. Beattie was then appointed director of the business development division of the NEB, responsible for investment in advanced technology, and he concentrated his efforts on the electronics industry, committing public money to such companies as INMOS, which made silicon chips, INSAC, exporter of British software technology, and ICL, the computer systems manufacturer. But after the election in 1979 of a Conservative government headed by Margaret Thatcher, and the beginning of a wave of privatizations, the government encouraged the NEB to dispose of its companies. Beattie was aware that the smallest NEB investments would be difficult to sell, and in 1981 he persuaded the NEB to set up a new company, Grosvenor Development Capital (so called because the headquarters of the NEB was in Grosvenor Gardens, Victoria, London), as a holding company for the eight smallest NEB companies. In effect this amounted to the privatization of these NEB venture capital investments. Beattie was appointed managing director in 1982, and in February 1982, at a time when the venture capital industry was just beginning to increase in size and scale, Beattie raised $6.9 million from three City institutions, including the British Rail Pension Fund, for Grosvenor Development Capital, reducing the government's stake to 30 per cent. In 1985 Beattie and his team formed their own management company, Grosvenor Venture Managers, based in Slough, to help in the management of several companies, and they were given the contract to manage Grosvenor Development Capital. Beattie was chairman and managing director. Grosvenor Venture Managers launched a new fund, Grosvenor Technology Fund, which attracted $9.5 million in 1985, and two more funds in 1988 and 1989. By 1990 he had raised $60 million for these companies, and he floated Grosvenor Development Capital on the stock market as an investment trust. A profitable and well-run company, Grosvenor Venture Managers was sold to Mercury Asset Management in 1994 for over $4 million. 
From a Christian background, Beattie was involved from his university days in stimulating missionary interest, and Christianity remained at the centre of his life. He was an elder of Maidenhead Baptist Church, and from 1983 he was on the council of the Scripture Gift Mission, a mission to distribute free 'Bible' resources in their own languages to people all over the world. Most of his spare time was devoted to church activities, but he was also an enthusiast for steam trains and aeroplanes, keeping a list of every plane he had flown on. 
In 1989 Beattie resigned as managing director of Grosvenor Venture Managers but carried on as an active chairman. He died of a heart attack on 13 August 1991, at his home, Caldbeck, Nursery Walk, Marlow, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 49579


Berki, Robert Nandor (1936-1991), political scientist, was born on 12 July 1936 in Budapest, the only child of Ferdinand Berki (1898-1987), a bank clerk, and his wife, Anna (1904-1977), a bank secretary. He went to the Catholic Piarista Convent School in Budapest in 1941 and stayed there until 1952. He then worked in the land redistribution department of the Hungarian government, and left it more than a year later to study music at a music academy in Budapest. During his two years there he concentrated initially on classical music and then on jazz, and learned to play timpani and drum. On leaving the academy he earned his living working as a petrol pump attendant during the day and as a drummer in jazz bands in the evening. When the revolution broke out in Hungary in 1956 he left the country after narrowly avoiding arrest. After a few weeks in a refugee camp in Vienna he arrived in Britain on 20 February 1957. He spent some time in a refugee centre outside London, and moved first to 7 Hereford Square, South Kensington, and then to 17 Rosenau Crescent in Battersea. During this period he worked as a dispatch clerk at Harrods and attended evening classes to improve his English and prepare for his O and A-level examinations. He cleared the latter with top grades and joined the London School of Economics in 1961 as a full-time student, securing an outstanding first in international relations three years later. He proceeded to Cambridge University the same year and completed his doctorate in 1967 on the thought of Hegel and Marx, under the supervision of E. H. Carr. 
Berki was appointed lecturer in the department of politics at the University of Hull in 1967, becoming senior lecturer in 1975, reader in 1982, and professor of European political and social theory and director of the Institute of European Studies in 1984. As director, one of his great achievements was to set up a new four-year degree in transnational integrated European studies, under which Hull students spent some time at selected universities in four European countries and acquired a truly European education and orientation. He also organized regular symposia and colloquia, which brought together eminent European scholars and placed Hull on the academic map of Europe. He wrote six books, co-edited three, and wrote more than a dozen major articles. His books included 'Socialism' (1975), 'The History of Political Thought' (1977), 'On Political Realism' (1981), 'Insight and Vision: the Problem of Communism in Marx's Thought' (1983), 'Security and Society' (1986), and 'The Genesis of Marxism' (1988). He was a reflective and meditative rather than an analytical and argumentative thinker, taking little interest in conceptual analysis and academic debates beyond the minimum necessary for his work. From the start of his academic career until the end of his life he remained deeply interested in Hegel, Marx, socialism, the best ways to combine the pursuits of order and justice, and the interplay between moral idealism and political realism. 
Berki rebelled against the sombre image and lifestyle of 'homo academicus' and freely indulged his dominant passions for jazz and football. He set up with like-minded colleagues a Don Beat Jazz group which provided excellent entertainment at departmental events and gave him the opportunity to display and sharpen his drumming skills. When once asked how his drumming fitted in with his philosophical preoccupation with the dialectic, he took a drumstick and said, 'Listen, you will hear the dialectic at work' (personal knowledge). Football was his other great interest. As a boy he was a keen supporter of Ferencvaros in Budapest and he regarded his visit to its home ground nearly thirty years later as one of the great pleasures of his life. On arriving in Britain he developed an affection for Everton Football Club and later for Hull City, of which he remained an enthusiastic supporter until his death. The hour and a half during which a soccer match was shown on television every Saturday evening was the most sacred for him, which no telephone call or colleague was allowed to disturb and which was invariably accompanied by cheese sandwiches and total domestic silence. 
Berki married Etelka Taph ('b'. 1934), a fellow Hungarian whom he had first met at a jazz club in Stalintown, about 30 miles from Budapest, on 3 August 1962, when he was just under half way through his undergraduate education. He gave her the name Mica (meaning a little pussy cat), and that is how she was known to their friends. They had two sons and a daughter, and a stepdaughter from Mica's first marriage to John Holler, whom she had divorced in 1959. 
Berki was a tall and well-built man with a long and receding forehead and deep reflective eyes that occasionally betrayed touches of sadness and insecurity. He led a highly ordered life in which everything had its assigned place and whose routine was rarely allowed to be disturbed. He once remarked that there was something of a German civil servant in him. He was a deeply religious man who rarely missed his Sunday mass, and counted the local priest among his close friends. He had a strong sense of what was due to him and to others, and both demanded the former and readily conceded the latter. He was just as easily upset when others were late for a meeting with him as when he was, and apologized when late for being 'immoral by a few minutes' (personal knowledge). He was a warm and kind man, with a strong sense of duty to his students, colleagues, and the university. He was complex, not easy to get to know, but capable of deep and generous friendship with those who broke through his reserve and respected the order and rhythm of his life. 
Berki was a strong family man. Deeply devoted to his parents, he got his mother to join him in Britain in 1964 and his father in 1970, and looked after both until their deaths. He was very fond of his stepdaughter, who lived with him until her marriage and was a regular visitor thereafter. He adored and was highly protective of his wife, who did not settle down in Britain as easily as he had. Like many first-generation migrants he was keen that his three children should become an integral part of British society without losing their cultural roots and language. Berki died of a brain haemorrhage in Hull on 17 September 1991, and was survived by his wife, stepdaughter, and three children. He was buried at Chanterland's Avenue cemetery, Hull, on 19 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 49581


Black, Sir Cyril Wilson (1902-1991), property developer and politician, was born on 8 April 1902 at 11 Langham Mansions, Kensington, London, one of four sons (three surviving) and two daughters of Robert Wilson Black (1871-1951), property developer, of 11 Langham Mansions, and his wife, Annie Louise ('b'. 1880), elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Jonathan North, mayor of Leicester in 1914-18, of Glebe Mount, Oadby, Leicester. Both parents were devout Baptists. His father was both assiduous and astute in building up a family fortune, which amounted to more than $2 million at his death. 
Black's upbringing was austere; it would, indeed, be reasonable to call it severe. The house was teetotal, and nicotine was prohibited. Regular church attendance was mandatory. Striving for riches and success, however, was encouraged. Robert Black was not disposed to bestow on his son any financial advantages accruing from his own wealth. The one major monetary outlay he was prepared to make was on the boy's education, and it can reasonably be supposed that he was pleased when, eventually, Black followed him into the business of property development, having trained as a chartered surveyor. He must have been even more pleased when, before he was forty, his son had made himself a millionaire through his own unstinting efforts. Many youngsters might have rebelled against the strictness of this upbringing, but Black revelled in it and, to the end of his days, held fast to its principles. During the twenty years in which he served in the House of Commons -- from 1950 to 1970 -- even his most virulent enemies (and he had many) could find no chink in his moral armour. 
Black was educated at King's College School, and went on to train at the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors. He quickly -- in his twenties -- began to put his technical training to effective commercial use, and when he married (Dorothy) Joyce ('b'. 1908/9), daughter of Thomas Birkett, boot manufacturer, of Wigston Hall, Leicester, on 6 March 1930, he was a coming man in the property world. However, he was driven by much more than financial ambition. From his youth he threw himself into public work (which he listed as a recreation rather than as a vocation). He saw political activity as the best means of achieving moral ends. He began with local politics, and became a member of Wimbledon borough council in 1942, and was its mayor from 1945 to 1946 and 1946 to 1947. He became member of Surrey county council in 1943, was elected chairman from 1956 to 1959, and served until 1965. In that year he also became a member of Merton borough council, and was mayor of Merton from 1965 to 1966. His energy was titanic, and a resume of his political career only hints at its strength. At one time he was a director of more than fifty companies, but still found time to give efficient devotion to his favourite causes: the advocacy of temperance, the censorship of what he considered pornography, and the development of a morally uplifting educational system. 
When Black entered the House of Commons in 1950, as Conservative MP for Wimbledon, allies and opponents alike found him completely immoveable on his chosen subjects. He was already prominent in the temperance movement and chairman of the Temperance Permanent Building Society. He had acquired a chain of alcohol-free hotels through a family company; when, in 1981, the directors decided to apply for a drinks licence, he resigned, and sold his shares. He was also, at various times, involved in the Boys' Brigade and the Girls' Brigade, a governor of a number of schools (including his own), a member of the South-West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board, and an enthusiastic lay preacher. 
In the House of Commons, however, Black met with virtually no success. He campaigned against the liberalization of divorce law, and the relaxation of licensing laws, and failed. He fought for the return of the birch as an instrument of criminal punishment, and for stricter control of immigration, but this latter subject had already been taken up by more formidable politicians. He was, however -- paradoxical though it seemed to his critics -- a keen supporter of the United Nations Association, and a governor of a Roman Catholic Ursuline convent in his constituency. There were, then, limits to his intolerance, and he was a man who strove mightily to do good. Nevertheless, he was not an easy man to like. His successful prosecution for libel of the 'Socialist Leader', for calling him a racist, and his unsuccessful attacks on the publication of 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' and 'Last Exit to Brooklyn', set him firmly against the tide of his times. In private he could be a reasonable, if over-earnest, conversationalist. But, as he went about his multifarious activities, with a permanent half-sneer on his face, and as he thundered in public against what he called decadence, he was a voice calling in the lonely wilderness. The sole consolation he received, outside his own circles, was the knighthood bestowed upon him on Harold Macmillan's recommendation in 1959. He retired as MP for Wimbledon in 1970, although he remained active in various causes thereafter. He died in Cheam, Surrey, on 29 October 1991; he was survived by his wife, two daughters, and a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 49583


Blaxter, Sir Kenneth Lyon (1919-1991), animal nutritionist, was born at Egbert House, Wroxham Road, Sprowston, Norfolk, on 19 June 1919, the son of Gaspard Culling Blaxter, a handicraft teacher who ran a smallholding, and his wife, Charlotte Ellen, 'nee' Lyon. He was educated at the City of Norwich School and left at the age of fifteen to take up an appointment as a clerk with the Norwich Union Life Assurance Society. Drawn to agricultural science as a career, K. B. (as he was universally known) undertook an honours course in agricultural science at Reading University from 1936 to 1939. After graduation he was appointed as an assistant to Professor H. D. Kay, then director of the National Institute for Research in Dairying in Shinfield, Reading, and under Kay's direction he became closely involved in the national policy for feeding high yield dairy cows, investigating the use of iodinated casein for this purpose. After service in the Royal Artillery (1940-41) he returned to the institute and was then seconded to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries' Veterinary Research Institute, Weybridge, and joined the team of Green and Alcroft in studies on the significance of trace elements such as copper and cobalt. His own studies on the toxicity of lead in feed for ruminant livestock were many years later still recognized as the outstanding papers on that subject. He obtained his PhD from Reading University in 1944 for a thesis, 'The maintenance of the winter milk supply in wartime'. On 23 February 1946 he married Edith Klara Goeritz ('b'. 1917/18), a scientific assistant at the Imperial Bureau of Dairy Science, and daughter of Siegfried Goeritz, a leather goods manufacturer. There were no children of the marriage, which ended in divorce in 1952. 
In August 1946 Blaxter was awarded a Commonwealth fellowship to study under Professor H. H. Mitchell at Illinois University, USA. Mitchell was recognized throughout the world as one of the outstanding animal nutritionists of his time, with a particular interest in establishing the nutrient requirements of farm livestock on a scientific basis. It was at the Illinois campus at Urbana that Blaxter developed his subsequent interest in the dominant role played by energy in ruminant animals' metabolism, and its role in determining protein and other nutrient requirements in general. Mitchell's postgraduate taught courses in nutrition were immensely stimulating and Blaxter took an active part in these. 
On returning to the UK in 1947 Blaxter was appointed to the headship of the nutrition department of the Hannah Dairy Research Institute, Ayr, and thus began his hands on research interest in energy metabolism of ruminant livestock. The wide range of related studies bore testimony to his tireless energy, his inquiring mind, and his ability to direct the research work of his nutrition department staff. Subjects for study ranged from nutritional disorders of calves, with particular reference to magnesium deficiency, to vitamin E and selenium and their significance in relation to muscular dystrophy of calves. These were additional to his major interest in the utilization of feed energy by ruminants, the environmental effects upon their energy requirements and feed energy utilization, and studies affecting feed intake by ruminants. For his energy studies Blaxter designed, constructed, and used four 24 hour respiration chambers for sheep and goats, and one for steers. Although Blaxter had had no formal training in mathematics he recognized the powerful contribution that appreciation of mathematical studies could make to the analysis of biological data, and was soon recognized as a world authority in its application to the data obtained at the Hannah Institute. In this he was greatly encouraged by Lord Rothschild, who was at that time chairman of the UK's Agricultural Research Council. Dr H. Ruben, a mathematician, was seconded to work at the Hannah Institute in the early days of Blaxter's headship. 
On 12 October 1957 Blaxter married Mildred Lillington Hall (1925-2010) ['see 'Blaxter, Mildred Lillington], daughter of Robert Charlton Hall, a bank manager. She had a degree in English literature from Oxford and subsequently took a first-class honours degree in sociology at Aberdeen University. They had three children, all of whom entered the field of biology: Alison (the eldest) trained as a veterinary surgeon, Mark became a molecular biologist working in the field of medicine, and Piers a conservation officer in the outer islands of Scotland. Mildred was appointed to the Sociology Research Institute at Aberdeen University and became one of the most respected and active workers in the field of sociology research, a fact of which Blaxter was immensely proud. 
At the Hannah, largely on the basis of work carried out by himself and his colleagues, Blaxter formulated the early developments of a feed evaluation system for ruminants which he greatly extended during his later work at the Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen, where he was appointed director in 1965 in succession to Sir David Cuthbertson. At that time the principal objective of the institute was to establish research aimed at providing the Scottish farmer with knowledge of direct assistance to him, with particular reference to the Scottish livestock industry. With great enthusiasm Blaxter took aboard this continuing objective of the Rowett. In this regard it is relevant to note that in addition to academic degrees he held national diplomas in agriculture (NDA) and in dairying (NDD); at the same time he realized the importance of maintaining and expanding basic research. Thus the programme under Blaxter was a wide-ranging one, including subjects as varied as branched chain fatty acids, interactions of trace elements, muscle protein and collagen syntheses, the biochemistry of cell walls, and (of major interest to Blaxter) continuing work on energy utilization by ruminants and feed evaluation. From the vastly increased knowledge concerning feed energy utilization Blaxter made further advances in his feed evaluation system. From a practical point of view he was also a great exponent of the red deer project -- the farming for venison of red deer -- which he considered was the first large ungulate of temperate regions to be domesticated for thousands of years. In conjunction with the Hill Farming Research Organisation he published a monograph on the progress made in this field. 
Blaxter retired from the directorship of the Rowett Research Institute in 1982 (becoming an honorary research associate) and he and his wife moved from Aberdeen, taking up residence at Stradbroke Hall, Stradbroke, near Eye, Suffolk. In 1982 he was appointed member and then chairman of the Individual Merit Promotion Panel responsible to the cabinet office, a post he held until the panel was disbanded in the early 1990s. During his retirement he became increasingly involved in the question of world food supply, and was very much in demand as a speaker. His immensely busy career is well reflected in the following facts: he published more than 300 original research papers, gave sixteen nominated lectures, published four textbooks, and was given eleven honours and awards in addition to being knighted in 1977. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1965 (president from 1979 to 1982) and fellow of the Royal Society in 1967. He will always be remembered as one of the foremost world authorities in the field of animal nutrition. His influence extended far beyond the nutrition of man and animals, although underlying the ability to be so farsighted was his love of agriculture and the practical aspects of farming in the UK -- a characteristic rare in so many agricultural scientists of his time. He died at his home, Stradbroke Hall, of a brain tumour on 18 April 1991, and was buried three days later. He was survived by his second wife and his three children. A memorial service was held in King's College chapel, Aberdeen University, on 30 September 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49584


Bobath, Berta Ottilie (1907-1991), physiotherapist, was born in Berlin on 5 December 1907, the daughter of Hermann Busse, a Jewish manufacturer of dresses. She trained as a remedial gymnast in Germany, and married Kurt Roehl, from whom she later obtained a divorce; the couple had one son, Peter Lutz Roehl (1933-1996). In 1938 she left Germany as a refugee and arrived in Britain, where she met another refugee, the psychiatrist Dr 
Berta Bobath had worked in Germany with children suffering from cerebral palsy, and in 1944 she set up a unit for children affected by the condition at the Princess Louise Hospital, London. After the Second World War she was asked to treat the society portrait painter Simon Elwes, who had suffered a severe stroke, and with her help he learned to walk again and to paint with his left hand. This success led her to work on rehabilitating other stroke patients. She took the diploma of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy in 1950, and was awarded a fellowship of the society in 1954 for her thesis 'A study of abnormal postural reflex activity in patients with lesions of the central nervous system', which was published in 1975 as an illustrated monograph as 'Motor Development in the Different Types of Cerebral Palsy'. In 1951 she started a private clinic, which became the Western Cerebral Palsy Centre, a registered charity, in 1957. Karel Bobath was honorary consultant physician of the charity. He had been an assistant psychiatrist at Brookwood Hospital, Woking, and went on to work with Dr Alex Shapiro at Harperbury Hospital in St Albans, where he set up the first unit for children with physical disabilities in a hospital for the mentally handicapped in England. 
Berta Bobath did not believe that spasticity was untreatable, and at her clinic she was able to develop her neurological approach to treating children with cerebral palsy, based on the idea that such children were not born with abnormal patterns of posture and movement but developed them through their own activity, and that these could therefore be improved through correct positioning and handling. She believed in the importance of very early diagnosis and treatment, devising individual plans which included teaching parents how to handle their children at home. Her object was to counteract abnormal patterns of movement and avoid further deterioration, and thus help the child reach their full potential and to function as normally as possible. In treating adult stroke patients she concentrated on retraining the affected side through physiotherapy, rather than through allowing the patient to neglect the hemiplegic side and confine themselves to using the unaffected side. Her treatment was based on real-life situations, so that what the patient learned would be part of their daily routine, and not just a series of exercises divorced from daily life. She strongly believed that the more 'normal' a patient could be, the easier it would be to readjust to family and social life. In all this she was greatly helped by her husband, from 1960 medical director of the cerebral palsy unit at Harperbury, who developed the theoretical basis to support her ideas. 
The Bobaths developed postgraduate courses at the centre to train physiotherapists, occupational and speech therapists, and doctors in the Bobath approach to the treatment of neurological disorders. They went on lecture tours abroad, and addressed international conferences, developing a world-wide following. In 1975 the centre moved to larger premises in Hampstead, London, and was renamed the Bobath Centre. Berta Bobath was appointed MBE in 1978, and in 1981 she received an honorary doctorate from Boston University. She and her husband won the Harding award for 'outstanding work of benefit to the disabled'. She published 'Abnormal Postural Reflex Activity Caused by Brain Lesions' (1965; 3rd edn 1985) and 'Adult Hemiplegia: Evaluation and Treatment' (1970; 3rd edn 1990). 
Berta and Karel Bobath were both suffering from heart disease when they took drug overdoses and died together on 20 January 1991 at their home, 36C Arkwright Road, Camden. As a result of a memorial appeal, a new purpose-built Bobath Centre for Cerebral Palsy was opened in East Finchley in 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 49585


Karel Bobath (1905-1991). Bobath was born in Berlin on 14 March 1905, the son of Hynak Bobath, a merchant from an Orthodox Jewish family in Prague. He was working in casualty at Willesden General Hospital when he married Berta on 23 April 1941 and became the adoptive father of her son, Peter. 


@@@@@


doc= 49587


Bowen, Edward George (1911-1991), radiophysicist, was born on 14 January 1911 in Cockett, Glamorgan, Wales, the youngest of four children of George Bowen (1872-1959), steelworker and later insurance agent, and his wife, Ellen Ann, 'nee' Owen, who was born in nearby Pembry in 1876. He was educated at Cockett infants' school, Sketty elementary school, and the municipal secondary school, from where he went with a state scholarship to University College, Swansea, graduating with a first-class degree in physics (1930), an MSc (1931), and a fellowship (1932) for PhD studies at King's College, London, with E. V. Appleton. On 27 December 1938 he married Enid Vesta Williams ('b'. 1910/11), daughter of Benjamin Thomas Williams, grocer. She was a science teacher whom he had met at university. They had three sons: Edward, David, and John. 
Early in 1935 Bowen was selected by Robert Watson Watt, the 'father' of British radar, to help A. F. Wilkins develop the first air warning equipment at Orfordness, Suffolk; Bowen built the high-power transmitter. A year later the group moved into nearby Bawdsey Manor to plan the vital chain of coastal warning stations. Bowen, however, accepted the challenge of devising radars for aircraft -- one type, aircraft to surface vessel radar (ASV), for locating surface vessels, the other, air interception radar (AI), for intercepting night bombers. In September 1937 he unofficially demonstrated his experimental ASV's potential by locating the British fleet, during North Sea exercises, in visibility so poor that Coastal Command aircraft had abandoned their search. His later sets were a major factor in defeating submarines attacking Atlantic convoys. For technical and operational reasons, Bowen's first AI radars were not successful in the RAF in late 1939, but the technical deficiencies were fixed in 1940 with limited modifications and thorough engineering (AI mark IV). However, Bowen clashed with Superintendent A. P. Rowe, whose deputy, W. B. Lewis, had intervened in the modifications without consulting Bowen. After May 1940 Bowen ceased taking an active part in his group's work, but his AI mark IV, with the operational problems solved, was decisive in the 1941 night raids. 
In August 1940 Bowen became the radar member of Sir Henry Tizard's mission to North America. At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, he helped establish the radiation laboratory and its programmes, based on the new British magnetron, the top-secret key to microwave radar. Afterwards he worked to ensure effective liaison with Britain. Late in 1943 he was recruited in Boston by Professor F. W. G. White for Australia's radar centre, the radiophysics laboratory in Sydney. On 1 January 1944 he became White's deputy for research. 
Bowen was chief of the radiophysics laboratory from May 1946 to 1971. His first ventures were to edit 'A Textbook of Radar' (1947), by the staff, and to develop peacetime radar applications, especially for civil aviation. Later two programmes dominated research. J. L. Pawsey's group studied radio radiation from space. With Pawsey's outstanding scientific ability, supported by Bowen's management skills, it won international recognition in the emerging science of radio astronomy. The second programme, directed by Bowen, explored the physics of rainfall and its stimulation. Systematic cloud seeding over twenty-four years established world leadership. The detailed mechanism underlying Bowen's persistence hypothesis has since been largely explained, but his speculations about the roles of meteor showers and the moon in rainfall periodicities remain controversial. 
By the 1950s observational radio astronomers needed much higher resolution. Pawsey's group made progress with interferometric solutions, but Bowen judged correctly that building a giant steerable paraboloid would be quicker. He organized comprehensive London studies of the engineering problems and negotiated substantial American funding. When completed in 1961 at Parkes, New South Wales, the 210 foot telescope was the outstanding instrument of its type, but curtailment of the brilliant interferometry approach split Pawsey's group. 
Bowen played a vital role in the Anglo-Australian 153 inch optical telescope (AAT) for Siding Spring Mountain, New South Wales. Between 1968 and 1973 he chaired the majority of the meetings of the interim joint policy committee and its permanent successor, the AAT board, which had overall project responsibility. Design and construction were entrusted to their project office in Canberra. Bowen, who could draw on experience with the new radio telescope technology at Parkes, steered the enterprise through many crises. The result was a telescope in 1974 with an unsurpassed performance for its size. By 1970, however, dissent had surfaced over the facility's eventual management. At a board meeting in 1972 to settle the issue, Bowen voted for the British position. In 1973, when he accepted a three-year appointment as scientific counsellor at the Australian embassy in Washington, DC, the government forced his resignation from the board. After his embassy appointment ended in 1976 he retired to Maryland before returning to Sydney in 1978. 
Bowen published sixty-two papers and a second book, 'Radar Days' (1987). His honours included the US medal for freedom (1947), appointment as CBE (1962), and fellowship of the Royal Society (1975). Athletic and dynamic, he enjoyed competitive cricket and sailing. He was an ardent Welshman, known to friends as Taffy. In December 1987 he suffered a stroke, and he gradually deteriorated. He died on 12 August 1991, at the Ashley House Nursing Home, Chatswood, Sydney, Australia. His body was cremated at the Northern Suburbs memorial gardens and crematorium, North Ryde, Sydney, four days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 49588


Box, (Violette) Muriel (1905-1991), screenwriter and film director, was born on 22 September 1905 at Simla, Poplar Grove, New Malden, Surrey, the third child of Charles Stephen Baker (died 1945), a clerk for the South Western Railway at Waterloo, and his wife, Caroline Beatrice, 'nee' Doney (1872-1961), variously a pupil teacher, a maid, and an assistant in a magic-lantern shop. Nicknamed Tiggy, she received her primary education at St Matthew's School, Tolworth, Surrey, and in 1915 she began attending Holy Cross Convent in Wimbledon, only to be expelled, primarily because she had not been baptized. She then transferred to Surbiton high school, where she began to take ballet lessons and also studied drama under actor-manager Sir Ben Greet. Contemporaneously, a chance meeting with Joseph Grossman of Stoll Pictures led to her securing work as an extra in 'The Wandering Jew' and in the thriller series 'The Old Man in the Corner' (both 1920). 
Muriel Baker became more fully involved in films in 1929, when she quit her typing job at Barclays Corsets in Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, to join the scenario department of British Instructional Pictures. With the advent of talkies she was promoted to read unsolicited manuscripts and she rapidly developed both a sure story sense and a keen ear for dialogue, which she exploited in a series of short pieces, written for the Welwyn Folk Players. However, her real education in film came on Anthony Asquith's 'Tell England' (1930), on which she served as continuity clerk. She soon transferred to British International Pictures at Elstree, where one of her assignments was Alfred Hitchcock's 'Number Seventeen' (1931). In 1932, while based at Michael Powell's 99 Company, she unsuccessfully auditioned for the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, but found solace in aspiring playwright Sydney Box (1907-1983). Following his divorce from Katherine Knight in 1934, he and Muriel Baker married at Holborn register office on 23 May 1935. 
By this time Muriel Baker and Sydney Box had already published two collections of playlets, 'Ladies Only' (1934) and 'Petticoat Plays' (1935), which were written specifically for all-female amateur casts. Shortly after their debut professional production, 'Mr Penny's Tuppence', opened at the Opera House, Blackpool, they completed the first of their twenty-two film scripts, 'Alibi Inn' (1935), an undistinguished melodrama, which was directed by Pen Tennyson. As she later explained, 'I used to do the overall plot, then Sydney would start work on it and 'diddy it up' wherever he could... it would usually go through five or six stages' (McFarlane, 89). Following the birth of their daughter, Leonora, on 5 November 1936, Muriel Box resumed her writing career with the little-seen play 'Home from Home' (1939) and she received her first solo screenwriting credit on the Ministry of Information's 'A Ride with Uncle Joe' (1939). She then rejoined Sydney at Verity Films, which by 1942 was the largest documentary operation in Britain. Muriel Box's directorial debut, 'The English Inn' (1941), was among the more than 100 information and training films that the company produced, yet, within a year, she had been removed from 'Road Safety for Children', as propaganda chief Arthur Elton believed that women were unsuited to directing. 
Sydney Box, however, continued to exhibit unswerving faith in his wife and they coproduced '29 Acacia Avenue' in 1945 (although it was not released for another two years, as the strict Methodist J. Arthur Rank considered it to be unwholesome). By this time the Boxes had won an Academy award for their screenplay for 'The Seventh Veil' (1945), one of the first features to take psychiatry seriously. Yet Muriel was still frustrated in her ambition to direct, with Michael Balcon refusing to give the go-ahead to her 1950 reworking of 'Romeo and Juliet', as he reckoned she could never command the respect of a feature crew. It took Sydney's formation of London Independent Producers for Muriel to make the breakthrough. Shot in just twenty-three days, 'The Happy Family' (1952) made little critical or commercial impact, but 'Street Corner' (1953), a female riposte to 'The Blue Lamp', 'The Beachcomber' (1954), a sturdy remake of 'The Vessel of Wrath', and the stinging television satire 'Simon and Laura' (1955) were more warmly received. In spite of the social awareness and technical assurance of her work, Box always found funding difficult and had to make the Children's Film Foundation's Napoleonic drama 'The Piper's Tune' (1962) for a mere $22,000. 
Shortly after directing her thirteenth and final feature, 'Rattle of a Simple Man' (1964), Muriel Box separated from Sydney and turned her back on film to co-found the UK's first feminist publishing company, Femina, which boasted Vera Brittain among its board members. Muriel Box personally edited the imprint's first volume, 'The Trial of Marie Stopes', although all attempts to bring it to the screen foundered. She was divorced from Sydney Box in May 1969 and on 28 August 1970 she married Gerald Austin Gardiner, Baron Gardiner of Kittisford (1900-1990), lord chancellor from 1964 to 1970. He was the son of Sir Robert Septimus Gardiner, company director, and the widower of Lesly Doris, only daughter of Alderman Edwin Trounson of Southport. Following her marriage Muriel Gardiner became an increasingly active campaigner for women's rights, notably assisting Lady Edith Summerskill in her bid to reform the divorce laws. She completed her own memoirs, 'Odd Woman Out', in 1974, and published a biography of her husband, 'Rebel Advocate', in 1983. Although never an innovative or bankable talent, Muriel Box was justly, if belatedly, hailed in the 1980s as an inspiration to women film-makers everywhere for managing to overcome the prejudices of a male-dominated industry. She died on 18 May 1991 at Mote End, Nan Clark's Lane, Mill Hill, London, which had been her home since before her marriage to Gerald Gardiner. She was survived by her daughter, Leonora; Gerald Gardiner had died sixteen months previously. 


@@@@@


doc= 49591


Brill, Kenneth Henry (1911-1991), social worker, was born on 13 April 1911 at 28 Rectory Road, Barnes, Surrey, the elder of the two sons of Percy Henry Archelaus Thomas Brill (1881-1918), schoolteacher, and his wife, Charlotte Emily, 'nee' Crisp (1882-1940), also a schoolteacher and later headmistress of Kilve School, Somerset. Brill, brought up by his mother after his father died in the First World War, was educated at Bristol grammar school, which he left, aged sixteen, after an undistinguished school career. After a time as a trainee surveyor in Somerset he moved to London, where he lived in an East End settlement. There he became involved in the parish of a radical Anglican priest, St John Beverley Groser, and joined campaigns to support the Jarrow marchers, to fight slum landlords, and to challenge Mosley's blackshirts. This radicalism was reinforced when he met Jessica Atkinson (1915-1990), daughter of Frederick Atkinson, commercial traveller; they married on 21 August 1938 and shared a lifelong commitment to Christianity, socialism, and (later) social work. They had one daughter, Judi. Meanwhile Brill trained at the London School of Economics as a probation officer and psychiatric social worker but the Second World War interrupted his social work career. He volunteered for the Royal Air Force and served as a flight sergeant and navigator (one who frequently found it difficult to follow the map, he confessed). 
After the war Brill worked for MIND (the National Association for Mental Health) while serving as a Labour councillor in Haringey. The creation of children's departments in 1948 offered him an opportunity to bring together his commitment to children, his organizing ability, and his vision of a better future in the role of children's officer. His first appointment was in Croydon, after which he moved to Devon, where he worked for thirteen years; his final post as children's officer was in Barnet. Children's departments were an organizational response to the vulnerability and potential for abuse of a virtually unregulated foster care system. The drive that Brill brought to his successive appointments was founded on the needs of children as individuals, not cases. His pioneering approach saw a dramatic reduction in the numbers of children in residential care. The emphasis of all the departments in which he worked was switched to family support. Initially Brill could seem austere and distant; his concern for detail and his meticulous drafting sharply differentiated him from those social workers whose concern for humanity outran their concern for organization and order. As secretary of the Association of Children's Officers for seventeen years he used his great organizational skills to the benefit of a national body. The association supported the development of a unified social work profession, which came into being with the 'Local Authority Social Services Act' of 1970. 
The British Association of Social Workers (BASW) was established as a professional association in 1970. Brill was a logical choice for the first general secretary and brought a natural authority to the role as well as a rich knowledge of the history of the fledgeling profession. He succeeded in welding together a number of disparate professional groups. During his time as general secretary BASW was at its zenith, with over 1000 members attending its annual general meetings. The pressures of the job were immense, with a demanding membership, fast developing social services, and (latterly) daily commuting from London to Birmingham, where the association decided to relocate -- a decision fully supported by Brill despite the personal consequences. Throughout this period his drive and energy seemed inexhaustible. Then, at the age of sixty-three, when his contemporaries were pursuing retirement activities, he startled the social work world by returning to Barnet as director of social services. He took on the post during a strike and characteristically led from the top by personally undertaking emergency duty out of hours. 
Conventional retirement was never likely to appeal to Brill. He served as clerk to the Council of National Voluntary Child Care Organisations, edited the newsletter of the Devon branch of BASW, was active in his parish council and in local organizations, and registered for a PhD at the University of Birmingham. The subject of his study was the development of children's services from the Curtis report of 1946 to the 'Children Act' of 1989. Despite failing health he completed his thesis and received his doctorate in Birmingham two days before his death, at his home, Dunns Cottage, Cheriton Fitzpaine, Devon, on 16 December 1991. He was survived by his daughter, his wife having died in the previous year. He was buried at Cheriton Fitzpaine on 2 January 1992. In the course of a long and active working life Brill helped to shape the new profession of social work. His commitment to quality in child care was an inspiration to those who knew and worked with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 49592


Brown, Frederick Richard (1910-1991), cricketer, was born at Lima, Peru, on 16 December 1910, the son of Roger Grounds Brown, who had strong business interests in South America, and his wife, Inez Anita Milne. He attended St Peter's preparatory school, Vina del Mar, Valparaiso, until the age of ten, when he was brought to Britain. He was coached at St Piran's School, Maidenhead, by the famous South African G. A. Faulkner, founder of the first indoor cricket school. At the Leys School, Cambridge, already able to bowl the googly, he was brought on by N. J. Holloway and the Nottinghamshire professional Albert Iremonger. After four years in the eleven, two as captain, he emerged a ready-made all-rounder, tall, broad-chested, and powerful, a formidable striker of the ball and a strong wrist spinner. 
As a Cambridge freshman (1930) Brown headed the bowling averages; in the next season he headed the batting and at the age of twenty won his first England caps against New Zealand. In 1931, after two years reading economics, he went down from St John's College, Cambridge, to take up a position in a firm of Lloyd's insurance brokers, which allowed him to continue to play cricket. In 1932 with Surrey he did the double of 1000 runs (1135) and 100 wickets (120), nearly all on the perfect Oval pitches. He also played one of the most memorable innings in county history, 168 in 2 hours 10 minutes against Kent at Blackheath. Then, with seven sixes in an innings of 212 lasting 3 hours 20 minutes, he lambasted Middlesex at the Oval. 
Brown was a natural choice to tour Australia in 1932-3, though his brand of cricket formed no part of the bodyline scheme of his captain, D. R. Jardine. In the remaining pre-war years he alternated between county and club cricket to the benefit of both. Commissioned into the Royal Army Service Corps in 1939, he was taken prisoner at Tobruk in June 1942 and lost 4 stone in captivity at Chieti, Italy. On his return to Britain he married, on 9 June 1945, Marjorie Elizabeth Palmer ('b'. 1910), the daughter of Ernest Cecil Nottage Palmer, deputy chairman of Huntley and Palmers, biscuit manufacturers. They had three sons and one daughter. Business claims, meanwhile, seemed to have put a finish to a career of rich promise, largely unfulfilled. 
However, in 1949 came an opportunity which combined a profitable job with the leadership of Northamptonshire, a county apparently destined to be permanent holders of the wooden spoon. Brown not only transformed them, 'doing the double' in that season as he had done for Surrey seventeen years before, but was chosen again for England, and as a result of an admirable 122 out of 131 in under two hours for Gentlemen against Players at Lord's the following year was chosen to take MCC to Australia in 1950-51. 
Though England were beaten in the rubber, as in the two previous ones, Brown's all-round cricket and cheerful personality greatly endeared him to the Australian public. After four defeats England won the fifth test, the captain, bowling now chiefly at medium pace, taking in the match eight for 81. In 1951 he led England to a 3-1 victory over South Africa, and became a selector. Nor was that the swansong. In June 1953 his fellow selectors persuaded him to turn out once more against Australia, and in a highly dramatic drawn match at Lord's he played a full part with 50 runs and in 52 overs six wickets. After a gallant stand of 163 for the fifth wicket in the England second innings between Watson and Bailey, when Australia seemed to be coasting to victory, Brown added 28 to enable England to hold the fort. 
Brown's qualities, surprising to say, did not adapt happily to the managership of overseas tours, when he took MCC sides to South Africa (1956-7) and Australia (1958-9). Press relations, amiable enough during his captaincy, were never cordial afterwards. Still to come, however, was long service in the governance of cricket, as chairman of selectors, president of MCC (1971-2), chairman of the Cricket Council, and first chairman and then president of the National Cricket Association (1974-90), where he was active in the encouragement of youth cricket. In the transfer between the loose control of the game by MCC and the more democratic structures dating from 1968 he played a leading part. For a few years he was in his element as a BBC commentator. He was raised from MBE to CBE in 1980. Brown died at his home, 13 Isles Court, Ramsbury, Marlborough, Wiltshire, on 24 July 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49593


Brown, Sir Raymond Frederick (1920-1991), industrialist, was born on 19 July 1920 at 4 Nettleton Road, Greenwich, London, the son of Frederick Brown, then working as a dock labourer but later a small shopkeeper, and his wife, Susie Evelyn, 'nee' Hutchins. After leaving Morden Terrace London county council school at the age of fourteen he joined Broadcast and Relay Services (later Rediffusion) as an engineering apprentice, continuing his education at evening classes at South East London Technical College and Morley College. He spent the war years on secondment from Rediffusion installing radio navigation beacons for the RAF, and after the war he helped to install mobile transmitters in Germany to enable the British army of the Rhine to receive broadcasts from the British Forces Broadcasting Service. He married Eva Constance Hugh ('b'. 1921/2), daughter of Henry Hugh Jennings, engineer gauge maker, on 13 September 1942; they had one daughter but were divorced in 1949. On 19 June 1953 he married Carol Jacqueline Elizabeth ('b'. 1931/2), daughter of Henry Robert James Spinks, company director. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Brown worked as sales manager in the communications division of Plessey Ltd from 1949 to 1950 when he left to found Racal Ltd jointly with Wing Commander (George) Calder (Jock) Cunningham: the name Racal -- pronounced 'Ray-call' -- came from a combination of RAY-mond and CAL-der. Based in north London, it began as a consultancy for the planning of radio communications systems but in 1951 they formed Racal Electronics Ltd as a private company, to manufacture radio equipment for the major communications companies. The company moved from its original small factory in Isleworth to larger premises built to its requirements in Bracknell New Town, Berkshire, in 1954, and continued to expand in the field of radio communications, concentrating on high frequency equipment. Racal was the first British company to sell proprietary radio communications equipment, rather than entering into contracts with customers to supply to their individual specifications. Among its most successful products in the early years were the RA 17 high frequency radio receiver, first manufactured in 1957, and the Harness B intercommunication units for tanks and military vehicles. Cunningham died in 1958 but the company continued to grow, with the volume of business quadrupling between 1957 and 1962. In 1961, when it was floated as a public company with Brown as chairman and managing director, Racal had a workforce of 825, with 50 per cent of its sales to British government departments, while international customers included NATO, SHAPE, and governments throughout the world. When Brown left the company in 1966, 62 per cent of its orders were for exports. Since 1956 he had spent some six months in every year selling Racal products abroad, negotiating licensing agreements for the overseas manufacture of equipment designed by Racal, and acquiring licences for it to make equipment developed elsewhere. Several overseas subsidiary companies were formed, starting with Racal (Australia) Pty Ltd in 1961. An installation section of the company was developed, which undertook major projects abroad. 
Brown was appointed head of the new department of defence sales at the Ministry of Defence in 1966 and spent three years there working to increase Britain's share of the world market in defence equipment. He was knighted in 1969 and appointed adviser on commercial policy and exports to the Department of Health and Social Security, where he remained until 1972. He subsequently served as an adviser to the National Economic Development Office. He joined Muirhead, another leading electronics company, as chief executive and managing director in 1970, holding these positions until 1982, when he was elected chairman. He was one of the first to realize the possibilities of the facsimile machine, and was responsible for its development at Muirhead. When he left in 1985 he became an executive director of STC (formerly Standard Telephones and Cables Ltd). He retired in 1990. 
A horse lover and keen polo player, Brown not only kept horses and a string of polo ponies, but was also chairman of Racecourse Technical Services from 1970 to 1984. At his country estate in Witley, near Godalming, Surrey, he had a prize-winning herd of Hereford cattle, and he enjoyed golf and shooting. He had a warm and exuberant personality, and was enthusiastic about anything that he did. He held no strong political views, and was happy to serve under any political party: it was coincidental that most of his government work was done while the Labour government was in power. He devoted much time to charitable causes, including the Ronald Raven Chair of Clinical Oncology Trust, and muscular dystrophy. He died of cancer at his home, Witley Park House, Surrey, on 3 September 1991 and was buried in the churchyard at Witley on 11 September. He was survived by his second wife and their three children, his daughter by his first marriage having predeceased him. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 2 November 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49594


Browne, Coral Edith (1913-1991), actress, was born Coral Edith Brown (she later added the 'e' to her surname for stage purposes) on 23 July 1913 in Melbourne, Australia, the only child of Leslie Clarence Brown, restaurateur, and his wife, Victoria Elizabeth Bennett. Her father ran a successful restaurant in Melbourne. She was educated at the Claremont Ladies' College there. Acting (at least for a well-brought-up young girl) was at the time unthinkable in one of Australia's most conservative communities. She had started to study costume design at an art school attached to the local repertory theatre when an actress fell suddenly ill and Browne was thrust on stage to play a woman living 'in sin' in Galsworthy's 'Loyalties' (1931). She was never thereafter to leave the stage for long; at eighteen she was a notable Melbourne Hedda Gabler, and at twenty-one a widely experienced repertory actress. 
For her twenty-first birthday Browne's father gave her $50 to visit London, on the condition that she would return home if the money ran out before she had made any kind of success. It duly ran out, but not before Browne had settled into the first of several liaisons, this one with the West End manager Firth Sheppard. 'Firth is my shepherd,' she once noted, 'I shall not want' (private information). It took her several years of understudying and minor role playing before she made her name in 1941, opposite Robert Morley, as the long-suffering secretary Maggie Cutler in 'The Man who Came to Dinner' by Kaufman and Hart, which played in London and on tour almost throughout the Second World War. During this time she started an off-stage affair with the actor and singer Jack Buchanan (1890-1957) ['see 'Buchanan, Walter John], with whom she shared a long run in 'Castle in the Air' (1949). 
By now thoroughly established as a comedienne of considerable elegance and a wicked wit, Browne decided as early as 1951 that she wished to be taken more seriously, even classically, on stage, and joined the Old Vic company in that year to play first Emilia to Douglas Campbell's Othello, and then Regan to Donald Wolfit's King Lear, an experience she likened to being 'a bit of fluff on the carpet at the approach of a vacuum cleaner in full thrust' (private information). Like Maggie Smith, whose career parallels Browne's in many ways, she became renowned for her backstage commentaries; acting with Nigel Patrick in 'The Remarkable Mr Pennypacker' (1955) was, she said, 'like working with two tons of condemned veal' (private information). 
Browne's first truly classical success came in 1956, when (again at the Vic) she played a notable Lady Macbeth, and then Gertrude to the somewhat late-life Hamlet of Michael Redgrave; they subsequently took the latter production to Moscow, where Browne met with the spy Guy Burgess (who had been in love with Redgrave at Cambridge), an encounter which later became the subject of Alan Bennett's play 'An Englishman Abroad', in which Browne played her younger self for BBC television in 1983. Meanwhile Browne had married, on 26 June 1950, the actor and agent Philip Westrope Pearman (1910/11-1964), son of Albert Pearman, flour miller. The marriage 'was famously happy, perhaps 'because of' rather than 'despite' his ambiguous sexuality' ('The Independent', 31 May 1991). Ten years after his death, and after a long affair with Michael Hordern ['see 'Hordern, Sir Michael Murray (1911-1995)], she married the actor and art expert Vincent Price (1911-1993), whom she had met on a horror film, 'Theatre of Blood' (1973). They decided to live in London and furnish a flat; told by a shop manager that the bed they wished to purchase for it had a five-week delivery delay, Coral pointed at her always-cadaverous new husband; 'Five weeks?' she asked, 'Have you seen Mr Price?' (private information). 
In the 1960s Browne reverted to high comedy and seldom revisited the classics. Through the 1960s and 1970s she scored many London hits in such comedies as 'The Right Honourable Gentleman' (1964-6) and 'Lady Windermere's Fan' (1966). Wilde and Lonsdale were always among her favourite dramatists, though she curiously missed out on Coward and Rattigan. In 1970 she joined the National Theatre for a notable Mrs Warren in 'Mrs Warren's Profession', her first return to Shaw since her early days in Melbourne, and later that decade she took on (with Vincent Price) two difficult Anouilhs, first 'The Waltz of the Toreadors' (1974) and then 'Ardele' (1975). 
Browne's film career was always intermittent, though she had notable successes as the tough, bitchy friend of the star in 'Auntie Mame' (1958), the cynical procuress to Vivien Leigh in Tennessee Williams's 'The Roman Spring of Mrs Stone' (1961), and the lesbian BBC administrator in 'The Killing of Sister George' (1969). One of her last great appearances was as the elderly Mrs Alice Hargreaves, the original Alice in Wonderland, in 'Dreamchild' (1985). By then she had settled in California as Mrs Vincent Price, though none too happily; Hollywood was altogether too artificial a culture for her tough Australian honesty. Told by a box office manager that she had rung far too late to secure tickets for a much vaunted 'Macbeth' featuring Charlton Heston and Vanessa Redgrave that was opening at the local theatre, her response was 'Right then, I'll just have two tickets for after the interval' (private information). 
Browne's friends sometimes wished she would more often take more challenging work. But that would be to overlook how good she was in what she did choose to do, and her courage was unquestionable, not least when she ventured into Joe Orton's 'What the Butler Saw' (1969) at a time when few stars of her generation and elegance would even risk being seen in the audience. Like Edith Evans and Marie Tempest, but precious few others, she was often greater than her roles, and it is arguable that she was often funnier off-stage than on. She endured a long and painful terminal illness with characteristic grace, goodwill, and discretion before dying in Los Angeles on 29 May 1991. She was survived by her husband, Vincent Price. A mass of thanksgiving was celebrated at the church of the Immaculate Conception, Farm Street, London, on 5 September 1991. With her death the British theatre lost a certain style, made up equally of talent, courage, and arrogance, which it was already impossible truly to recapture in an age when directors, designers, and writers called the shots. 


@@@@@


doc= 49596


Burn, Andrew Robert (1902-1991), historian and classical scholar, was born on 25 September 1902 at the rectory, Kynnersley, Shropshire, the son of Andrew Ewbank Burn (1864-1927), rector of Halifax and dean of Salisbury, and his wife, Celia Mary (1866-1959), daughter of Edward Richardson. From Uppingham School (1916-1921) he proceeded as a scholar to Christ Church, Oxford, where his tutor was R. H. Dundas. After graduating with a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1925 he returned to teach in his old school, Uppingham, where he was senior classical master from 1927 to 1940. On 31 December 1938 he married Mary Wynn Thomas ('b'. 1910), daughter of Wynn Thomas, until her marriage assistant keeper in the Victoria and Albert Museum and a part-time teacher of Greek and Byzantine art. 
In 1940 Robin and Mary Burn moved to Athens, where Robin was British Council representative until 1941. On 22 April 1941, as the German army advanced, they left Athens on the last civilian boat, and travelled via Crete to Egypt, where Burn was commissioned in the intelligence corps at general headquarters Middle East in Cairo. In 1942 he was involved in cipher-breaking German intercepts at an 'outstation' of Bletchley Park at Heliopolis. In 1943 he was posted to Aleppo to interrogate escapers, mainly Greek, from Europe. The following year he was appointed second secretary in the British embassy to the Greek government in exile in Cairo, and worked briefly in Caserta for Harold Macmillan, at that time resident minister in the Mediterranean. After the liberation of Greece he returned with the embassy to Athens, where he experienced the communist rising and the siege of central Athens and the embassy. At Christmas 1944, in a time of emergency, he met Churchill and Eden on their visit to Athens. He never lost his love for Greece, its landscape, its culture, and its people, and the Greek government recognized this when it honoured him in 1970 with the silver cross of the royal order of the Phoenix. 
In 1946 Burn returned to academic life when, on the invitation of A. W. Gomme, he accepted the post of senior lecturer in ancient history in the University of Glasgow. He remained there until his retirement in 1969, being promoted to reader in 1965. After his retirement the teaching of ancient history at Glasgow was incorporated in the departments of humanity (Latin) and Greek (later to be incorporated in a single department of classics), but before then history was still regarded as somewhat peripheral to the studies of classics students, and Burn was in effect a self-contained one-man department, with sole responsibility for the teaching of both Greek and Roman history at all levels. From 1958 to 1959 he was visiting Gillespie professor of the College of Wooster, Ohio, and from 1961 to 1962 he was a member of the institute of advanced studies at Princeton. From 1966 to 1969 he served as president of the Glasgow Archaeological Society. 
Burn was a highly congenial teacher and colleague, and many newly appointed lecturers were grateful to him and his wife for the hospitality and encouragement which they provided in their Glasgow flat. He was noted for his fund of anecdotes, and for his dry humour. 
In 1969 he retired from his Glasgow post to spend his final three teaching years as visiting professor at the American 'College Year in Athens', thus appropriately combining his love of teaching with his love of Greece. His last years were spent with his wife, Mary, in retirement in Oxford, where 'he was already a legend' when he arrived ('The Independent', 27 June 1991). In 1979 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and in 1982 Oxford awarded him the degree of DLitt. He continued to play an active part at seminars and meetings until his death of heart failure and old age at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Woodstock Road, Oxford, on 17 June 1991. After cremation on 21 June his ashes were interred at St Michael's Church, Summertown, Oxford, on 8 October 1991. 
Apart from journal articles and reviews Burn published a large number of books. Indeed, he used to say that writing books was his hobby. Already, as a schoolmaster at Uppingham, he produced 'Minoans, Philistines and Greeks, 1400-900 B.C.' (1930), 'The Romans in Britain: an Anthology of Inscriptions' (1932), and 'The World of Hesiod: a Study of the Greek Middle Ages, c.900-700 B.C.' (1936). During the war years he found time to publish two small books, 'This Scepter'd Isle: an Anthology of English Poetry' (1940) and 'The Modern Greeks' (1942). His Glasgow years saw the appearance of 'Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic Empire' (1947), 'Pericles and Athens' (1948), 'Agricola and Roman Britain' (1953), 'The Lyric Age of Greece' (1960), 'Persia and the Greeks: the Defence of the West, c.546-478 B.C.' (1962), 'A Traveller's History of Greece' (1965), and 'The Warring States of Greece: from their Rise to the Roman Conquest' (1968). After retirement he published, with his wife, Mary, 'The Living Past of Greece: a Time-Traveller's Tour of Historic and Prehistoric Places' (1980). Many of these books were to be revised and reprinted, some under different titles. All were highly readable, and many remained for many years standard in their field, and figured prominently in students' reading lists. They ranged widely over ancient and modern, political and military, Greek, Roman, and oriental history, literature, archaeology, and topography, and combined sound scholarship with exceptional skill in communicating it to specialist and non-specialist alike. Burn was a popularizer in the best sense of that word. He enjoyed reading as much as he enjoyed writing. At the age of eighty-six, in accepting an invitation to review a book for the 'Classical Review', he wrote to the editor, 'I love reviewing now that I do no more serious work! Send me anything you think fit' (personal knowledge). Throughout his life he was a committed member of the Church of England, and, during his Glasgow period, of the Scottish Episcopal church. 


@@@@@


doc= 49597


Burton, (Frances) Elaine, Baroness Burton of Coventry (1904-1991), politician, was born on 2 March 1904 at 17 Royal Avenue, Scarborough, Yorkshire, the only child of Lesley Aubrey Burton and his wife, Frances Butler. She remembered her father as an upper-class wastrel who squandered his inheritance, yet he was also a hurdler in the 1908 Olympics and gave her a lifelong enthusiasm for sports. He paid local boys a penny each to race her, and in 1919 she won the 100 yards sprint at the Northern Counties Ladies' Championships in Manchester. After attending Leeds Girls' Modern School she trained as a teacher at Leeds City Training College and taught in primary schools and evening classes in Leeds from 1924 to 1935, coached city sports teams, and played county hockey and cricket. However, she realized that she was a political animal, if not necessarily a good party person, and amid the economic insecurity of the 1930s she abandoned her career to study unemployment first hand. She spent two years (1935-7) as a social worker in south Wales before becoming an organizer of keep fit classes for the National Fitness Council. 
Upon the outbreak of the Second World War, Burton was laid off and spent over six months seeking work. Reluctant to teach again, she presented an article about women's unemployment to a newspaper editor and her initiative resulted in a weekly column in 'The Star' on women's wartime difficulties; these articles were published in 1941 as 'What of the Women?'. This was followed in 1942 with 'And your Verdict?', which accused the government of denying women their full role in the war effort. She also worked for the John Lewis Partnership. Her interest in politics blossomed and in June 1943 she stood as a Common Wealth candidate in the Hartlepool parliamentary by-election, where she was soundly defeated by the Labour candidate. After Labour rejected an alliance with the young left-wing movement in 1944 many Common Wealth members, including Elaine Burton, switched parties to ensure a united front against the Conservatives. While the Labour landslide and the magnanimous endorsement of Common Wealth's leading light, J. B. Priestley, did not help her win Hendon South in 1945, she defeated the former Conservative minister Leslie Hore-Belisha five years later in Coventry South. 
As a late convert to Labour, Burton aroused some suspicion among her new colleagues, though one sceptic -- Jean Mann -- was soon impressed by her doughty advocacy of women's issues in the face of an indifferent party leadership. An ardent but not aggressive feminist, Burton urged equal pay and had a talent for rapidly asking ministers follow-up questions before the speaker could move on. Though she personally hated housework and cooking she became the housewives' voice in parliament, making her an authority on consumer protection. In 1955 she delivered a political broadcast on value for money. She also successfully sponsored a 'Disposal of Uncollected Goods Bill', enabling shopkeepers to sell abandoned goods left for cleaning or repair. For example, she told MPs, there were 450,000 uncollected pairs of shoes at cobblers' shops in the country and this bill would help such tradesmen to recoup some of the resulting costs. 
Burton championed Coventry's needs, particularly its employment problems. None the less her local party threatened to deselect her in 1955 after she defied their instructions and voted to deny Aneurin Bevan the party whip over his perceived challenge to Clement Attlee's leadership. The controversy soon subsided, and at that year's general election Coventry's anti-Labour swing was smallest in her constituency, perhaps because voters respected her independent stand, but in 1959 she was defeated and felt 'gutted' at losing her platform in parliament. For two years she worked as an adviser at John Waddington Ltd, which had produced a card game invented by her, based on the coronation. She returned to parliament on her creation as Baroness Burton of Coventry in April 1962. For years her trademark had been her large and colourful veiled hats, known as the 'bride's mother's hat' -- she had even worn them on the dole queue -- but in the upper house she ran into a seventeenth-century rule forbidding headwear. In 1965 she persuaded the house to abolish the rule and enlivened the chamber with her millinery as she had done in the Commons. 
Burton made many more substantial contributions to the Lords' work, including the continuation of a crusade she had begun as an MP. Remembering her own experience of buying clothes horses in order to practise hurdling, abandoning her dream of swimming the channel, and seeing athletically talented students unable to fulfil their potential owing to lack of resources, she argued vigorously for improved funding of amateur athletics (though she was staunchly opposed to tobacco sponsorship). She warned that a ministry of sport would be meddlesome, but as early as 1956, in one of her numerous letters to 'The Times', she urged the creation of an independent grant supported body like the Arts Council. After she had raised questions and initiated debates on the issue the government agreed to subsidize amateur athletes who wished to compete internationally. In 1965 she was appointed to the newly formed Sports Council, which served only to advise the government but in 1971, the year she retired, it was given independence and responsibility for allocating funds. 
Baroness Burton also spoke on such favourite topics as women's opportunities in business and public life, initiating a debate on the matter at the age of eighty (she had been a founding member of the Federation of Business and Professional Women). She championed the rights of air travellers, campaigned to protect children from flammable nightwear, and took an interest in broadcasting, having served on the Independent Television Authority between 1964 and 1969. Throughout the 1970s she worried about the Labour Party's direction and urged fellow moderates to actively resist the encroachment of the far left. Feeling that her pleas were in vain she and eight other peers left the party in January 1981, declaring her inability to accept such policies as unilateral nuclear disarmament, withdrawal from the EEC, and the party's proposed new method of choosing its leader. She became the Social Democratic Party's spokesman in the Lords on civil aviation and consumer affairs, and remained active until she died, unmarried, on 6 October 1991 at her home, 18 Vincent Court, Seymour Place, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 49598


Caine, Sir Sydney (1902-1991), colonial official and university administrator, was born on 27 June 1902 at 58 Gresham Road, Hendon, London, the son of Harry Edward Caine, railway clerk, and his wife, Jane Harker, 'nee' Buckley. He was educated at Harrow county school and the London School of Economics (LSE), obtaining a first-class honours degree in economics in 1922. He first became an assistant collector of taxes, then in 1926 passed the revived civil service competitive examination and entered the Colonial Office, where his understanding of fiscal administration was appreciated at a time when the department and the colonial governments were forced by worldwide recession to make cuts in expenditure. In 1929 he was appointed secretary to the West Indian sugar commission and five years after that secretary to the United Kingdom sugar industry inquiry committee, created to protect the economies and expand the markets of the sugar-producing British dependencies. 
In 1937, when Hong Kong required a sounder economic structure, Caine was sent there as financial secretary. He reshaped the system of revenue collection and designed a number of fiscal reforms which, because of the Japanese invasion, could not be fully implemented until after the Second World War, when they formed the basis of the territory's subsequent prosperity. He enjoyed living in the Far East and the many intellectual challenges it presented. 
Caine was recalled to the Colonial Office as an assistant secretary in 1940. There his wide understanding of the financial implications of radical economic and social changes in colonial administration intended by the first 'Colonial Development and Welfare Act' was particularly valuable. He was soon seconded to the colonial supply liaison office in Washington, to handle economic and labour problems arising from the United States 'Lend-Lease Act'. As a member of the Anglo-American Caribbean commission he was afforded in 1942 an opportunity to further the interests of the West Indies and help protect their constitutional advance while negotiating the terms of collaboration between Britain and America to defend that region during and immediately after the war. The scope of his work widened when that same year he returned to England as financial adviser to Oliver Stanley, the secretary of state for the colonies. In 1944 Stanley promoted him to assistant under-secretary of state and in 1947 Arthur Creech Jones promoted him to deputy under-secretary of state. As such, early in 1948 he led the discussion in Paris between French and British officials on closer economic co-operation between the colonies of the two countries, including the building of better communications between neighbouring territories. Later that year he presided over similar discussions with officials of the Belgian ministry for colonial affairs. Although he transferred to the Treasury as third secretary towards the end of the year, his work still had a strong connection with Britain's overseas possessions as, from 1949 to 1951, he led the United Kingdom Treasury and supply delegation in Washington and the World Bank mission to Ceylon. 
Caine's career took a different direction in 1952 when he became vice-chancellor of the new University of Malaya. Once again radical innovations were required of him. Instead of one university site where the faculties covered the complete range of subjects, he oversaw the development and expansion of two branches of the university, and witnessed the creation of a third. In 1949 Raffles College had combined with King Edward VII's Medical College to form the basis of a university in Singapore. When Caine arrived in Malaya plans were under way for an expensive transfer to Johore, where a site had already been acquired by the government but not yet transferred to the university authorities. Caine, with the assistance of the then director of the London School of Economics, Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, drew up a new plan for the Singapore University College to remain a centre for the arts, science, medicine, social science, education, and law, with a separate campus in Kuala Lumpur for teaching agriculture and engineering as well as the arts, science, and medicine. Already Nanyang University College had been hurriedly created for Chinese students who were not sufficiently fluent in English to qualify for places in the University of Malaya. It had a more technical leaning, resembling some American universities. In 1957 Malaya became an independent kingdom and Caine returned to England, having already set in motion the scheme for the branches of the University of Malaya to become separate universities by 1962. While there he had also acted as economic adviser to the chief minister of Singapore, helping to design long-term economic policies to foster the development of local industries, rapid expansion of the social services to the extent that could be supported financially by the colony, and a more even distribution of income. At the same time he was appointed chairman of the Caribbean fiscal commission, which drew up financially viable plans for the support of the administration of the short-lived Federation of the West Indies. 
From 1957 to 1967 Caine was director of the London School of Economics, responsible for considerable expansion of its premises and for handling the notorious student protest at the announcement of Sir Walter Adams, principal of the University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, as his successor. Since 1965 Caine had himself served as governor of the Reserve Bank of Rhodesia, created by the British government after Ian Smith's unilateral declaration of independence to handle the external finances of the government of Rhodesia, including colonial administrators' pensions and students' fees. Caine regarded the LSE insurrection as a bid for student power, such as had begun the previous year at Berkeley in the United States, and believed it was fomented in the LSE by American agitators. He had been considering ways to give students a voice in the management of the school, and had sympathy with some of their demands. He exercised reason and firm resolution in dealing with the protesters, until the issue was settled in time for them to sit their final examinations and for him to retire on 30 September 1967. 
In retirement, as well as writing several papers on financial matters (including one for the Institute of Economic Affairs advocating 'pay television') and educational principles, he produced one book on the foundation of the LSE and another on the purpose and prospects of British universities, over which he considered the government exercised too much control. As a practical expression of those views he became chairman of the planning board of the independent University of Buckingham, which opened in 1973. The latter was unusual in offering two-year degree courses, the academic year consisting of four, rather than three, long terms. 
Caine was created CMG in 1945, KCMG in 1947, a grand officer of the order of Orange Nassau (Netherlands) in 1947, and commander of the order of Dannebrog (Denmark) in 1965. He served as a member of the Independent Television Authority from 1960 to 1967 (deputy chairman from 1964 to 1967); as a member of the International Institute of Educational Planning from 1963 to 1970; and as co-ordinator of the Indonesian Sugar Study from 1971 to 1972. He received honorary doctorates from the University of Malaya in 1956 and from the University of Buckingham in 1980. 
Caine was a handsome man with a considerable presence. He was married three times: first on 15 August 1925 to Muriel Ann Maud (died 1962), daughter of Abner Harris, of 18 Hervey Close, London; second on 23 March 1965 to Doris Winifred (1900/01-1973), daughter of Walter Folkard, of Forest Gate, London; and third in 1975 to Elizabeth Crane Bowyer, daughter of J. Crane Nicholls and widow of Sir Eric Bowyer (1902-1964). There was one son of his first marriage, Sir Michael Caine (1927-1999), and two stepsons and two stepdaughters of his third marriage. Caine died on 2 January 1991; he was survived by his third wife, his son, and his stepchildren. A memorial service was held at St Clement Danes on 2 February 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49600


Cameron, Sir James Clark (1905-1991), general practitioner and medical administrator, was born on 8 April 1905 at Bridge of Earn, Perthshire, Scotland, the only son and elder child of Malcolm Clark Cameron (1872-1917), police officer, and his wife, Grace (1879-1963), seamstress, daughter of James Clark and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' MacArthur of Aberfeldy. The family had roots in Rannoch, Perthshire. 
Cameron was educated at Glencarse School, Acharn School (near Kenmore), Breadalbane Academy, and Perth Academy. Leaving school in 1923 he took a gap year working in a pharmacy, an experience which persuaded him to study medicine. He then attended University College, Dundee (then part of St Andrews University), graduating MB and ChB in 1929. This was followed by a hospital residency in Arbroath. 
Like many of Scotland's medical graduates Cameron migrated south after qualification. Settling in general practice in Croydon in 1931 he proved a popular doctor and soon opened a second surgery in his home, near Wallington. This early expansion in a flourishing London suburb no doubt prompted his subsequent advice to aspiring general practitioners, quoted by a local colleague Trevor Silver: 'Always count the chimney pots before setting up your plate' (Silver, 1131). On 25 February 1933 he married Irene Ferguson (1905-1986), daughter of Arthur Ferguson of Perth, an Edinburgh graduate who, until her death, provided staunch support. He was deeply attached to her and to their three children: Hamish, who became a consultant child psychiatrist; Sheila, who became a QC; and Jennifer, who became a magistrate. 
Cameron's group practice in Wallington remained his professional base for forty-five years, and throughout his post-war career in medico-politics he maintained this strong clinical foundation, holding large Saturday surgeries to compensate for the hours spent in weekday committees. He kept close links with local colleagues, successfully chairing the south-west London and Surrey local medical committee. A firm believer in democracy, Cameron practised it assiduously throughout two decades of representing doctors. Indeed, his chairmanship of local and national committees was sometimes marked by a surfeit of democracy as he allowed fractious colleagues to talk themselves out in his pursuit of an agreed solution to a controversial problem. On occasions he displayed a Nelsonian disregard for an inquorate meeting, and some of his most effective work was done when subsequently socializing late into the night with committee members after formal proceedings had ended. 
Cameron had joined the Officers' Training Corps at university, and in 1939 was commissioned into the Territorial Army. By the spring of 1940 he was a battalion medical officer in the King's Royal Rifle Brigade. His unit was deployed to hold Calais against the advancing Germans, to give time for the British expeditionary force's evacuation to England from nearby Dunkirk. His gallantry in this fierce battle, during which, under fire, he amputated a wounded soldier's forearm with a rusty hacksaw, earned him a mention in dispatches. He was, inevitably, captured and sent to Stalag Luft 21 in Germany. There, as well as caring for many nationalities in the prison's hospital, he worked hard to maintain prisoners' morale, organizing camp shows, taking church services, learning German, and negotiating on the prisoners' behalf with the camp authorities. Such was his command of German and ability to represent prisoners' interests that on one occasion the authorities locked him up as a suspected spy. In October 1944 he was moved to a camp in Poland with American prisoners of war. From there he wrote home: 'Everyone is very optimistic... but I have given up prophesying' (private information, J. Isaacs). This was an understandable sentiment after five years of incarceration. 
Cameron later remained reticent about his wartime experiences, which ended with his leading a gruelling trek of fellow prisoners to Odessa after their release by the Russian army. Certainly, the years in camps coloured the remainder of his life, although fortunately his natural affability, gregariousness, and common sense survived intact. He kept in touch with former comrades, but an enduring hatred of his captors was manifest over twenty years later when he refused to enter a car hired to take him to negotiations in Whitehall because it was a Mercedes. A positive outcome of his camp experiences was his abiding support for the Red Cross, with which he had worked when organizing the repatriation of sick prisoners. Back in general practice he regularly lectured Red Cross volunteers, and in 1958 was awarded the organization's badge of honour and was made a life member. 
As well as great stamina Cameron had a well disguised inner toughness, products, no doubt, of his strict Presbyterian upbringing and the war. These traits were coupled with a shrewd intelligence, an unusual empathy with people, a remarkable memory, and the ability to identify the sentence that mattered in a mass of text. It was no surprise that he became a skilful negotiator as well as an effective family doctor. One quirk for such a successful medico-politician was a reluctance to put pen to paper: listening and talking were his strengths. He could, however, be an uncompromising opponent of anyone he believed had let him down; nor did he suffer fools gladly, though his kindness to friends and to the British Medical Association (BMA) staff was legendary. 
A champion of principles he held dear, Cameron's belief in and deep anxieties about general practice in the National Health Service (NHS) prompted his entry into medico-politics in the early years of the service. 'I came back from five years in a prisoner of war camp to find general practice in a mess and my gut feeling was that it was a branch of medicine with no future' (Macpherson, 26). It was Cameron's determination to help revive general practice -- for the benefit of patients as well as doctors -- rather than any desire for personal aggrandizement that motivated his medico-political activities. 
In 1956 Cameron was elected to the BMA's general medical services committee, which represented nearly all family doctors via a network of active local committees, and on 19 March 1964 -- when still relatively unknown outside the BMA -- he was elected its chairman. A modest man, he was as surprised as many others when he beat the two fancied, high-profile candidates in what was an unexpected election for the chair. The committee's previous chairman, A. B. Davies, had resigned following an angry national conference of representatives of general practitioners (GPs) which had castigated the committee's proposed evidence for a pay rise to the doctors' and dentists' independent pay review body. As someone who epitomized the value of patients having a personal doctor, Cameron was to prove an ideal leader for Britain's family doctors. In the period after his election he judged the main hope for general practice to be with the government-initiated Fraser inquiry. This was, however, overtaken by events in February 1965, when the review body recommended 'such a tiny pay award that GPs exploded' (Timmins, 220). Cameron's abilities were tested to their limits at local and national meetings where he and his committee colleagues struggled to channel doctors' anger into a constructive policy. 
The task was formidable. As well as having to persuade a financially beleaguered government to accept potentially expensive reforms, Cameron had to combat militant rival GP organizations and unite general practitioners, many of whom hankered nostalgically for pre-NHS practice and fees for items of service in place of remuneration based on patient list size -- a change that the government deemed non-negotiable. As general medical services committee chairman, however, Cameron was determined also to improve standards of training and practice, a necessary quid pro quo for better pay and conditions of service. Furthermore, more well qualified recruits were needed urgently to offset a debilitating loss of disillusioned, experienced doctors from the NHS. The level of anger among family doctors was such that in February 1965 the BMA decided to collect GPs' undated resignations from the NHS, for possible use later. An overwhelming majority responded and, whatever personal reservations Cameron may have had about industrial action by doctors, he recognized the 'realpolitik' of the situation. As the committee chairman he had both to placate alarmed consultants' leaders, fearful that hospitals would be overwhelmed, and to persuade an angry minister of health, Kenneth Robinson, to stay at the negotiating table. 
Drawing on many professional and governmental sources, including ideas from the progressive Royal College of General Practitioners (of which he was later elected an honorary fellow) and the Medical Practitioners Union, Cameron and his negotiating team of elected GPs and BMA secretariat staff set out to turn the crisis to the advantage of patients and doctors. He never pretended to be an original thinker, but he could spot a good idea, and he had the leadership qualities to weld a group of informed, independent, often prickly individuals into an effective team. The negotiators' proposals, 'A Charter for the Family Doctor Service', hammered out during a hectic weekend in Brighton in February 1965, were the basis of negotiations with the government. Robinson, the minister of health and the son of a family doctor, recognized the parlous state of general practice and the risk this posed for the NHS, and saw in Cameron someone with whom he could deal. Their mutual empathy -- and willingness to communicate informally to test their respective positions -- contributed to resolving the crisis. Indeed, Cameron sometimes had more trouble with militants in the profession than with the minister and his civil service team. Interestingly, Robinson admitted privately many years later that the net loss of 600 GPs from the NHS in 1963-4 worried him more than the threat of mass resignations or the BMA's attempt to launch an insurance-based scheme for general practice. For his part Cameron saw the resignation threat as being as much a safety valve for the profession as a credible weapon in negotiations. 
Cameron, 'a dead straight but artful Scot' (Timmins, 220), handled acrimonious professional meetings and intense negotiations with skill, courtesy, and determination. 'When rarely and deliberately, he was terse, the result was dramatically effective' (Gullick). Certainly, when necessary he faced down the profession's militants, and on one occasion refused to accept a ministerial letter. Many months of tense and complex negotiations finally resulted in 1966 in Cameron and Robinson agreeing a vastly improved contract. Timmins later wrote: 'The deal not only stopped the rot. It produced a renaissance in general practice' (Timmins, 223). Cameron would surely have been proud of this judgement. 
After the agreement was implemented Cameron wanted to resign as chairman of the general medical services committee, but members asked him to stay on. So, despite illness, he led Britain's GPs for ten years, until a serious operation obliged him to resign in 1974. During that time he contributed greatly to the development of postgraduate education for family doctors. GPs honoured him by naming a charity for GPs and their families after him. The money came from a government-held practice compensation fund set up in 1948, and his memory of a ministerial chance remark, made seven years earlier, secured the return of the money to the profession. The committee made him its only life member on his retirement. He was appointed CBE in 1974, and in 1975 the BMA awarded him its gold medal for distinguished merit. 
In 1971 Cameron had failed by one vote to get elected chairman of the BMA council. The defeat hit him hard, even though the result may have been in part because the previous chairman had been a general practitioner, and members wanted a consultant. Restored to health by 1976 he was elected to the chair of the BMA council in that year, serving until 1979, the year in which he was knighted for services to medicine. 
Cameron's three years as council chairman were not as memorable as his time with the general medical services committee. The NHS was, with difficulty, trying to cope with the consequences of reorganization, a lack of resources, and rising militancy among its staff, including senior and junior doctors. Cameron wanted fundamental change in the NHS to prevent its recurring crises. He did not, however, have the empathy with the diverse medical groupings on the council that he had enjoyed with his GP colleagues on the general medical services committee. In any case the medico-political issues were complex and messy, without the intense focus of the GP contract crisis. They were not susceptible to fundamental solutions, at least not under the existing Labour administration. In addition, the BMA secretariat, upon whom Cameron had relied heavily during the 1960s, was under strain, struggling to respond to BMA members' 'union' needs without damaging the association's professional role. Organizational reform was not the chairman's forte, and the intraprofessional stresses within the association taxed even his patience: late-night convivial socializing was no longer the effective problem-solver that it had been in the 1960s. Indeed, it was on occasions counterproductive. Even so, he presided over a reorientation of the BMA's activities that strengthened its regional services to individual members, a necessary response to the challenge of an NHS that had moved from being an administered service to a managed one. He was also active in promoting the interests of GPs in the European Community as a member of the advisory committee on medical training of the European Commission from 1976 to 1982. 
Medico-politically, Cameron's time as council chairman could best be described as a holding operation. But this in no way detracted from his pivotal contribution to the renaissance of general practice. Had that rescue operation failed it was probable that the NHS itself would have failed. Ironically, in his final speech to the BMA's annual meeting in June 1979, Cameron warned of the failing state of the NHS: 'It suffers from chronic underfinancing... an overblown administration... bad personnel management and... poor industrial relations.... So far none of these fundamental problems have been realistically tackled' ('BMJ', 1979/2, 1803). At the previous annual meeting he had declared his belief that 'if the care of the patient is to be paramount -- and that after all is what the NHS is about -- then the doctor's authority in all matters affecting the patient's welfare must be recognised and his clinical judgement accepted'. Aneurin Bevan had set out, Cameron said, 'to provide the facilities and the circumstances in which doctors could exercise their skills for the benefit of the patient. The basic concept has become corrupted' ('BMJ', 1978/2, 297). It was to be further corrupted during the remaining years of Cameron's life, when he observed the radical policies of successive Conservative governments converting patients into customers, with clinical priorities too often being subordinated to management and accounting objectives. Such a cultural change was anathema to him. 
Cameron retired from clinical practice in 1977. After his wife's death in 1986 he moved to a flat in Haven Green, Ealing. He died of leukaemia at the Royal Marsden Hospital, London, on 22 October 1991. He was cremated six days later and his ashes were interred in the family grave at Aberfeldy. Had this complex, friendly, caring man -- the archetypal family doctor -- survived the decade, he would surely have grieved to see his family doctors' charter crushed by the management mills of the NHS internal market. 


@@@@@


doc= 49601


Carr, William (1921-1991), historian, was born on 1 April 1921 in Workington, Cumberland, the only child of William Carr (1876-1933), a colliery cashier, and his wife, Eleanor Stewart (1880-1933). He was educated at Workington County Technical School. Bill (as he was known to his family and his many friends) was among the finest historians of Germany of his generation. His interest in Germany had been shaped by personal experience of war and subsequent service in the occupation forces. He had fought in France as part of the signals corps and the Royal Artillery before working from July 1945 as part of the team interrogating suspected Nazi war criminals. His deployment in the following months with the field security police at Husum in Schleswig stirred the interest in that region that was to culminate in his first book, 'Schleswig-Holstein 1815-1848: a Study in National Conflict' (1963). The book emanated from the thesis he had submitted for his PhD, awarded in 1955 at the University of Birmingham, where he had graduated with first-class honours in 1948; he had recommenced in 1947 the studies he had begun in 1939, which were interrupted in 1941 through service with the armed forces. 
In fact, Carr's interest in the Schleswig-Holstein question had already borne its first fruits in his undergraduate dissertation, which drew the particular commendation of his tutors. They commented that 'Mr. Carr possesses a distinct flair for research and is capable of going on to produce valuable and original work'. The remarks accompanied the successful application that Bill made in 1949 for an assistant lectureship at the University of Sheffield. With his new post, Bill began the career at Sheffield that would eventually lead to a personal chair in 1979, and commenced the loyalty to Sheffield University that lasted until his retirement. 
Bill was a popular and effective university teacher, and was in great demand as a speaker at other universities and to audiences of sixth-form pupils, not least because of his extensively used 'History of Germany, 1815-1945' (1969), which went into a fourth edition months after his death in 1991. Excellent teacher though he was, Bill insisted that the essence of the historian's work was in research and writing, and his own publications form the base of his lasting reputation as a historian. His main interests -- in issues of foreign policy and war -- found expression in a brief but incisive study of Nazi foreign policy, 'Arms, Autarky, and Aggression' (1970), an excellent account of the interwoven strategies of Germany, the USA, and Japan in 'Poland to Pearl Harbor' (1985), and 'The Origins of the Wars of German Unification' (1991). In tackling such major issues he looked at them afresh, with an independent and original mind. He was open to new approaches and flexible in interpretation. His clarity of thought owed much to the heavy dose of common sense that characterized all his work. His way was invariably to question the obvious or orthodox, to read sources 'against the grain', to reject any notion of outcomes predetermined by impersonal forces, while at the same time to emphasize the structural agencies which influenced individual actions in history. These qualities were especially well reflected in his 'Hitler: a Study in Personality and Politics' (1978), a work described as 'a remarkable synthesis' (J. Lukacs, 'The Hitler of History', 1998, 32). For all its brevity, it remains an outstanding analysis, less a biography than a blend of thematic reflections, full of originality and penetrating insight. 
Outside his scholarly career, Bill was actively engaged in public service in his adopted city of Sheffield. He was a member of the national health executive in Sheffield between 1966 and 1971, a member of the city's education committee from 1968 to the early 1980s, chairman of the governors of the city college of education from 1971 to 1976, and chairman of the finance and general purposes committee of Sheffield City Polytechnic from 1976 to 1989. In addition, he was a JP in Sheffield from 1969 until his death, and a member (subsequently vice-chairman and chairman) of the board of visitors at Wakefield prison from 1967 until 1991. He was also a committed trade unionist and a lifelong active supporter of the Labour Party: he served as chairman of the Hallam divisional Labour Party between 1959 and 1966. More surprising to those who did not know him well was that, following his conversion to Roman Catholicism at the age of seventeen, he continued to hold strong religious beliefs. 
Not least, Bill was a devoted family man. He had met Kathleen Mary (Kate) Williams (1926-2015), then a fellow student (subsequently a teacher), while at Birmingham University. They married on 28 December 1950, and their daughter Mary Louise was born two years later. Bill drew great strength from his family, and rejoiced in the birth of his granddaughter, Eleanor, in 1990. Bill and Kate, an inseparable couple, were generous hosts with an extensive circle of friends, arising in part from his public service and work for Sheffield Labour Party as well as from academic contacts in Britain, America, and Germany. Bill was a cultured man, with interests in art, music, literature, and foreign travel. He was a warm, kind person, full of good humour and good sense, sharp in intellect, generous in feelings, unstinting in support for younger colleagues, loyal in friendship. His northern working-class roots left a lasting mark on his personality and values, as well as on his approach to the past. When given a professorial room -- a 'Fuhrerzimmer', as he dubbed it -- in the history department at Sheffield, one of his first acts was to remove the picture of Charles I on the wall and replace it with a more ideologically conducive one of his political hero, Aneurin Bevan. He regarded a career in a university lecturing and writing on German history as a privilege and was wont to comment -- reminding himself of the privations of his parents' generation -- that, whatever its less appealing sides, it was certainly 'better than working'. 
Bill's growing distinction led inevitably to his promotion to a chair in Sheffield and offers to take up visiting professorships in the USA, which he accepted at Lincoln, Nebraska (1970), the University of Pennsylvania (1972), Salt Lake City, Utah (1983), and New Mexico (1986). He retired from his post at Sheffield University in 1986. Only days before he died Bill heard the news that he had been awarded, for services to German history, the Bundesverdienstkreuz by the president of the Federal Republic of Germany, a fitting tribute to a fine scholar. William Carr died of a coronary thrombosis on 20 June 1991 at his home, 39 Tapton Crescent Road, Sheffield, and was buried on 28 June in Sheffield. 


@@@@@


doc= 49602


Carstairs, George Morrison (1916-1991), psychiatrist, was born on 18 June 1916, the son of the Revd Dr George Carstairs, a distinguished, dedicated Church of Scotland missionary stationed in Mussooree, India, and his wife, Elizabeth Huntley Young. Son and father shared a passion for their adopted country, and from childhood onwards Morris (as the son was known) became fluent in both English and Hindi. Perhaps deliberately, he never lost that trace of Hindi which flavoured his soft Edinburgh English. 
At the age of ten Carstairs returned to his ancestral city, Edinburgh, to be schooled at George Watson College and, later, to study medicine at Edinburgh University, from which he graduated MB and ChB in 1941. His career thereafter was somewhat unusual. His upbringing in India had exposed him to the widespread suffering of the underprivileged, which had in turn engendered compassion for the underdog. He became acutely aware of the inadequacies of his traditional medical education: it had given him only the vaguest insight into the causes of, and even less on how to mitigate, the social problems that plagued his conscience. His ignorance prompted him to take a course in anthropology at Cambridge and later in New York, where he worked for a time with the world-famous anthropologist Margaret Mead. He was an apt student, and his early book 'The Twice Born' (1957), a study of the Brahmans, won praise from Mead herself. On 14 December 1950 Carstairs married Vera Dorris Lilian Hunt ('b'. 1924/5), an anthropologist, and he and his young wife began a study of an Indian village, Sujarupa, where they lived and shared the primitive life of the inhabitants. The study assumed marathon proportions and was completed only after twelve separate visits to India; it was finally published thirty-two years after it had begun, under the title 'The Death of a Witch' (1983). 
So launched, Carstairs was firmly committed to combining the profession of anthropology (with allied interests) with that of medicine and psychiatry. After graduating in medicine he worked as an assistant physician at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital, then from 1942 to 1946 served in the RAF as a medical officer. After demobilization he was elected a Commonwealth fellow to work in the USA from 1948 to 1949, then spent a further year there as a Rockefeller research fellow (1950-51). Having returned to the UK, he was appointed in 1953 a senior registrar at the Maudsley Hospital, London, the Mecca of British psychiatry. Here he worked under Professor Sir Aubrey Lewis. The relationship between master and pupil was not entirely harmonious, although each respected the other's talents. Nevertheless, Lewis, being aware of Carstairs's particular interest and expertise, gave him the opportunity to study a quite different disadvantaged population much nearer to home than India -- namely, those suffering chronic psychoses, in the main, chronic schizophrenia. 
In 1960 Carstairs was given his own Medical Research Council unit at University College, London, designated for the study of psychiatric epidemiology. In the following year, 1961, he was elected to the chair of psychological medicine (psychiatry) in the University of Edinburgh, with the proviso that he take his unit with him. This was agreed. 
Of all the many achievements Carstairs crammed into his life, the tenure of the chair in Edinburgh was without doubt his most successful. He collected around him distinguished colleagues, both academics and clinicians working in neighbouring National Health Service hospitals. With this spread of talents, Carstairs built his department into a centre of excellence for research and for teaching graduate and undergraduate students. But above all he continued to focus on his primary interest: the psychiatric concomitants of anthropology and sociology. 
To add to his insatiable appetite for hard work, Carstairs travelled widely, particularly in India, on behalf of the plans of the World Health Organization for the development of psychiatric facilities in under-developed countries. About the same time (1967-71) he presided over the World Mental Health Organization. At a different level he achieved fame, or infamy, as the result of his highly controversial Reith lectures of 1962, 'This island now', where he argued that chastity was not the supreme moral virtue. The views he put forward were, in certain quarters, deemed the more outrageous because they were held by the son of a distinguished Scots cleric. 
Carstairs's exemplary success in Edinburgh, coupled with his prominent role on the royal commission on medical education, prompted an invitation in 1973 to accept the vice-chancellorship of York University. He agreed; but what should have been a triumph turned out to be something akin to disaster. The time and place were wrong, and he missed the ambience of the medical school and the company of medical colleagues. Additionally, he found himself having to cope with the unpleasantness of the student protest movement, rampant at that time, and with the anti-authority atmosphere it created, which was incompatible with the role of the guru to which he had become accustomed. 
After five years Carstairs shed the trappings of a vice-chancellor and returned to what was to him by far the more congenial work in India, where he completed a major report for the World Health Organization together with an update of earlier psychiatric and anthropological studies. The final touches of this work were completed during a year as fellow of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington. Carstairs then returned to London and finally to his last resting place, Edinburgh. 
Carstairs was self-evidently a complex man, yet his personal tastes were simple, verging on the ascetic: he preferred the shabby but culturally rich International Centre in Delhi to the grandeur of the vice-chancellor's house in York. He was not, by the same token, an establishment man: in 1971 he declined the invitation to stand for election as president of the newly established Royal College of Psychiatrists, a post which he might well have won. A man of absolute integrity, Carstairs refused to be intimidated no matter what. For example, he must have known how much outrage the forthright opinions he expressed in his Reith lectures of 1962 would generate. Similarly, he knew full well that he was swimming against the tide when he fearlessly attacked R. D. Laing and his cohorts, the leaders of the zany anti-psychiatrists, when they were at the peak of their popularity in the 1970s. Towards the end of his life Carstairs, who was divorced from his first wife, contracted a brief second marriage to Nancy Shields Hardin. 
Carstairs was a great human being, an exemplary teacher, a born leader, and an outstanding doctor, all attributes that serve to highlight the tragedy of his decline into senile dementia. He died at his home, 12 Hermitage Gardens, Edinburgh, on 17 April 1991, supported to the end by his former wife, Vera, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49606


Clayton, Peter James (1927-1991), radio broadcaster and author, was born on 25 June 1927 in Burghill Road, Sydenham, London, the only son of Charles Augustus Clayton (1891-1961), a clerk with the Southern Railway, and his wife, Rachel Constance French (1894-1985), who was a canteen assistant. He inherited a love of railways -- and in later life was still keen to share his knowledge with fellow enthusiasts. He was educated at Haberdashers' Aske's School, at Hatcham, where he was a devoted pupil of headmaster E. H. Goddard, who summed up Clayton's early talents as 'a dangerous facility for putting utter rubbish into good English' (private information). After leaving school in 1945 he did three years of national service in the RAF, serving mainly in Iraq and Kuwait. After demobilization in 1948 he was employed for a short while as a catering assistant with a hydroelectric scheme in the Scottish highlands ('a porridge stirrer' was his description of the job), before joining the staff of Greenwich Public Library, where he remained for seven years. He married Janet Mason ('b'. 1932), also a librarian, on 6 September 1952 and they had one daughter, Jo Anne, who was born in 1962. They moved to Princes Risborough in 1955 while he worked for a brief spell at High Wycombe Public Library. 
Clayton had been brought up in a family where light and popular music were a shared pleasure, and his special interest in jazz began about 1942. The first professional move toward these prime areas of interest came in 1956 when he joined the publicity department of the Decca Record Company, which then had its headquarters in Brixton Road; he worked briefly in the cataloguing section before becoming assistant to Peter Gammond as creator and writer of popular and jazz record sleeves and other associated publicity publications. As an offshoot of these activities he and Gammond began a lifelong friendship and partnership that resulted in the publication of 'A Guide to Popular Music' (1960); 'Know about Jazz' (1963); '14 Miles on a Clear Night' (1966); '101 Things', a book of cartoons which reflected his considerable talent as a comic artist (1966); and later 'The Guinness A-Z of Jazz' (1986) and 'The Bluffer's Guide to Jazz' (1987). An intended partnership on 'The Oxford Companion to Popular Music' (1991) was sadly curtailed by his increasing ill health. 
Clayton left Decca in 1960 to work as a copy-writer with Green Shield and subsequently with an advertising agency, becoming a freelance journalist in 1963 or 1964. For a short time he edited the magazine of the National Jazz Federation, 'Jazz News', and he had the opportunity to broadcast. His natural talent for radio work was noted by producer Teddy Warwick, who started him off with some contributions to 'The Jazz Scene'. His comfortable voice and deceptively casual approach, backed up by deep knowledge and careful research, marked him as a disciple of the Alistair Cooke school of witty wisdom and well-disguised pedantry, and led to a variety of programmes that included 'Sounds of Jazz', 'Album Time', 'Round Midnight', and 'Jazz Parade'; most memorably, he was the regular presenter of 'Jazz Record Requests' on BBC Radio 3 from 1972. He was equally well known to overseas audiences through his broadcasts on BBC World Service programmes, and he was much in demand as a compere at jazz festivals. 
Clayton gradually widened his entertainment coverage both in broadcasting and as a regular columnist for the 'Sunday Telegraph' from 1964, which included a spell as a radio critic. From 1986 he contributed to the weekly magazine 'Review'. He continued to present 'Jazz Record Requests' until he became too ill to continue; nevertheless, he managed to make a brief final appearance when his old friend and colleague Charles Fox, who had stood in for him on the programme, died in May 1991. His last years were severely interrupted by illness. He was in King's College Hospital in 1988 and for a seven-week spell in 1990, when he became partly paralysed. He died, only a few weeks after making his last broadcast, in St Christopher's Hospice, Sydenham, on 10 August 1991, less than a mile from where he was born and had lived until he was evacuated to Oxted and Teignmouth during the war. He was cremated at Norwood crematorium, and was survived by his wife. 
Keith Stewart, who had been his BBC producer for many years, said that Peter Clayton was the finest broadcaster with whom he had ever worked. Radio was a medium to which he took naturally, his relaxed and persuasive way of drawing people out being based on a genuine personal interest in their talents and foibles. He had a great love of language and never descended to the common jargon of the popular music scene, and his voice had a rich quality underlined by calm and good humour. He was essentially a radio man and never as completely at ease on television. 
Clayton was of short stature and, beyond walking, not much inclined toward physical exercise, and his energetic mode of life, involving much travel all over the country and late nights in dusty studios (with too few chances of relaxing at his cottage retreat in Lyme Regis), and hasty snacks, all took a heavy toll on his health. He had hoped to retire to Lyme Regis in 1990 and had become involved in the town's activities, including compering concerts given by the town band. He wrote a privately printed booklet, 'Walks in Lyme Regis'. In spite of his tribulations in the last few years, he managed to maintain his good-humoured approach and was ever loyal to old friends and associates. One could regret, as he frequently did himself, that the fleeting medium of broadcasting took up so much of his time and talent, for he was an accomplished writer and artist and might have achieved an even more lasting monument in these fields if he could have found the time and opportunity. 


@@@@@


doc= 49610


Cohen, Ruth Louisa (1906-1991), economist and college head, was born on 10 November 1906 in Bushey Heath, Hertfordshire, the second child and elder daughter of the two daughters and three sons of Walter Samuel Cohen (1870-1960), barrister and financier, and his wife, Lucy Margaret, 'nee' Cobb (1877-1942). The family background combined the 'haute juiverie' of business with radical Unitarianism, free-thinking yet with a marked sense of public duty. After schooling with a governess and at Hayes Court in Kent, in 1926 Ruth Cohen followed her mother to Newnham College, Cambridge, to read for the economics tripos. Cambridge economics was at its most exciting and innovative and provided an atmosphere in which she thrived, being placed in the first class in part 2 in 1929 and winning an Adam Smith prize in 1930. In that year too she was awarded a Commonwealth fellowship and went off to spend two years in the United States, at Stanford and Cornell universities. On her return she became a research officer in the Agricultural Economics Research Institute in Oxford, where she remained until returning to Newnham as fellow and director of studies in economics in 1939. In 1930 she published 'Factors Affecting the Price and Production of Potatoes'; in 1933 'Milk Marketing Schemes and Policies'; in 1934, with K. A. H. Murray, 'The Planning of Britain's Food Imports'; in 1936 'The History of Milk Prices'; and in 1940 'The Economics of Agriculture'. 
War service almost immediately took Cohen away from Cambridge again and she served first in the Ministry of Food (1939-42) and then in the Board of Trade (1942-5). She returned to teaching and research in Cambridge in 1945 when she was appointed university lecturer in economics. In 1954 she was enormously gratified to be elected principal of Newnham College. She led the college until 1972, a term of eighteen years which she afterwards characterized as too long both for an institution and for an individual. It was, however, a period in which Newnham followed her lead in wholehearted engagement with the affairs of the university (full membership of which had only been granted to women in 1948) and of the wider world, making its own modest contribution to the post-Robbins expansion of higher education with a new building. 
In these decades Cohen served on the economics faculty board, on the university syndicates on education and on the relationship between the university and the colleges, as a university member of the county education committee, on the academic planning board for the new University of Essex, as a governor of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, as a lay member of the General Medical Council, and as chairman of the Ministry of Agriculture committee for the provincial agriculture advisory service. She was appointed CBE in 1969. 
Cohen approached administrative matters with the same immense energy, ruthless economy, grasp of detail, and directness, sometimes to the point of bluntness, with which she approached everything, including her beloved and beautiful garden. It made for brisk meetings and clear, if parsimonious, outcomes. She did not suffer fools gladly; but she took a broad and generous interest in all her students and her colleagues, often knowing and understanding far more about them than they realized. Her clarity of vision and unswerving sense of principle supported many of them in difficult and delicate situations. 
External commitments, and the detailed grip on college affairs and finances which Cohen maintained, precluded much new research in these years, though in 1953 she had surveyed farm price controls in western Europe and in 1958 she published 'Effects of Mergers' with P. L. Cook. However, she continued to keep abreast of new work, to teach, and to advise in her specialist field of agricultural economics. Her brother Sir Andrew Cohen's term as governor of Uganda (1952-7) fostered a considerable interest in and knowledge of east African affairs. 
On retirement from the principalship in 1972 Cohen characteristically took herself off to France for six months, to give her successor a clear run and to learn to cook. Then with gusto she embarked on a new career as a Cambridge city councillor, holding Newnham ward for the Labour Party from 1973 to 1987. She tackled council business and fought for her constituents with the same attention to detail, economy, and pugnacity with which she had led her college, visiting the site of every planning application and proving a very tough and effective chairman of the finance committee when Labour took control of the council in 1980. 
Peripheral neuropathy increasingly limited her mobility in her last years. With clear-eyed practicality she sold her house, found a ground-floor flat, and learned to use a Batricar. Instead of leading the canvassing on foot she organized it from her sitting room for everyone else. Cohen died suddenly, but peacefully, at her home, 2 Croft Lodge, Barton Road, Cambridge, on 27 July 1991, watching the test match on television, just as the progress of her illness was beginning to threaten her cherished independence. She never married. Her body was cremated at Cambridge crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 49613


Cork, Sir Kenneth Russell (1913-1991), accountant, was born on 21 August 1913 in Finchley, Middlesex, the youngest of the three sons of William Henry Cork (1885-1940), chartered accountant, and his wife, Maud Alice, 'nee' Nunn. After leaving Berkhamsted School in 1930, he joined his father's City accountancy firm, W. H. Cork & Co., which specialized in bankruptcy, and qualified as a chartered accountant in 1937, in which year, on 12 June, he married Nina ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of Ernest Alfred Oswald Theodore Lippold, furniture manufacturer. They had one son (Sir Roger Cork, lord mayor of London in 1996-7), and one daughter. In 1937 W. H. Cork, Gully & Co. was formed, to do audit work for W. H. Cork & Co., and Kenneth Cork became a partner, with H. J. Gully, in this new firm. He enlisted in the Honourable Artillery Company in 1938, and spent the war in north Africa and Italy, reaching the rank of lieutenant-colonel, in charge of all the catering services at allied forces headquarters and the Army Catering Corps in Italy in 1944. 
His father and H. J. Gully had died during the war, and Cork became senior partner in W. J. Cork Gully in 1947. He began to take on insolvency work, and soon moved from audit and accountancy work to specialize in receivership. By the 1970s, W. J. Cork Gully was the largest insolvency practice in Britain, and 'the mere mention of Cork's name struck terror into the hearts of businesses everywhere' (Levin, 233). Cork felt this was unfair, as his philosophy was that receivership did not necessarily lead to failure, and he preferred to try to save an insolvent business and sell it as a going concern, rather than to put it into liquidation, which would mean closing it down and disposing of its assets, as was the usual practice. For example, when Brentford Nylons went bankrupt in 1976, Cork managed to keep the factory going, and sold it to Lonrho, saving 3000 jobs. W. J. Cork Gully was called in to investigate and deal with most of the major bankruptcies of the 1960s and 1970s, including that of Rolls Razor, which made cheap washing machines for John Bloom, and crashed with a $4 million deficit in 1965, and that of Emil Savundra's Fire, Auto, and Marine Insurance Company, which left 400,000 British motorists without cover, in 1966. This investigation took eleven years, before the firm was able to rescue $1 million for the creditors. Another major case was that of the Stern Group, dealing in residential property, which collapsed in 1974 with debts of over $170 million. In 1980 a new firm, Cork Gully, was formed in a merger with the insolvency department of Coopers and Lybrand, with Cork as senior partner, and it became a division of Coopers and Lybrand. One of the first cases taken on by the new firm was that of the DeLorean Motor Company, which had built a factory in Belfast to manufacture sports cars for sale in America, financed by the British government. When the government called in Coopers and Lybrand to review the desirability of continued support, Cork headed the investigation, and as a result of his report the government put the Belfast factory into receivership. 
Cork played an important part in the government of the City of London. He was elected to the common council in 1951 for Billingsgate ward, and as chairman of the music committee in 1957 he was responsible for planning the Barbican Arts Centre. In 1970 he was elected alderman by Tower ward, and he served as lord mayor of London from 1978 to 1979. He was also a member of the Wilson committee set up by the government in 1977 to review the country's financial institutions, and in the same year he became chairman of the insolvency law reform committee, to investigate insolvency law in the United Kingdom. The committee decided to write a new law, rather than to try to amend the existing law, with the object of making it easier for an insolvent business to be sold as a going concern, which would preserve jobs, and would also be in the best interests of the creditors. The principle behind the Cork report, published in 1982, was that a business is a national asset, and all insolvency schemes must be aimed at saving a business. In drafting the 1985 'Insolvency Act', the government did not accept the report in its entirety, but picked bits out of it, including the idea of appointing an administrator to try to save businesses threatened with bankruptcy. In his foreword to the 1991 edition of 'A Practitioner's Guide to Corporate Insolvency and Corporate Rescues', Cork wrote: 'a good insolvency practitioner is coming to be regarded not simply as the undertaker to a business which has failed, but as a source of advice to struggling businesses which hope to avoid collapse'. That this was the case was to a large extent a result of his example. 
Cork retired from Cork Gully in 1983, and although he continued to take an interest in insolvency -- he published the 'European Insolvency Practitioners' Handbook' in 1984 -- he became interested in venture capital and the creation of new businesses (rather than his previous work of rescuing old ones), and was chairman of Advent Eurofund (1983-91), Advent Capital (1985-91), and Advent Management (1988-91). He also helped to set up the youth enterprise scheme, to lend venture capital to young people. 
Always interested in the arts -- he was chairman of the Royal Shakespeare Company from 1975 to 1985, and it was he who persuaded the Royal Shakespeare Company to make the Barbican its London home -- Cork was vice-chairman of the Arts Council from 1986 to 1987, and chaired the Arts Council inquiry into theatre in England, which produced its report, 'Theatre is for All' (known as the Cork report) in 1986. An expert in finance for the arts, in this report he argued the case for public investment in the arts. 
Cork was a devout member of the Church of England, who liked to listen to the 'Bible' on his journey into the City, and he preached at St Paul's Cathedral during his year as lord mayor. He loved sailing, and always said he would have preferred to skipper a rum-runner in the south seas to joining the family firm. Appointed GBE in 1978, he was the first accountant to have his portrait hung in the National Portrait Gallery, a few days before his death on 13 October 1991, in the London Clinic. He was cremated at Chilterns crematorium, Amersham, on 21 October, following a funeral at the church of Sts Peter and Paul, Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 49616


Baring, (George) Rowland Stanley, third earl of Cromer (1918-1991), banker and diplomatist, was born on 28 July 1918, the only son and youngest of three children of Rowland Thomas Baring, second earl of Cromer (1877-1953), courtier, and his wife, Lady Ruby Florence Mary (1886-1961), second daughter of Gilbert John Elliot-Murray-Kynynmound, fourth earl of Minto, viceroy of India. He was known by the courtesy title of Viscount Errington (his grandfather the first earl having died the year before his birth) until succeeding as third earl in 1953. He was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, which he left after a year. His father was lord chamberlain (1922-38) and all his life he moved in court circles; he acted as page of honour to George V (who was his godfather) from 1931 to 1935, and to Queen Mary at the coronation in 1937. On 10 January 1942 he married the Hon. Esme Mary Gabriel Harmsworth ('b'. 1922), younger daughter of Esmond Cecil Harmsworth, second Viscount Rothermere. They had a daughter, Lana Mary Gabriel ('b'. 1943), and two sons, Evelyn Rowland Esmond ('b'. 1946) and Vivian John Rowland ('b'. 1950). Lady Cromer was later a lady-in-waiting and from 1967 lady of the bedchamber to Queen Elizabeth II. 
After Cambridge, Errington acted as private secretary to the marquess of Willingdon, former proconsul, during his official goodwill visit to South America in 1938, and then, in October 1938, joined his family's merchant bank of Baring Brothers as a clerk. His career was cut short by the outbreak of war. He joined the Grenadier Guards in 1939 and (after accompanying the marquess of Willingdon to New Zealand in 1940) saw active service in north-west Europe. He was appointed MBE in 1945, and demobilized as a lieutenant-colonel in 1946. 
Errington rejoined Barings in 1946 and for a year he worked in New York with Kidder Peabody and J. P. Morgan, among others. On his return in 1948 he was appointed a partner. He joined a partnership with several long-serving members, and for many years played a comparatively junior role in the firm's affairs. Nevertheless he took up directorships of public companies such as Royal Insurance and Daily Mail and General Trust, the latter being the family business of his father-in-law, Lord Rothermere. On succeeding as earl of Cromer, he found diversion in the House of Lords. He spoke on subjects ranging from the technical (no par value shares) to the general (the Suez crisis, when dressed in the full uniform of a lieutenant-colonel of the Grenadier Guards). In 1954 he joined a parliamentary delegation to Brazil. The connections he developed doubtless assisted his appointment (at the request of Sir Roger Makins, the British ambassador) in 1959 as economic minister and head of treasury and supply delegation at the British embassy in Washington, which he combined with the UK executive directorships of, among others, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 
In 1961 Harold Macmillan, who found Cromer 'very intelligent. He agrees with me' (H. Macmillan, 'At the End of the Day', 1973, 381), appointed him governor of the Bank of England, although Cromer was not Macmillan's first choice, Sir Oliver Franks having already declined the post. At forty-two, Cromer was the youngest governor since the eighteenth century. While a traditionalist, he was also a modernizer at a time when modernization was much needed by the City and the bank. He breathed new life into the bank, then at a low ebb following the Parker tribunal and the findings of the Radcliffe committee, by recruiting a generation of young and able managers. More generally, he helped to steer the City towards a dominating role in the emerging and immensely important Euro markets. A staunch defender of financial good order, his relationship with both Conservative and Labour governments was frequently difficult, as he pressed courageously for policies of economic probity to ensure low inflation and a sound currency. Macmillan and his chancellor, Selwyn Lloyd, came to find Cromer's warnings an irritant. Cromer's relations with prime minister Harold Wilson were more difficult still; they encountered bruising confrontation. 
The Labour government elected in October 1964 aimed to carry through an ambitious programme of social welfare, but its inability to adapt this to the reality of what could be afforded led to a run on sterling in November. A 2 per cent rise in the interest rate failed to re-establish confidence, and the reserves were draining away. At the height of the crisis, Cromer demanded expenditure controls and the abandonment of Labour policies in order to restore confidence in sterling and head off a major international financial crisis. A defiant Wilson told him that the solution lay in the hands of the world's central banks and sent him off to raise from them $3 billion in credits. Cromer achieved this in a few hours of hectic telephoning, although he had anticipated the need and had already prepared his ground. Confidence was restored for the time being, which the next day enabled Wilson to rebut tory overtures for a national coalition government. While this credit-raising exercise won Cromer Wilson's admiration, in 1965 their relations grew worse as a succession of economic crises followed. Wilson's response to Cromer's continued pleas for moderation in expenditure was influenced by his belief that the governor was motivated in part by political considerations. On the eve of the 1966 general election, when Wilson sought to strengthen his precarious majority, he rejected an unpopular interest-rate rise proposed by Cromer to head off another crisis. Cromer warned him that the bank had a statutory right to act independently and, if overruled, it would say so publicly. 'In that case', the prime minister said, 'the history of the Bank of England, which had begun with Governor Houblon, would end with Governor Cromer' ('The Times', 1 Jan 1997). It was hardly surprising that later in 1966 neither Cromer nor the chancellor wished for the governor's tenure of office to be renewed for a further five years. Cromer had continuously undermined his cause by public utterances and by an ability to antagonize the politicians; this underlined his attachment to a passing world of less politicized relationships. Labour leaders were later to establish easier relations with Cromer's successors, Leslie O'Brien and Gordon Richardson, and said so publicly. 
In 1966 Cromer returned to Barings, where he was now senior partner both in terms of years of service and in his partnership share. But, devoted as he was to his family's bank, the somewhat humdrum existence it now offered him was an anticlimax, and at times he was out of step with its understated style. Outside Barings he sat as chairman of a committee of inquiry into the working of Lloyd's of London; had its report, which went unpublished for seventeen years, been acted on more fully, many of the market's later excesses might have been avoided. He became chairman of IBM (UK) Ltd and a director of Union Carbide Corporation of the USA, and joined a Board of Trade inquiry into export business generated by capital projects overseas. His implied criticism of Wilson's government continued. His public utterances -- not least on the authoritative television programme 'Panorama' on the eve of the June 1970 election, when he referred to the existence of 'a very much more difficult financial situation than the new government found in 1964' -- were seized upon by the tories. It is reckoned these comments were a significant factor in tipping the scales in their favour. 
Edward Heath, who knew Cromer well, rewarded him with the appointment from January 1971 as ambassador in Washington. Relations between the Heath government and President Nixon and his secretary of state, Henry Kissinger, were not close, but it is considered that Cromer did well in difficult circumstances. These were the years of British entry into the Common Market, and here Cromer's financial background well qualified him to explain Britain's position to the Americans. It was also the time of the Yom Kippur War, for which British support was tepid, and, not least, of Watergate. 
On his return to London in March 1974 Cromer was still a comparatively young man, and he considered resuming his position at Barings; however, another generation of partners was now firmly in place and had embarked upon a process of overdue modernization. Instead Cromer became special adviser to the firm and resumed or took up afresh directorships of leading companies, including Shell Transport and Trading Company Ltd, IBM (UK) Ltd, P. & O. Steam Navigation Company, Imperial Group, and Compagnie Financiere de Suez. He was made a privy councillor in 1966 and received numerous honours including appointment as GCMG in 1974 and KG in 1977. In 1980 he retired to Jersey but he returned to live in London in 1990. He died in London on 16 March 1991. He was survived by his wife and two sons (the elder of whom succeeded him as fourth earl of Cromer), his daughter having predeceased him in 1974. A memorial service was held at the Guards' Chapel, Wellington Barracks, London, on 16 May 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49617


Cumming, Barbara Theresa (1909-1991), nun, printer, and musician, was born on 15 December 1909 at 61 Thurleigh Road, Battersea, the third daughter of Frederick Mann Cumming (1869-1931), a civil engineer's assistant, and his wife, Emma Georgiana Love (1868-1935). Barbara was effectively an only child, as both her sisters died before she was born. She was educated at the county secondary school, Clapham (1920-27) and at the Royal Academy of Music (1927-31). A prize-winning student who gained diplomas and teaching qualifications in piano and elocution, she was appointed sub-professor for piano at the academy in September 1932. She relinquished this post in January 1933, on becoming resident music mistress at the Collegiate School for Girls, Wentworth, Bournemouth, a position that she retained until 1941. 
Barbara Cumming first came into contact with the Oxford Group (later Moral Re-Armament) about 1930, and by 1932 was a fully committed member. She fell in love with another member but the leader of the group refused them permission to marry. Her first professional engagement as a pianist was in London, at the Wigmore Hall in April 1939. Beethoven and Brahms were her great loves, and she became well-known as a player of Brahms. In 1940 her school was evacuated to Llangollen; a Christmas spent at Le Bon Sauveur Convent, Holyhead, led to her conversion to Roman Catholicism. She entered Stanbrook Abbey, near Worcester, an enclosed community of Benedictine nuns, on 18 December 1941, at the age of thirty-two, and remained there until her death. She was named Hildelith after the second abbess of Barking. 
Dame Hildelith became a full member of the community on 15 August 1946. Many of her monastic duties drew on her musical abilities. She was assistant organist from 1943 to 1979, and director of the choir and director of music from 1969 to 1982. She was cellarer from 1951 to 1955, with responsibility for the business side of the abbey and its properties, at a time of financial crisis for the community. To raise money she recommended the closure of the printing press, founded in 1876. Instead the abbess, Dame Elizabeth Sumner, appointed her printer, in November 1955, a post that she held with great distinction for thirty-five years. 
The Stanbrook Abbey Press under Dame Hildelith quickly became one of the leading private presses, renowned for the quality of its book design and press work. She initially sought advice from printers and typographers, notably Jan van Krimpen, whose types were used in the majority of fine books from 1958 onwards. The combination of handmade papers and distinguished types, with the calligraphy and decorations of Margaret Adams, characterized much of Stanbrook's output. The press produced some eighty titles between 1956 and 1988, including Siegfried Sassoon's 'The Path to Peace' (1960), the 'Rituale abbatum' (1963), and Russell Flint's 'The Lisping Goddess' (1968). Dame Hildelith herself wrote 'The Stanbrook Abbey Press: Ninety-Two Years of its History', which was published in 1970. 
Dame Hildelith made a significant contribution musically at a time of transition to the vernacular liturgy. She was a founder member of the Panel of Monastic Musicians and edited several books, notably 'The Stanbrook Abbey Hymnal' (1974). Appointed an associate of the Royal Academy of Music in 1984, she influenced the establishment of its pioneering postgraduate course in church music studies. It was her friendship with the musicologist, writer, and broadcaster Alec Robertson that led her to set up a memorial fund that provided a church-music scholarship at the Royal Academy of Music in 1988. She unified the apparently divergent worlds of typography and music: 'There is a strange affinity in their respective spheres between plainsong and typography, so that the deep study of one may enrich the understanding of the other' (Cumming, 'Stanbrook Abbey Press', 145-6). To her, typography was 'silent song'. 
Dame Hildelith was a warm-hearted and generous person who made time for people and their requests; her enthusiasm and good humour are apparent in the spirit of joy that infused her work. Her gift for friendship brought her a wide range of contacts outside the community. She suffered a heart attack in 1982, and deteriorating health made large-scale printing projects impossible for the last eight years of her life. She died in Evesham Community Hospital on 19 April 1991, and was buried at Stanbrook on 23 April. She was a fine musician and a first-rate private press printer, but these achievements were expressions of her Benedictine vocation, to which she devoted the major part of her life. 


@@@@@


doc= 49620


Davis, Ralph Henry Carless (1918-1991), historian, was born at 11 Fyfield Road, Oxford, on 7 October 1918, the third and youngest son of Henry William Carless Davis (1874-1928) and his wife, Jennie Rosa, daughter of Walter Lindup of Bampton Grange, Oxfordshire. His father was regius professor of history in the University of Oxford and a fellow of Balliol College. Ralph's older brothers, Patrick (1914-1996), later a city solicitor, and Godfrey Rupert Carless (1917-1997), secretary of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, both attended the Dragon School, Oxford, and Highgate School, but on his father's sudden death in 1928 Ralph was transferred from the Dragon to the Quaker school at Leighton Park, Reading. He matriculated from Balliol in 1937 to read history; his tutors were R. W. Southern and Denys Hay. 
There was an unconformable quality in Ralph Davis which his education had at least done nothing to quell. Under the threat of the Second World War, and despite a visit to Germany in 1939, he refused to register for military service, and after appearing before a tribunal he chose to join a Friends' Ambulance Unit. He served in Finland and was briefly interned in Sweden before being posted to the Middle East, where he moved with the Hadfield-Spears mobile hospital from Lebanon through the western desert to Tunisia, Italy, and southern France. A stay in Cairo enabled him to add 'The Mosques of Cairo' (1944) to his publications, which had begun with an undergraduate paper on masons' marks in the Oxfordshire Archaeological Society's 'Journal' for 1938. He was demobilized in 1945 and returned to Balliol with the Croix de Guerre to set beside (though he never chose to do so) his brother Patrick's mention in dispatches. He graduated BA with first-class honours in modern history in 1947, and was appointed to an assistant mastership at Christ's Hospital, Horsham. In 1948 he was offered an assistant lectureship at University College, London (UCL), by Sir John Neale. At UCL he met and in 1949 married Eleanor Megaw, who had been tutor to women students since 1946, when she left the Women's Royal Naval Service. Their two sons were born in 1952 and 1955. 
The essential elements of Davis's career were now in place. He stayed at UCL until 1956 when he was elected to a fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, and in those years he had revealed a wide range of talents. Neale's expectation that every member of his department would devote two and a half days each week to research, both in term and in vacation, was not burdensome to him. At the same time, however, he was delivering first-year lectures to a mixed and enthusiastic audience of students of both science and the humanities, which issued in a beguilingly popular text book, 'A History of Medieval Europe from Constantine to Saint Louis' (1957). He also instituted and maintained an introductory week at Cumberland Lodge -- a connection which he owed to a friend of Eleanor's -- for history freshmen, who could then meet not only other members of a large and vigorous department, but speakers from elsewhere. From 1956 onwards he pursued similar policies at Merton. As tutor for admissions he established visiting fellowships for schoolteachers and had the satisfaction of seeing the college rise to the top of the Norrington Table, a prize for which he would not have striven but which it was gratifying to receive. In 1970, however, following the retirement of H. A. Cronne, the University of Birmingham appointed Davis to its chair of medieval history and he retired from Oxford, congenial to him in respect of his family's tradition, to the familiar challenge of a great civic university. 
Since Davis's later years at UCL his interests had turned from the social structure of medieval Suffolk -- studies in the rich archives of St Edmund's Abbey to which V. H. Galbraith had originally drawn his attention -- to the broader issues examined in 'King Stephen, 1135-1154' (1967) and in the critical work on a variety of historical sources, notably charters and chronicles, which followed it. Most of those works rested on his collaboration with H. A. Cronne upon the third volume of the 'Regesta regum Anglo-Normannorum'. The 'Regesta' had been launched by H. W. C. Davis, Ralph's father, in 1914, when it fell foul of J. H. Round, a scholar of morbid sensitivity who consistently looked for faults in the work of others. The second volume, containing the writs and charters of Henry I, appeared in 1956, edited by Charles Johnson in collaboration with Cronne. 
Cronne then proceeded to a third volume, joined by Ralph Davis, to whom an increasing proportion of the work fell as Cronne resisted and triumphed over a malignant disease. There was much of filial piety in Davis's approach to Stephen's reign, and his preliminary work led to an assault on J. H. Round's conclusions on the nature of Stephen's relations with the baronage, and in particular with Geoffrey de Mandeville. In the event, controversy over the dating of Stephen's and Matilda's charters to Geoffrey continued for the rest of Davis's life, ending with a long-drawn-out sequence of articles and notes in the 'English Historical Review' initiated by John Prestwich. The exchanges were ultimately inconclusive, but Ralph's arguments were always cogent. The third volume of the 'Regesta' was followed in 1969 by a fourth, with facsimiles. The completed work surpassed H. W. C. Davis's original intentions, with full texts, not only of Stephen's writs and charters, but also those of Matilda and the young Henry of Anjou, all edited to a high standard. 
Ralph Davis's own talents lay less in the minutiae of charter dating than in the imaginative reconstruction of society and the lives of individuals which can now be reached only through such formal documents. His identification of Robert of Lewes as the author of the 'Gesta Stephani', perhaps the most significant by-product of his work on the 'Regesta', is a notable example of his skills in research and his serendipitous gift in noting connections. A different, wider-ranging example can be found in 'The Normans and their Myth' (1976). 
Davis's years in Birmingham from 1970 to his retirement in 1984 gave full play to his abilities in enthusing colleagues and defining common goals. As it happened, the interval between Cronne's retirement in 1968 and Ralph Davis's arrival eighteen months later was a time of disruption and general unease in all universities, but he was not given to finding or making difficulties, and he achieved as much in excitable as others might in more tranquil times. He reorganized undergraduate teaching on the lines with which he had first experimented in UCL, with fortnightly tutorials and seminars. As at UCL, and supported at all turns by his wife, he took every occasion to emphasize the identity and interests of his colleagues and their students. He made no attempt, beyond the adequately formidable business of defining such interests, to create common studies, but he promoted the west midlands as a field of research, and brought colleagues from other universities with an interest in medieval history into annual meetings to dine and discuss general or particular themes in a congenial atmosphere. He continued to edit 'History', which he had taken up in 1968, and was elected president of the Historical Association in 1981. He was elected fellow of the British Academy in 1975 and remained closely involved in the academy's work until his death. 
Much as they had enjoyed their time in Birmingham, the Davises returned to Oxford on Ralph's retirement in 1984. There he spent seven productive years in studying the Normans, medieval warfare -- discussed felicitously in 'The Medieval War-Horse' (1989) -- and the promotion of history as a field of study in schools and universities. He also sought ways of diminishing common strife in Northern Ireland, where Eleanor's family ties with both the Unionist and the home rule camps gave him an insight. He died in Oxford on 12 March 1991, after a sudden illness, and was buried on 17 March. The width of his interests and the warmth with which the whole community of his colleagues regarded him were attested at his funeral and at a memorial service at Merton College in July 1991. He had a rare ability to convey the intensity of his own vision of the past, by a combination of documentary evidence and the physical remains, on the one hand in Cairo and the Krak des Chevaliers, and on the other in the signs and marks of medieval masons in the Cotswolds, and his hearers were always enjoyably aware of and partakers in the zest with which he both pursued and presented his perceptions. 


@@@@@


doc= 49623


Leon, Jack de (1902-1956), theatre manager and impresario, was born on 12 August 1902 at Colon, Panama, the second of eight children of Michael de Leon (1868-1914), merchant, and his wife, May Miriam Maduro (1881-1964). His love of drama developed from when he operated a puppet theatre as a child. In 1911 the family moved to London where he was educated at University College School, Hampstead. After brief forays into the import trade and publishing, he was articled to the legal practice of Indermaur and Brown in London in 1923. On 30 August 1921, at the St John's Wood synagogue, he married Beatrice Lewisohn ['see below'], an actress and founder of a drama school. 
In 1924, encouraged by Beatie's mother and with financial help from his elder sister, Delia ['see below'], de Leon leased the Prince's Hall, Kew Bridge, Brentford, Middlesex, which had formerly served as a dance hall, a skating rink, and a cinema. It opened as the Q Theatre on 26 December 1924 with 'The Young Person in Pink', a comedy by Gertrude Jennings, and with Milton Rosmer as the production manager. Beatie was in the cast, making her professional debut. Although their first production had already achieved success in London's West End, the de Leons' intention was to specialize in wholly new plays in the hope that after a week-long trial at the Q, they would be taken up by West End managers. The policy proved sufficiently successful for the theatre critic James Agate to write: 'Clever Mr Jack de Leon that what you think today... the West End managers often think tomorrow' ('Sunday Times', 25 July 1926, 6). By now de Leon had surrendered his solicitor's articles. His own first play, 'The Man at Six', written under the name of Noel Doon and in collaboration with Steve Donohue, was produced at the Q on 16 January 1928. 
Criticism of the contractual arrangements with new writers and a series of practical problems led the de Leons to relinquish management of the Q in March 1929. Their association was renewed two years later when Beatie reopened the theatre for a season of plays performed by students from her drama school. 
Although he remained closely involved with the Q, de Leon's own future was expanding as a playwright and impresario associated increasingly with productions, including revues, in the West End and on provincial tour, and writing a number of film scripts. He also became an expert in stage lighting; his light cues were included in the publication of his version of Goethe's 'Faust' which he produced at the Q in April 1948. 'The Man at Six' was produced at the Queen's Theatre at Easter 1929. For a few months in 1929 he leased the newly built Duchess Theatre. In April 1930 'The Silent Witness', written again by de Leon and Donohue, opened at the Comedy Theatre. De Leon was involved with the production of Noel Scott's 'Traffic' at the Lyceum Theatre in July 1930 and with 'Rocklitz' by Marjorie Bowen at the Duke of York's Theatre in February 1931. 
Gradually the Q became re-established on a fully professional basis, but now with Beatie in overall charge, and reverted to including in its programme new plays, many of which transferred to the West End. Among these in 1933 was de Leon's most ambitious and untypical play, 'Francis Thompson', based on the life of the poet. It was said to have 'several scenes which catch at one's throat' but to 'emphasise too much the prostitute element' ('The Stage', 9 March 1933, 12). 
In the next twenty years the Q was a training ground for actors, producers, stage managers, and technicians. Among those whose careers began or were nurtured there were Richard Attenborough, Dirk Bogarde, Phyllis Calvert, Joan Collins, Joan Hickson, Vivien Leigh, Margaret Lockwood, James Mason, and Michael Wilding, and the director Peter Brook. Between 1938 and 1940 the de Leons ran the Embassy Theatre, Swiss Cottage, London, alongside the Q. In 1943 and 1944 de Leon put on summer seasons at the Savoy Theatre, Kettering. 
De Leon's role as impresario created such West End successes as 'See How They Run' at the Comedy Theatre in 1945, 'The Giaconda Smile' at the New Theatre in 1948, 'To Dorothy a Son' at the Savoy Theatre in 1950, and 'And So to Bed' at the New Theatre in 1951. His last West End production was 'The Count of Clerambard' at the Garrick Theatre in 1955. Competition from television and, more immediately, a leaking roof and insufficient financial support from the Arts Council and the local authority, led to the closure of the Q on 19 February 1956. De Leon died from a heart attack on 21 September 1956 at his mother's home, 254 Kew Road, Kew, Surrey, and was cremated at Golders Green on 23 September. 
De Leon was tall and elegant with a shock of black, later grey, wavy hair. He always dressed in dark suits or a black jacket, waistcoat, and striped trousers. 'He was a barrister manque... [with] that sort of investigative mind, a natural feel for the dramatic and an arresting voice' (Barrow, 67). 
His wife and co-founder of the Q Theatre, Beatrice Augusta de Leon (1900-1991), was born on 22 November 1900 at 26 Darnley Road, Hackney, London, the ninth child of Bernhard Lewisohn (1850-1906), boot manufacturer, and his wife, Lydia Moses (1865-1939). As a child she was taught by her widowed mother to recite and was often taken to the local theatre in Dalston and to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, London. She was educated in London at Lady Hollis's School, Skinners' School, and Northfield high school. At thirteen she left to learn shorthand and typing and she worked until 1916 in clerical positions before she followed an older brother, Victor, to train at Herbert Beerbohm Tree's Academy of Dramatic Art (later the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art). With Delia de Leon she founded the London Academy of Dramatic Art in 1923. 
Beatie de Leon acted occasionally at the Q but suffered from chronic stage fright and was far happier training others or in management. After the closure of the Q and de Leon's death she and the couple's only child, Jean, ran the De Leon Drama School in association with Richmond Adult College for some thirty years. She retired in 1984. Subsequently she became an 'angel', investing in West End shows including the musical 'Oliver'. She was warm-hearted and had immense courage and drive. Dirk Bogarde compared her to a bright-eyed wren or robin, 'eager, alert, determined... [and] amazingly unsentimental' (Barrow, xv). She died of cancer on 16 February 1991 at the home she shared with her sister-in-law Delia, King's Lodge, Kew Green, Kew, Surrey, and was cremated at Golders Green on 19 February. 
Jack de Leon's sister Delia de Leon (1901-1993), actress, was born at Colon, Panama, on 10 February 1901. In 1909 she was sent to Jamaica to be educated at a school run by English women. She moved to London with her family in 1911. She had two ambitions: 'to be an actress and... to come to an understanding of God' (Barrow, 78). She appeared in a number of productions at the Q between 1925 and 1935, initially under the name of Delia Delvina, and was in 'The Children of the Moon' when it transferred from the Q to the Royalty Theatre, London, in October 1926. She became a disciple of the Indian avatar, Meher Baba (1894-1969), in the 1930s. She was both generous and impractical. Pete Townsend wrote of the 'passion, constancy, meticulousness, and enormous anxiety' which combined in an 'endearing eccentricity' (de Leon, xiv). She never married. Her autobiography, 'The Ocean of Love', was published in 1991. She died on 21 January 1993 at Abbeyfield, 4 Ennerdale Road, Kew, and was cremated at Mortlake on 31 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 49624


Sidney, William Philip, first Viscount de L'Isle (1909-1991), army officer and politician, was born on 23 May 1909 in Chelsea, London, the only son of William Sidney, fifth Baron de L'Isle and Dudley (1859-1945), barrister and politician, and his wife, Winifred Agneta Yorke, 'nee' Bevan (died 1959), elder daughter of Roland Yorke Bevan. He had an older sister, Mary Olivia (1906-1959). His father, the fourth son of the second Baron de L'Isle, was mayor of Chelsea in 1906-8, and a Conservative member of the London county council from 1922 to 1934; he acceded only briefly to the barony, two months before his death. 
Bill Sidney was educated at Eton College and at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he devoted himself more to sports and the Officers' Training Corps than to academia. In 1929, from Cambridge, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the supplementary reserve of the Grenadier Guards. During the next nine years he worked hard in the City of London where, in gaining valuable business experience, he qualified as a chartered accountant. At the same time he helped his father to nurse his extensive estates at Penshurst Place near Tonbridge, Kent, and at Inglesby Manor, Great Ayton, Yorkshire. In the process he became an enthusiastic countryman. 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, Sidney, by now a captain, joined his regiment and served with the British expeditionary force in France until, in May 1940, he returned home from the beaches of Dunkirk with his commanding officer, General Sir Harold Alexander; he was among the last to leave under heavy German air attack. Back in London, he married on 8 June 1940 Jacqueline Corinne Yvonne Vereker (1914-1962), the only daughter of John Standish Surtees Prendergast Vereker, sixth Viscount Gort VC, who had been his commander-in-chief throughout the battle of France. They had four daughters and a son. 
After various postings and intensive commando training in England, Sidney was promoted major and served in north Africa. On 22 January 1944, as a company commander with the 5th battalion, Grenadier Guards, he landed on the Anzio beachhead in Italy with the British Sixth Army corps, led again by General Alexander. At first almost unopposed, the British force was rapidly challenged by greatly superior German numbers, strongly supported by the 'Luftwaffe'. In fierce fighting at Carrocento throughout the night of 7-8 February 1944, Sidney, in command of a support company of a battalion of the Grenadier Guards, led a counter-attack with hand grenades at the head of the crew of a 3 inch mortar. His citation for the Victoria Cross read: 'Dashing forward with superb courage and utter disregard for danger he was wounded in the face by a German grenade which killed the grenadier at his side. Though further wounded in the thigh, Sidney sent back the remainder of his company to bring up more ammunition and grenades while, virtually single-handed and at point-blank range, he kept the enemy at bay with his tommy gun, driving them back with many casualties until the ammunition-party returned to continue the fierce fighting for another hour. Only then, gravely wounded and weak from loss of blood, did he allow himself to be assisted so that his wounds could be dressed. There is no doubt that, as a result of his action, in the face of great odds, the battalion's position was re-established with far-reaching consequences on the battle as a whole.' Invalided out of the army, and while still suffering from his wounds, Sidney received the Victoria Cross from George V at Buckingham Palace on 12 October 1944; it was accompanied by a piece of VC ribbon cut from Lord Gort's tunic. Two days later, transferred to the regular army reserve for parliamentary duties, Sidney was returned, unopposed, as the Conservative member of parliament for his birthplace, Chelsea, in succession to Sir Samuel Hoare, who had become Lord Templewood in Winston Churchill's administration. Shortly thereafter, as parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Pensions, and now beginning to climb the political ladder, Sidney was selected to deliver his maiden speech during his first month in the House of Commons, in reply to the king's speech to Parliament. In 'ringing phrases' he gave a much praised, authoritative comment on the state of the war. 
Sidney's time in the House of Commons was, however, short. The death of his father on 18 June 1945 took him to the House of Lords. There followed, on 26 July 1945, the general election which brought Clement Attlee's Labour government to power for the next six and a half years. During that time de L'Isle worked in the City of London, was appointed joint treasurer of the Conservative Party, and maintained and improved his historic country seat and gardens, at Penshurst Place, which held a special nostalgia for him as the home of his forebear, Sir Philip Sidney, the gallant Elizabethan poet, diplomat, courtier, and embodiment of chivalry. De L'Isle especially enjoyed showing visitors the remarkable collection of arms and armour in the crypt, the oak-panelled long gallery, the Elizabethan gardens, and the beautiful lake, first mentioned in family records more than 500 years before. At this time also he forged his first contacts with aviation through the Air Ministry's continuously open and lighted Penshurst landing ground at Chiddingstone Causeway on the top of the North Downs; with its telephone link to Croydon airport and an automatic wind indicator, Penshurst began to be used frequently by private flyers, who enjoyed the hospitality extended whenever he was at home by de L'Isle himself. 
When on 26 October 1951 a Conservative government under Sir Winston Churchill returned to power with a slim majority, de L'Isle was appointed secretary of state for air, to his special delight and outstanding success. He quickly displayed an enthusiasm for the service which won the unstinted regard of senior officers and all other ranks. He showed his determination for practical involvement by learning to fly at the Royal Air Force Central Flying School, also setting an example by becoming the first air minister to fly by both day and night -- and the first to fly a jet aircraft (a Canberra). During his fifty active months as secretary of state for air, the Royal Air Force was more than doubled in strength, from less than 125,000 personnel in 1951 to more than 269,000 in 1955. At a time of rapid technical development, not only did the RAF capture the world's air-speed record at more than 727 m.p.h., but also the first V-bombers were brought into service in the form of the Vickers Valiant in January 1955, followed by the further advanced Avro Vulcan and Handley Page Victor. De L'Isle's term at the Air Ministry also saw a major advance in the equipment of the RAF in helicopters and guided weapons. 
De L'Isle worked closely and cordially with Sir William Dickson, chief of the air staff, and then with his successor, Sir John Slesser. Throughout his time at the Air Ministry he was seen by the RAF as one of the most effective and respected of air ministers, devoted to the service in the mould of Lord Trenchard. With his quiet but immensely competent interest in every aspect of the service, he was highly regarded by all ranks wherever his duties took him. His private secretary wrote: 'Numerous visits to Harwell, Windscale, Aldermaston and the major factories of the aircraft industry registered his concern. Yet one's abiding impression, however serious the subject, was that laughter and immense enjoyment of the human comedy were never far away. To be with him, in the office or outside, was much more a pleasure than a duty. ('The Times', 30 April 1991)' In August 1952 de L'Isle made an 8000 mile tour of inspection of RAF establishments in the Middle East. He had proposed to continue to Singapore, Hong Kong, and on to the United States and Canada. These plans were, however, turned down by the prime minister who, despite his own worldwide overseas visits, wrote to de L'Isle: 'The power of a Secretary of State is best wielded from his desk' ('The Times', 30 April 1991). 
When Anthony Eden succeeded Winston Churchill as prime minister in April 1955, he decided that his secretary of state for air must be responsible to the House of Commons. Loyally, but reluctantly, de L'Isle accepted his replacement by his well-trained parliamentary secretary, Nigel Birch. De L'Isle left the Air Ministry in December 1955. In January 1956 he was made a viscount, dropping from his title the term 'and Dudley', recalling with amusement that at a lunch at the United States headquarters in Ruislip, Middlesex, two places had been laid for him -- one on each side of the chairman. 
In August 1961 de L'Isle was welcomed by the Australian prime minister, Robert Menzies, to be governor-general of Australia, the last Englishman to hold that post. At once de L'Isle disarmed any incipient criticism by his courtesy and by the informality of his presence, his delightful sense of humour, and by the extent of his local knowledge. He reinforced his regard for Australia by purchasing two properties in New South Wales and by setting up a local company to tend them. He was appointed GCMG in 1961 and GCVO in 1962. In November 1962 his wife died. 
After four well-regarded years in Australia, de L'Isle returned to England in September 1965. He married on 24 March 1966 Margaret Eldrydd, Lady Glanusk, daughter of Major-General Thomas Herbert Shoubridge, and widow of Wilfrid Russell Bailey, third Baron Glanusk. With his second wife de L'Isle delighted once more in his historic seat at Penshurst Place, and again extended hospitality and personally conducted inspections to visitors to Penshurst. His cheerful company in the family home, together with his courteous, relaxed, and enthusiastic presence, was much valued, and he was always calm, considerate, and the essence of courtesy. At the same time his business acumen began to be much sought after. He was chairman of Phoenix Assurance and Parmerston Property Development, and a director of the British Match Corporation, Lloyds Bank, the Yorkshire Bank, and Schweppes. He was a trustee of the RAF Museum, the Churchill Memorial Trust (1975-91), the British Museum (1950-64), and the National Portrait Gallery (1965-72), and from 1968 to 1984 he was chancellor of the Order of St Michael and St George. He was appointed KG in 1968. His concern for human rights was displayed by his chairmanship and then presidency of the Freedom Association. 
De L'Isle, 'a brave and distinguished nobleman' ('The Independent', 13 April 1991), died at Penshurst Place on 5 April 1991. He was survived by his second wife and the five children of his first marriage. He was succeeded as second viscount by his son, Major Philip John Algernon Sidney ('b'. 1945). A memorial service was held in the Guards' Chapel, Wellington Barracks, London, on 23 May 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49626


Douglas, William Gerald (1934-1991), film-maker, was born on 17 April 1934 at 14 Third Avenue, Newcraighall, Edinburgh, the only son of John James Douglas (1913-1988), coalminer, and Rose McEwen Beveridge (1912-1996), hosiery worker. He was brought up initially by his maternal grandmother, also Rose Beveridge, and then, following her death, by his father and his paternal grandmother. After a period of national service in Egypt, during which he met his lifelong friend and companion, Peter Jewell, he moved to London and embarked on a career of acting and writing. After spending some time with Joan Littlewood's Theatre Workshop company in Stratford East he was cast in the Granada television series 'The Younger Generation' in 1961, and had a musical, 'Solo', produced in 1962 at Cheltenham. In 1968 he enrolled at the London International Film School, where he wrote the screenplay for a short autobiographical film, 'Jamie'. Encouraged by the distinguished British film-maker Lindsay Anderson he secured a commission from the British Film Institute for the project, now entitled 'My Childhood'. Released in 1972 the film's considerable success on the international festival circuit helped to pave the way for the second and third instalments of what became a trilogy of Douglas's formative years, 'My Ain Folk' (1973) and 'My Way Home' (1978). 
The Bill Douglas trilogy recounts the harrowing experiences of a young boy, Jamie, growing up in crippling poverty. 'My Childhood' depicts his life with his cousin Tommy and their maternal grandmother towards the end of the war, the harsh material and emotional impoverishment alleviated only by his friendship with a German prisoner of war. After the grandmother's death Tommy is sent away to a children's home and Jamie is taken in by his father's family. The harrowing privations that he endures at the hands of his cold and vindictive paternal grandmother become the primary focus of 'My Ain Folk', culminating in Jamie's being incarcerated in a similar manner to that of his cousin. 'My Way Home' picks up the story a few years later, with Jamie now old enough to leave the home. After ill-fated attempts to live first with his father and then with a foster mother he spends a period in a hostel for down-and-outs before being called up for national service. It is during his posting in Egypt that he finds redemption through his friendship with Robert, a young middle-class Englishman who introduces him to books and the possibility of a more optimistic and fulfilling future. 
The austere black and white images of Douglas's films embodied a stillness and intensity reminiscent of silent cinema, far removed from the kind of film-making associated with the 1970s. The use of non-professional actors in several key roles recalled the work of similar film poets like Robert Bresson and Satyajit Ray, and served to enhance Douglas's interrogation of the experience of poverty and deprivation, the pain palpably etched on the face of young Stephen Archibald, as Jamie, and conveying infinitely more about the human condition than the most skilful acting could ever hope to do. Douglas's visual style was augmented by the equally spare and precise use of sound. Just as the stillness of the image forced the audience to look, so the relative silence encouraged greater attention to specific sounds -- boots scraping on asphalt, the chirping of birds, and the timbre of voices -- granting an emotional power lost in the aural bombardment characterizing much contemporary cinema. 
Despite a wealth of critical plaudits Douglas struggled to fund his next project and was forced to find other ways of earning a living. In 1978 he was invited by former head of BFI Production, Mamoun Hassan, to teach at the National Film and Television School, where he proved an inspiring presence. As director of the National Film Finance Corporation, Hassan also helped to realize 'Comrades', Douglas's film about the Tolpuddle martyrs, six Dorset farm labourers who were arrested in 1834 and tried for forming a trade union, and subsequently transported to Australia. But it had been a long and frustrating struggle to raise the $3 million budget for a film that finally appeared in 1987, seven years after the screenplay had been completed. Dubbed a 'poor man's epic', 'Comrades' continued Douglas's interest in the perseverance of the human spirit in the face of material adversity. It also alluded to his fascination with the world of optics and image-making by way of several references to various forms of pre-cinematic optical toys and media, such as the magic lantern, the zoetrope, the peep-show, and the camera obscura. The story itself is ostensibly mediated by the character of an itinerant magic lanternist, who reappears in a number of roles. 

'Comrades' was Douglas's last film. He died of cancer at his home, Ashpool, Park Lane, Barnstaple, Devon, on 18 June 1991 and was buried at the church of St John the Baptist, at nearby Bishop's Tawton, on 24 June. He left two unmade screenplays, 'Justified Sinner', an adaptation of James Hogg's celebrated novel, and 'Flying Horse', based on the life of the pre-cinema pioneer Eadweard Muybridge. Another posthumous script, 'Ring of Truth', written during a fellowship at Strathclyde University in 1990, was produced by BBC Scotland in 1995. But Douglas's legacy was not confined to his films. With Peter Jewell he was a voracious collector of books, memorabilia, and artefacts relating to the history and prehistory of cinema. In 1995 Peter Jewell donated their collection of some 50,000 items to the University of Exeter; two years later a museum and study centre, the Bill Douglas Centre for the History of Cinema and Popular Culture, was officially opened to the public. 


@@@@@


doc= 49632


Elton, Charles Sutherland (1900-1991), animal ecologist, was born on 29 March 1900 at Withington, Manchester, the youngest of the three children, all sons, of Oliver Elton (1861-1945), literary scholar and translator, and his wife, Letitia Maynard (1865-1948), writer, daughter of the Revd Dugald MacColl of Glasgow and his wife, Janet Mathieson. The Elton forebears were from Cheshire, and later from near Ledbury, Herefordshire. His maternal great-grandmother, Janet Sutherland, from the east coast of Sutherland, was the source (via his uncle, Dugald Sutherland MacColl, the watercolour artist) of his middle name. 
Elton's youthful zest for natural history was actively encouraged and directed by his eldest brother, Geoffrey, seven years his senior, who was to die suddenly in 1927, aged thirty-four, and to whom he dedicated his first and most famous book, 'Animal Ecology' (1927). Eight long summer family holidays spent on the Eastnor estate in the Malvern hills also had a huge influence on his outlook. 
Military training dominated Elton's schooldays at Liverpool College (1913-18), but he immersed himself in Darwin's 'Origin of Species' and in the complete works of Alfred Russel Wallace. On leaving school he was called up briefly into the Royal Engineers, signal training service, before going up to New College, Oxford, in 1919, to read zoology under E. S. Goodrich. Elton and others rebelled against the continuing emphasis, in zoology then, on comparative anatomy and descriptive embryology. In any spare time he studied the behaviour and life histories of living animals in a large number of ponds near his Liverpool home and also in the Lake District and near Oxford. He used his windowsill in New College for early experiments on the warning colours of water mites. 
Fired with enthusiasm for polar exploration after the reports and films of Scott's and Shackleton's pre- and mid-war expeditions, a group of young biologists and geologists, most of them from Oxford University, set up the Oxford University expedition to Spitsbergen (Svalbard) in 1921. Invited by his tutor, Julian Huxley, to join it as his assistant, Elton, then a second-year undergraduate, was in fact given a free hand to do his own work. This expedition, followed by two more in 1923 and 1924, was to have the most profound influence on Elton's thinking and ideas about animal communities and interactions within them, in this high latitude, isolated land that was 'heavily glaciated, ice-bound for most of the year and some parts even in summer' (Elton MSS, A47, 1). He worked closely with V. S. Summerhayes, a botanist from University College, London, and veteran of the battle of the Somme. Summerhayes and Elton, publishing in the 'Journal of Ecology' in 1923 and 1928, found that the effect on climate of the Gulf Stream meeting the polar ice-pack in Spitsbergen was reflected in four life zones for both the plant and animal communities. In 1927 Elton was a founding member of the Oxford University Exploration Club. In 1929 he was awarded the Royal Geographical Society's Murchison grant for his three seasons' study of the distribution of life in Spitsbergen. 
After taking first-class honours in zoology in 1922 Elton was appointed departmental demonstrator in 1923, university demonstrator in 1929, and finally university reader in animal ecology and senior research fellow of Corpus Christi College in 1936, posts he held until his retirement in 1967. In his statutory lectures to undergraduates his scholarly teaching was, much later, considered to be 'marked by a complete lack of dogmatism.... One felt that to tell his audience what to think would have appeared to him to be insulting.... He always gave a carefully researched and balanced treatment of a subject with copious references to both sides of an argument. (Macfadyen, 500)' 'It was when he dropped his voice and became least audible that he made his most profound and original remarks' (Crowcroft, 142). 
Soon after the last Spitsbergen expedition, Elton produced his first book, 'Animal Ecology' (1927), about general principles regulating animal communities. 'Elton... set out to turn natural history into science, and that, of course, is what ecology is: the quantitative and experimental study of living organisms in relation to their environments' (Hardy, 'Influence', 3). Great clarity and deceptive simplicity of language and style mark out this classic work, which had a major influence on generations of young biologists the world over. Reprinted nine times (and republished with a new preface and 'selected later reading' in 1966) it was still in print more than fifty years later, and was translated into Russian, Polish, Spanish, and Japanese. It was republished in North America in 2001. 
The second main line of research which engaged Elton and colleagues for many years was into fluctuations in numbers, and at times plagues, of animals and the importance of movements of their populations. His participation in the 1930 Oxford University expedition to Lapland fuelled his interest in this problem. These fluctuations can be of serious economic and epidemiological importance, so Elton and his colleagues carried out intensive investigations into the population dynamics of mice and voles in Bagley Wood, near Oxford, from 1923 to 1931. About the same time he had begun extensive research into the roughly ten yearly and three to four yearly cycles of Canadian wildlife, notably those of the fur bearing mammals. They all hit the bottom of their cycles in 1931. Elton, in his broad survey 'Voles, Mice and Lemmings: Problems in Population Dynamics' (1942), described the poverty this caused in northern Labrador. Added to the trough of the worldwide depression, this hit projects like the Oxford work. Elton had been the Hudson Bay Company's biological consultant since 1925, and now took part in an international conference on biological cycles called at the remote fishing village of Matamek, on the north shore of the Gulf of St Lawrence. One result was that the New York Zoological Society gave financial support to the Oxford work. To this the Royal Society added a large sum for research on vole populations, and in 1932 Elton, as director, was able to start his Bureau of Animal Population; it was primarily to act as a clearing house for information on population changes in Canadian wildlife, but also to be a centre for the study of mammalian populations (mainly rodents at first). However, despite many decades of research on both sides of the Atlantic on the problems of cycling / fluctuating mammalian populations, the mechanism was still not satisfactorily resolved within Elton's lifetime. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 the bureau (with its expertise in the study of mice and voles) was switched to research, under the Agricultural Research Council, into effective control of rodents and rabbits to protect the nation's foodstuffs. 'The Bureau team, under Elton's low-key but powerful leadership, introduced some novel ideas into British rodent control' (Crowcroft, 29). A most generous anonymous donor (much later revealed, by Crowcroft, as Sir John Ellerman, second baronet) enabled the results of the bureau's war work to be published in 1954 as 'The Control of Rats and Mice', in three volumes (the first two, on 'Rats', edited by D. H. Chitty, and the third, on 'House Mice', edited by H. N. Southern). Elton provided a masterly introduction and overview to this work. 
During the war Elton and other ecologists were also looking forward to the post-war reconstruction period and planning the practical aspects of future national nature reserves. With A. G. Tansley and Captain C. Diver he played a major part in the report of the Wildlife Conservation Special Committee (1947), chaired by J. S. Huxley. Much of its advice was accepted by the government, and the Nature Conservancy was established in 1949, under the privy council. Elton was a member of its scientific policy committee from 1949 to 1956, and was closely involved with the Nature Conservancy throughout its sixteen-year existence. 
In the light of his long-standing interest in zoogeography (on which he lectured to undergraduates, as well as on animal ecology), Elton outlined his own ideas on conservation and invasion biology in 'The Ecology of Invasions by Animals and Plants' (1958, republished in North America in 2000). He showed how Wallace's realms had been broken down over the previous 200 years following the huge increase in, and speed of, man's mobility all over the world, with many animal and plant species becoming pests in their new homes and new food chains replacing old ones. He maintained that ecological principles had to be applied to practical conservation (and gave three BBC broadcasts about this in 1957): 'Conservation', he believed, 'should mean the keeping or putting in the landscape of the greatest possible ecological variety -- in the world, in every continent or island, and so far as practicable in every district... provided the native species have their place' ('Ecology of Invasions', 155). 
Fresh opportunities arose after the war for Elton to develop research into more complex animal communities, since Oxford University had just acquired the nearby Wytham estate, with roughly 1000 acres of deciduous woodland and grassland and small freshwater bodies. In 1949 Elton, as president of the British Ecological Society, gave an inspired address, 'Population interspersion: an essay on animal community patterns' (published in the 'Journal of Ecology' in 1949), in which he envisaged a continuing ecological survey which was to study all groups of animals and all kinds of habitat, involving plant ecologists as well. He thought that the newly founded Nature Conservancy might set up active research centres where ecologists' data and notes on communities and species could be accumulated and used scientifically. The computerized Biological Records Centre at Monks Wood, near Huntingdon, later did just that, though its primary task was the mapping of species' distribution. 
At first Elton's ecological survey covered Oxfordshire, Berkshire, and Buckinghamshire, but later it concentrated on the Wytham area, contributions to the whole picture being made by some of his staff, visiting scientists, and graduate students. With R. S. Miller, an American postgraduate from Colorado, Elton developed for ecological survey a practical system of habitat classification by structural characters (published in the 'Journal of Ecology' in 1954). In his 'magnum opus', 'The Pattern of Animal Communities' (1966), Elton set out to assess all that had been revealed using these methods over the previous twenty years. Besides bird and mammal populations (using the whole wood), communities in many kinds of minor habitats had thrown light on the larger canvas of interactions, which he referred to as a 'girder system' of partly interlocking community units which might show 'ecological resistance'. 
Just before and after retirement Elton went on several expeditions to tropical South America and to Montserrat in the West Indies to experience and study, though very briefly, the complexity and diversity of tropical rain forest -- at the opposite extreme from his Spitsbergen tundra communities. The results of his studies were published in articles in the 'Journal of Animal Ecology' in 1973, and in 'Biological Conservation' in 1975. 
Elton had founded the 'Journal of Animal Ecology' in 1932, continuing as editor until 1951. In his honour, after his retirement, the British Ecological Society published the February 1968 issue of the journal as a Festschrift, consisting entirely of papers (all, as usual, rigorously refereed) by members and ex-members of the Bureau of Animal Population. The bureau had become a world centre for research in terrestrial animal ecology, attracting younger research workers 'who carried the Elton tradition to distant places' (Hardy, 'Elton, Charles'). It had been properly established in 1947 as part of the administrative department of zoological field studies, under the sympathetic chairmanship of the newly appointed Linacre professor of zoology and comparative anatomy, Alister Clavering Hardy (of plankton recorder fame). The essence of the bureau was bound up with Elton's genius as a field naturalist and observer, with his breadth of scholarship, his worldwide appreciation of the nature of learning, and with his insight as a scientist, and it ceased to exist when he retired. (An insect physiologist, J. W. S. Pringle, was by then the Linacre professor.) 
Besides the books already noted, Elton published 'Animal Ecology and Evolution' (1930, from three lectures at University College, London), 'Ecology of Animals' (1933), and 'Exploring the Animal World' (1933, BBC talks for amateur naturalists), and some book reviews which were, at times, hard hitting. All but one of his books were translated into several languages. He also wrote ninety-eight articles (most published in scientific journals), of which twenty-eight were either co-authored or edited by him. There are thirty-four unpublished natural history notebooks in the Bodleian Library. He was honoured by eight American scientific bodies, including the New York Zoological Society, of which he became an honorary member in 1931, and the Ecological Society of America (life member and eminent ecologist award, 1961); he also received the John and Alice Tyler ecology award (1976) and the Edward W. Browning award (1977) for conserving the environment. Honours from British scientific societies included honorary membership of the British Ecological Society (1960), fellowship of the Royal Society (1953) and its Darwin medal (1970), and the Linnean Society's gold medal (1967). 
Elton's first marriage, in 1928, was to Rose Montague (1906-1997); this marriage, without issue, was dissolved amicably in 1937. On 1 December of the same year he married (Edith) Joy Scovell (1907-1999), the poet, and daughter of the Revd Frederick George Scovell, vicar of St Andrew's Church, Sharrow, Sheffield. They had a daughter, Catherine Ingrid ('b'. 1940), a nurse, and a son, Robert Andrew ('b'. 1943), a medical statistician. 
Of medium height and build Elton had, by middle age, lost much of the hair from 'his heavy thoughtful head' -- as his wife put it in her poem 'A Naturalist' (E. J. Scovell, 'Collected Poems', 1988, 87). Fair skinned, blue-eyed, and clean-shaven, and usually a very serious man, he 'was never an easy person to know' ('The Times', 7 May 1991). His mild manner and quiet voice belied his underlying toughness, and he came to be known, in a friendly way, as 'The Boss' by staff and students in the post-war bureau. He could not abide crowds and, even in his fifties, refused to attend meetings with more than thirty people present, so in 1976 had to receive the munificent Tyler award in Los Angeles by proxy. He hated unauthorized photography and in the early 1970s refused to sit for his portrait to be painted with three other eminent former colleagues for a set piece commissioned for the new zoology building -- 'I don't intend to adorn the walls of the Sistine Chapel!' (private information). However, Denys Kempson's portrait photographs of him were hung in Oxford University's department of zoology and Corpus Christi College. 
Having lived all his adult life in Oxford, Elton died at St Luke's Nursing Home, Latimer Road, Oxford, on 1 May 1991, following a stroke. His funeral service took place at Oxford crematorium on 4 May 1991. He was survived by his wife and two children. 
Four animals bear Elton's name: 'Camptocladius eltoni', a small chironomid fly (with aquatic larvae), collected by Elton on Bear Island in 1921 and described by Edwards in 1922; 'Micaria eltoni', a male spider, collected by Elton at Klaas Billen Bay, Spitsbergen, in 1921 and described by Jackson in 1922; 'Enchytraeus eltoni', a small, white enchytraeid worm, collected by Elton at Liefde Bay, Spitsbergen, in 1923 and described by Stephenson in 1924; and 'Eutrombicula' (S. G. 'Eltonella') 'eltoni', a tropical forest trombiculid mite (ectoparasitic on a scorpion in Malaya), described by Audy in 1956. The last was 'named for Charles Elton F.R.S. to whom ecologists and epidemiologists must be grateful for ideas and guiding principles in the sphere of animal ecology, and to whom the present writer is indebted in many ways, not the least being the example set of lucidity in writing on ecological subjects without a trace of the jargon and monstrous Greek derivatives which have ministered by cryptology and neologism to an esoteric obfuscation of ecological neoconcepts. (Audy, 'Bulletin of the Raffles Museum', 28, 1956, 36)' Two ecological concepts, from Elton's first book, have also had his name appended to them by later writers: the 'Eltonian Pyramid of Numbers', and the 'Eltonian concept of Niche' (as an animal's role in a community, contrasting with the habitat-niche used by the American ecologist J. Grinnell and others). The Elton Library, situated in the Bodleian's zoology library, houses the Bureau of Animal Population library, its research photographs and archives, and Elton's and the bureau's publications. Elton's Spitsbergen material and Wytham ecological survey material are now in the Hope collections in the Oxford University Museum of Natural History. 


@@@@@


doc= 49633


Martin Francis Antony Ennals (1927-1991), human rights activist, was born in Walsall on 27 July 1927. He was educated at Queen Mary's Grammar School, Walsall, and the London School of Economics, graduating in international relations. He then worked briefly for the National Union of Students as assistant secretary. On 11 May 1951 he married Jacqueline Betty Morris ('b'. 1927/8), shorthand typist, daughter of David Morris, schoolteacher; there were one son and one daughter of the marriage. Later in the year he took up a post with UNESCO in Paris, where he was president of the staff association. He returned to England in 1960 to become general secretary of the National Council for Civil Liberties (later renamed Liberty). From 1966 to 1968 he was information officer for the National Committee for Commonwealth Immigrants, in which post he came into direct conflict with the government of which his brother David was a member. He was then secretary-general of Amnesty International from 1968 to 1980, overseeing a period of rapid growth during which the staff of the secretariat grew from nine to 150 and its annual budget from $20,000 to more than $1.6 million. Characteristically, when Amnesty received the Nobel peace prize in 1977, he insisted that a released 'prisoner of conscience' should actually accept the award. After leaving Amnesty he was head of the Greater London council's police committee support unit, from 1982 to 1985, but in the latter year he reverted to his interest in international human rights issues by becoming secretary-general of International Alert. He remained with this organization until 1991, when he became Ariel F. Sallows professor of human rights at the University of Saskatchewan, Canada. He died of lung cancer in Saskatoon, Canada, on 5 October 1991, survived by his wife, from whom he was separated, and his two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49634


Fawcett, Sir James Edmund Sandford (1913-1991), lawyer and jurist, was born on 16 April 1913 at the parsonage, North Hagbourne, Wallingford, Berkshire, the son of the Revd Joseph Fawcett, Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Edith Annie, 'nee' Scattergood. He was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford, Rugby School, and New College, Oxford. After taking first classes in both classical moderations (1933) and 'literae humaniores' (1935), he turned to the law and was awarded the Eldon law scholarship. On 7 August 1937 he married Frances Beatrice Lowe ('b'. 1913/14), daughter of Dr Elias Avery Lowe, reader in palaeography at the University of Oxford. They had met when they were both pupils at the Dragon School. They had a son and four daughters. Fawcett later converted to his wife's Roman Catholicism. 
Fawcett was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1938 and also won a prize fellowship at All Souls College. He joined the north-eastern circuit and practised until the outbreak of the Second World War, when he volunteered for the Royal Navy. After a year as a rating he was commissioned and went on to serve as the torpedo officer of a destroyer. He was awarded the DSC in 1942 for his part in sinking an Italian destroyer. 
In 1945 Fawcett became an assistant legal adviser at the Foreign Office, and from 1948 to 1950 he served with the United Kingdom delegation to the United Nations in New York and also for a time with the British embassy in Washington. He was involved in the preparation of the 1948 universal declaration of human rights. In 1950 he left the Foreign Office to pursue his practice at the bar as a member of the chambers at 2 Hare Court of John Galway Foster MP, himself an international lawyer and a fellow of All Souls. He was counsel in four cases before the International Court of Justice at The Hague, in three of them appearing for the United Kingdom. He did not apply for silk until 1985. In 1955 he was appointed general counsel to the International Monetary Fund in Washington, and he held that appointment for 5 years. This work stimulated the writing of informed and original articles on legal aspects of international trading and finance. In 1961 he was again elected to a fellowship at All Souls, which he retained until 1969. 
In 1962 Fawcett was appointed a member of the European Commission of Human Rights, a position he held until 1984, an unrivalled period of twenty-two years. This work, though demanding, especially when from 1972 to 1982 he was its much respected president, was a part-time occupation. Consequently Fawcett was able also to do much else. From 1969 to 1973 he was director of studies at the Royal Institute of International Affairs. From 1976 until 1980 he held the chair of international law at King's College, London, a position which suited him well as he was a gifted teacher and had already written a refreshing introductory manual for students of international law, 'The Law of Nations' (1968). He was knighted in 1984. 
Fawcett's work in Strasbourg with the Commission of Human Rights -- or 'common rights', as he liked to call them -- was an outstanding contribution to the development and administration of human rights in Europe. In those days (the commission ceased to exist in 1998) all petitions alleging breaches of the European Human Rights Convention went first to the commission, and relatively very few found their way to the Court of Human Rights. The work of the commission was diplomatic as much as legal, and this suited Fawcett's inclinations. He was ambivalent about the strictly judicial settlement of some kinds of disputes, and in one of his writings he expressed the view that 'the judicial settlement of disputes, though better than friction and conflict, still falls short of their settlement by countries in consultation on how best they may work together' (Fawcett, 'The place of law in an international organization', 'British Yearbook of International Law' 36 1960, 328). 
Fawcett wrote, and wrote well, throughout his career, and his writings reflected the broad sweep of his interests and learning. Probably his most influential book was 'The Application of the European Convention on Human Rights' (1969), a practical and scholarly commentary on the convention, article by article. But there were seven other books and some threescore articles. He was a pioneer writer on international trade law. He wrote perceptively on the legal problems of international organizations, and also about the uses of outer space, a legal subject that reflected his hobby of astronomy. He was concerned about the legal problems of energy and was one of the earliest voices to question the wisdom of the lavish use of fossil fuels. He was no mere international lawyer, for he had a profound understanding of the common law too, though his learning was lightly and only aptly displayed. The great strengths of his writings were analysis, clarity, and elegance. He rather liked to begin with a paradox that needed explaining. There were no routine writings. He wrote when he had something to say. 
Fawcett was handsome and charming. He was an excellent pianist. His family was his pride and joy. As a lawyer and scholar he had independence of mind and spirit. In 1973 he became one of the few international lawyers chosen for membership of the Institut de Droit International, but he failed to appear at the biennial conferences. On receiving a letter pleading that he might try to attend the next one his reply was a courteous request to be permitted to resign because, he said, 'I fear I am not a conference man' (private information). He died at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, on 24 June 1991, following a stroke. He was survived by his wife and five children. A memorial service was held at St Etheldreda's, Ely Place, London, on 30 September 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49637


Beytagh, Gonville Aubie ffrench- (1912-1991), dean of Johannesburg, was born in Shanghai, China, on 26 January 1912, the son of Leo Michael ffrench-Beytagh, the managing director of a cotton company, and his wife, Edith, formerly McIlraith. His father was a lapsed Irish Catholic seminarian. His mother left home when he was still young. He had a somewhat anarchic upbringing in China, followed by the irksome discipline of an English evangelical public school, Monkton Combe (which he disliked), and a slightly more tolerable time at Bristol grammar school. In England he was placed, with his brother and sister, under the legal guardianship of Miss Esylt Newbury, the daughter of a vicar, who operated a benign but restrictive regime. Desperate to be free from such constraints, just before his seventeenth birthday in 1929, he went to New Zealand to enrol on an agricultural course at Waitaki high school. He was soon expelled and embarked on two years of roaming, taking casual jobs, getting into fights, and sleeping rough. As a result of a chance encounter with a distant relative he renewed contact with his mother, now remarried and living in South Africa, and was persuaded to go to that country in 1933. (At first he was classified as an 'Asiatic' by the immigration authorities, obsessed by racial categorization even in the period before apartheid.) He found work as a clerk for a mining company in Johannesburg. 
Searching for some purpose and order for his life, ffrench-Beytagh came into contact with the Johannesburg branch of Toc H, whose membership included Alan Paton. He experienced a yearning for Christian faith and a dawning sense of vocation to the priesthood. Geoffrey Clayton, bishop of Johannesburg, encouraged this commitment, and sent him for ordination training to St Paul's College, Grahamstown, at that time an all-white college. 'The college turned out to be a rather mausoleum-like, dull, brick structure which to me had the psychological impact of a prison', commented ffrench-Beytagh in his autobiographical 'Encountering Darkness' (1973). Clayton urged him to persevere, and they remained close friends. 
Gonville ffrench-Beytagh was ordained in 1938. Strongly aware of the anarchic tendencies in his personality, and subject to intense bouts of depression, he found great spiritual support in a catholic Anglican spirituality which combined discipline and regularity (he rose daily at 4 a.m. to say the office, and, as a priest, celebrated mass daily), with a sense of freedom and an understanding for the moral waywardness and intractability of the human personality. His pastoral ministry during the war years was pursued with great energy and revealed his gifts as a counsellor and spiritual adviser. His political consciousness remained undeveloped at this stage. He had little contact with non-Europeans in his ministry until he was appointed as priest in charge of St Alban's mission for the coloured (mixed race) community of Johannesburg. Nevertheless, after 1948 he had little sympathy with the National Party's racial policies, and he resigned his South African passport in protest at the passing of the 1953 'Bantu Education Act', to which his bishop, Ambrose Reeves, was vigorously objecting. 
In 1954 ffrench-Beytagh was invited to become dean of Salisbury Cathedral in Southern Rhodesia. Again his work was primarily among white Anglicans. But his liberal opinions on race, and his disdain for the reactionary nature of settler politics in Southern Rhodesia, gave an increasingly political edge to his ministry. 
In 1965 ffrench-Beytagh returned to South Africa as dean of Johannesburg. For the first time his work brought him into intimate contact with Africans, as the cathedral was beginning to explore ways of embracing all communities in order to become a multiracial congregation. He now became involved in activities which in South Africa were construed as political. In church councils he spoke out against moves to suspend membership of the World Council of Churches (WCC) in protest against the fund to combat racism and WCC support for liberation movements in southern Africa, a campaign which infuriated white South Africa. He led a campaign against the continued house arrest of Helen Joseph, a member of the cathedral's congregation. He strongly criticized apartheid for the damage it caused to family life for Africans, and its criminalization of even the most law-abiding. It was in line with this concern that, when Defence and Aid (the organization for the support of political prisoners and their relatives) was banned in 1967, ffrench-Beytagh determined to continue its work. He set up a personal fund, using money given for this purpose by Alison Norman, a friend from his time in Rhodesia who was now living in Britain. He was careful to steer clear of any hint of association with the leaders of Defence and Aid, including Canon Collins in London, and with those who had worked locally for the organization, such as Winnie Mandela. But as far as the government was concerned ffrench-Beytagh's operation was merely a subterfuge for the continuing activities of Defence and Aid. The security machinery increasingly kept track of the dean's activities, using informers and 'agents provocateurs'. 
In 1970 ffrench-Beytagh was arrested and charged under the 'Terrorism Act' of 1967. He was accused of incitement to overthrow the government, for example by urging members of Black Sash, the liberal women's organization, 'to support and prepare for a violent revolution'. He was also indicted for pursuing links with banned organizations such as the African National Congress and the South African Communist Party, for possessing their literature, and for using the money supplied by Alison Norman (who was named as a co-conspirator) to further the aims of those organizations to subvert the regime. His accusers included a member of his congregation, Ken Jordaan -- in fact an undercover security officer who had himself incited ffrench-Beytagh to make incautious statements -- and a putative member of Black Sash who was actually a government plant. The judge, finding him guilty on three counts, sentenced ffrench-Beytagh to the mandatory five years' imprisonment. This was overturned on appeal in 1972, and ffrench-Beytagh immediately left the country -- a decision the wisdom of which he always doubted, and for which he felt a continuing sense of guilt. 
Gonville ffrench-Beytagh became a curate at St Matthew's, Great Peter Street, Westminster, and in 1974 rector of a City of London church, St Vedast's. He became honorary canon of Canterbury Cathedral in 1973. His ministry of spiritual counselling and his frank writings and discussion on clinical depression, including 'Facing Depression' (1978), were combined with an abiding concern for the dehumanizing effect of apartheid ('the blasphemy of apartheid', as he called it), and with a concern for prisoners of conscience. He retired in 1987, to live in an informal community organized by Alison Norman, who continued to give him practical and emotional support. His collection of meditations, 'A Glimpse of Glory' (1986), with its extended commentary on George Herbert's poem 'Prayer', well illustrate the style and sources of his spirituality. He never married. He died at the London Hospital, Mile End, London, on 11 May 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49639


Fielding, Alexander Wallace (1918-1991), intelligence officer and author, was born Alexander Percival Feilman Wallace on 26 November 1918 at Ootacamund, in southern India. His father, Alexander James Wallace -- variously described by his son as a major in the Sikhs and as a barrister -- and his Irish mother, Mary Gertrude, 'nee' Robinson, both died while he was a child. Presumably he was adopted by Percival Wallace Fielding, a company director, whose surname he took. Throughout his life he was known by the diminutive forename Xan. Most of his childhood he spent in France; his stepgrandmother owned the Chateau Fielding, at Nice, which he and his sister long used as their permanent address. From a preparatory school at Harrow he won a classical scholarship to Charterhouse School, but disliked the classics, and sooner than go up to Oxford went to Bonn University in 1937. He moved on to Munich, became involved in anti-Nazi student agitation, and was arrested and run out of Germany by the Gestapo. An attempt to join the International Brigades in Spain also foundered in arrest. From journalism in London he moved eastwards; the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 found him working as a barman in Cyprus. 
Fielding spent several months in Athens working on counter-espionage, and was commissioned into the Cyprus regiment in Jerusalem in September 1940; he transferred to the intelligence corps in 1943. After six months as an intelligence officer in the 7th division he moved at the end of 1941 into the Special Operations Executive (SOE), and went by submarine on his first mission into Crete. Lithe and strong, with fluent Greek, he could pass for a Cretan, and made innumerable friends on the island while organizing resistance round Canea. In two long spells, from January to August 1942 and from November 1942 right through to January 1944, he built up -- and fought in -- substantial guerrilla bands, as well as labouring on German fortifications, of which he took careful note. For his first mission he was appointed to the DSO while still a substantive lieutenant. On his second he succeeded in reconciling the local communist and anti-communist resisters, thus helping to spare Crete some of the civil troubles that tormented much of the rest of Greece. He formed an instant friendship with an SOE colleague, Paddy Leigh Fermor. Both of them relaxed, whenever a chance offered, at a house renamed Tara, in Cairo, with a small group of companions. 
Fielding, by now a major, revisited Crete briefly in July 1944, with leave to shoot a fellow officer whom he was able to clear of suspicion, and then moved to the SOE's base at Algiers, from which, ill-codenamed Cathedrale, he was parachuted into south-eastern France on 9 August to work with Francis Cammaerts ('Roger'), who led all resistance east of the Rhone. They were both arrested four days later at a chance control near Digne; 'Roger' was recognized, and they were saved only by the effrontery and bravery of his courier, Christine Granville ['see 'Gizycka, Countess Krystyna]. Fielding then spent the winter at the SOE's base at Bari, in south-east Italy, and then moved on to Ceylon, intending to operate in Cambodia. The end of the war prevented this; he made a point of visiting the frontier of Tibet before he returned to Europe. 
Fielding spent the rest of his life travelling, translating, and writing, delighting many people with his companionship. His wide reading combined with his lively wit, deep voice, and good manners to make him an outstanding talker, once his initial reserve had been penetrated. On 11 July 1953 he married the Hon. Daphne Winifred Louise Thynne, marchioness of Bath (1904-1997), writer, with whom he revisited Crete. She was the elder child and only daughter of George Crespigny Brabazon Vivian, fourth Baron Vivian, and the former wife of Henry Frederick Thynne, sixth marquess of Bath. The marriage ended in divorce in 1978, and on 8 March of the following year Fielding married Agnes (Magouche) Phillips ('b'. 1921/2), daughter of Commodore John Holmes Magruder, of the US Navy. There were no children of either marriage. 
Fielding's 'The Stronghold' (1953) described the White Mountains in Crete with vivacity and skill; 'Hide and Seek' (1954) gave more details of his career in the SOE. He also annotated 'The Cretan Runner' (1955), Leigh Fermor's translation from the Greek of George Psychoundakis. His 'Corsair Country' (1958) recounted a journey that he made by motor car, with his first wife, along the -- then rather inaccessible -- Barbary coast of north Africa. He also wrote 'The Money Spinner' (1977), an account of the casino at Monte Carlo that, as an inveterate gambler, he knew only too well. He translated from French into English a dozen books by Pierre Boulle, one of which was published as 'The Bridge on the River Kwai' (1954); Chevallier's 'Clochemerle-les-Bains' (1964); nine novels by Larteguy; one by Andre Malraux; and several more. When he and his second wife settled in Spain, near Ronda, in Andalusia, he edited the letters exchanged between his neighbour Gerald Brenan and Ralph Partridge, published as 'Best of Friends' (1986). Four years later he produced a life of one of his Tara companions, Billy McLean: 'One Man in his Time'. He wrote a short book about the winds, published in an extended German translation as 'Das Buch der Winde' in 1988 and, in a small limited edition, as 'Aeolus Displayed' in 1991. 
Though suffering from cancer Fielding was able to revisit Crete for the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the battle of 1941 on the island, where scores of his friends were enchanted to see him. He died in Paris on 19 August 1991, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49640


Finniston, Sir (Harold) Montague (1912-1991), metallurgist and businessman, was born at 26 Aikenhead Road, Govanhill, Glasgow, on 15 August 1912, the eldest child in the family of two sons and three daughters of Robert Finniston and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Diamond. Both parents were Russian-Jewish immigrants; the original family name was Feinstein. Monty, as he was universally known, became one of the outstanding industrial technologists of his generation, and arguably of the twentieth century. He was remarkable in numerous ways, not least for having risen from near-poverty conditions in the slums of Glasgow before the First World War to become a key figure in Britain's development of the atom bomb and subsequently the peaceful development of nuclear energy in the 1950s and thereafter. His later achievements, first as deputy chairman and chief executive and then as chairman of the nationalized British Steel Corporation, led to a belated drive to modernize the steel industry and, perhaps inevitably, to a fierce battle with ministers in Harold Wilson's Labour government of the 1970s, which was to force him out of British Steel. 
Finniston's father was a tailor's machinist and then a struggling salesman; his mother was an archetypal Jewish home-loving mother trying to make ends meet in threadbare circumstances, devoted to her small family. Home was in rough, tough Govanhill, in a grey, sandstone tenement three storeys high, with three 'apartments' on each landing. The apartments consisted of one room and a kitchen, and there was one communal lavatory per landing. There was no electricity -- only gaslight -- and heating was by a coal fire. At that time Glasgow had the highest rate of tuberculosis in Europe. Survival was often by sheer luck, chance, or brutal scheming. 
Finniston was educated locally at Victoria School until he was eleven. By that time his father's situation had improved slightly and the family had moved to a larger apartment in Glasgow's Crosshill -- with three rooms, kitchen and bathroom, and with electric light. It was while Finniston was living here that he won a scholarship to the prestigious Allan Glen's School, which specialized in science. He became a star scholar, which enabled him to overcome a serious problem: to qualify for university entrance it was necessary to spend six years at Allan Glen's School, but Finniston's scholarship was due to terminate after five years and his family couldn't afford to finance a sixth year. The brilliant young Finniston overcame this handicap by qualifying for Glasgow University at the unusually early age of sixteen. 
From his arrival at Glasgow University it was clear that this exceptional young man, consistently top in all his exams, was destined for a considerable career. Originally Finniston was drawn to medicine, but was saved for technology because of his squeamishness at the sight of blood. He graduated in metallurgical chemistry and then went on to take a PhD on the combustibility of coke at the Royal College of Science and Technology, Glasgow, where he was subsequently a lecturer from 1933 to 1935. By one of those curious quirks of circumstance Finniston helped to tutor another young metallurgist, Ian MacGregor, who later became Margaret Thatcher's appointee as chairman of British Steel two stages after Finniston. After his lectureship Finniston then took a post as a metallurgist with the steelmakers Stewarts and Lloyds (1935-7). This was his first direct association with the steel industry, and it was the job he was holding when on 15 April 1936 he married his childhood friend Miriam Singer ('b'. 1914/15), daughter of Morris Singer, tailor. They had a son, Michael, and a daughter, Barbara. 
After Stewarts and Lloyds, Finniston was chief research officer at the Scottish Coke Committee (1937-40). He then joined the Royal Naval Scientific Service (RNSS) as a metallurgist, a post he held for six years. This appointment marked his move away from Glasgow, initially to Sheffield, where the RNSS had an important base. Finniston started with research on the quality and design of naval guns before specializing in bomb-casing design and torpedo development. 
Finniston's work and inventiveness brought him to the notice of Whitehall's senior scientists and he was seconded to the Ministry of Supply, the department responsible for the development of nuclear weapons. Shortly after the end of the war he was sent with a team of British scientists to the top secret nuclear project at Chalk River in Canada to work on applying nuclear power to submarine propulsion. Much of his work was connected with the metallurgical substance and design of atomic weaponry, and he was drawn into the highly secret team of scientists and engineers who were working on 'the bomb' in co-operation with the Americans and Canadians. It was while working at Chalk River (where he remained until 1947) that Finniston established a close personal friendship with the top-ranking American admiral who was in charge of that particular aspect of the United States' nuclear programme, Hyman Rickover. At their first meeting the American admiral asked Finniston: 'What do you know about atomic energy, Monty?' Finniston paused and replied, 'Very little, sir.' 'Then, why the hell are you wasting my time; you'd better get the hell out of here when you've finished your coffee', Rickover retorted. Yet that first meeting went on for several hours, with the American admiral becoming increasingly fascinated by his unusual Scottish visitor (private information). In later years Rickover was a frequent visitor to Britain's nuclear headquarters at Harwell, where he would attend crucial meetings with his British counterparts -- always insisting that his friend Monty Finniston must be available to be with him. 
Finniston was appointed chief metallurgist of the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) at Harwell on his return from Canada and for ten years from 1948 he developed a reputation which might well have carried him to the top of the Harwell establishment in succession to Sir John Cockcroft, had it not been for internal rivalries and, perhaps, petty jealousies. Finniston was never a self-seeker nor one to spend his time dabbling in internal power-politics. His commitment to his work -- and to his family -- was total. He openly (perhaps too openly) demonstrated his impatience with any semblance of cronyism. For him the focus of a rational and effective work pattern was to build a mutually co-operating team. At Harwell he recruited and led a young team of research scientists drawn from a wide range of backgrounds. None had any prior experience of nuclear power, let alone of the new materials that were just emerging, such as uranium, plutonium, zirconium, and beryllium. These new metals and alloys were crucial to the atomic energy programme, but their behaviour in response to the intense radiation inside the nuclear reactor was unpredictable, dangerous, and, as was discovered, dramatic. Finniston provided exceptional qualities of leadership and encouragement to his young and inexperienced team. His enthusiasm and commitment were contagious, and the team worked under great pressure on very tight time schedules. 
Finniston's metallurgy division at Harwell was responsible for producing the fuel elements for the various reactor designs, and, as was inevitable with such primary, and sometimes experimental, work, many problems emerged -- especially in connection with the protective metallic canning of uranium. Finniston's team was working at what were then the scientific and technological frontiers in the development of atomic energy. Sir Alan Cottrell, Finniston's deputy at Harwell, described that period as a tremendous struggle during which Finniston fought 'against a lot of prejudice'. In particular there were two great battles: 'First within Harwell where the ruling elite, in those far distant days, were the nuclear physicists who thought that everything else, especially materials work, was mere blacksmithing to provide them with their required hardware. Secondly, with the Northern AEA Group [Risley, Culcheth, Springfields, and Windscale] who thought that all materials technology belonged to them. [Finniston] fought and won these battles. (Petch, 135)' During his decade at Harwell, Finniston worked with some of the most notable scientists and physicists of the post-war period, including two men who later defected to the Soviet Union -- Dr Klaus Fuchs and Dr Bruno Pontecorvo, who no doubt took with them secret data of innovations and discoveries that had been researched by the remarkable Finniston team. Details now available of what Fuchs told the Soviets indicate quite clearly that the materials involved in making the bomb included substances on which Finniston had researched. 
Finniston never placed barriers in the way of his warmth and friendship, and his availability to help any of his Harwell colleagues. He knew practically everyone at Harwell. He and his family lived in a house within the Harwell settlement, where they were on familiar terms with all their neighbours and fellow workers. It was very much an integrated as well as a closed community. Finniston was a workaholic and an insomniac, getting up at 5 a.m. and working all day, often seven days a week. Neighbours from Harwell days recalled him even at weekends padding around the garden in his slippers and suddenly crying out: 'I've got an idea', and then disappearing in a puff of enthusiasm to his desk or workbench (private information). His overall lifestyle was rigorous without being austere. He appreciated an occasional glass of wine and a good meal, but there was nothing lavish about his personal demands. 'I like a simple steak or some chicken' he would declare, and he almost always stuck to that regime. He kept himself fit, and his slight, trim physique hardly ever changed over the years. His whole personal bearing radiated energy, but never in a demonstrative manner. Nor was this the window dressing of false modesty. He possessed a deep, philosophical humility, a characteristic quality of truly outstanding ability. 
Ideas flowed from Finniston's fertile mind in surges. One extraordinary notion he conceived while at Harwell was as a member of a highly confidential committee (even by Harwell standards) that was later labelled the 'crazy committee'. It was the job of this group of scientists and technologists to think the unthinkable. One special question came on to the agenda: what to do with nuclear waste? This was during the earliest days of nuclear energy development, when the critical issue was safety in production rather than the eventual disposal of the deadly waste material. Finniston came up with the idea of packing the waste into specially designed rockets and sending it into space. The idea was never pursued, which was perhaps as well in the light of subsequent invasions into space. 
Finniston was also the first scientist at Harwell to process raw plutonium. Through his American contacts he persuaded a leading American nuclear scientist to bring over a small sample of plutonium (no bigger than the size of a pea, according to one eye witness) which Finniston and his team then worked on and refined into uranium. When Finniston left Harwell in 1958 he confessed that he left with a heavy heart; later he said that his Harwell days had been 'the happiest of my working life' (private information). 
In 1959 Finniston moved into private industry, becoming technical director at C. A. Parsons in Newcastle upon Tyne. There he took charge of a large new laboratory that Parsons had built to serve as the nuclear research centre for Parsons and other member firms of the Nuclear Power Plant Company -- one of five consortia set up to design and build Britain's first civil nuclear power stations. In 1962 he persuaded the Parsons' board to convert the whole research operation into the International Research and Development Company (IRD), which carried the entire enterprise beyond nuclear specialization towards a much broader concept of engineering and technological development. Finniston had for long recognized the untapped potential in Britain for technological research and development. He saw how the UK was missing out compared with the United States, Japan, and Germany, and he was a pioneer in trying to steer both government and private industry into the new world of technological advance. He served as managing director of IRD from 1962 to 1967, and then as chairman from 1968 to 1977. 
It was while Finniston was still running IRD in 1966 that the Labour government under Harold Wilson invited Finniston to join a committee planning the renationalization of the steel industry (which had been nationalized in 1949 but denationalized in 1953). The committee was the forerunner of the British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed in 1967 with Lord Melchett as chairman and Finniston as a deputy chairman in charge of technical and research development. He became BSC's chief executive in 1971 and then chairman in 1973 on Melchett's death, at which point he was projected onto the national platform, a 'public' figure -- something that he always found it hard to get used to. 
Well before he took over Melchett's vacant chair Finniston had been actively involved in trying to modernize the British steel industry and to bring it up to the standard of the world's outstanding steel performer, Japan. As chief executive of British Steel he took a team of experts there to study the exceptional achievements of the Japanese steel groups. He returned from Tokyo convinced that British Steel must adopt substantial elements of the Japanese system of integrated production, based on fewer but larger plants. The productivity gap between British and Japanese steel plants was huge: the blast furnace output index (output of tons per manshift per hour) for British steel production in 1969-70 -- when Finniston took his team to Japan -- was 64, while in Japan it was 148, with an average of 104 for all industrialized countries. 
The British steel industry's problems were immense. It was old fashioned, often run down, and there was under-investment. Thirty-nine separate private steel companies produced a mere 14 million tons a year -- not only well below the output of competitor countries but far below accepted international levels of efficiency. Stripped of ideological questions, the nationalization of steel seemed a logical process. The planning committee, prior to nationalization, had concluded that British Steel, reorganized and modernized, could reach a target of 35 million tons a year by the end of a ten-year period. 
When the Conservative Party won the 1970 election Edward Heath was committed to de-nationalizing steel, but he was persuaded by the secretary of trade and industry, Peter Walker, to keep most of the industry in public ownership and to give British Steel the opportunity and the finance to start a massive reorganization scheme. The plan that emerged from these negotiations was very much the responsibility of Finniston -- though everyone concerned, in both politics and industry, was convinced that there was no serious option. The plan involved a major reduction in the industry's workforce, then some 220,000, which inevitably brought Finniston into conflict with the steel unions. This was a new challenge for Finniston, but he handled it with great care and skill. Bill Sirs, general secretary of the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation, whose members suffered the largest cuts, later paid a considerable tribute to Finniston: 'Monty had that touch of human understanding. He was a good man who won my respect in difficult times' (Petch, 138). He also won the respect of Sirs's predecessor, Sir Dai Davies. Finniston himself found the task of cutting back on numbers a very hard task. He publicly declared: 'Whenever I lay men off, I see faces' (Petch, 138). He regarded the whole question of redundancy in the steel plants as a BSC responsibility and not one that should be left to the government. So he created BSC (Industry) in 1975, which was designed to help retrain redundant steel workers and to find them alternative jobs in new industries which Finniston encouraged to come into the areas of steel closures. It was a policy that had particular success in south Wales. 
Politically, however, Finniston did less well. There was friction with ministers about steel modernization and reorganization and the government set up the Beswick committee, whose report proposed keeping old steel plants in existence despite the financial burden. Finniston clashed with ministers over the Beswick report and especially with Tony Benn, who became secretary of state for industry in the Wilson government of 1974. Finniston had already been blamed for overestimating the steel industry's potential market and pushing ahead too enthusiastically with modernization. But this was an unfair and jaundiced criticism since the whole concept of a larger, more efficient steel industry was a well-established requirement agreed by all parties as an economic essential for the UK from the mid-1960s onwards. Finniston nevertheless took the blame for what was later described as 'over-ambitious over-expansion'. Moreover, the long delays in getting new equipment into steel plants aggravated the problem. By the time the industry was better equipped to compete with countries such as Japan, a world recession, induced by the 1973-5 oil crisis, had transformed the scene. 
The British steel industry was in the process of being turned round in a spectacular way when the recession hit. For the first four years of nationalization from 1967 the industry made losses, but then it began to make small profits -- $78 million in 1974-5. Steel prices were tightly controlled by the government -- a hidden subsidy to the rest of industry. If European prices had operated, as later they had to, BSC's profits would have been ten times that. But Finniston took the blame for the industry's record, and his refusal to accept political interference led to his downfall. When in 1976 the government came to consider extending his term of office he was rejected, especially by Tony Benn, as being out of sympathy with the government. It was an absurd judgement, but it was accepted by Harold Wilson, albeit with reluctance. 
Finniston was sixty-four when he left BSC. It is interesting to speculate that if the question of renewing his appointment had been delayed until James Callaghan was ensconced in no. 10 the outcome might well have been different. Such speculation is strengthened by the fact that one year after his departure from British Steel Finniston was appointed as chairman of a government enquiry into the engineering profession and its future -- a Callaghan appointment. Finniston's report, published in 1980, offered a major blueprint for the future of British industry, not just for the engineering profession. It argued: 'The regeneration of UK manufacturing competitiveness must be given over-riding priority in national policies with the emphasis on developing market-orientated engineering excellence' ('The Times', 5 Feb 1991). Finniston hoped that the report would persuade the government -- Mrs Thatcher had just been elected -- into changing its attitude toward manufacturing industry, but it didn't. Although an engineering council was established, the government turned down Finniston's key proposal, which was to establish a statutory engineering authority with wide powers to train a new generation of engineers and to ensure the highest standards of qualifications through a properly registered professional body with its own code of professional practice. Nevertheless the report represented an important watershed for engineering and in particular led to a basic change in attitudes to women engineers, since Finniston recommended sweeping changes to help the admission of women into the engineering profession. 
Finniston was actively involved in innumerable organizations throughout the 1980s. He was chancellor of Stirling University from 1978 until 1988, pro-chancellor of the University of Surrey from 1978 until 1985, and a member of the council of King's College, London, from 1985 until 1990. He received honorary doctorates from his old universities of Glasgow and Strathclyde and from a dozen others. He was chairman of the council of the Scottish Universities Business School (1976-87); president of Carmel College (1980-82); council member of the Weizmann Institute and of the New London Synagogue; and he was associated in various ways with Lancaster University, Cranfield Institute of Technology, Corby City Technology College, and Waltham Forest College. He was chairman of the Open University's appeal committee (helping to raise $3 million for the university), and was also instrumental in encouraging Sir Isaac Wolfson to make the first of his donations to Oxford University, which culminated in the founding of Wolfson College, Oxford. He was chairman of the Policy Studies Institute from 1975 to 1984. 
At various times in the 1980s Finniston was chairman or director of more than a dozen companies and indeed started his own, H. M. Finniston Ltd, in 1980. None of this deflected his time and attention from active work for a number of charities. He was founding chairman of the Prison Reform Trust (1981-8) and did a great deal of work to raise funds for the trust as well as visiting, and lecturing in, prisons. He was also chairman of the Amnesia Association and president of the Stress Syndrome Foundation. 
Finniston was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1969 (vice-president, 1971-2), a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1978, and a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 1983. He was knighted in 1975. He died at 27 Circus Road, Westminster, London, on 2 February 1991, following a severe heart attack. He was survived by his wife and two children. A memorial service was held at the New London Synagogue on 7 May 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49642


FitzGibbon, Theodora (1916-1991), writer on cookery, was born on 21 October 1916, the only legitimate daughter of John Archibald Rosling (known as Adam) and his wife, Alice Winifred Hodgkins. A great many myths surrounded her life and background: she once told an interviewer that she was born at Southampton, her mother having narrowly avoided giving birth on the boat from Ireland, but she was in fact born at 28 St James Road, Bethnal Green, London, where her maternal grandmother, who was present at her birth, had founded a slum clinic at the turn of the century. In her autobiography 'With Love' (1982) -- which covers the years 1938-46 and contains a superlative account of living in Chelsea during the blitz -- she says she was brought up by her grandmother, and that her mother worked at the clinic for over twenty years. Some sources give her father's occupation as veterinary surgeon, but her birth certificate describes him as 'petty officer, Royal Naval Air Service (motor engineer)', and at the time of her first marriage he was stated merely to be 'of independent means'. Her own name appears in a variety of forms: on her birth certificate she was Joan Eileen, on her first marriage she was Joanne Eileen Winifred, on her second she was Joanna Eileen Theodora, and at her death she was simply Theodora, the name by which she had been known for most of her life. (As an actress, she had used the name Karen Petersen.) 
None of this would surprise her readers. Reminding them 'how close to the truth are the stories of Somerville and Ross', she instanced her own great-great-uncle, who, she claimed, 'coined his own money in Cloughjordan, King's county, in the 1870s and always used it. As children we would play with some of the coins' ('With Love', 23). Theodora was educated in a number of convents, including St Joseph's, Hendon, and the Sacre Coeur in Bruges (and was expelled from one for betting on horses), as well as at home. She travelled widely with her exigent father -- once when served 'sole Veronique' in an incorrect sauce he threw it on the floor of the restaurant -- eating her way around Europe, the Middle East, and parts of India (where she learned how to make the masala for a curry from scratch). It may have been at a finishing school near Paris that the former Queen Natalie of Serbia gave her cooking lessons. 
When Theodora was eighteen, her father gave her $1000 and left her to make her own way. She went on the stage in repertory in Coventry and Birmingham, and then joined a touring company, the English Players, in the French provinces. She later had several parts on the West End stage, modelled for a fashionable couturier, and appeared in films, including Anthony Asquith's 'Freedom Radio' (1941). In Paris for a fortnight in 1938, she met the successful photographer (and less successful surrealist painter) Peter Rose Pulham (1910-1956) and began an affair. Through him she met Balthus, Cocteau, Dali, and Picasso in Paris, and then in London, after a dramatic escape from France by bicycle and boat from Bordeaux, she worked for a time for the Free French, befriended the poet Brian Howard, stayed at Rosa Lewis's Cavendish Hotel, and consorted with both the frogman Commander Crabbe and the Soviet spy Donald Maclean. At the one-room Colony Club, the Horseshoe, and the Mandrake, she and Pulham drank with the young painters John Banting, John Minton, Lucian Freud, and Francis Bacon. 
The affair with Pulham ended in 1943, after Theodora had met the Irish-American writer (Robert Louis) Constantine Lee-Dillon FitzGibbon (1919-1983). In his amiable farewell note, Pulham declared his liking for 'dirty black-haired women' ('With Love', 150): Theodora was a fastidious natural blonde, whose long arms had been admired by Picasso. After the divorce from his first wife was finalized, FitzGibbon and Theodora were married, at Chelsea register office on 21 March 1944. Dylan Thomas was to have been one of the witnesses, but arrived too late for the ceremony: he wrote a version of 'At last, in a wrong rain' for their wedding anniversary. The marriage lasted fifteen years, and was often stormy. It ended in divorce in 1959, when Theodora found FitzGibbon in bed with one of her house guests. The following day they complimented her on the 'boeuf a la mode' she had left in the kitchen. 
Theodora FitzGibbon began her career as a cookery writer in 1952. Having been obliged to feed her husband and friends during the war and rationing on horse-liver pate, whale meat, and rook pie, she was commissioned to write a cookery book, 'Cosmopolitan Cookery in an English Kitchen'. She welcomed the opportunity to return to more conventional foodstuffs, and showed an understandable preference for rich ingredients. More than twenty-five further cookery books appeared. A series of 'A Taste of...' books examined different regional specialities mainly from the British Isles, including 'A Taste of Ireland' (1968) (which startles the squeamish reader with a recipe for drisheen, a dish of pig's blood and cream), but were not merely recipe books: she had a talent for acquiring arcane knowledge about the history, sociology, and geography of food, which she shared with her readers. Nowhere was this more pronounced than in her encyclopaedic 'The Food of the Western World' (1976), for which she gathered material for fifteen years. Lest the reader think her recipes were overwhelmingly based on the subsequently unpopular offal and dairy produce, 'Eat Well and Live Longer' (1968) collected recipes without the use of animal fats. In 1956 she began a cookery column in the 'Daily Telegraph', and for twenty years she contributed a column to the 'Irish Times'. 
Theodora remained on friendly terms with FitzGibbon after their divorce, despite her own second marriage, on 17 September 1960, to George Edward Morrison ('b'. 1922), a film-maker and film archivist, and lived in Dalkey, co. Dublin. In this marriage she found domestic equilibrium and happiness, and in many ways the move to Ireland was a return to her roots: she maintained: 'I have never understood the English, nor they me' ('The Guardian', 27 March 1991). Her novel, 'The Flight of the Kingfisher' (1967), was made into a successful television play, but she did no further work in that form. Her two volumes of autobiography, 'With Love' (1982) and 'Love Lies a Loss' (1985), were her last books. Theodora FitzGibbon died on 25 March 1991 in St Columcilles Hospital, Killiney, co. Dublin, having outlived most of the rackety, bohemian companions of her youth. 


@@@@@


doc= 49643


Fonteyn, Dame Margot (1919-1991), ballet dancer, was born on 18 May 1919 at 49 London Road, Reigate, Surrey, the younger child and only daughter of Felix John Hookham ('b'. 1889), civil engineer, and his wife, Hilda Acheson, formerly Fontes (1894-1988). Fonteyn claimed to have inherited her enthusiasm and response to music and rhythm from her half-Irish, half-Brazilian mother, and from her father the tenacity and perfectionism to exploit those qualities so as to become one of the great dancers of all time. 
From the age of four Peggy attended dancing classes with Grace Bosustow in Ealing, where the family had moved. Bosustow luckily gave her not only a proper grounding but was able to tell her mother (the prime mover of her career) how to choose good teachers when Mr Hookham's new job with the British-American Tobacco Company necessitated moving to the United States and then China. At first the liveliness of character-dancing attracted Peggy more than the pure classicism that later brought her fame, and she had no real ambition until inspired, on a visit home in 1931, by seeing Alicia Markova (the finest English ballerina before Fonteyn) in 'Les sylphides'. The Hookhams were then living in Shanghai, where luckily they found an exceptionally talented teacher, the Russian emigre George Goncharov. He already had another English girl, June Brae (later Fonteyn's colleague at Sadler's Wells), as a pupil, whose seriousness fired Peggy to try harder, having grown used to being the best in her class. (Goncharov's partner Vera Volkova later became one of Fonteyn's most influential teachers in London.) After two years her mother brought her back to England, and she studied first with Markova's teacher Serafina Astafyeva before joining the Vic-Wells School. Within a few weeks she was performing with the Vic-Wells Ballet, and before the year was out had her first solo role, acting not dancing as the child in Ninette de Valois's 'The Haunted Ballroom', under an interim version of her stage name, Margot Fontes. She then took the name Fonteyn; her brother, Felix, a photographer specializing in dance, adopted it too. Before Fonteyn was sixteen Frederick Ashton gave her the surprisingly voluptuous leading part of the Creole girl in his 'Rio Grande'; when Markova left the company soon afterwards, Fonteyn was one of the young dancers who shared the ballerina's roles among them. It did not take long for her (despite her own feelings of inadequacy) to emerge as the pick of the bunch, and by the time she was twenty Fonteyn had danced the lead in three of the great classics: 'Giselle', 'Swan Lake' and 'The Sleeping Beauty'. She had also created roles in a series of ballets by Ashton: the Fiancee in 'Le baiser de la fee', the captivating Woman in Ball-dress in 'Apparitions', the poor duped Flower-seller in 'Nocturne', forlorn Julia in 'A Wedding Bouquet', and the Young Woman in 'Horoscope'. Ashton, whose muse had hitherto been Markova's more brittle precision and delicacy, wrote later (in 'The Art of Margot Fonteyn') of her innate musicality and wonderful physical proportions, her sense of line and beautiful arm movements, and that: 'Never once did she make a gesture which was not completely true; one that did not come from the heart.... Along with her other attributes she has a feminine warmth which readily communicates itself to an audience.... Had I not been able to work with Margot, I might never have developed the lyrical side of my work. (Money)' Fonteyn was fortunate in the colleagues under whose professional influence she found herself. De Valois, directing the young company, had a far-sighted grasp of strategy in repertory and casting. Ashton not only developed Fonteyn's interpretative gifts but advised her how to dress and behave off-stage. Robert Helpmann, her most frequent partner, set the example of his keen theatrical flair, and the company's music director, (Leonard) Constant Lambert, a man of wide culture, took her particularly under his wing. Lambert and Fonteyn became lovers, but he ended their relationship gracelessly when he remarried, which perhaps explains why in her autobiography she failed to mention his artistic influence. 
The outbreak of the Second World War brought a more urgent tempo to the company's work. Instead of only two or three performances a week, they began dancing nightly, with matinees besides, to entertain war workers and troops on leave; long, gruelling tours were made between short London seasons. The company, renamed Sadler's Wells Ballet, was in the Netherlands when the Germans invaded, and escaped with nothing more than what the dancers stood up in. Fonteyn by now was, at twenty, the undisputed ballerina, with a consequent demand for her to appear as often as possible. And there were new roles to add, notably two by Ashton which extended her range with the passion of 'Dante Sonata' and the glitter of 'The Wanderer', besides another classic, 'Coppelia', to which she brought a distinctive sense of humour. 
This wartime experience helped develop the stamina that made Fonteyn's later career possible, but at the time it did more to consolidate her talent than to advance her artistry. The way she danced in 'The Sleeping Beauty' when the company moved to Covent Garden in 1946 seemed impressive by the standards of the time. Luckily Ashton immediately created in 'Symphonic Variations' a work showing Fonteyn's lyrical gifts to supreme advantage. Further important roles were as the Miller's Wife in 'The Three-Cornered Hat' (dancing with its choreographer, Leonide Massine) and in Ashton's creation of the austerely evocative 'Scenes de ballet'. Another turning point came in 1948, when she went to Paris to create the role of Agathe, the cat-woman (Fonteyn loved cats) in Roland Petit's 'Les demoiselles de la nuit'. The frank admiration of this glamorous young choreographer, and being treated as a star, added a new assurance and crispness to everything she did on returning to London. The acclaim Fonteyn received in New York in the following year, opening the Sadler's Wells Ballet's first season there with 'The Sleeping Beauty', completed the transformation into a ballerina of international quality. 
Before the American tour an injury during the first night of Ashton's 'Don Juan' had kept Fonteyn from the stage for several months and prevented her from dancing in the premiere of his first three-act ballet, 'Cinderella'. When she took over, however, she made the work specially her own, bringing out its qualities of humour and romance. This was soon followed by two of Fonteyn's greatest roles: the emotional depth and richness of 'Daphnis and Chloe', the drama, comedy, and classic display of 'Sylvia'. Both were by Ashton but they were as different as could be. 
Fonteyn's career was subsequently interrupted more than once by serious injury or illness that might have precipitated other dancers into early retirement, but she returned each time apparently stronger than before, and went on successfully long past the age when a dancer's powers usually decline. In Fonteyn the physical loss was compensated for by continually developing expressiveness and artistic maturity. 
In 1955 Fonteyn married Dr Roberto Emilio de Arias (1918-1989), son of Harmadio Arias, president of Panama from 1932 to 1936, and his wife, Rosario Guardia de Arias. He was a sweetheart of Fonteyn's girlhood who had married and had a family before re-entering her life. A lawyer and politician in his native Panama, he was immediately after their wedding appointed ambassador to the court of St James. Fonteyn managed to combine the duties of an ambassador's wife with her already demanding career, although she revealed otherwise little concern for politics (she was criticized for dancing in South Africa during a dancers' union ban over apartheid, and she happily accepted invitations from Imelda Marcos, wife of the right-wing Philippine president). When Arias fell from political favour she supported his attempts to regain power in Panama, even to the point of being arrested and deported during one of his attempted coups, an experience she bore with calm dignity, as she did also an occasion in 1967 when she and Rudolf Nureyev were held in custody in San Francisco after attending a party where some of the guests had used drugs. 
Shortly before Fonteyn's wedding Ninette de Valois told her that she had been chosen to become president of the Royal Academy of Dancing (an international body responsible for teaching standards in ballet) in succession to its founder president, Adeline Genee. When she found her reluctance to accept the post firmly overruled, Fonteyn refused to treat it as a sinecure, and to her other responsibilities she added frequent meetings, oversight of a new syllabus, and the organization of annual fund-raising galas. 
In 1956 Fonteyn, having been created CBE five years earlier, was promoted to DBE. That same year, seeing the Russian ballerina Galina Ulanova as Juliet during the Bolshoi Ballet's first London season was a stimulus for Fonteyn; at last she could understand what Ashton had always said about the extraordinary speed of Anna Pavlova, and try to emulate it. Another Russian former ballerina much admired by Ashton, Tamara Karsavina, also helped from 1954 by coaching her in 'The Firebird' and other roles. But during the later 1950s, troubled by a painful left foot, Fonteyn began to think longingly of retirement, and more so when Michael Somes, her most regular partner since Helpmann's retirement ten years earlier, and well suited to her by his musicality, relinquished all his parts needing strong technique. Fonteyn even for a time gave up her most demanding ballet, 'Swan Lake', with its double role for the ballerina. She was worried that this might lead to a general decline in her ability, although reassured when Ashton created another long ballet for her, 'Ondine', a fluent role that gave her special pleasure. 
The most vital impetus to extending Fonteyn's career came in 1962 when de Valois invited Rudolf Nureyev, newly settled in the West, to dance with what had by now become the Royal Ballet, and offered Fonteyn the opportunity of dancing with him in 'Giselle' for his debut. She had reservations because of the difference in age (she forty-two, he only twenty-three) but decided she must accept to maintain her pre-eminence. In fact they went wonderfully together, each inspiring the other and able to learn from the experience. Thus began possibly the greatest of all ballet partnerships: two dancers, both individually superb, who raised each other to new heights. Their immediate rapport, the chemistry between them on stage, and the unanimity of purpose in preparation gave their performances together a uniquely satisfying quality. Besides, both learned so much from the other in matters of style, emotional understanding, and presentation that their work with other partners benefited too. Nureyev's analytical understanding of technique and its physical basis also helped Fonteyn to overcome difficulties she had experienced, for instance with fouettes. 
Fonteyn's long career on stage was made easier because her dancing never depended primarily on virtuosity, although her technique was stronger than was often said -- by herself among others. It was she who introduced the long, sustained balances now expected of Aurora in the 'Rose adagio' of 'The Sleeping Beauty'. Notably, too, when younger dancers took over some of the roles created for Fonteyn, they revealed unexpected difficulties, apparently because they lacked her gift of phrasing steps to the music. Certainly Fonteyn never lacked the technique for any role in which she was cast. These covered a vast range. Besides the many ballets created for her by Ashton, other choreographers who made roles for her were as varied as de Valois in her seriously dramatic 'Don Quixote'; John Cranko, whose 'Poeme de l'extase' with the Stuttgart Ballet was inspired by Skryabin's music, the paintings of Klimt, and a Colette novel to show Fonteyn the mature woman; Peter Darrell, who presented her as a Beardsley seductress in 'Scarlet Pastorale' with the Scottish Ballet; and even the American contemporary dance pioneer Martha Graham, who mounted 'Lucifer' for Nureyev and Fonteyn. 
The greatest dramatic experience of the Fonteyn-Nureyev partnership was 'Marguerite and Armand', where Ashton adapted the story of Marguerite Gautier into a series of flashbacks to a Liszt sonata. Fonteyn's role in this ranged, within a few minutes, from the smiling cynosure of all male eyes at a party, through her sickness, her happiness in the country, her self-sacrifice, the bitterness (shown in the inimitably painful dragging of her feet) of rejection and insult, to the final reconciliation coming tragically too late; all set against the feverish intensity of Nureyev's Armand and the stubborn dignity of Somes as the father. 
Fonteyn and Nureyev were, against her wishes and those of the choreographer, but at the insistence of the Royal Ballet's American impresario, the first to play the title roles in Kenneth MacMillan's 'Romeo and Juliet', which had been meant for two of MacMillan's previous collaborators. Mostly, however, it was the old classics in which Fonteyn and Nureyev repeatedly played together. Both, for instance, were unmatched in giving theatrical point to Petipa's sublime dances for 'The Sleeping Beauty' (although, surprisingly, she claimed it was the ballet she least liked). In 'Swan Lake' she amazingly got better and better, not by elaborating but by simplifying so as to strip the role down to its essence. When Nureyev added unfamiliar classics to the Royal Ballet's repertory (the Shades scene from 'La bayadere', 'Raymonda', the 'pas de deux' from the 'Corsair') and invented his own 'Swan Lake' in Vienna, he insisted that Fonteyn had to be the ballerina, and deliberately gave her solos she would find difficult, to spur her to new discoveries. 
With the Royal Ballet Fonteyn occupied a position of complete supremacy. It was sometimes suggested that her presence held back the progress of other dancers, but there was never among her contemporaries or juniors anyone to equal her. By 1959 the demand for seats when she appeared was such that special prices were charged, and in that same year she began to be billed as a guest artist so that she would be free to accept more of the other engagements she was offered worldwide. Nevertheless the Royal Ballet remained her base until Ashton, who had succeeded de Valois as director, retired in 1970, although she also danced with more than thirty other companies and specially assembled groups. 
From 1964, when Dr Arias was shot and paralysed by a colleague whom he was alleged to have cuckolded, Fonteyn had an extra incentive to go on working for his medical bills; she remained devoted to his well-being and took him in a wheelchair on most of her journeys. To mark her sixtieth birthday in May 1979 the Royal Ballet gave a gala in her honour, including a 'Salut d'amour' by Ashton which he danced with her. She also danced with her old partner Helpmann in the 'Tango' of Ashton's 'Facade', and at the end of the performance the Royal Ballet gave her, uniquely, the official title of prima ballerina assoluta. This had been widely assumed to be her farewell, but after that she took on another new role as the leading nymph in Nijinsky's 'L'apres-midi d'un faune' during Nureyev's 1979 summer season, for which he also persuaded her to resume the Girl in 'Le spectre de la rose'. From time to time thereafter she appeared on special occasions, but only in parts that required no steps; her last time on stage was as the Queen in 'The Sleeping Beauty' with Birmingham Royal Ballet in Miami in February 1986. 
In later years Fonteyn settled in a small house with no telephone in a remote village in Panama, where Arias had a farm, and that remained her home after his death on 22 November 1989. She had few comforts, having spent most of her money on caring for him, but she found a real interest in cattle farming. She fell ill with cancer, but still undertook some teaching and coaching. She also continued visiting England each year, for the assembly of the Royal Academy of Dancing and to attend the degree ceremony at Durham University, which had elected her its chancellor in 1982. This honour was offered unexpectedly and she said that she accepted with awe, but she threw herself wholeheartedly into its duties, astonishing the academics with the fluency and passion for education revealed in her speech, delivered without notes, at her installation in Durham Cathedral. 
Fonteyn's own general education had been repeatedly interrupted by putting dance first, but that did not prevent her writing several books. The most ambitious was based on a six-part television series which she wrote, introduced, and starred in, called 'The Magic of Dance' (1980; BBC television series 1979). There were also an autobiography (1975), a study of Pavlova (1984), and 'A Dancer's World' (1978), explaining the nature of a ballet career. 
Because Fonteyn was known to have exhausted her savings on hospital bills for her husband and then for herself, Covent Garden gave a gala for her benefit in May 1990 at which the tenor Placido Domingo volunteered to sing, and Somes and Nureyev took small parts in 'Romeo and Juliet', before an audience determined to demonstrate its admiration and affection for the guest of honour. She died in Panama City nine months later, on 21 February 1991, and was buried near her village home. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 2 July 1991. 

'Many dancers excelled Fonteyn in virtuosity or their theatrical intensity in dramatic roles. Her special gift was for grasping completely the intention and balance of the dance and the music and bringing them to life for the audience. She never lost the joyousness which marked her dancing from childhood, and the ability to communicate that was perhaps the supreme secret of her art. During an extraordinarily long career she brought her gifts to ever wider audiences in many parts of the world on stage; millions more saw her on television or in films. Consequently, even more than Anna Pavlova in the early years of the century, Fonteyn awakened a love of dance in untold thousands of spectators. ('The Times')' 



@@@@@


doc= 49645


Fox, Charles Richard Jeremy (1921-1991), writer on jazz and radio broadcaster, was born on 7 April 1921 at 4 Clarence Buildings, Weymouth, Dorset, the son of Harold Fox, at the time an electrician with HMS 'Gibraltar', and his wife, Martha Mary Warren. The family moved to Bournemouth in the mid-1930s, and Fox lived there until he moved to London in 1954. He developed an interest in jazz in his schooldays and soon began to study and write on the subject. Fox was giving regular record recitals to the Bournemouth Rhythm Club by the early 1940s, helping to formulate many local youthful tastes for jazz; he made a similar contribution in the field of modern literature, of which he was also an enthusiastic follower. Everyone who has written appreciatively of his career has noted his wide and all-embracing tastes; his outlook on both music and literature was founded on the traditional but extended to the most avant-garde. Before he was able to write for a living, he worked for Thomas Cook, the well-known travel agency. During the war years he worked in the drawing-office of the Experimental Bridging Establishment at Christchurch, where the famous Bailey bridge was conceived. 
Fox moved to London in 1954, having already established a solid reputation as a jazz critic through his writing in various jazz magazines including 'Jazz Forum', published in the 1940s, and he later became a regular contributor to Albert McCarthy's 'Jazz Monthly', founded in 1955, which published some of the country's most intelligent writings on jazz until it folded in 1972. His services were soon in demand for the newly created LP sleeves, and he wrote many for the smaller jazz labels as well as for the larger EMI, Philips, and Decca groups, for the latter writing regularly for the London series 'Origins of Jazz'. He also contributed to 'The Decca Book of Jazz' (1958) and 'Duke Ellington: his Life and Music' (1958) (both edited by Peter Gammond), contributing one of the best pieces in the book on Ellington (who was always one of his very special interests) and his recordings in the 1930s; he then collaborated with Peter Gammond, Alun Morgan, and Alexis Korner on 'Jazz on Record: a Critical Guide' (1960). Charles Fox wrote 'Fats Waller' (1960; reprinted in 'Kings of Jazz', New York, 1978) and 'Jazz in Perspective' (1969); and collaborated with Valerie Wilmer on 'The Jazz Scene' (1972) and with Max Harrison and Eric Thacker on 'The Essential Jazz Records, Volume 1' (1984; 2nd edn, 2000). An outstanding example of his writings on jazz was 'Sit down and listen: the story of Max Roach', an article in 'Repercussions: a Celebration of African-American Music' edited by Geoffrey Haydon and Dennis Marks (1985). There was a frequent strain of wit in his reviews, a good example being reprinted in Jim Godbolt's 'A History of Jazz in Britain, 1950-70' (1989). But like others who have become too deeply embroiled in the more temporal forms of journalism and broadcasting, he never got round to writing the really substantial volumes on jazz that his followers would have liked him to produce, or what would surely have been welcome books on his other interests such as music-hall and cricket (he was a loyal supporter of Hampshire). 
From the early 1950s Fox was a regular jazz record reviewer for 'The Gramophone', and he wrote for 'Jazz News' from 1951 to 1962. He was also jazz critic at various times for the 'New Statesman', 'The Guardian', and the 'Sunday Times'. He interviewed many leading jazz musicians including Benny Carter, Milt Jackson, Dizzy Gillespie, Earl Hines, and Clark Terry for BBC Radio 3's series 'Jazzmen Talking' and presented a history of jazz called 'Jazz in Perspective' for the same network, as well as conceiving many individual radio features, of which the most ambitious were documentaries on Jelly Roll Morton and Max Roach and a history of ragtime. From the early 1960s he was the host of the weekly record programme 'Jazz Today'. In the 1970s he returned to his native Weymouth to live at 40 The Esplanade; he travelled to London each week to record the programme, keeping a 'pad' in Bayswater at the home of Alexis Korner and his wife. When Peter Clayton became ill he took over Radio 3's 'Jazz Record Requests', but Clayton briefly took over again when Charles Fox suddenly succumbed to a heart attack and died in an ambulance on his way to the Weymouth and District Hospital on 9 May 1991. 
Fox's great literary interests were less known. A shared interest in poetry led to a friendship with the poet Christopher Logue, whom he first met in 1949 at a meeting of the Bournemouth Film Society. With the help of Patrick Brangwyn they produced for a short while a poetry magazine entitled 'Ninepence'. Fox often contributed poems to other magazines, both jazz and literary -- a typical example of his crossover interests being 'Poem for the Late Jimmy Noone' published in 1947. At this time he wrote and published a children's book. In 1958 he was involved with Logue in the experimental poetry-and-jazz movement and produced a successful album with the backing of the Tony Kinsey Quartet. 
The fostering of serious jazz interest on BBC Radio 3 was Charles Fox's natural niche; he was an erudite and scholarly man, bearded and prone to wearing the tweed jackets and woolly pullovers so characteristic of the immediate post-war years, and many may have found him a bit daunting at first acquaintance. But then one discovered a person of great warmth, charm, wit, and humour, always ready to spend generous time on any jazz or literary project. He is remembered as one of the finest writers and talkers on jazz that the British scene has produced. 


@@@@@


doc= 49647


Frohlich, Herbert (1905-1991), theoretical physicist, was born on 9 December 1905 in Rexingen, in the Black Forest of south-west Germany, the second of three children of Julius Frohlich (1879-1952), a cattle dealer, and his wife, Frida, 'nee' Schwarz (died 1959). The family moved to Munich while Herbert was still young. Both parents were Jewish. Frohlich took no interest in his mother's devout faith and soon showed his independent spirit. He chose his own school and later transferred to a technical college where he discovered the attractions of radio and mathematics. At the University of Munich he studied theoretical physics, first with Wilhelm Wien and then, after Wien's death in 1928, with Arnold Sommerfeld, gaining his DPhil in 1930. During this period he was an enthusiastic hiker, mountaineer, and skier, and until late in life would lead colleagues and students on long, fast, cross-country walks, illuminated by lively discussion of physical problems. He was always generous of time and ideas, and inspired great devotion. An appointment in 1933 as a 'Privatdozent' at Freiburg University was cut short when Hitler assumed power. His father suffered a severe beating, and the whole family, except Frohlich himself, took the first opportunity to escape to France and thence to Palestine. Frohlich (as he was known to almost everyone, even his wife) hazarded his life for a year in Germany to rescue what he could of the family property. The local Nazi leader being absent for a day to confer with Hitler, Frohlich slipped away to Russia and the Ioffe Institute in Leningrad. But in 1935, along with other foreigners, he was expelled, and eventually reached haven in Bristol by way of Rome and Holland, with support from the Academic Assistance Council. Apart from a few months of internment in 1940 as an enemy alien he spent the war in Bristol, and then went to Liverpool in 1948 at Sir James Chadwick's invitation, the last of his many migrations. There, on 3 July 1950, he married the much younger Fanchon Aungst, an American and a talented artist who had studied philosophy at Oxford. To his disappointment, for he loved children, the marriage was childless. 
Frohlich, who was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1951, remained professor of theoretical physics at Liverpool until 1973; he was then professor of solid state electronics at Salford University from 1973 until 1976. He had wide-ranging interests in physics and a ready skill in the mathematical analysis of whatever problem took his fancy. His approach was strongly influenced by the German models of his youth, with a delight in systematic development from basic ideas until he was satisfied that his result was compatible with the known facts. For the facts themselves he was content to rely on the experimenters, having no personal interest in the practical affairs of a laboratory. One merit, to him, of Liverpool was the university's willingness to establish a separate theoretical physics department for his research students and collaborators, with only a small number of undergraduate students to teach. 
Frohlich's university career in Munich had started little more than a year after the discovery of quantum mechanics, and his professor, Sommerfeld, a master of the older quantum theory, was one of the pioneers of applying the new theory to the conduction of electricity by electrons in metals. Frohlich's book, 'Elektronentheorie der Metalle' (1936), was perhaps the first of its kind (after the ground-breaking article of Sommerfeld and Bethe in the 'Handbuch der Physik') and the first to include any discussion of semiconductors, obscure and little considered as they were then, but later dominating every aspect of electronics and computers. Between then and 1950 he set aside his interest in metals, and concentrated on insulators, their polarization by weak electric fields, and their catastrophic breakdown in stronger fields. At the same time he became fascinated by new ideas in nuclear physics, especially those of Hideki Yukawa on the as yet undiscovered mesons that bind protons and neutrons into a stable atomic nucleus. His work in this area showed his ability to master and develop the latest mathematical methods involved in the quantum theory of fields. From time to time he returned to these problems with great fertility of imagination but, as befell most other workers in particle physics, his conceptions suffered severe competition, and perhaps little of his achievement survived explicitly in the fundamental theories that later commanded assent. 
By contrast Frohlich's work on dielectrics, on which he published a small but still widely quoted text in 1949, led him to a succession of discoveries which guaranteed his place in the history of solid-state physics. In Bristol he began, with Mott, to study the motion of electrons under the influence of strong electric fields, and the collisions with vibrations of the crystal lattice which deflect their motion and hinder the growth of an avalanche of fast electrons -- an important mechanism of dielectric breakdown. In examining the process further he brought to bear his expertise in quantum field theory, possibly its first application to solids, to analyse the deformation of an ionic lattice by the field of an electron. Not only did he describe the 'large polaron', moving as a free particle with the electronic mass somewhat enhanced by the locally deformed lattice, but he realized that the deformation itself could attract another electron to form a loosely bound pair. This led him to propose in 1950 the first theory of superconductivity that had the merit of a sound physical basis. 
It was recognized after 1933 that the ability of certain metals to conduct electricity without resistance, at very low temperatures, depended on their expulsion of magnetic flux, and after 1936 this property of perfect diamagnetism became linked with the presence of an energy gap -- unlike ordinary metals at zero temperature, an electron in a superconductor cannot be excited to a higher state without the supply of a certain minimum energy. Frohlich showed that the attractive force resulting from lattice distortion could produce the desired gap without (as in insulators) inhibiting electron motion. While preparing his paper for publication he learned that different isotopes of mercury make the transition to superconductivity at slightly different temperatures, as his theory predicted. This was enough to convince him and others that electron lattice interaction lay at the heart of superconductivity. Frohlich's detailed theory was not readily accepted, and it was seven years before the idea of electron pairs was incorporated into the later renowned theory of John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer. But Frohlich's achievement inspired this breakthrough, and was entirely novel in that until then the ionic lattice had been treated as a rigid structure, playing at most a minor role in superconductivity. 
Frohlich's earlier work on dielectrics also seems to have inspired the ideas which from 1966 dominated his thought -- a complicated system, such as a living cell, might be stimulated into organized oscillatory motion by irradiation with relatively weak electromagnetic waves. Despite the handicap of an analysis hard enough for many physicists and opaque to most biologists, he attracted an enthusiastic following who were encouraged by observations that the rate of cell division could be altered by irradiation, and that the effects were sharply dependent on the frequency used. There is no direct evidence to support Frohlich's precise mechanism, but the occurrence of any such effect was enough to stimulate further experiments, which he supported to the last, especially at the Max Planck Institut in Stuttgart, where he was a visiting professor from 1980. He died of cancer of the bladder in Liverpool on 23 January 1991, and was cremated there a week later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49648


Fuller, Roy Broadbent (1912-1991), poet, was born at Failsworth, Lancashire, on 11 February 1912, the eldest son of Leopold Charles Fuller (1884-1920), assistant works manager at a rubber-proofing mill, and Nellie, 'nee' Broadbent (1888-1949), the daughter of a workhouse master's clerk. They were married in 1910. Roy's father died after an operation for bowel cancer on 18 December 1920, and shortly thereafter his widow and family began a life of living in rented accommodation. Roy attended Blackpool high school from 1923 to 1928 and on leaving school was articled to a firm of solicitors, T. and F. Wylie Kay. He was admitted as a solicitor in 1934. On 25 June 1936 he married Kathleen (Kate) Smith (1913-1993), a journalist with the 'West Lancashire Evening Gazette'. They moved to Kennington near Ashford in Kent, where for three years he was with Flower and Pain, solicitors. Their only son, John Leopold Fuller, himself to become a distinguished poet, was born on new year's day 1937. In December 1938 they moved to Blackheath, when Fuller joined the Woolwich Equitable Building Society as assistant solicitor. 
Fuller first came to public attention as a poet through publication in 'Twentieth Century Verse', edited by Julian Symons, himself later famous as poet, novelist, and critic, and a lifelong friend of Fuller. Symons initiated the series of 'Fortune Poets' in which Fuller's first book, 'Poems' (1939), appeared. Fuller's early poetry was marked by the influence of the work of W. H. Auden and (via the poetry of Norman Cameron) of Robert Graves. 
With the outbreak of the Second World War Fuller was inducted into the Royal Navy in April 1941. After a course in radar, in April 1942 he left for Africa where he was promoted to petty officer in 1943. The experience of Africa in the context of the savagery of the Second World War deepened Fuller's poetry and brought to the fore that sense of incipient chaos lurking in so much of it. During the war John Lehmann, an enduring friend of Fuller, encouraged his work by publication in 'New Writing and Daylight' and 'Penguin New Writing', and by bringing out his second and third books, 'The Middle of a War' (1942) and 'The Lost Season' (1944), from the Hogarth Press. These books established Fuller as a poet of importance. 
Fuller returned to England in 1943 to serve as a lieutenant at the Admiralty in London. On demobilization in December 1945, he returned to the Woolwich, where he remained until his retirement. The end of the Second World War brought a challenging cultural situation for Fuller, whose strongly political orientations, with a decided sympathy for communism, seemed increasingly anachronistic. His immediate post-war collections, 'Epitaphs and Occasions' (1949) and 'Counterparts' (1954), do not have the power of his wartime work, though his extensive reviews and broadcasts of those years contributed to a cultural ambience favourable to the Movement of the 1950s. Many of those often controversial reviews were for 'The Listener', edited by his friend J. R. Ackerley, to whom 'Counterpoints' was dedicated. It was not until the publication of 'Brutus's Orchard' in 1957 that Fuller found a new and abiding poetic voice. There followed a series of volumes -- 'New Poems' (1968), 'Tiny Tears' (1973), and 'From the Joke Shop' (1975), in which Fuller experimented with syllabic verse and wrote with great naturalness and fluency in a manner that was to be characteristic of him -- urbane and ironic, tentative yet exploratory. 
While Fuller's reputation is based on his poetry, in mid-career he published several novels. He began with crime fiction: 'With my Little Eye' (1946), 'The Second Curtain' (1953), and 'Fantasy and Fugue' (1954), brought together in 1988 as 'Crime Omnibus'. These led to his writing 'Image of a Society' (1956), which reflected his experience at the Woolwich; this was followed by 'The Ruined Boys' (1959), 'The Father's Comedy' (1961), 'The Perfect Fool' (1961), 'My Child, my Sister' (1965), considered by many his best, 'The Carnal Island' (1970), and 'Stares' (1990). These books did not initially receive the appreciation they deserve even if they do not represent the foundation of Fuller's fame. Running through them was the theme of the relation of art to life, not inappropriate to an author who had so strong a worldly career. In 1958 he became the solicitor for the Woolwich and was a director from 1969 to 1987, and served as vice-president of the Building Societies Association from 1969 to 1987. 
Fuller was elected professor of poetry at Oxford University for the period 1968 to 1973. His lectures, with their careful and sensitive exploration of the craft of poetry, were published as 'Owls and Artificers' (1971) and 'Professors and Gods' (1974). He was created a CBE in 1970. He served as a governor of the BBC from 1972 to 1979 and from 1976 to 1977 as a member of the Arts Council, where he was chairman of the literature panel. He resigned over what he felt was the profligate distribution of public funds. He was also a member of the Library Advisory Council for England from 1977 to 1979. Awards he received included the Duff Cooper memorial prize in 1968, the queen's gold medal for poetry in 1970, the Cholmondeley award of the Society of Authors in 1980, and an honorary doctorate of literature at the University of Kent in 1986. 
Handsome, moustached, with a full head of curly hair, in his later years he was said jokingly to resemble a retired major-general in appearance. His first three volumes of memoirs, 'Souvenirs' (1980), 'Vamp till Ready' (1982), and 'Home and Dry' (1984), covering his life up to the end of the Second World War, aimed to produce an account that would not seem to be dominated by an imposed pattern. The result appeared desultory to some -- including his publishers, who advised against publication. This led to changes of publisher that were ultimately less than fortunate, and he was left with problems in finding an outlet for his poetry, as he explains in his final volume of memoirs, 'Spanner and Pen' (1991). The experience was extremely disturbing to him -- particularly as the work that he sought to get published was his masterpiece, 'Available for Dreams' (1989) which jointly won the W. H. Heinemann award. 

'Available for Dreams' is perhaps his finest work, in which the tightly contained decency and composure that mark all his poetry come together with the unease concerning the whole enterprise of civilization that lurked behind his wartime poems. These pressures emerge movingly in a domestic ambience, often of his garden at Blackheath, through the awareness that his own life, and the lives of those close to him, are coming to an end. 
In 1990 Fuller was operated on for prostate cancer and again shortly afterwards to retard the spread of the cancer in his bones. After a brief return to activity, he was confined to his home at 37 Langton Way, Blackheath, London, where he died on 27 September 1991. His body was cremated at Eltham crematorium, without benefit of clergy, as he had wished. A widely attended memorial event was held as part of the 1992 Greenwich Festival. 
Fuller was described by the poet Gavin Ewart as 'one of the finest British poets of this century' (quoted on the dust jacket of 'Available for Dreams'), and this is likely to remain an accepted verdict on his achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 49649


Garscadden, Kathleen Mary Evelyn (1897-1991), radio broadcaster, was born on 18 February 1897 at 13 Nithsdale Gardens, Crossmyloof, Glasgow, the daughter of George Garscadden, accountant and businessman, and his wife, Maggie Jane Vint. She was educated at Hutchesons' Girls' Grammar School, Glasgow, before moving to London to train as a professional singer under Sir Henry Wood. She did not pursue her goal of becoming an opera singer and returned to Glasgow. 
Garscadden's broadcasting career began when she acted as a singer, pianist, and announcer on her father's amateur radio station (5MG), located at 141 Bath Street, Glasgow. This station was later bought by the BBC when opening its first Scottish station (5SC) on 6 March 1923 at 202 Bath Street, the location of her father's business premises. Garscadden was invited by Herbert Carruthers (the BBC's first station director in Scotland, and organist in the church choir in which she sang) to join the BBC as a programme assistant in 1923. She sang in concerts and was involved in schools broadcasting, but the primary outlet for her talents was 'Children's Hour', which was broadcast daily at 5 p.m. BBC local stations were also opened in Edinburgh, Aberdeen, and Dundee, transmitting their own children's programmes. Broadcasting was local because of the limited power of the transmitters. 
In the early years BBC staff became the friendly unseen 'aunts' and 'uncles' to young listeners. Garscadden was originally referred to as Auntie Cyclone by her fellow broadcasters because she sometimes read the weather forecasts. She was accompanied by Uncle Bert (Herbert Carruthers), Uncle Mungo (Mungo Dewar), and Uncle Alex (A. H. S. Paterson). She recalled that the BBC disapproved of her being called Auntie Cyclone because it was thought this might confuse children, and so she later became known simply as Auntie Kathleen. Her popularity turned her into a public celebrity. Crowds gathered at the studio to obtain her autograph, and she received a large volume of correspondence from listeners. 
Garscadden retained vivid recollections of the excitement at hearing her voice transmitted from the studio in Bath Street. She produced serial plays, including the Scottish version of 'Toytown', and was also involved in the Radio Circle, a forerunner of Children in Need, which helped children's charities and kept the BBC in contact with its young listeners. On 1 November 1928 the Edinburgh and Dundee stations began to take 'Children's Hour' from Glasgow, which Garscadden presented. The programme became an important fixture in the programme schedules because the BBC recognized that young listeners constituted its future adult audience. Garscadden believed in the Reithian concept that radio could be used to inform and educate, not just to entertain the audience. The coverage of music, literature, history, art, geography, and natural history was certainly appreciated by the programme's young and not so young audience -- in many homes the family listened together. 
Following the outbreak of the Second World War regional programme services disappeared and were replaced by a single Home Service from London, in which Scotland contributed material to 'Children's Hour'. In 1940 Garscadden was appointed as 'Children's Hour' organizer for Scotland, a post she held until her retirement. Favourite serials first broadcast during the war years included 'Tammy Troot' and 'Down at the Mains'. A separate fifty-minute Scottish 'Children's Hour' was restored after the war with the introduction of the Scottish Home Service on 29 July 1945. Programme output was wide-ranging and included dramatized adaptations of classics, outside broadcasts, features on famous Scots, and music from the Glasgow Orpheus Choir. Wireless created many radio personalities, and Garscadden gave opportunities to aspiring actors, musicians, comedians, and entertainers. Many went on to become household names within and beyond Scotland. They included the actors Gordon Jackson, Fulton MacKay, John Grieve, Molly Weir, and Tom Conti; singers such as Moira Anderson and Sydney Devine; the entertainers Stanley Baxter, Jimmy Logan, and Rikki Fulton; and the impressionist Janet Brown. Andrew Stewart, an early participant on 'Children's Hour', went on to become controller of BBC Scotland in 1957. 
Garscadden retired in June 1960 after thirty-seven years' service with the BBC. On 1 July members of the Broadcasting Council for Scotland placed on record their warm appreciation of her outstandingly fine record of service. She left the BBC at a time when children's programmes on radio were being scaled down because of television's increasingly powerful counter-attraction. She returned to give a talk about her childhood in the final 'Children's Hour' programme in 1964. She continued to sing and give piano lessons to children in her small flat at Victoria Place, Station Road, Milngavie, and also took part in occasional programmes. She was presented to the queen in 1983 at the diamond jubilee of BBC children's broadcasting. 
Garscadden was unusual in having worked during her long career as a presenter, broadcaster, programme organizer, and producer. She helped to inform, inspire, and stimulate that boundless world of the imagination in children fostered by the intimacy of radio. Her vast programme output complemented the formal work of the classroom. She conveyed her love of children over the years, and was a natural broadcaster who adhered to high professional standards. She was a legendary character in Scottish broadcasting, discovering many well-known personalities and endearing herself to generations of young listeners. She died of haematemesis at the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, on 20 February 1991 and was cremated at Clydebank crematorium, North Dalnottar, on 27 February. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 49652


Gilliatt, Roger William (1922-1991), clinical neurologist, was born on 30 July 1922 at 58A Wimpole Street, Marylebone, London, the son of Sir William Gilliatt (1884-1956), obstetrician, who attended the births of the prince of Wales and Princess Anne, and his wife, Anne Louise Jane, 'nee' Kann (1884-1978), anaesthetist, daughter of John Kann of Lyne, Surrey, stockbroker. He had one older sister, Elizabeth (1920-2004), private secretary to Winston Churchill from 1945 to 1955. 
Gilliatt was educated at Hildersham House preparatory school, Kent, and Rugby School, Warwickshire. He entered Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1940 but interrupted his studies by enlisting with the King's Royal Rifle Corps in 1942. Serving in north-west Europe as battalion scout platoon commander, he was twice mentioned in dispatches and awarded the Military Cross. The citation spoke of 'Lieutenant Gilliatt's very great leadership... outstanding personal courage [and his] great coolness under heavy shelling proving the greatest inspiration to his men' ('Institute of Neurology annual report'). Reticent about these events in later years, Gilliatt's only comment on the episode was: 'I got lost' (ibid.). After the war he served in the Territorial Army and at one point considered joining the Special Air Service in Malaya, but his father 'sternly put the stark alternatives, a career as an adventurer or as a physician, and left him in no doubt as to the decision he expected' (ibid.). 
Gilliatt returned to Oxford on demobilization and graduated with first-class honours in physiology in 1946, six months after returning from war service. Awarded the Theodore Williams scholarship, from 1946 to 1947 he was research assistant at the spinal injuries unit at Stoke Mandeville Hospital and the university laboratory of physiology in Oxford. After further study at the Middlesex Hospital medical school he graduated BM BCh at Oxford in 1949. He then worked as house physician, casualty officer, and medical registrar at the Middlesex Hospital (1950-53); house physician and resident medical officer at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases (1953-4); physician to the National Hospital and the department for nervous diseases, Middlesex Hospital (1955-87); professor of clinical neurology, University of London (1962-87); and honorary consultant to the Royal Postgraduate Medical School and the Hammersmith Hospital (1982-7). On 18 December 1954 he married Penelope Ann Douglass Conner ['see 'Gilliatt, Penelope (1932-1993)], journalist and writer, daughter of Cyril Conner, barrister. There were no children of the marriage, which ended in divorce in 1963. On 16 May the same year Gilliatt married Mary Elizabeth Green, a 27-year-old journalist, and elder daughter of Arthur Joseph William Green, director of an engineering company. They had one son and two daughters. 
From 1955 to 1962 Gilliatt was a clinical neurologist with a successful Harley Street private practice. Hospital rounds were conducted with military precision. The ward sister placed the patients at attention in their beds, with a chair at the foot for Gilliatt's bag. A luckless medical student, mentioning that a patient with tabes dorsalis had acquired syphilis in the First World War, was taken aside and reprimanded for the indiscretion: 'when speaking of antecedent causes, leprosy 'yes'; syphilis 'no''. Years later Gilliatt apologized for being such a stuffed shirt (private information). But the style did not change and his ward rounds remained perfunctory. The registrar stated the facts; the senior registrar offered an interpretation; the house officer wrote notes but was best advised to remain silent; and Gilliatt spoke briefly to the patient. Behind this veneer of austerity lay the combination of intellectual superiority and an apparent reluctance to display his clinical skills alongside those of the full-time neurologists at Queen Square. Sometimes, and especially if the case had been referred from a neurologist in provincial practice, Gilliatt would visit the patient later in the week, and make a note. These showed clinical skills and a sympathetic attitude to patients that he did not reveal at other times. 
Gilliatt brought rigour and discipline to his own research, which focused on the mechanisms of mechanical and toxic damage to peripheral nerve. His Oxford DM was awarded in 1955 for work on human sensory phenomena. He was Goulstonian lecturer of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1962 and delivered the Oliver Sharpey lecture in 1975. He espoused the ethic of clinical science whereby a problem identified in the clinic should be taken to the laboratory, investigated systematically, and the insights gained used to improve the management of patients. 
Professional life changed for Gilliatt in 1962 when he was appointed to the foundation professorship of clinical neurology in the University of London. This represented the culmination of a long and complex campaign. It was becoming clear that the doctrinaire style of clinical neurology must change as the National Hospital approached its centenary, if the subject and that institution were to avoid being left behind by advances in experimental medicine. But with rigid opposition for change from the medical committee, still Queen Square failed to develop academically. That Gilliatt was eventually able to effect the transformation of academic neurology depended on his vision of the field and ability to harness goodwill and manage opposition. His method was rarely to be absent from the hospital; to prepare for difficulties; to select and prepare allies; to use logical arguments; and occasionally to surprise. The style stemmed from his military background. No less useful as ammunition was the legacy of a famous letter from Derek Denny-Brown to Michael Kremer, dean of the Institute of Neurology. In refusing the offer of the professorship at the Institute of Neurology, Denny-Brown had argued that the professorial unit must not be separate from the rest of activities in the hospital; two days each week should be devoted to research protected from teaching and clinical duties; reciprocal respect and facilities must be ensured between the professor and heads of the laboratory departments, especially in neuropathology; there must be a university contribution to the recurrent costs; and the professor should involve everyone in advancing neurological medicine. Denny-Brown told Ian McDonald in 1963 that Gilliatt 'having the right priorities, being of the establishment, and likely to succeed in moulding the place to his purpose was the only hope for Queen Square' ('Institute of Neurology annual report'). 
By the nature of his role in an institution retaining a monopoly in the training of academic neurologists Gilliatt nurtured most of the professors of neurology in the United Kingdom. He was at ease with and greatly admired by those who worked in his immediate vicinity. He was hospitable and socially attentive to overseas students. But he appeared less relaxed with British trainees, among whom he had a fearsome reputation for aloofness and acerbity. His waspish tongue became legendary. 
Outside the world of science and medicine Gilliatt was known for having been best man at the marriage of Antony Armstrong-Jones and Princess Margaret in Westminster Abbey in May 1960. The 'Daily Express' ran a feature on him in the week before the wedding. The columnist Anne Sharpley wrote of Gilliatt's presence, the ease with which those who met this quiet man soon found themselves involved in long discussions and arguments, and the 'nerve-wracking task of having the eyes of the world on him for a tricky courtly role usually carried out by members of the hereditary peerage'. There was later sympathy at the public breakup of his marriage to Penelope Gilliatt, who left Gilliatt for the playwright John Osborne. The gossip columnists made a meal of this, delighted to get back at her for a searing article written for 'Queen' attacking them for the inaccuracy and scurrilous nature of their columns. 
Gilliatt's views were much in sympathy with the Labour Party and on one occasion he canvassed for a friend who stood (unsuccessfully) as a parliamentary candidate. In 1934-5 his aunt Alice Gilliatt (1880-1957), a suffragette and socialist, was the first woman elected as mayor of Fulham. Despite his socialist opinions, however, Gilliatt would say with much relish that there was nothing like the prospect of a weekend in the country with a valet to unpack his clothes before dinner. He retained a love of history and of literature, especially the writings of Anthony Trollope. He hoped to write a book in retirement on the characters in Trollope but that ambition was not realized. 
After reaching the University of London's statutory retirement age Gilliatt moved to the United States and was appointed senior consultant in clinical neurophysiology at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. Reflecting on his career at Queen Square, on the occasion of the unveiling of his portrait, Gilliatt confided: 'I might have had a slight feeling that I was being kicked out and pensioned off by a not very grateful Institute. As it is I can look back on all those years in the department with the feeling that we did really achieve something, all of us together. (Gilliatt to Ian McDonald, 14 Oct 1988, priv. coll.)' After he separated from his second wife Gilliatt's later years were spent with Patricia Stolar, with whom he found much happiness. He died from pancreatic cancer on 19 August 1991 in Washington, DC, and was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49653


Glynne, Mary Dilys (1895-1991), plant pathologist, was born Mary Dilys Glynne Jones on 19 February 1895 at Glyn Dyl, Upper Bangor, Caernarvonshire, the second daughter and third of five children of John Glynne Jones (1849-1947), solicitor, and his wife, Dilys Lloyd Glynne Jones, nee Davies (1857-1932), educationist. She was a pupil at the Bangor School for Girls, her mother having been a founding governor. She then went on to study at North London Collegiate School (where her mother had also been a pupil and, later, an assistant mistress), and graduated with a degree in botany in 1917 from the University College of North Wales, Bangor, in the founding of which institution both her parents had been closely involved. 
Having dropped the 'Jones' from her surname, Mary Glynne began her professional life in the department of agriculture at Bangor during her graduating summer. The director, Robert G. White, soon recommended her to (Edward) John Russell, director of the agricultural plant research station at Rothamsted. She went to Rothamsted in 1917, initially on a voluntary basis but soon as an assistant botanist under Winifred Brenchley. She remained in close professional and personal contact with Russell until his death, corresponding with him on material for his last work, 'A History of Agricultural Science in Great Britain', published posthumously in 1965. She was an advisory officer to the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries from 1918 and in the same year transferred to the new Rothamsted mycology department as one of the original members under William B. Brierley. Her first major work was on the wart disease of potatoes ('Synchytrium endobioticum'), a soil-borne pathogen which was leading to widespread crop failure, and further economic losses when healthy produce could not be transported owing to disease control restrictions. She devised a method of identifying certain soil fungi and susceptible and resistant varieties of potato. Her method of isolating resistant varieties, the Glynne-Lemmerzahl method, remained in use, with modification, long after her death. She was awarded her MSc by the University of Wales for her publications on wart disease. 
In 1927 Glynne was awarded the Georgina Sweet fellowship by the Australian Federation of University Women, which afforded a year's study in Australia. She worked on cereal diseases at the University of Melbourne and travelled through Victoria on the Department of Agriculture's 'Better Farming Train', a mobile demonstration and lecture facility promoting better farming and housekeeping practices through the dissemination of scientific knowledge. Her study tour extended to Tasmania and New Zealand and, on the return journey, to Cape Town and on up into Rhodesia, Kenya, and Tanganyika, learning about the practical problems of agriculture in the developing world. 
On returning to Rothamsted after her year abroad Glynne concentrated on the study of soil-borne cereal diseases, with the autumn of 1930 spent at the Biologische Reichsanstalt in Berlin. She found that, rather than wind and rain, fungal disease at the base of wheat and barley stems was responsible for fields flattened before harvest. In addition to being the first to establish the fungal cause of eyespot of wheat in Britain ('Cercosporella (Pseudocercosporella) herpotrichoides', later known as 'Oculimacula spp.') her extensive trials also established the detrimental effects of growing successive cereal crops on the same land, with clear guidance for addressing the problems through crop rotation, nutrition, and varietal changes. In 1935 she found 'Gibellina cerealis', a fungal pathogen isolated in the UK only at Rothamsted, thought to be traceable to Roman introduction (with the only overseas outbreaks in Italy, Russia, and China). 
Glynne's work, which had a considerable impact on improving yields, gained particular attention during the Second World War, when optimum food production was vital. In 1943 she was awarded a DSc by the University of Wales. After the war she continued to work on cereal diseases, and extensive field trials confirmed her work on crop breaks and rotations. She was made an OBE for services to agriculture in 1960 and retired from her role as a principal scientific officer at Rothamsted in the same year, although she continued to work there on a voluntary basis for two years and her name last appeared on an academic paper in 1985. She was a fellow of the Institute of Biology and, in addition to the archive at Rothamsted, there is a collection of her papers at the Royal Geographical Society, particularly with regard to the lectures that she gave on Cambodia (and especially the temple complex of Angkor Wat) in the 1950s and 1960s. 
In addition to a long and productive professional life Mary Glynne was a passionate and pioneering mountaineer. She came to climbing via fell walking and joined the Fell and Rock Climbing Club in the mid-1920s. While on the Georgina Sweet fellowship she climbed in Australia, New Zealand, and, on her homeward journey, South Africa. She was the first woman (and only the second person) to climb Mount Spencer in New Zealand. She served as vice-president of the Ladies' Alpine Club and was a member of the Pinnacle Club (a club for women climbers established in 1921). While her major Alpine climbs, including the Matterhorn, Mont Blanc, La Meije, and Aiguille du Dru, were between 1930 and 1933, she ascended Mount Fuji in Japan during a lecture tour in 1962 in her late sixties. In addition to climbing she went diving over the Great Barrier Reef and, in later life, developed an interest in yoga. She was an amateur, but well informed, archaeologist, an interest which led to involvement in the 1930s in the excavation of Verulamium (St Albans), with Sir Mortimer Wheeler calling on her professional expertise in examining carbonized Roman wheat grains, which informed her thinking on the incidence of wheat diseases in the area. She died of bronchopneumonia in the Field House Nursing Home in Harpenden on 9 May 1991, a short distance from Rothamsted, the setting of her long and remarkable professional life which had resulted in measurable and enduring improvements in agricultural production at home and abroad. 


@@@@@


doc= 49654


Godwin, Dame Beatrice Annie (1897-1992), trade unionist, was born on 6 July 1897 in Frith Hill, Farncombe, Surrey, into the large family of William Godwin (died 1932), leather dresser and draper, and his wife, Louisa Clare, 'nee' Pearce. She attended the British School in Godalming, Surrey, but, with no money for her further education, left school aged fifteen. 
At sixteen Godwin became a clerk in the counting-house of a West End store in London, earning 5's'. a week. In 1916 she moved to the army pay office, where she remained for three years as a poorly paid civilian clerk. She was among a deputation of young women who asked the army paymaster for more money, but with no union backing they were shouted down. Godwin realized that office workers must become organized. Her sister Elsie, a civil servant, introduced her to the Association of Women Clerks and Secretaries, a small, elitist union of highly qualified, mainly civil service, employees. Godwin joined in 1921, having trained as a shorthand typist. In the mid-1920s she helped to establish and became a prominent member of the Young Suffragettes, who were campaigning to have the vote extended to young women under the age of thirty (an aim achieved in 1928). 
After employment in the offices of engineering and printing firms, Godwin joined the staff of the Association of Women Clerks and Secretaries in 1925, becoming a full-time London organizer in 1928 and assistant secretary in 1931. She also became active on the National Joint Committee of Working Women's Organisations. In 1940 the Association of Women Clerks and Secretaries merged with the National Union of Clerks to become the Clerical and Administrative Workers' Union (CAWU). Godwin became assistant general secretary and confirmed delegate to the TUC annual conference for five years. One of her official duties was to edit the union's journal, 'The Clerk'. In 1949 she was unexpectedly elected to one of the TUC's reserved seats for women, which she retained until 1962, fully representing clerks in an unrivalled style. 
One of Godwin's goals was equal pay for work of equal value, coupled with equal opportunity and responsibility. She and Anne Loughlin pushed for the principle from 1944, and at the International Labour Organization conference in 1951, Convention 100, which accepted equal pay, was carried by two-thirds of the conference delegates (though it was not ratified in Great Britain until 1971). In the 1950s the CAWU was the most adamant and successful union in the campaign for equal pay. Godwin was appointed OBE in 1952 for her efforts. Within the TUC she chaired the national women's advisory committee for some years, and was president of the National Federation of Professional Workers. She considered running for parliament but decided that trade union work was more rewarding. 
In 1956 Godwin was elected general secretary of the CAWU, the first woman to rise to the top of a mixed-sex union. She aimed to attract more white-collar workers into the union, and she led her union through a period of expansion and consolidation, impressing other union leaders with her flair and authority. A moderate socialist, she worked relentlessly against communist control of unions and supported the expulsion of communist-dominated unions from the TUC. 
One of Godwin's great concerns was the promotion of better educational opportunities for the working class. She worked for the Mary Macarthur educational trust, which enabled working women to obtain further education, and served on the national trade union committee of the Workers' Educational Association, the Carr Saunders committee on education for commerce, and the Central Advisory Council for Education (England). She was co-author of the Crowther report in 1959, produced by the Central Advisory Council for Education, and was a member of the court of the University of Southampton. She believed that a good general education was of paramount importance, and that there should be special full-time pre-employment courses or part-time employment with compulsory day release, not vocational training at school. She attended weekend and summer schools and continued to campaign for more training and further education at TUC annual congresses. She believed that standards of office competence were falling because employers did not encourage further training. 
Despite her dislike of strikes, Godwin achieved her biggest success and most publicity by winning a battle with the Automobile Association in 1960 over recognition of the CAWU, after eight members of staff were sacked for walking out in protest over working conditions. The duke of Edinburgh resigned as patron during the five-and-a-half-week strike. In less sensational negotiations Godwin was noted for her leadership skills and word power. Often she was the only woman in joint union teams negotiating with companies in fields as diverse as air transport, coalmining, and electricity supply. She enjoyed a good working relationship with male union officials. 
In August 1961 Godwin was elected president of the TUC, the third woman to hold the post. She was acutely aware of the need to bring the TUC up to date, as advancing technology meant fewer manual workers. During a hectic year she managed to tour all the union areas in the UK. She used her president's speech to the TUC conference in 1962 to attack the government's National Incomes Commission, and to voice her disappointment that the state school system was improving so slowly. She was created DBE in 1962 in recognition of her contribution to the CAWU and for her public work, especially in education. 
After her year as president, Godwin retired from union activity. She became a governor of the BBC (1962-8) and was appointed a full-time member of the industrial court (1963-9). She joined the editorial board of the moderate 'Socialist Commentary' and, disillusioned by the militants in the Labour Party, became a founder member of the Social Democratic Party in 1981. She enjoyed cooking and entertaining in the house she shared with her sister Elsie, and was a keen gardener until overtaken by infirmity. She died at the Kingston Hospital, Kingston upon Thames, on 11 January 1992, of bronchopneumonia. 
A tall, well dressed woman, Godwin looked like the prim headmistress of a girls' school while president of the TUC, but she loved dancing and drinking (in moderation) with the boys. She had one of the sharpest and best-read minds in the TUC, and was noted for her pragmatism and common sense. In negotiation, as she told a 'Daily Mail' reporter in September 1961, 'I'm very, very tough. I can make my voice heard well across any conference room' ('Daily Mail', 15 Sept 1961). It was these qualities, coupled with driving ambition, that took Godwin to the top in her chosen career. 


@@@@@


doc= 49655


Betty, William Henry West (1791-1874), actor, was born on 13 September 1791 in the parish of St Chad, Shrewsbury, the son of William Henry Betty (died 1811), a farmer, of Hopton Wafers, Shropshire, and later manager of a linen factory in Ballynahinch, co. Down, and his wife, a Miss Stanton of Worcestershire. Betty's first visit to a play was in 1801, when he saw Sarah Siddons perform the role of Elvira in 'Pizarro' by Richard Sheridan at the Belfast theatre. He declared that 'he should die if he were not permitted to become a player' ('Georgian Era', 455), and his father apprenticed him to William Hough, the Belfast prompter. The boy's first stage appearance was on 11 August 1803 at Belfast in the role of Osman in 'Zara' by Aaron Hill; later in the season he attempted such roles as Young Norval ('Douglas' by John Home), Rolla ('Pizarro'), and Romeo. Tours to Dublin, Cork, Waterford, Glasgow, and Edinburgh followed. At the last city, box-office receipts for six nights amounted to $844. Betty went on to Liverpool, Sheffield, and Chester. 
Having been invited to the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, Betty made the first of twelve appearances at 50 guineas a night on 1 December 1804. Intervening nights were played at Drury Lane at a higher salary, until overwork took its toll. From 18 December until the new year Betty rested, then during 1805 and the first half of 1806 he acted at both theatres. His repertory was extended to include such roles as Achmet ('Barbarossa' by John Brown), his opening role in London, and Frederic ('Lovers' Vows' by Elizabeth Inchbald). Most of the parts he essayed were of mature and often tyrannical characters: Osmond ('The Castle Spectre' by Matthew Lewis), Zanga ('The Revenge' by Edward Young), Hamlet, Richard III, and Macbeth. He made an extensive tour during the summer of 1805 while the patent theatres were closed, when he took in his former haunts and, additionally, Berwick, Coventry, Durham, Newcastle upon Tyne, North and South Shields, Preston, Stourbridge, Sunderland, Whitehaven, Wolverhampton, Worcester, and York. 'Bettymania' was beginning to wear thin by 1807, but the youth continued his provincial tours until 11 July 1808. He then made a temporary farewell at Stratford upon Avon and became a commoner of Christ's College, Cambridge, until his premature withdrawal in June 1811 on the death of his father, at Pym's Farm, Wem, Shropshire. Betty returned to Covent Garden from 5 November 1812 until 12 June 1813 to muted acclaim and thereafter restricted his appearances to the provinces. On 9 August 1824, after playing Sir Edward Mortimer ('The Iron Chest' by George Colman the younger), Betty took his final leave of the stage at the Southampton theatre. 
As a child performer Betty was an attractive, agile boy, tall for his age (4 feet 6 inches) and with curly flaxen hair. His small features made him appear flat faced. His presence attracted attention, and something of his charisma is captured by John Opie in his portrait of Betty as Young Norval (1804). By the 1812 season, when Betty was in his early twenties, the stoutness that beset him throughout the rest of his life was already in evidence. 
At the time of Betty's stage debut the 'baby-bubble' (Ann Mathews's term for the phenomenon of the juvenile performers) captivated audiences; Betty's father, together with Hough, used this in promoting the boy. Hough had schooled him to be a professional. After watching Betty's Achmet, James Boaden wrote: 'He turned himself, like a veteran, to his work -- his eye never wandered from the true mark, and though not dark, it was quick and meaning ['sic']' ('Georgian Era', 456). William Hazlitt was fascinated by his Norval: 'he seemed almost like some 'gay creature of the element', moving about gracefully, with all the flexibility of youth' (W. Hazlitt, 'Works', ed. P. P. Howe, 8.294). Adult roles, however, presented difficulties: a miniature tyrant screaming at towering adults left spectators unmoved. His principal weakness was his lack of vocal power and range, causing him to shriek if strength were required. He found difficulty with blank verse, ignoring its rhythm, which gave all of his speeches a 'tea-table familiarity' (William Godwin's phrase). Some critics faulted the audiences: Leigh Hunt charged them with being 'unmanly' and Thomas Campbell's declaration that the actor was no more than 'a hallucination in the public mind' (Russell, 364) veers towards a charge of mass hysteria. During the 1812 season it was evident the faults of the teenager had become exacerbated in the adult. His vocal limitations induced him to rant, blank verse was beyond him, his features remained flat, and with corpulence grace had deserted him. Watching Betty play Alexander the Great ('The Rival Queens' by Nathaniel Lee), Henry Crabb Robinson described him as a 'fat, fair, ranting, screaming fellow who might much better represent a Persian eunuch than a Macedonian conqueror' (E. Brown, 49). 
One of Betty's difficulties was his complacent arrogance. By 1805 Hough had been dismissed, in spite of the general praise for his achievement in creating a boy wonder, and 'Peter Pangloss' reported Betty speaking about help with technical matters: 'Oh, that's nothing... when I am on... I am sure to bring them down; I engross the whole attention of the audience' (Playfair, 130). John Bannister recognized in the actor a lack of application and consequently the impossibility of improvement. Those who early in his career had referred to Betty as the Young Roscius, an allusion to David Garrick, had done the child actor no service. Betty regretted his necessary departure from the London stage, and in 1825 'The Times' reported that he had attempted to commit suicide. 
Before 1819 Betty had quietly married Susanna Crow, a Shropshire girl, and in September of that year their only child, Henry Thomas, was born. After his theatrical career had ended Betty lived in London, at Holborn, the Adelphi, and 37 Ampthill Square, Highgate, where he died on 24 August 1874. He was buried in a tomb of his own design in Highgate cemetery. 
His son, Henry Thomas Betty (1819-1897), was born in London on 29 September 1819. He studied theology, but after two years abandoned this and, with his father's help, prepared to become an actor. He made his first stage appearance at the Hereford theatre on 28 August 1838, playing Achmet (his father's first London role) in 'Barbarossa'. The theatre was managed by John Boles Watson III (possibly Watson IV), in whose company Betty continued to perform. He played in various provincial companies until 1843, when he appeared at Edinburgh and Glasgow and then London, making his debut at Covent Garden on 28 December 1844. Other London theatres at which he performed were the Pavilion, Queen's, and Olympic, where in 1854 he made his farewell to the stage. 
To some extent Betty traded on the family name, reviving the roles his father had played. Nevertheless he was a capable actor, wrote an obituarist in the 'Illustrated London News' (27 February 1897), 'of the Old-world 'legitimate' type'. During his retirement he continued his theatrical connections as president of the Dramatic and Musical Benevolent Fund, and after his death left $5000 to the General Theatrical Fund and a further sum of the same amount on the death of his widow; the bequest was to be known as Betty's Fund for Poor Actors and Actresses. Betty died at The Betony, Thurlow Park Road, West Dulwich, on 7 February 1897 and was buried at Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 49658


Smith, (Lillias Irma) Valerie Arkell- (1895-1960), sexual impostor and perjurer, was born on 27 August 1895 in St Clements, Jersey, the daughter of Thomas William Barker (1857-1918), gentleman farmer and architect, and his wife, Lillias Adelaide Hill (1868-1923). Her parents moved to Surrey in 1899, where her brother Tom Leslie was born. Valerie was educated at Huxley's School for Young Ladies at Prior's Corner, Surrey, and then at Upavon, Wiltshire, finishing her education at a convent school at Graty near Brussels. 
In 1914 Barker took up war work as a VAD attached to St Hilda's Hospital, Haslemere. From 1915 she worked as a horse trainer for the Canadian army at Rodborough Common and then at the Bristol remount depot. She remained working with horses, moving on to a hunting stable near Shrewsbury and then to a stables in Meopham, Kent. While in Kent, Barker met her first husband, Lieutenant Harold Arkell-Smith ('b'. 1882/3) of the Australian 20th battalion. They married on 27 April 1918 but the marriage lasted only six weeks, although they never divorced, and she subsequently returned to her parents' house. On 26 August 1918 she enrolled as a member of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force. 
After the war Arkell-Smith worked in a tea-shop in Warminster, where she met her next partner, the Australian soldier Ernest Walter Pearce Crouch (1876-1923), who was married but separated. They lived together in Shepperton, and then from July 1919 in France, where he worked in the Paris office of 'The Times'. Their son Tony was born on 27 February 1920 in Paris. Nine months later Pearce Crouch lost his job and they returned to England. On 15 June 1921 their daughter Betty was born. They managed to find work as tenant farmers at Bailiffs Court, an estate in Climping in Sussex. However, their relationship was unsatisfactory and Arkell-Smith spent her time with Elfrida Emma Haward ('b'. 1895/6), whom she had met in 1922 in Littlehampton. She left Pearce Crouch in 1923 and began a life as a man under the assumed identity of Victor Barker. 
Arkell-Smith checked into the Grand Hotel in Brighton as Sir Victor Barker. The transition was easy for she had already gained a reputation for 'affecting masculine attire, and particularly for wearing men's heavy boots' ('Daily Mail', 3 March 1929). As Colonel Victor Barker she married Elfrida Haward at St Peter's parish church in Brighton on 14 November 1923. The marriage was conducted by the Revd Laurence Hard, who was apparently unaware of the groom's real identity. 'I told Miss Haward that I was not what she thought I was; I told her that I was a man who had been injured in the war' ('Sunday Dispatch', 10 March 1929). Elfrida always maintained that she believed her. 
As the 'Colonel', Arkell-Smith followed a variety of careers, including that of an actor with the stage name of Ivor Gauntlett, boxing club manager, owner of a secondhand furniture business, dog kennel manager, dairy farm manager, cafe owner, and orchard worker. Owing to this instability Elfrida left the 'Colonel' in autumn 1928 and returned to her father's house. Arkell-Smith became politically involved with the National Fascisti, a militant breakaway group of Britain's fascist movement, in 1927, running a boxing programme for its members. 
In 1929, after Arkell-Smith had changed both her name and rank to Captain Leslie Ivor Victor Gauntlett Bligh Barker, she found work as a desk clerk in the Regent Palace Hotel in London, posing as a retired officer. There she was arrested on a bankruptcy charge and was sent to trial at the Old Bailey in London. Put on remand at Brixton prison, she was found to be a woman. The charges against Arkell-Smith were in consequence increased to include perjury as a result of her marriage to Elfrida Haward. 
The trial was sensationalized in the press. The prosecutor, Sir Ernest Wild, revealed that not only had Arkell-Smith married Miss Haward posing as an officer, but she had also been tried as a man two years previously in July 1927 in the Old Bailey for possessing a forged firearm certificate, although found not guilty. With the revelation of the new charges, she was found guilty of perjury and was sentenced to nine months in Holloway prison. Despite her marriage to Elfrida, Arkell-Smith was not charged under the amendments to the 1920 'Sexual Offences Act'. 
When Arkell-Smith left Holloway she reverted to the identity of Victor Barker. After a variety of short-term jobs, calling herself John Hill, by 1937 she was attracting enormous crowds to her show, entitled 'On a Strange Honeymoon', in Blackpool, where she portrayed Colonel Barker. 
Under another male identity, that of Jeffrey Norton, Arkell-Smith lived as the husband of Eva Norton. In the early part of the Second World War she worked as a switchboard operator in a hospital outside London, and also joined the Home Guard. After the war the couple moved to Kessingland, Suffolk, where Arkell-Smith called herself Geoffrey and became a shop assistant. She died of Parkinson's disease on 18 February 1960 at 3 Wrights Cottages, London Road, Kessingland, Suffolk, and was buried in the grounds of St Edmund's Church, Kessingland, on 23 February. On her death certificate her name was given as Geoffrey Norton, otherwise Lilias Irma Valerie Arkell-Smith. 


@@@@@


doc= 49659


Arnold, Mary Anne (b. 1825), sailor and cross-dresser, was born in Sheerness, Kent, and may have been the daughter of Lieutenant Arnold of the Royal Navy who served aboard the 'Ganges' and 'Prince Regent' men-of-war. According to a report in 'The Times' following her detection in October 1839, an officer of the 'Robert Small' claimed she was the daughter of the late Lieutenant Arnold who retired with his family to Sheerness after his last commission. According to 'The Times' Lieutenant Arnold 'continued his habits of dissipation' and was admitted to the Greenwich Hospital where he died in 1839. Mrs Arnold had supported herself and their family of four children through manual labour until her death in 1835. Mary Anne herself told the lord mayor of London that she was born in Sheerness, orphaned, and from the age of ten supported herself by working as a farm labourer and running errands before finding permanent employment in a rope-making factory in Sheerness. There she earned 2's'. 6died a week. 
Mary Anne may have been inspired by her two older brothers to escape the drudgery of factory life for the sea; one brother was boatswain of the 'Royal Adelaide' and the other a carpenter aboard the 'Britannia', to whom his sister had divulged her secret. Perhaps because of them, she went 'frequently in boats and amongst the shipping she found that boys of her age who went to sea were better fed were 'thought more of' and in every way in a superior condition to her' ('The Times'). In 1835 she borrowed an old jacket, trousers, and shirt from a male friend on the pretext that she was 'going to have a lark in them' and signed up as a cabin-boy aboard the 'Williams', a Sutherland collier lying at Sheerness. She worked aboard the 'Williams' as a cabin-boy above and below decks for more than two years and to the satisfaction of six captains. 
As Mary Anne later told the lord mayor, 'I was a strong boy in appearance and I had great strength... far beyond my years' ('Weekly Dispatch'). But she disliked the last captain she worked for, so left the 'Williams' in October 1838 and signed on with the 'Annie' at Shields, bound for London and Quebec. When the 'Annie' was shipwrecked at Blakeney off the Norfolk coast, Mary Anne then joined the 'Choice' bound for London with stores for the 'Robert Small' East Indiaman. Her true identity was discovered in October 1839 while she was working as a cabin-boy aboard the 'Robert Small' 'en route' back to London from Calcutta. She appeared before the lord mayor of London in July 1840 'to ask assistance for a few weeks before her departure to India' ('Weekly Dispatch'). Her story was widely reported in the London press. 
Witnesses to her story, like many nineteenth-century accounts of female sailors, record that Mary Anne was considered a valuable member of the crew, even excelling in a crisis. As an officer reported to 'The Times', 'She has well done her work as a strong active boy on this ship. I have seen Miss Arnold among the first aloft to reef the mizen-top-gallant [the highest] sail during a heavy gale in the Bay of Biscay'. She described herself as 'able to do the hardest work in the ship... I am sure I was as strong as any 'other' man in the ship and there was no labour I was not able to perform' ('Weekly Dispatch'). But the captain became suspicious of her 'after she submitted to the ceremony of tarring and shaving in its roughest form' when the 'Robert Small' crossed the equator. 
On the captain's orders, Mary Anne was inspected by the ship's surgeon and explained to the crew how she became a sailor. However, once her true identity was revealed, she was dispatched to a cabin where 'the lady passengers have given her lots of presents [and] her hair is already getting long and... she will soon think of ringlets' ('The Times'). Meanwhile, the captain assured his former cabin-boy that even though she was now wearing women's clothes again and unable to perform her duties, she would receive her full pay when the ship docked in London. By then she was earning $4 11's'. a month. 
Aboard ship Mary Anne was received as a 'heroine'. 'Miss Arnold is, though, rather bashful considering the short time she has had to learn ladies' ways, but like other heroes and heroines, capable of being drawn out' ('The Times'). But after docking in London she appeared at Mansion House with a female friend to ask the lord mayor to pay for her room and board until she could return to India. 'She thought she could be of service to ladies who travelled for she was never sea sick in her life and was not afraid of anything' ('Weekly Dispatch'). After making an awkward curtsey to Mr Hobler, the lord mayor's assistant, who paid her in cash, Mary Anne left the room. Nothing is known of her subsequent life. 


@@@@@


doc= 49660


Gunn, Isabel (1780-1861), sailor and cross-dresser, was born in Orkney, on 1 August 1780, the daughter of John Fubister and Girzal Allan, and was baptized Isabel Fubister on 7 August in St Andrew's parish, Orkney. Few details are known about her life until she signed on with David Geddes, an agent for the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) at Stromness in June 1806, disguised as John Fubister. The name was probably borrowed from her brother John, who was baptized on 20 March 1783. She set sail aboard the 'Prince of Wales' on 29 June to begin the six-week journey of 3000 miles across the north Atlantic. The crew arrived at Fort Albany, on James Bay, after a five-day journey travelling south in a shallop (a three-masted boat with lug sails) from Moose Factory on 27 August 1806. Fubister undertook several journeys canoeing up river to deliver supplies to the company's fur trading outposts. On 22 June 1807 the new governor, James Hodgson, set off for Martin's Fall with a crew that included one Fubbister and another Orcadian, John Scarth ('b'. 1770), for a 1800-mile journey up river as part of a larger brigade destined for Pembina Post on the Red River. 
Fubister was abruptly forced to give up 'his' disguise when, during Christmas 1807, he was among a group of HBC men celebrating at the home of a Northwest Company officer, Alexander Henry. Fubister, feeling unwell, asked to lie down and Henry made the following entry in his journal of 29 December: 'I was surprised at the fellow's demand; however, I told him to sit down and warm himself. I returned to my own room, where I had not been long before he sent one of my people, requesting the favour of speaking with me. Accordingly, I stepped down to him and was much surprised to find him extended on the hearth, uttering dreadful lamentations; he stretched out his hands towards me, and in piteous tones begged me to be kind to a poor, helpless, abandoned wretch, who was not the sex I had supposed but an unfortunate Orkney girl, pregnant and actually in childbirth.... In about an hour she was safely delivered of a fine boy. ('New Light')' After this spectacular disclosure Fubister returned to her former identity (although she inexplicably took the surname Gunn) and returned to Fort Albany in May 1808, travelling with Hugh Heney's party. Since she was the first European woman ever to travel this far west (the HBC refused to allow their employees to bring their wives or families) news about her extraordinary journey travelled quickly. On 24 May fur trapper Peter Fidler noted in his 'Journal of a journey from Swan to the Red River' that 'the woman Mary Fubbester ['sic'] who was delivered of a Boy 5th Jany last is also gone out -- she hired with Mr. Geddes in Stromness as a man, in men's clothing 1806 -- remained at Albany one winter and her sex was not known till delivery except to one John Scart ['sic'] her parmour on whose account she came out -- she worked at anything and well like the rest of the men.' Back at Albany Fort, Isabel was put to work washing for her former colleagues and minding the eleven children of the HBC's officers. A letter sent home to Orkney by schoolteacher William Harper suggests that she resented this new form of employment. He wrote that his compatriot was living 'with her child and her chief employment is washing for all hands which indeed she is no witch at as far as I think she has been washing for me... she seems not inclined to go home' (Harper to W. Watt, 5 Sept 1808, Ernest Marwich MSS). But she managed to stay an additional year and sailed home with her son, James Scarth, on 20 September 1809. 
Isabel Gunn never married but retired to Stromness with her son, where she became known as a local witch who sold love potions and charms to the young. Despite her extraordinary adventure she died a pauper, alone, at South End, Main Street, Stromness, Orkney, on 7 November 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 49661


Lawrence, Dorothy (1887/8-1964), journalist, soldier, and sexual impostor, was of uncertain origins, but by 1911 was a freelance journalist living in Kensington, London. 
In 1914, at the start of the First World War, Lawrence was living in Paris. She contacted several British newspapers, offering to work as a war correspondent from the front line in France, but all the editors she contacted refused to employ a woman to cover such dangerous work. The military veto on civilians at the front line made it almost impossible to get even male reporters to the front, although one editor did respond with the comment, 'Of course if you could get to the front' (Lawrence, 41). 
Lawrence later recorded her thoughts at this time in her autobiography: 'I'll see what an ordinary English girl, without credentials or money can accomplish' (Lawrence, 41-2). After being turned down several times in her attempt to get to the front, including a request for a first-aid posting by the British War Office, she finally joined the Voluntary Aid Detachment. However, no one would send her anywhere because she was too young, so she reverted to journalism. She befriended two English soldiers in a Parisian cafe, and they agreed to provide her with a uniform which they smuggled into her flat in small parcels under the guise of washing. Lawrence bound her chest, and padded her back with sacking and cotton, struggling with her unfamiliarity with masculine clothing. Her friends taught her to drill and march. She managed to persuade two Scottish military policemen to cut her hair and then dyed her skin using a diluted furniture polish to give it a bronzed hue. After obtaining identification as Private Denis Smith of the 1st Leicestershire regiment, and with a real identification disc and a forged pass, which she wrote herself, and a safe-conduct pass from the mayor, she headed for the front lines. She cycled towards Bethune, and eventually arrived in Albert. 
A Lancashire coalminer named Tom Dunn befriended Lawrence and found her a place in the British expeditionary force tunnelling company, a mine-laying company within 400 yards of the front line, where she was constantly under fire. He found her an abandoned cottage in Senlis Forest to live in, and she returned to it each night after laying mines by day. After working hard at her job and harder at hiding her gender, she was assaulted by the daily hardships of a front-line soldier. Suffering from chills and rheumatism, she also became increasingly aware of the physical danger she was in. Lawrence worried about what would happen to the men who had helped her if she were wounded and her gender discovered. After ten days the worry and discomfort became too much and she requested an interview with her commanding sergeant. After revealing her true gender to him, she was hauled from the trench and placed under military arrest. She escaped her arresting officers, but shortly afterwards gave herself up. 
Dorothy Lawrence was taken to the British expeditionary force headquarters and interrogated as a possible spy and was made a prisoner of war. She explained that the reason for her masquerade was to obtain a byline as a journalist. Since the army did not know what to do with her she was taken cross-country on a horse to Calais. There, her interrogation occupied the time of six generals and approximately twenty other officers, and her ignorance about the term 'camp follower' caused problems for her. Lawrence recalled later, 'We talked steadily at cross purposes. On my side I had not been informed what the term meant, and on their side they continued unaware that I remained ignorant! So I often appeared to be telling lies' (Lawrence, 161). 
After her interrogation Lawrence was taken back to the Third Army headquarters in St Omer, where she was re-examined. She was thrown into a guard room policed by eight soldiers who were under strict instructions to refuse her all visitors. The army was embarrassed because of the serious breach in its security system and because of growing fears about women taking on male roles during the war. She was then detained in the Convent de Bon Pasteur, which kept her for two weeks until she agreed to swear an affidavit promising that she would not write for the newspapers and reveal to the British public how she had fooled the British army. Escorted back to Boulogne, she was then sent back to England. 
In Folkestone, Dorothy Lawrence was made to promise not to divulge anything of her experiences until she received permission. This completely destroyed her original purpose of writing articles regarding the front lines: 'In making that promise I sacrificed the chance of earning by newspaper articles written on this escapade, as a girl compelled to earn her livelihood' (Lawrence, 189). Upon arrival in London she was taken to Scotland Yard but was released on the proviso she could guarantee her address for ten days. Unable, apparently, to do so, she was released onto the Embankment with a guinea-pig as a gift of the St Omer convent under her arm, and with nowhere to go. 
Lawrence published her account of her experiences in 1919. In 1925 she was committed to the London County Mental Hospital, Hanwell, and later to the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum, renamed the Friern Hospital, where she died on 29 August 1964, aged seventy-six. She was buried in New Southgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 49662


Yudenitch, Flora Sandes- (1876-1956), nurse and soldier in the Serbian service, was born on 22 January 1876 at Nether Poppleton, near York, the youngest daughter of the Revd Samuel Dickson Sandes (1822-1914) and his wife, Sophia Julia Besnard (died 1911). She came from a large family, was educated by governesses, and trained as a secretary. She also received first-aid training with the Ladies' Nursing Yeomanry. When war broke out in August 1914 Sandes's immediate offer of service to the War Office as a Volunteer Aid Detachment nurse was rejected. But if Britain did not want her, Serbia did. On 12 August she left London with Madame Mabel Grouitch's Red Cross nursing unit bound for Salonika in Greece. Her first journey to Serbia was fraught with difficulties: France was still mobilizing, trains were disrupted, platforms choked with soldiers on their way to the front, and boats were often scarce. But the nurses arrived after a memorable thirty-six hour voyage from Piraeus to Salonika on the deck of a Greek cattle ship in a raging thunderstorm. From there they travelled by train through the Vardar valley to Kragujevac. A telegram was waiting when Sandes arrived, stating that her father, with whom she had lived until her abrupt departure, had died on 23 August. 
Sandes plunged into work at the First Reserve Hospital, where seven English nurses worked with Serbian doctors to tend more than 1000 sick and wounded soldiers. They were casualties of the Serbs' efforts to repel the Austrian invasion across the Danube. After exhausting hours on duty the nurses took turns sleeping on straw mattresses, sharing a single blanket, and eating, all in the same room. The hospital was desperately short of medicine and other supplies, and only the worst cases could be treated with anaesthetic. After the first three months Sandes became deeply committed to the Serbian cause. When she returned to London it was to raise funds for medical supplies, and after only six weeks Sandes's country-wide tour had yielded more than $2000. She returned to Serbia accompanied by an American nurse, Emily Simmonds, literally sitting on packing cases containing 120 tons of cotton, gauze, and other much needed materials. 
By this time, the British nurses and doctors in Serbia had assumed political significance. Sandes visited the English consul before leaving Nish and was handed a letter from Sir Edward Grey, the British foreign secretary. Whatever assistance the nurses gave Serbia, he said, was helping Britain and the allies and was of inestimable benefit to the common cause. The British nurses were a highly visible sign of allied concern. The door was thus opened for British women to set their own course of action in Serbia. Flora Sandes became indispensable as a nurse, surgeon, and hospital administrator in Valjevo, where the death rate of typhus victims soared to 70 per cent and more than 200 died each day. Although qualified only as a nurse, Sandes was soon performing minor surgery. The loss of medical staff to typhus was enormous. At the end of the month only one Serbian doctor, an orderly, and the nurses remained. 'Looking back', Sandes wrote in 1927, 'I have just naturally drifted by successive stages from nurse to soldier' (Sandes, 'Autobiography', 12). But it was actually only fifteen days after joining the Serbian army's 2nd regiment's ambulance unit that she was asked to stay on. When the regiment pulled back to within a few miles of Monastir, the regimental commander, Colonel Milic, required Sandes to make a decision. Unequivocally, she chose to remain with the regiment, overjoyed that 'I represented England!' (ibid., 14). From the Serbs' perspective, it was entirely reasonable since there were other women in the army; enlistment was often haphazard and Sandes's ability to shoot and ride were highly prized. At home on leave the following year she undertook major fund-raising throughout England. 
Whatever reservations were expressed about women in the ranks at home, however, Sandes's experience and position demanded the same respect shown to any official representative of an allied army. She had returned home wearing the Kara George star -- the highest medal awarded to non-commissioned officers -- for her bravery during the Serbian retreat into Albania. She had lived in the trenches with her comrades, shared their food, slept underneath their overcoats, divided her last cigarettes and crusts of bread with them, and was severely wounded in November 1915 by a Bulgarian bomb. Promoted to sergeant she was wounded again in July 1917 and returned to her unit the following October. She participated in the final offensive against the Austrian and Bulgarian forces and was demobilized on 31 October 1922. She also acted for the Serbs as a fund-raiser and unofficial ambassador, conducting speaking tours in Australia and Britain and along the western front. 
After more than six years serving in the Serbian army, and having reached the rank of captain, Flora Sandes settled in Belgrade and found that demobilization made it necessary to relinquish her hard-won honorary male status. On 14 May 1927 she married a fellow officer, a Russian named Yuri Vladimovich Yudenich, and though they both retired to civilian life, she felt a permanent incapacity to settle down to anything. She tried her hand at driving Belgrade's first taxi cab, wrote an autobiography, acquired a speed-boat licence, taught English, and acted as a matron to a dancing troupe in Paris. She was called up for service again in 1941 but after the bombing of Belgrade, both she and Yuri were interned by the Germans. They were released but Yuri died in September 1941 and Flora returned to England via South Africa. 
Flora Sandes-Yudenitch died from obstructive jaundice at the Ipswich and East Suffolk Hospital, Anglesea Road, Ipswich, on 24 November 1956. She was cremated on 27 November at the Ipswich crematorium and her ashes were placed in the garden of remembrance. 


@@@@@


doc= 49663


Neuton, John (c.1350-1414), canon lawyer, was born in the diocese of Norwich, but was brought up in the diocese of York, according to his ordination record in the register of Bishop Thomas Arundel. By the end of November 1375 he had qualified as BCL, presumably at Cambridge, while another entry in the act book on 1 December of that year further describes him as an advocate of the consistory court. It seems unlikely, therefore, that he could have been born much later than 1350, both because the BCL degree entailed at least five years of legal studies after preparation in the arts, and also because appointment as an advocate was customarily restricted to relatively senior practitioners at the bar of the consistory court. Although Neuton was practising as an advocate at least as early as 1375, and appears occasionally as a commissary judge of the consistory, his formal admission as an advocate took place only on 23 January 1377. An act book entry for 1378 shows that, in addition to his legal practice, he was also lecturing that year as an inceptor in civil law at Cambridge. 
Neuton had received the degree of DCL by 20 September 1379, the date on which Bishop Thomas Arundel of Ely (died 1414) appointed him as the official-principal, or presiding judge, of the episcopal consistory. Although the court's jurisdiction derived from the bishop of Ely and covered the entire diocese, it habitually held its sittings and transacted its other business in Cambridge, in part no doubt because Cambridge was easier of access than Ely, and in part because the lawyers who clustered around the university furnished the nucleus of a well-trained and competent bar. The consistory customarily transacted its formal business in the parish church of the official-principal, and during Neuton's period in office it met in St Mary-without-Trumpington-Gate (Little St Mary's). Neuton presided over the consistory there until Bishop Arundel was translated to York in 1388, and he continued to do so during the first two years of the pontificate of Arundel's successor, John Fordham (died 1425). 
Although Neuton was named as rector of Rattlesden in his home diocese of Norwich some time before 1379, he remained a layman until after his appointment as official-principal, and was ordained a priest only on 10 March 1380. His patron, Archbishop Arundel (as he was by then), did not forget his former official-principal and legal adviser. By the end of 1390 he had brought John Neuton to join his administration at York as vicar-general of the diocese, canon, and treasurer of the minster. Neuton thus became in effect Arundel's second in command. He was also at least once employed on royal business, when in the autumn of 1393 he took part in negotiations for peace with France. When Arundel was translated to the archbishopric of Canterbury in 1396, however, Neuton remained at York and retained his position there under archbishops Waldby (died 1398), Scrope (died 1405), and Bowet (died 1423), the last two of whom were, like Neuton, former officials-principal of the Ely consistory. 
Neuton was appointed master of Peterhouse in 1382, while he was still living in Cambridge and Arundel was still bishop of Ely, and he retained the mastership until 1397, long after he had taken up residence at York. This situation created difficulties for the college, which had to keep a stream of messengers almost constantly riding the roads between Cambridge and York, a problem that became particularly acute when the college was involved in complicated affairs, such as appropriating the living of Cherry Hinton. Presumably the inconvenience of having a non-resident master was more than offset by the benefits that flowed from Neuton's powerful ecclesiastical connections. The library at Peterhouse also profited considerably from Neuton's mastership, for Neuton, like Arundel, was a shrewd and aggressive collector of books and gave the college numerous valuable items from his collection. York Minster, too, benefited from Neuton's bibliophilia. When Neuton died in the summer of 1414 he bequeathed the nucleus of his collection of law books to the minster library, to hold in trust for his nephews against the time when they would in their turn enrol as students of law. 


@@@@@


doc= 49664


Thornton, Anne Jane (b. 1817), sailor and cross-dresser, was born in Gloucestershire, the daughter of a prosperous merchant. After her mother's death in 1823 her father moved to Donegal, Ireland, where he opened another highly successful shop. At age fifteen she met an American, Captain Alexander Burke, with whom she fell in love. But when Captain Burke left Donegal to return to his father's home in New York in 1832, Thornton decided to follow him. She left Donegal with a maid-servant and a boy who helped her to find a suit of male clothes and to obtain a passage to England. There she engaged as a sailor aboard the 'Rover' while the maid-servant carried a message about Anne Jane's plans back to Mr Thornton in Donegal. 
Thornton, in her sailor's disguise, docked at East Port, Maine, and then walked 70 miles to the home of Captain Burke in St Andrew's, New York state, where she learned that her lover had recently married. Forced to support herself financially, she maintained her male disguise and obtained a situation as cook and steward aboard the 'Adelaide' for $9 per month. The ship set sail for the Mediterranean and Anne Jane's 'swarthy complexion favoured her deception' for the next two years ('Interesting Life', 5). While the ship was docked in Lisbon, Portugal, she engaged on the 'Sarah', but it was aboard that ship that her female identity was discovered. 'One day as she was washing in her berth, with her jacket loose in the front, one of the crew caught an accidental view of her bosom' (ibid.). 
The sailor threatened that unless Anne Jane agreed to have sex with him, he would reveal her to the ship's Captain M'Intre. She refused her shipmate's advances, and he then went to the captain who, according to one account, 'turned her out to work amongst the men, by whom she upon all occasions was most grossly insulted' ('Interesting Life', 5). The captain later described his astonishment upon learning that his young sailor was female: 'I could scarcely credit the mate when he told me of it. I can bear testimony to the extraordinary propriety of her conduct and I ask again whether I have not acted properly towards her' ('The Times'). However, her work was exemplary; until she arrived in London in February 1835, 'she did the duty of a seaman without a murmur and had infinitely a better use of her hands than her tongue' (ibid.). 
Before the 'Sarah' docked at London, several other crew members had already begun to have suspicions about Thornton's true identity. An interview in 'The Times' with Captain M'Intre confirmed both that she had been abused by the other sailors and that she had worked hard aboard the ship. 'She performed [the duties of a seaman] to admiration. She would run up the top gallant-sail in any sort of weather and we had a severe passage. Poor girl, she had a hard time of it, she suffered greatly from the wet but she bore it all excellently and was a capital seaman', he said. 
Anne Jane Thornton was interviewed by the lord mayor of London after he had read newspaper reports about her adventures and sent a city police inspector to investigate her story. The mayor scolded Anne Jane for abandoning her father while praising her courage and propriety aboard ship. He offered her financial support until she could be reunited with her father and return home to Ireland. Her story was popularized in an autobiographical chapbook and inspired the ballad 'The Female Sailor'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49665


Lydford, John (c.1337-1407), canon lawyer, was born in the diocese of Exeter, probably at Lydford in Devon, about 1337 -- he was known to be almost seventy in 1406. He was probably educated at Stapledon Hall (later Exeter College) in Oxford; after his death his executors gave some of his books to the college. His brother Robert was also a student there. Lydford's will mentioned Robert Hereward, archdeacon of Taunton, as one of his early benefactors, and he asked to be buried in Exeter Cathedral at the feet of a canon of the same name. Most of our knowledge of his career is taken from his memorandum book or formulary, which has survived among the Exeter diocesan records. Gaps in the diocesan registers make the date and place of his ordination uncertain, but by 1361 he had been presented by the crown, during the vacancy of the abbey of Abingdon, to the benefice of Lockinge in Berkshire, and entries in the memorandum book suggest that at this time he was gaining experience as a proctor in the Salisbury ecclesiastical courts. Perhaps the most important step in his career was his exchange of Lockinge for a prebend in the free chapel of Bosham in Sussex. Here, with the approval of Bishop Grandisson of Exeter (died 1369), the patron, he joined a distinguished group of west-country canonists, John Shillingford, Ralph Tregrisiou, and Robert and Nicholas Braybrooke, who were closely attached to the rising west-country churchman, William Courtenay (died 1396), the future archbishop of Canterbury. He also encountered the Arundel family, who were later to employ his services in Avignon. In 1368 Courtenay went to Oxford as chancellor of the university and was accompanied by Lydford as his clerk. When in 1369 Courtenay became bishop of Hereford, Lydford went too, and was soon dispatched by his master to act as his proctor at the papal court at Avignon. He was resident there for long periods between 1370 and 1376, and acquired much expertise and professional knowledge which made many clients and friends for him to the end of his life. 
By 1370 Lydford seems to have proceeded 'doctor utrius legis' and had become an advocate in the court of arches. More importantly for his career, however, he was taken up by William Wykeham, first as a proctor in Avignon and then, from 1377 to 1394, as his diocesan official. He had already played an important part, in 1376, in persuading the pope to intercede with Edward III to restore Wykeham to royal favour, and it seems likely that he also advised Wykeham on the acquisition of the bull which authorized the foundation of New College, Oxford. During his tenure of the officiality Lydford was certainly occupied with the endowment of the college, but his memorandum book shows him as also busy in the details of diocesan visitation and with a number of difficult law cases affecting episcopal authority. The household records of the bishop's establishment show him also to have been a regular and frequent guest of the bishop on occasions unconnected with diocesan business. At the same time he maintained his links with Courtenay and his fellow canonists. This was the peak period of Wyclif's activity and of Lollard agitation, and Courtenay was deeply involved. When in 1382 Courtenay convened the so-called Earthquake Council at Blackfriars in London, Lydford appeared as one of the canonist assessors and helped to draw up the condemnation of Wyclif's doctrines. Even after the end of his official employment by Wykeham and Courtenay, Lydford maintained his concern with heretical doctrines, and the memorandum book includes copies of such important documents as the appeal of the Lollard Nicholas Hereford to Rome, and the articles drawn up by Baldwin Shillingford in 1395 against William Thorpe's heretical preaching in the diocese of London. It seems certain that Lydford had become a Lollard expert. By 1385 the centre of Lydford's interests had shifted back to Exeter. He had been a cathedral canon from at least 1376 and in 1385 became archdeacon of Totnes; from this time until his death in December 1407 his principal residence was in Exeter. There are regular signs in the Exeter chapter books of his activities there, and the episcopal registers of Bishop Brantingham and Bishop Stafford, as well as his own memoranda, show that he was regularly employed as adviser and administrator by the bishops and the chapter officials. 
Lydford's true importance was as an experienced canonist, whose opinion was sought by ecclesiastics and laymen at all levels. He was not particularly learned, but his memoranda reveal him as an intelligent and adaptable administrator whose activities touched the church and also the state at a good many points. It is known that he borrowed, and presumably read, the chapter manuscript of 'Speculum historiale'. He took pride in the 'good letters' he wrote, and he carefully enumerated in his will his beautiful, large, noted breviary, a fair 'legenda sanctorum', a long crimson robe furred, and the black maple cup from which he had drunk much good wine. 


@@@@@


doc= 49666


Pucelle, Gerard (d. 1184), canonist and bishop of Coventry, is of unknown origins, though his surname suggests French or Norman provenance. He was a teacher before 1156, lecturing in canon law, perhaps also in theology and civil law, in the schools of Paris, and he came to enjoy the special favour of Louis VII ('r'. 1137-80). 
Gerard Pucelle received his first orders and benefice from Archbishop Thomas Becket (died 1170) before the latter left England in November 1164. He was with Becket in the early days of the latter's exile, but by the first months of 1166 had gone to Germany. It was a time of schism in the church, and the German emperor, Frederick Barbarossa ('r'. 1152-90) was supporting a rival pope against Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81). Pucelle was received with great acclaim in Cologne, whose schismatic archbishop, Rainald von Dassel, was Frederick Barbarossa's chancellor. Pucelle's friend John of Salisbury (died 1180) protested, and refused Pucelle's invitation to join him in Germany, but Pucelle stayed on. He seems to have been master of the cathedral school of Cologne in this period, and to have played a significant role in the brief efflorescence of a Colognese school of canon law. Writing to Becket in 1167 Pucelle affirmed his loyalty to the archbishop and informed him of events in Germany. 
Gerard Pucelle distanced himself from Becket's cause in 1168 by returning to England and taking an oath to Henry II. Later in that year, however, Pucelle was reconciled with the archbishop. At Becket's request Alexander III absolved Pucelle of his association with the schism, on condition that he renounce the benefice that he had obtained in Germany, and take an oath denying the validity of schismatic orders. Becket and Alexander also interceded with Louis VII for Pucelle. Pucelle was still involved with the supporters of Henry II in 1170, when he tried to arrange for Becket to meet Geoffrey Ridel, the archdeacon of Canterbury, and Froger, bishop of Sees. John of Salisbury chastised Pucelle for having associated with the excommunicated Ridel and bluntly warned him that he would find it difficult to be reconciled with the church a second time. At about this time Pucelle may have resumed teaching in France. 
Between 1174 and 1183 Gerard Pucelle witnessed at least fifty-six -- approximately a quarter -- of the surviving 'acta' of Archbishop Richard of Dover (died 1184); normally he heads the list of witnesses. He was not with Richard for the entire period, however. In the early months of 1178 he was with Peter of Blois in Rome, representing the archbishop in a dispute with St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury. In February Alexander III, praising Pucelle's 'litteratura' and 'scientia', granted him the privilege of retaining the income from his English benefices for four years while he was teaching. In March Alexander permitted Pucelle to recover the revenues of his German benefices. At about the same time Cardinal Pietro da Pavia, the papal legate in France, commended Pucelle to the pope. Attending the Third Lateran Council in March 1179, as Richard of Dover's representative, Pucelle pleaded the cause of Master Bertram, a distinguished lawyer who may have been Pucelle's pupil at Cologne, and who had been elected bishop of Bremen. Pucelle probably taught again in Cologne in 1180, before returning to England some time before September 1181. 
Gerard Pucelle was elected bishop of Coventry, probably in May or June 1183, and was consecrated at Canterbury on 25 September. However, he died at Coventry on the following 13 January, under circumstances that led some to suspect that he had been poisoned, and was buried in Coventry Cathedral. The monks of Canterbury celebrated his obit with the rites usual for an archbishop. 
According to Herbert of Bosham (died 'c'.1194), Gerard Pucelle was celebrated in his day, both as a lawyer and a teacher, though the reasons for his fame are not entirely clear. He was associated with canonistic activity at Paris and Cologne, but none of the known products of those schools is likely to have been his work. He may have written a lost 'Summa super decretalia'. Various canonistic glosses and 'summae' refer to his opinions, and there is at least one reference to his theological opinions. Pucelle was one of only two twelfth-century authors to claim a knowledge of Cresconius, an obscure African canonist of the sixth or seventh century; the other author may have been Pucelle's pupil. To characterize Pucelle as a polymath of wide reading would fit well with John of Salisbury's light-hearted description of him rifling the bookshelves of Rheims for manuscripts to take with him to Cologne. Another generation of canonic studies may reveal more. 
Pucelle's character is difficult to assess. He may have been -- like many lawyers before and after him -- a person who thought that he could do good while doing well. His association with the schismatics was, at best, impolitic, and his reconciliation with Henry II was disloyal to Becket, but in both instances Pucelle may have thought that he could act as a mediator. The fact that he was reconciled with both Becket and Alexander III suggests that he was not a man with whom one could remain angry for long. In his later years Pucelle advanced his own career while remaining loyal and of service to his patron, Archbishop Richard. He seems to have incurred no opprobrium when he argued successfully on behalf of Battle Abbey that one of his patron's early 'acta' was invalid, and his argument may well have been correct. If he died the victim of foul play, then that should probably be attributed to local politics, rather than to any personal failing. 


@@@@@


doc= 49667


Bryan, Sir Thomas (d. 1500), judge, was born in obscure circumstances, though he assumed arms containing three piles in allusion to those of Sir Guy Bryan (died 1390) whose barony became extinct in 1456. His early career suggests that he was the son of a Londoner, and the most probable lineage is that of John Bryan (died 1395), citizen and fishmonger, whose son John (died 1418) owned property in various parts of London, Buckinghamshire, Middlesex, and Essex. Sir Thomas likewise had property in London and Buckinghamshire. 
Thomas Bryan may have attended university before turning to legal study in the 1440s. An incident in the year-books for 1496, when he dismayed Sir Roger Townshend by referring to universal and particular negatives, the figure, and a sophister's verse, certainly suggests a more advanced scholastic background than was usual for a common lawyer. By 1456, when he acted as a feoffee of Gray's Inn, he was doubtless already a bencher, and in the same year he made his first appearance in the year-books. At this period he was acting as counsel to several London companies, and by 1459 he was steward of St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1460 he was elected common serjeant of London, an office which he held until his creation as a serjeant-at-law in 1463. By April 1470 he had become one of the king's serjeants. 
On the accession of Edward IV in 1471 Bryan was appointed chief justice of the common pleas, and in 1475 was created a knight of the Bath. In 1472 he received a remarkable patent of reappointment 'during good behaviour', the usual form of judicial appointment being 'during the king's pleasure'. The plea roll for Hilary term 1477 contains a badly defaced drawing which shows Bryan, in robes, receiving an amended version of this patent from the king. His tenure of the chief justiceship, which lasted for a little over twenty-nine years until his death, was the longest ever, though his lasting influence was staid rather than innovative. He always maintained that the common law should be guided by equity and justice, and he was not unaware of social changes: for instance, he favoured the new-found protection of the copyholder against his lord by an action of trespass. Nevertheless, in a period when the king's bench, under Hussey and Fyneux, was developing new remedies and becoming a rival court for court of common pleas, Bryan's judicial conservatism set the court of common pleas on a course which by the end of the sixteenth century would seem distinctly reactionary. 
Bryan did not favour the current movement to find a means of barring entails. Although the doubts which he expressed in 'Taltarum's case' (1472) failed to prevent the common recovery from becoming established in the early years of his presidency, he was scrupulous to protect the interests of leaseholders and remaindermen. Such considerations seem to have weighed less with his fellow judges, but the legacy of his cautious approach was the elaborate scheme of double and triple vouchers developed in the following century. In 'Hulcote's case' (1493) he stopped counsel from disputing the 'common learning' that a landowner's freedom to dispose of the fee simple could not be restrained by condition, while in the same case approving a condition against barring an entail: this distinction encouraged a spate of 'perpetuity clauses', to counter the common recovery, which were not finally declared ineffective until 1613. Bryan was also opposed to the circumvention of wager of law by means of actions on the case, the issue later to provide the main source of contention between the two benches. 
Bryan married Isabel (died 1467), widow of Thomas Blount, treasurer of Calais, whose jointure lands lay in Lincolnshire. The couple settled, however, in Buckinghamshire, at Marsworth near Ashridge, and it was in the latter's church that Bryan desired to be buried if he died within 20 miles. Bryan also owned London houses in the parishes of St Andrew, Holborn, and St Sepulchre; he had some connection with St George's Inn and in 1475 purchased the freehold of Thavies Inn, both in the latter parish. Bryan may have married as his second wife Isabella, widow of William Bowes. He died on 14 August 1500. 
Bryan's only son, Sir Thomas (died 1518), was admitted to Gray's Inn, but became a knight of the body, and vice-chamberlain to Katherine of Aragon. The younger Sir Thomas Bryan had a son, Sir Francis Bryan (d. 1550), who was a courtier, diplomat, and man of letters, and had two daughters, Elizabeth Dilcock and Joan Clement. 


@@@@@


doc= 49668


Marow, Thomas (1460x65-1505), lawyer, was the third son of William Marow of Bishopsgate, alderman of London and grocer, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Richard Rich, sometime sheriff of London. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in the 1480s. There he seems to have been a protege of Thomas Frowyk, to whom (according to his brother's will) he was related; he later took over Frowyk's chambers in the Inner Temple, and in the British Library there is a manuscript year-book which belonged successively to Frowyk and Marow. 
In 1491 Marow succeeded Frowyk as common serjeant of London, and in 1495 was promoted to under-sheriff, holding that office until he became a serjeant-at-law in 1503. Meanwhile he became a bencher of his inn, delivering a reading in 1497 on part of the 'Statute of Gloucester', and another in 1503 as junior serjeant-elect. It was for his serjeant's reading that he was long remembered in the legal profession, and is still known to legal historians. It was an elaborate exposition of the jurisdiction of justices of the peace, founded on the first chapter of the 'Statute of Westminster I' (1275), 'that the peace of Holy Church and of the land be well kept', and included the fullest exposition at that time of English criminal law. Though not printed until 1924, it was widely circulated in manuscript and exerted an influence upon later commentators on criminal law. 
The year of Marow's first permanent appointment, 1491, was also the year of his marriage. His wife, who predeceased him, was Isabel, daughter and coheir of Nicholas Brome of Baddesley Clinton, Warwickshire, who brought him property in Warwickshire. He doubtless maintained a house in that county, where he became a justice of the peace himself in 1497; there was formerly a window in Knole church with his arms and an exhortation to pray for the soul of Serjeant Marow and his wife. His brother William (died 1499), who was a member of Thavies Inn but not a lawyer, left him a life interest in Marow's Quay in Billingsgate, which brought him a London income from the fishmonger licensees. 
Marow did not long enjoy the benefits of his serjeant's coif. He served as an assize judge on the western circuit in 1504 and 1505, while in December 1504 he entered into an agreement with Sir Thomas Grene to marry the latter's daughter Anne, but died before the marriage could be solemnized, aged little more than forty. The record of the suit by his executors against Grene for the recovery of the marriage-money gives the date of his death as 10 April 1505. He left $5 to Lady Frowyk, and made Chief Justice Frowyk his chief executor. By his will he desired to be buried in St Botolph's Church, Billingsgate (where his father lay), with a memorial plate. His only child, Dorothy, married first Francis Cokayne of Ashbourne, Derbyshire, and second Sir Humphrey Ferrers of Tamworth, Staffordshire. Marow's nephew and ward, Thomas Marow (died 1538), son of his brother William, succeeded to the London property but settled in Warwickshire; this Thomas's son, another Thomas (died 1561), represented the county in the 1553 parliament and became lord of the manor of Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 49669


Constable, Robert (late 1450s-1501), lawyer, was the second son of Sir Robert Constable (died 1488) of Flamborough, Yorkshire, and Gray's Inn, and the younger brother of Sir Marmaduke Constable (d. 1518), who inherited the Flamborough estate and whom he followed to Lincoln's Inn in 1477. Unlike his brothers, he persevered with the law, and in 1489 became a bencher of his inn. His 1489 reading was given on the first two chapters of 'Westminster I' and includes an account of the law concerning entails, which, though full of precise and ingenious learning, was sufficiently traditional to omit all mention of the recently invented common recovery. In 1494 he delivered his second reading, probably on the 'Statute of 'Quo warranto''. Soon afterwards he received his writ to become a serjeant-at-law and, since it was the custom for the junior serjeant-elect to deliver a reading, he gave a third course of lectures in Lincoln's Inn in 1495. Like Thomas Frowyk (died 1506), his brother graduand in the Inner Temple, he chose the pseudo-statute 'Prerogativa regis', which he expounded in copious detail. This reading was printed in 1949, but only as far as the seventh chapter of the statute; more remains in manuscript. Constable seems to have avoided major royal office, though he was a justice of the peace and served as a member of the council of Lord Scrope of Upsale. In 1501 he was commissioned as a justice of assize and rode the western circuit. Doubtless he could have expected a permanent justiceship in the near future, but he died a relatively young man on 22 November of that year. 
In 1490, Constable married Beatrice, widow of Ralph, Lord Greystoke (died 1487), whose maiden name was Hawtcliff. The marriage is alluded to in his serjeant's reading, where he mentions his wife's suit for dower against Lord Dacre of Gilsland as committee of the lands of Lord Greystoke's heir. Besides enjoying the dower lands, his professional income enabled him to make substantial purchases in south-east Yorkshire. In 1497 and 1498 he paid 800 marks to Sir Thomas Lovell for the manors of Newsham and Broughton. He was also, according to his will, a parishioner of Holme on Spalding Moor. But his principal seat was established at North Cliffe, in the parish of Sancton, where his descendants remained until 1695. 
Constable's widow, Beatrice, took the veil in 1502 and died in 1505; she was buried at Sancton. They left two sons, Marmaduke and Robert, and two daughters, Elizabeth and Jane. The elder son, Marmaduke (died 1525), is not be confused with a contemporary Marmaduke Constable (died 1545), the son of the serjeant's brother Marmaduke, nor yet with a fourth person of the same name (died 1560), who was the son of Sir Robert Constable (died 1537). Marmaduke, not quite twelve years of age in 1501, was left $20 by his father for his exhibition at Cambridge for three years from the age of fifteen, and $24 for a further three years at inn of chancery. His mother left him another 10 marks to support him at Cambridge, and $10 for five years 'in the courtt and chancery'. In the event, he took up a military career, and fought against the Scots. He died in his thirties and left his law books to his younger brother, Robert. One of the Constable law books is now in the Bodleian Library, an important manuscript containing fifteenth-century year-books. 


@@@@@


doc= 49670


Fastolf, Thomas (d. 1361), canon lawyer and bishop of St David's, was one of a distinguished group of East Anglian lawyers nurtured by William Bateman (died 1355), bishop of Norwich. He was one of three lawyer sons of Thomas Fastolf of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk. His brother Nicholas (died 1330) was a serjeant-at-law and sometime chief justice of Ireland; another brother, Lawrence, became auditor of the audience court of Canterbury. Thomas probably read law at Cambridge, like other Norfolk lawyers who caught Bateman's attention, though he completed his studies abroad and may have taken his doctorate elsewhere. By 1326 he was a prebendary of York and archdeacon of Coventry, and he subsequently acquired prebends of Bangor (1330), Dublin, and Lincoln (1344), and a canonry at Wells (1347); he was archdeacon of Norwich from 1340 to 1347, and of Wells from 1347 to 1352. These preferments were rewards for public service, given principally at the curia. In 1326 he was a clerk of Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini (died 1335), and by the mid-1330s he was serving as a papal judge at Avignon. He became an auditor of the holy apostolic palace (or lord of the 'rota') before 1340, most likely in the time of Bateman, who was appointed to the rota in 1329 and was a dominant presence at the Avignon curia until his death in 1355. 
Fastolf was the author of a series of reports containing the arguments in thirty-six cases heard at seventeen sessions of the rota between 11 December 1336 and 26 February 1337. Although there is no evidence that these reports circulated in medieval England, two manuscripts have survived in Germany, and the text was later disseminated widely in its printed form. The first edition was printed in Rome by George Lauer in 1475, as part of a collection of 'decisiones' 'rotae', under the name of Thomas Falstoli. The Italian editor identified Falstoli as an Etruscan lawyer, but it is now accepted that he must be the English auditor Fastolf. It is known that similar reports were kept by other English auditors, perhaps under the influence of the common-law tradition, and that the genre may have been started by Bateman himself. The 1475 edition states that the 'decisiones' were extracted from a book on practice, but all the extant texts are in strict chronological sequence and evidently constitute a journal of the debates among the auditors of the first grade over two and a half months. Each case, or 'dubium', is typically stated by an auditor of first instance, with or without factual details, and is then argued back and forth with copious citations of canonical authorities. Nine participating auditors are mentioned by name, but there is no reference to advocates, perhaps because the judicial deliberations took place in secret. 
The 'decisiones' 'rotae' flowered later in the fourteenth century and provided the model for the reporting of secular cases in the royal courts of Italy and France in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Reported cases became, in consequence, a distinctive feature of the European 'jus commune' which prevailed until the time of Napoleon. The credit for starting this important case-law tradition may belong to Bateman; but, through the accidents of publication, Fastolf's journal stands at the beginning of the established canon, and now provides the earliest continuous text of legal debate in the rota. 
Fastolf's service in Avignon was rewarded in 1352 with the bishopric of St David's, to which he was appointed by papal provision. Upon acceptance of the mitre he resigned his seat in the rota, though the English presence in the court was maintained by Simon Sudbury (died 1381), another of Bateman's proteges and also a compiler of reported cases, who served as an auditor from 1348 to 1361. Fastolf died in June 1361. His brief nuncupative will, dated 21 June 1361, named as his executors David Ley, precentor of St David's, Robert Grymeston, coparcener of Dyserth church, and Philip Dyer, rector of Llanychlwydog; it was proved on 1 July following. His only specific request was that his body be buried in the lady chapel of his cathedral, to the right of the statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary. 


@@@@@


doc= 49671


Caxton, Jeremy of (d. 1249), sheriff and justice, was probably a relative of Geoffrey of Caxton, a knight active in Cambridgeshire affairs in the 1230s and 1240s, perhaps a younger brother or cousin. Both took their name from the Cambridgeshire village of Caxton, where Jeremy was granted an estate by Geoffrey's sister Amphelisa and her husband in 1247, soon after Geoffrey's death. He was active by 1219, when he was the attorney of Geoffrey of Hatfield in a case in the bench. The early part of his career was apparently spent in administrative work in Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire, under Hatfield. The latter was sheriff of the two counties from 1224 to 1232; by 1231, and probably earlier, Jeremy was serving him as clerk or under-sheriff, and succeeded him as sheriff in 1232. He remained in office until 1236, although from later in 1232 until his fall in 1234 the titular sheriff was Peter de Rivaux, who held the same position in many other counties. After leaving office Caxton served as keeper of the temporalities of the bishopric of Norwich from 1237 to 1239, as well as performing other duties for the king, and then in 1240 served as a junior justice on the Norfolk eyre under William of York, Henry of Bath, and Roger of Thinkleby. Later that year he made an exhaustive inquiry into the chattels and debts of Jews in many counties in eastern England, before becoming a justice in the court 'coram rege' early in 1241, possibly because of the ill health of Stephen of Segrave, who may have chosen him, since his interests in Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire probably meant that Caxton was known to him. 
Despite minimal previous judicial experience, Caxton continued as a justice there until his death, as one of the most senior judges in England, and with only a few short absences to undertake other government work. The latter included the keepership of the archbishopric of Canterbury, further Jewish and some forest inquiries, and some assize commissions, mainly in Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire. William of York and later Henry of Bracton and Henry de la Mare were his regular colleagues in the court, and he also held a London eyre in 1244 with York and Bath. An ordained clerk, the benefices he is known to have held were the Ramsey Abbey living of Warboys in Huntingdonshire, which he acquired in 1237; East Dereham in Norfolk, a rich living of the bishopric of Ely, which he held by 1245; and Godmersham in Kent, a church of Christchurch Priory, received in 1241. He is not known to have had any higher ecclesiastical ambitions, nor indeed to have attempted to acquire more extensive estates. He died in late November or early December 1249. In his obituary Matthew Paris described him as 'the king's special counsellor' (Paris, 5.94), but significantly did not credit him with being especially learned in the law, as he did several other senior judges. 


@@@@@


doc= 49672


Cachepol, Walter (d. 1369), canon lawyer, came from the diocese of Hereford. When he was already an Oxford master of arts and a tonsured cleric, although not yet in minor orders, he was collated by Archbishop Islip on 6 January 1362 to the rectorship of Lyminge in Kent, a benefice he held until his death. Cachepol entered almost immediately into his course of studies in canon law, and received a 'cum ex eo' licence on 27 August 1364 to hold for one year a benefice 'in absentia' while studying at university. Proceeding through minor and major orders, he was ordained priest on 30 March 1366. 
Cachepol's lectures provide a major source for our knowledge of the canon-law lecture hall in the medieval English universities. They form the core of the principal surviving collection of such university lectures (BL, Royal MS 9 E.viii). This collection contains the lectures of twenty Oxford canonists, yet carries as a heading for the table of contents 'Lectura Walteri Cachepole super decretales...', an indication of their substantial prominence. Twenty-six titles from the standard canon-law texts ('Decretals', 'Liber sextus', 'Clementines', 'Extravagantes' of John XXII) were treated in Cachepol's lectures (fols. 27-94'v'). Although not showing originality, his lectures can be taken as fairly representative of the type and quality of such scholastic acts and of canon-law studies generally in the second half of the fourteenth century. 
Cachepol died, with apparent suddenness, at some time between 14 and 27 April 1369, while teaching at Oxford and in the midst of lecturing on the title 'De electione' of the 'Liber sextus'. At that point a student wrote in his notes, 'heu, cum hic moritur doctor' 'Walterus Cachepol' ('when, alas, Dr Walter Cachepol died'; BL, Royal MS 9 E.viii, fol. 94'v'). His will, dated 14 April 1368, requesting burial in the parish church of St Magnus the Martyr, London, was proved on 27 April 1369. 


@@@@@


doc= 49673


Dene, Peter (d. in or after 1334), canon lawyer and monk, no doubt derived from one of the villages called Dean in Sussex. A secular priest of the Chichester diocese, he began to acquire benefices in Sussex by the late 1280s and, later, benefices elsewhere. By 1287 Dene was a master of arts and, probably by the century's end, a 'doctor utriusque iuris', though his university is unknown. In the meantime he had become a royal clerk and several times travelled overseas on the king's business for both Edward I and Edward II, while in 1297 he was a member of the regency council governing England in Prince Edward's name. In 1300, for a retaining fee of $10 yearly, he became legal adviser to the monastery of St Augustine at Canterbury, whose rights he undertook to uphold against the archbishop of Canterbury, among others. No doubt this contributed to the dispute in which he became embroiled with Archbishop Winchelsey, whose visitation of his province in 1302 found Dene's possession of East Tangmere church to be irregular. In 1302, and again in 1305, Winchelsey deprived him of all his benefices in the province of Canterbury, including canonries at Wells Cathedral and at St Paul's, London. 
A man of abundant enterprise and talent, Dene was soon in the service of the archbishop of York, acting, at different times, as his chancellor, commissary-general, and vicar-general. As a canon of York, he accompanied the archbishop on a visitation of St Mary's Abbey, York, whose chronicler called him (using Ovid's words) 'a dreadful snake' ('serpente diro'; 'Chronicle of St Mary's', 71). His wealth permitted him not only to donate the heraldic window in the north nave of York Minster but also to make generous gifts to St Augustine's, where he built houses within the monastic enclosure, presumably for his own use and for the use of his household when they were in Canterbury. 
Involvement in support of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, in his unsuccessful rebellion against Edward II in 1322, ended his career in the north. Within two weeks of the defeat at Boroughbridge, and within a week of the execution of Lancaster at Pontefract, Dene fled south, 'being threatened with arrest, imprisonment, loss of position, the seizure of all his property, and even with death' ('Chronica Guillielmi Thorne' col. 2055). (His fears were probably not without foundation, for Sir Bartholomew Badlesmere, with whom Dene may have been connected in his ill-fated adventure, was executed at Bleen near Canterbury on 14 April 1322.) He appeared at the gates of St Augustine's in Canterbury on 31 March 1322, begging admission to the community, and was instantly given the habit of a Benedictine monk. Three days later, without observing the usual year of probation, he made solemn profession, and Dr Peter Dene, became Brother Peter, monk of St Augustine's. His profession, as he later claimed, may have lacked canonical validity. In a hastily drafted will he left all his goods to the abbey, on the condition that he could have continued use of them until his death. He also remitted debts owed him by the monastery and bequeathed to the house a considerable amount of money and silver. The profession itself, he later claimed and the monastic chronicler seems to have concurred, was at best conditional: he would wear the habit and live at the monastery, but he would not live in the monastic dormitory, rather with his household in his own dwellings. Also, he would not join the other monks in church, chapter, refectory, or elsewhere for community exercises. 'He was free to act as the Lord inspired him and as it pleased him' ('prout sibi dominus inspiraret et de ipsius Petri libera procederet voluntate'; 'Chronica Guillielmi Thorne' col. 2055). Dene made a public statement before the community in chapter to the effect that by his profession he had no intention of leading the regular life. 
Eight -- or possibly nine -- years later, when the political climate had cooled, Dene asked for permission to leave and return to his former life. When the abbot paid no serious attention to his request, Dene, on a wintry night in December 1331, dressed in secular garb, climbed over the wall and, with the assistance of the rector of St Martin's, fled into what the monks considered apostasy. Three monks of St Augustine's snatched their apostate from a royal official, who had captured him and was removing him to prison at Maidstone. Dene subsequently claimed that upon his return he was forced to make a statement that his profession was absolute and that he was truly a monk. Dene's situation was complicated even further when he learned that Henry, the new earl of Lancaster, suspected him of stealing from his late brother's treasury and of concealing the stolen goods at St Augustine's. Nothing further is heard of this. 
Meanwhile, the canonist Dene secretly appealed to the pope at Avignon. Of the three papally appointed commissioners only Richard Oxenden, prior of neighbouring Christ Church Priory, entered St Augustine's on 23 and 24 November 1332 to determine the facts in the case. The reluctance of the community to co-operate led to Oxenden's excommunication of the prior and another monk. When at length Dene was allowed to be interviewed, he replied 'alto voce' for the benefit of his fellow monks that he was truly a monk and 'sotto voce' for the benefit of Prior Oxenden that he was too old in years and broken in body to pursue the matter. He remained at St Augustine's, perhaps not altogether unhappily, for in the following year he was selected to serve on a committee to choose a new abbot. He died some time after June 1334. 
Dene's library included the canon law texts of Gratian's 'Decretum' and the 'Decretals' of Gregory IX, and canonical commentaries by Hostiensis, Innocent IV, Guido de Baysio, William Durandus, Johannes Monachus, and Giovanni d'Andreae, as well as a five-volume collection of Roman law texts. He is depicted prominently as a kneeling figure in the heraldic window in York Minster. 


@@@@@


doc= 49674


Shepey, John (d. 1412), diplomatist and ecclesiastic, came from a wealthy bourgeois family of Coventry, where he was born. His paternal grandfather, Lawrence Shepey, was a burgess who had endowed a chantry in St Michael's Church. His father, Jordan Shepey, was one of twelve Coventry merchants who had succeeded in wresting control of the town from the prior and monks of Coventry Cathedral and putting it in the hands of their class; he became second mayor of Coventry under its new charter of 1345. 
As befitted the son of a wealthy local family who was heading for an ecclesiastical career, John Shepey became a canon of Lichfield Cathedral on 25 January 1363, and two months later chancellor. In the meantime, on 31 January, he was papally provided to a canonry in Wells Cathedral. By then his university career was well under way: Shepey was 'licentiatus' in civil law at Oxford at the time of his appointment to Lichfield Cathedral. In 1364 and again in 1366 the pope granted him a 'cum ex eo' licence to hold benefices 'in absentia' while studying at university. Shepey was a doctor of civil law by 1367. Notes of lectures given by him in the canon-law school on fourteen titles of the 'Decretals' have survived (BL, Royal MS 9 E.viii, fols. 156-66). He was soon active in the church courts: he was dispensed to be an advocate of the court of the arches on 16 October 1367, and became an official at Winchester in the following year. 
Shepey's talents also brought him into the royal service. He served on a number of embassies: to Flanders in 1372, to the papal curia at Avignon in 1373 (being arrested by the French 'en route' and released by papal intercession), again to Flanders in 1375, and, in later life, to the Scots in 1397. His service to the crown was rewarded in 1376 by an annual grant of $50 until he acquired a benefice of at least equal value. He had not long to wait. Later in the same year, on 22 December, Shepey became a canon of York Minster. His appointment by the pope to the deanship of Lincoln Cathedral in 1378 met with royal opposition, but, when the dust finally settled, John Shepey was dean of Lincoln and remained so until his death thirty-four years later. 
The first in the line of three consecutive long-lived deans of Lincoln, who served for a total of 105 years, Shepey concentrated his energies during his deanship on the affairs of the cathedral and frequently became embroiled in controversy and, indeed, litigation with his chapter. In 1400, for example, Shepey claimed the right to visit the chapter with the power to correct and punish; he also claimed rights in the appointment and dismissal of the lower clergy of the cathedral. The assistance of both Henry IV and the pope, Boniface IX, was appealed to in this matter, until at length, in July 1404, Henry Beaufort, bishop of Lincoln and half-brother of the king, settled the dispute in favour of the chapter. 
Shepey's career can be seen as representative of the churchman, who, born into urban wealth, followed a path that led from the study of canon law to service in the church courts, to diplomatic service for the crown, and then to a senior position in the ecclesiastical bureaucracy, in his case the deanship of the cathedral church of England's largest diocese. He died, probably in Lincoln, in 1412: his will, dated 14 January of that year, was proved on 17 March. He left books to New College, Oxford, possibly his old college, and to the Franciscan friars of Stamford Priory in Lincolnshire, as well as a silver cross and a richly decorated vestment to Lincoln Cathedral, where his body is buried. He is to be distinguished from the Benedictine theologian and bishop of Rochester of the same name (died 1360). 


@@@@@


doc= 49675


Swan, William (d. after 1445), canon lawyer, probably came from Southfleet in Kent. A cleric of the diocese of Rochester, he may never have advanced beyond minor orders, thereby remaining free to marry. His wife, Joan, and at least two daughters lived at Southfleet, in a household which also included Swan's mother. In a surviving but undated letter, Joan Swan told her husband that she would be willing to join him at the curia but would not learn the vernacular, German, an indication perhaps that Swan was then with the papal curia at Constance. He had a sister, Agnes, and two brothers, John, a pewterer, and Richard, a skinner of London, who acted as Swan's agent. 
Already an Oxford master of arts and 'licentiatus' in canon law, Swan arrived at the papal curia in 1404 during the brief pontificate of Innocent VII ('r'. 1404-6). It was at this time that Swan was concerned in the intricate business of the marriage suit of John Arundel and Elizabeth Talbot, who after their marriage discovered that they were related within the forbidden degrees, yet wanted to remain married; Swan met the pope to discuss the fee for a new dispensation. He continued in curial employment under Gregory XII, when that pope was under pressure to resolve the stalemated schism. Swan travelled with the papal curia from place to place in Italy, as Pope Gregory flirted with the idea of a meeting with his Avignon rival, Benedict XIII, at Savona. While at Viterbo, Swan became stricken with dysentery and remained there for six weeks, being nursed by Alice Tudor, who had a suit at the curia. Tempted to leave the peripatetic papal entourage headed by an increasingly difficult pope, Swan was persuaded by the papal chamberlain to remain. His loyalty to Gregory survived that pope's deposition by the Council of Pisa in 1409. During the council Swan was with Gregory at Rimini, and he earned displeasure in England by continuing to sue bulls from the deposed Gregory. Clearly disillusioned, possibly stunned by this criticism, Swan returned about 1410 to England, where he continued his studies in canon law at Oxford. Yet when the fathers gathered at Constance in 1414, Swan was once again in the service of Pope Gregory, now as papal secretary, and, during the council (1414-18) was active in the matter of the disputed election of the abbot of Fountains Abbey ('Frank v. Rypon'). 
After a brief stay in England, Swan returned to the papal curia in 1419 as a 'scriptor' and 'abbreviator' and became increasingly prominent in pursuing English interests, attracting a sizeable clientele of the famous and not-so-famous. He was involved in the difficult negotiations which led to the translation of John Kempe from London to the see of York in 1425 and also represented the interests of Henry Chichele, archbishop of Canterbury, in several matters brought before the papal curia. At an early stage of the Council of Basel (before 30 January 1433), Swan served as proctor for three English bishops: Worcester, Lincoln, and Bath and Wells. There is no evidence of his involvement in the council itself. Although Swan was said to have resigned his curial position by 1442, he seems to have acted as proctor for Christ Church Priory, Canterbury, in 1444. He is known to have rented a large house and garden from the English hospice of St Thomas in Rome. He died some time after 1445. 
The letter-book of William Swan is a principal source for Anglo-papal relations in the first half of the fifteenth century. It exists in two somewhat overlapping versions. The Oxford version (Bodl. Oxf., MS Arch. Selden B.23), written at least in part in Swan's own hand, covers the years from 1406 to 1426 and is particularly rich for the years before the Council of Constance. The London version (BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra C.iv) contains nothing before the pontificate of Martin V ('r'. 1417-31) and extends to 1441. A letter in the Oxford collection describes Swan in this fashion: 'Master William Swan, bachelor in laws, proctor-general in the Roman curia, who, though young, is yet very wise and circumspect, faithful and diligent, and conducts himself with ability in all his doings' (Jacob, 68). 


@@@@@


doc= 49676


Folville, Eustace (d. 1346), gangster and soldier, was the second of the seven sons of John Folville (died 1310), lord of Ashby Folville in Leicestershire, and his wife, Alice. He came of an established gentry family. The John Folville who was a king's banneret in 1286, and was knight of the shire for either Leicestershire or Rutland, or both together, six times between 1298 and 1306, was probably his father; the Ralph Folville who was knight of the shire for Leicestershire in 1315 was doubtless a relative. There is no unequivocal evidence linking the Folville family with criminality before Eustace's generation, but it is at least interesting that in 1284 John Folville appealed one Gillian Crumbaud of involvement in the killing on 30 November 1276 of her husband, Eustace de Folville, who was also his father; Gillian, who was presumably John's stepmother, was acquitted, though a man was outlawed for the crime. Then in 1292 John was himself accused by an approver at Reading of having harboured his own brother Robert, killed in the company of thieves. But again the charge was dismissed -- Robert had been killed by, not with, thieves. 
Of Eustace Folville's own involvement in felony there can be no doubt. On 19 January 1326, with his brothers Robert and Walter, and perhaps fifty other men, he committed one of the most sensational crimes of an exceptionally disorderly decade, when they waylaid and murdered Sir Roger Beler, a baron of the exchequer, at Rearsby, Leicestershire. The context of the deed was political: Beler was a former Lancastrian who had become a leading agent of the Despensers, and had made many bitter enemies as a result. Among those enemies were members of the Zouche family, one of whom struck the fatal blow, and apparently also the Folvilles themselves. But once the deed was done, perhaps because they were outlawed in consequence, Eustace and his followers became full-time criminals. A series of pardons -- one early in 1327, another in 1329 -- made no difference; they continued to kill, kidnap, and rob. Eustace himself was said to have been implicated in three or four murders, a rape, and three robberies between 1327 and 1330. Then, on 14 January 1332 he led what was now a criminal band (one that included four of his own brothers) in an exploit as startling as the murder of Beler, when they kidnapped Sir Richard Willoughby, a justice of the court of common pleas, and allegedly notorious for corruption, and held him to ransom for 1300 marks ($866 13's'. 4died). 
In this and some of his other misdeeds Folville co-operated with the gang led by James Coterel, which was based in Derbyshire but was prepared to engage in crime elsewhere; and the Coterels, in their turn, gave Folville shelter when necessary. Folville also had friends among the ostensibly law-abiding, who may have hired him and his company to commit acts of violence on their behalf -- precisely this charge was brought against a group that included a canon of Sempringham Priory, Lincolnshire, and the cellarer of Haverholm Abbey, also in Lincolnshire. Their pardons in the late 1320s suggest that the Folvilles could look for support somewhere in the regime of Mortimer and Isabella. More specifically, Eustace and two of his brothers wore the robes of Sir Robert Tuchet, lord of Markeaton, Derbyshire, and Ashwell, Rutland, and they numbered the constable of Rockingham Castle, Northamptonshire, among their associates. The activities of the Folvilles helped to inspire a government campaign against criminals in 1332, which as far as Eustace was concerned had very little effect. He was brought back into the ranks of the law-abiding in a manner characteristic of the later middle ages, by a pardon granted in 1333 in consideration of military service in Scotland. His skills in violence were called upon again for campaigns in Scotland in 1337, and in Flanders in 1338. In the following year he became a member of the abbot of Crowland's council, receiving 20's'. per annum for life in return for aid and advice. Whether his services were genuine is unknown, and it is possible that the fee represented a form of protection money -- in either 1340 or 1341 his brother Richard was killed as a criminal resisting arrest outside the parish church of Teigh, Rutland, of which he was rector. 
Eustace Folville died unmolested in 1346. His passing was noticed by the chronicler Henry Knighton, who described him simply as 'Eustace de Folville, who slew Robert ['sic'] Bellers' ('Knighton's Chronicle', 77). To present-day eyes Folville's career provides a perfect illustration of the weakness of authority and the ineffectiveness of law enforcement in the first half of the fourteenth century. To his own contemporaries, aware of the ill repute of his principal victims, he presented a more ambiguous image. Consequently he was remembered as an enforcer of rough justice as well as a lawbreaker. In William Langland's 'Piers Plowman', written over thirty years after the gangster's death, part of the process of setting the world to rights consists of what has been unrighteously taken being forcibly recovered, 'fro fals men with Foluyles lawes' (Langland, 1.564). 


@@@@@


doc= 49677


Coterel, James (fl. 1328-1351), gang leader, is assumed to have been a younger son of Ralph Coterel, a landowner in Cromford, Matlock, Tadington, and three other places in Derbyshire, who was dead by 1315. In his youth James was the leader of a gang that included his brothers John and Nicholas and also had links with other groups of criminals including that led by Eustace Folville. Nicholas Coterel's pardon as one of Thomas of Lancaster's adherents in April 1322, and the group's close link to members of the Bradbourn family who had also been among the earl's followers, indicates an affiliation to the opposition of Edward II's rule. John Kinnersley, a canon of Lichfield later accused of supporting the Coterels, had been a member of Thomas of Lancaster's council, and Richard Rolleston of Crich, one of their receivers, had probably been one of the earl's bailiffs. But although the Coterels' career of violence and crime began with the breakdown of Edward II's government, there are no indications of a political motive. By 1330 they had been accused of having pillaged estates of Henry, earl of Lancaster (died 1345), in Derbyshire and Staffordshire, and of having committed two murders, and they had already formed associations with other criminals. 
Between 1330 and 1332 James Coterel led a ring of gangs involved in murder, kidnapping, and extortion in the Peak District and northern Nottinghamshire. Despite his own attachment for murder at the Derbyshire eyre of 1330, and the outlawry of his associates in March 1331, Coterel was never arrested. This was due to the support he received in the area, especially from two religious communities, the dean and chapter of Lichfield and the priory of Lenton, Nottinghamshire. When a powerful commission of trailbaston justices, led by the chief justices of king's bench and common pleas, visited the midlands in 1332, he escaped arrest because he was warned by the prior of Lenton. The canons of Lichfield were repeatedly mentioned as receivers of Coterel's gang. This close connection with the dean and chapter of Lichfield, as well as with the Cluniac priory of Lenton, illustrates Coterel's standing in the High Peak District, where both these religious communities had previously clashed over conflicting claims to advowsons and tithes. James Coterel also benefited from Queen Philippa's patronage more than once. Through her influence he was able to purchase the wardship of a mill in Wormhill and lands in Tideswell in 1332 -- he still had property interests in the latter manor in 1339. When he received a pardon in 1351 it was again at the queen's request. It is likely that he obtained this support because Nicholas Coterel was bailiff of the queen's liberty in Derbyshire and Leicestershire, though Nicholas did not acquit himself well in that office, since he was summoned before the king's council to answer a charge of embezzlement in 1359. Although James Coterel repeatedly acted as tax collector for Lenton Priory in his later career, and was even entrusted with one arrest warrant in 1336 and another in 1350, when he and six others were instructed to find and capture three monks of Lenton who had left the priory, he still felt it necessary to obtain a pardon for extortions, oppressions, receivings of felons, usurpations, and ransoms in 1351. Nicholas Coterel was still alive in 1363, when the recognizance of a debt of $132 which he owed to John Folville and Robert Harrington was entered upon the close rolls, but the date of James's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 49680


Ternan, Ellen Lawless (1839-1914), actress, but chiefly remembered as the inamorata of Charles Dickens, was born on 3 March 1839 at 11 Upper Clarence Place, Maidstone Road, Rochester, Kent, the third of four children of the actors Thomas Lawless Ternan (1790-1846) ['see under 'Jarman, Frances Eleanor] and his wife, Frances Eleanor, nee Jarman (1802-1873). Ellen (usually known as Nelly) had two elder sisters, Frances Eleanor and Maria Susanna, and a younger brother who died in infancy. The three girls were put on the stage as 'infant phenomena', Frances with outstanding success, Nelly making her first appearance in Sheffield at the age of three; she was the least theatrically gifted of the sisters. After the early death of their father in 1846 they were obliged to earn their living, touring the north of England, Ireland, and Scotland with their mother. W. C. Macready, who acted with Mrs Ternan, took an interest in the family and gave some assistance. Nelly's first adult engagement was in a burlesque at the Haymarket in 1857, and it was after this that she was engaged by Charles Dickens, with her mother and Maria, to perform with his amateur company in 'The Frozen Deep' in Manchester. 
Nelly was eighteen, Dickens forty-five. The history of their relationship remains obscure in some respects, but there is no doubt that he fell passionately in love with her and changed the pattern of his life to accommodate this passion. He separated from his wife and gave substantial financial support to the Ternan family; and according to Kate, his clear-eyed daughter, who was the same age as Nelly, his attentions were at first a source of elation and pride to the Ternans. He trusted Nelly's judgement, sometimes showing her his work at proof stage. He praised her pride and self-reliance, and referred to her as his 'magic circle of one' and his Darling, 'drearily missed' during a separation. He used variants of her name in his novels: Estella, Bella, and Helena Landless. The relationship was known to a small group of intimates, but kept profoundly secret from the public on whose favour Dickens depended. 
Nelly Ternan left the stage in 1860, and either lived in France or travelled there with Dickens over a period of several years. In 1865 she and her mother were returning from abroad with him when their train was derailed; although Nelly was injured, Dickens was at pains to conceal her presence. He joined her frequently at Slough, and later at Nunhead, both places where he had taken houses under a false name. He also made plans to take her to the United States with him in 1867, but was dissuaded by the fear of scandal. It is believed, though not proven, that a son was born to them, who died in infancy; and that Nelly's situation caused her some pain and guilt. 
Dickens left Nelly $1000 in his will and set up a private trust fund which freed her from the necessity of working again after his death in 1870. She travelled abroad, then on 31 January 1876, in the parish church at Kensington, she married a clergyman twelve years her junior, George Wharton Robinson (1850-1910); she presented herself as much younger than her real age, thereby cancelling out the years of her association with Dickens. She helped her husband to run a boys' school in Margate, and gave birth to a son and a daughter. Her last years were spent at Southsea, where she was reunited with her sisters. It is notable that, although all three sisters knew Dickens intimately, they were neither asked for nor gave any account of their relations with him, and that no letters survive. For many years his admirers denied the fact of his attachment to Nelly Ternan, and, even when the weight of evidence made this position untenable, some continue to insist that the affair was unconsummated: a view that hardly fits with what is known of Dickens or of Victorian mores, or with her own silence on the subject. Nelly Ternan was remembered as a clever and charming person, forceful of character, undomesticated, and interested in literature, the theatre, and politics; but she remains an enigmatic figure. She died from cancer at 18 Guion Road, Fulham, London, on 25 April 1914 and was buried in the Highland Road cemetery, Southsea, in her husband's grave. There are no living descendants. 
Her eldest sister, 
The third Ternan sister, 


@@@@@


doc= 49681


McDonald, Allan (1859-1905), Roman Catholic priest and folklorist, son of John McDonald and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' MacPherson, was born at Kilmallie, on the borders of Argyll and Inverness-shire, on 25 October 1859. He was educated at Blairs College, Kincardineshire, and at the Colegio Real de los Escoceses, at Valladolid, Spain. He was ordained by Archbishop Eyre at St Andrews Cathedral in the summer of 1882. He was then appointed to the Oban mission under Bishop Angus MacDonald, and in 1884 became parish priest of Dalibrog with Eriskay in South Uist, an almost wholly Gaelic-speaking community, where he perfected his knowledge of the Gaelic language and of its South Uist dialect in which most of his writing was done. 
Probably encouraged by the Revd Alexander Campbell, a priest born in South Uist about 1819, McDonald began in 1887 to note down local traditions, songs, proverbs, and customs, often giving the actual Gaelic words of his respondents. By December 1892, well before the folklorist movement showed an interest in the Hebrides, he had filled two large notebooks. By 1900 he had amassed a substantial collection, which included examples of second sight, Gaelic hymns, and his poetry. He published a collection of Gaelic hymns for children in 1889 and a larger collection in 1893. His reputation spread beyond the Hebrides and in 1895, soon after his health had broken down and his duties had been confined to the island of Eriskay, he was visited by Ada Goodrich Freer in connection with the Society for Psychical Research's inquiry into second sight. The inquiry came to little, but Freer returned with abundant literary and folklore material, which she soon began to publish. She did this with McDonald's perhaps naive permission and she acknowledged his help, but she gave the impression that McDonald was little more than her assistant and that some of his material had in fact been collected by her. The extent of her reliance on McDonald later became apparent. McDonald was visited by several folklorists including, in the summer of 1905, Marjory Kennedy-Fraser, whom he also generously helped. 
McDonald was active in South Uist affairs and was briefly a member of Inverness-shire county council. He built a new church on Eriskay in 1903, financed by the sale of his manuscripts to Walter Blackie, the publisher. He was dean of the Isles, and died of pneumonia on 8 October 1905 on Eriskay, where he was buried. 
After McDonald's death his notebooks and papers were dispersed, and by the 1920s were thought completely lost. However, from 1947 this contributor, with the help of friends, was able to trace many of them and they are now chiefly in the Carmichael MSS in Edinburgh University Library and in the Henderson MSS in Glasgow University Library. McDonald's role in the timely collection of a fast-vanishing Hebridean folklore cannot be too strongly emphasized. 


@@@@@


doc= 49683


Bateman, Hezekiah Linthicum (1812-1875), actor and theatre manager, was born in Baltimore, Maryland, USA, on 6 December 1812, the fourth child and second son of Amzi Bateman ('c'.1777-1816) and his wife, Catherine Schaeffer Evans Bateman ('c'.1784-1870). Amzi Bateman, a fisherman by trade, was a member of the 6th regiment of the Maryland militia and actively participated in the defence of Baltimore against the invasion of British troops during the Anglo-American War. Following Amzi's death his widow, Catherine, tutored students to support her young family. 
Hezekiah, unwillingly apprenticed as a young man to a firm of Baltimore engineers, left that position in the winter of 1832-3 with the intention of becoming an actor. He played juvenile roles with a neighbour, Junius Brutus Booth the elder, and with Ellen Tree (later Mrs Charles Kean). In 1839 he was employed by the theatrical management team of Noah M. Ludlow and Sol S. Smith for their stock company, and made his debut at their St Louis Theatre on 8 April 1839. Smith thought Bateman 'a good actor for the experience he then had' (Smith, 140). 
At the time Bateman was employed, Ludlow and Smith also took on the comedian Joseph Leathley (Joe) Cowell and his daughter Sidney Frances Cowell (1823-1881) ['see 'Bateman, Sidney Frances]. Bateman and the sixteen-year-old Sidney were married in St Louis on 10 November 1839. Of their eight children, four would be remembered for careers on the stage: Kate Josephine Bateman (1842-1917), Ellen Douglass Bateman (1844-1936), Virginia Frances Bateman (1853-1940), the mother of Fay Compton (1894-1978) and Edward Montague Compton Mackenzie (1883-1972), and Isabel Emilie Bateman (1854-1934). 
When the Ludlow and Smith company experienced financial difficulties at the end of the 1840 summer season in St Louis, the Batemans returned to Baltimore, where Hezekiah entered into a grocery business. This commercial enterprise was short-lived, however, and after several appearances at local Baltimore theatres the family sailed for England. Hezekiah made his debut on a British stage at Osbaldiston's Victoria Theatre, Surrey, on 16 September 1846. Badly received, he was hissed off the stage and returned to America, penniless and in steerage. 
Hezekiah and Sidney next joined James Bates's theatrical company at the Louisville Theatre in Louisville, Kentucky, in October 1847. On 17 December 1847 'Children of the Wood' was announced, but, it was said, the two children scheduled to play were suddenly taken ill, and in their place the two Bateman daughters -- Kate, aged five, and Ellen, aged three -- were quickly taught the roles and went on. The local newspaper reported that they 'performed their parts most sweetly' ('Louisville Daily Journal', 18 Dec 1847). The two little girls earned laurels in subsequent performances in Cincinnati, followed by another season in Louisville. In May 1848 the elder Batemans left the Bates company and became managers of their small daughters. 
Between August and October of 1851 the 'Bateman Children' played London's St James's Theatre during the Great Exhibition, and then toured the British Isles; they returned to America in August 1852. For the next three years Hezekiah Bateman toured with the children throughout the United States, until November 1855, when he briefly assumed management of the St Louis Theatre. Between 1856 and 1859 he managed, toured with, and occasionally acted in Sidney's two plays 'Self' and 'Geraldine'. 
In 1859 the Bateman family settled in Brooklyn, New York. In 1860 Ellen, with no further interest in the theatre, married a French-born silk manufacturer, Claude Greppo, and settled in Paterson, New Jersey. Kate, in the meantime, embarked on a stage career as an adult star. She made her New York debut in her mother's adaptation of 'Evangeline' at New York's Winter Garden. 
Hezekiah Bateman managed Kate's successful tour following her New York appearance, culminating in May 1863 at New York's Niblo's Garden with the wildly popular 'Leah, the Forsaken', an adaptation by Augustin Daly of Mosenthal's 'Deborah'. During the summer of 1863, now with some financial means owing to the success of 'Leah', the family could afford to enjoy a European vacation. Before returning to America, however, Bateman secured an engagement for Kate at London's Adelphi Theatre. 'Leah, the Forsaken', now in an adaptation by John Oxenford, ran for a West End record-breaking 211 nights. 
With America in the throes of civil war, theatrical prospects in the British Isles were more promising than those in the United States. In January 1864 Bateman took Sidney and the two younger girls, Virginia and Isabel, to England, where they settled permanently. Following Kate's Adelphi engagement, Bateman managed her tour of the British Isles and, in 1866, returned with her to America for a tour of the USA. Simultaneously he managed a tour of concert artists, including Mme Parepa and Carl Rosa. Kate's marriage to George Crowe on 13 October 1866 permitted Bateman to turn management duties over to Crowe, and he was free, between 1867 and 1869, to manage the tour of a troupe of French artistes who were introducing the operettas of Jacques Offenbach to America. In January 1869 he sold his interest in the troupe to the American railroad financier Jim Fisk. 
Bateman then returned to England and, on 22 February 1871, assumed management of London's Lyceum Theatre. His plan, initially, was to use the theatre as a showcase for Kate and the younger daughters, Virginia and Isabel, who were then embarking on their own theatrical careers. In April 1871 he saw a young actor named Henry Irving in 'The Dream of Eugene Aram'. Upon his return he announced to his family: 'I have found the greatest actor of the century' ('Black and White', 25 April 1896, 523). 

'Fanchette' and 'Pickwick', the first two Lyceum productions under Bateman's management, fell far short of financial success. On 25 November 1871, however, the future prospects for Bateman's finances improved radically with the presentation of 'The Bells', an English translation and adaptation by Leopold Lewis of the Erckmann-Chatrain tale 'Le Juif polonais'. Irving's weird and wonderful power in the leading role made an indelible mark on the history of British theatre and solidified both Irving's reputation and the financial position of Bateman's Lyceum. 
Bateman and Irving followed the 151 night run of 'The Bells' with 'Charles I', 'The Dream of Eugene Aram', 'Richelieu', 'Philip', and then 'Hamlet'. 'Hamlet', which opened on 31 October 1874, was, from the first night, an unqualified success and a triumph for both the manager and the actor. Five months later, with 'Hamlet' still on the boards, Irving organized a dinner party at a Pall Mall restaurant for Bateman, after which the group repaired to the Westminster Club for further socializing. There may have been sharp words exchanged between Bateman and the management when he was asked to leave the club at the required closing time. Upon rising the following morning, 22 March 1875, Bateman was suddenly seized by sharp chest pains, and he died within hours at his home, Rutland Lodge, Rutland Gardens, Knightsbridge, London. 'The Times', in eulogizing him, stated that 'he stood gallantly forward as the promoter of an intellectual and morally irreproachable drama at a day when the theatrical world was threatened with a deluge of vice and frivolity' ('The Times', 24 March 1875, 8). He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 27 March. 
Following his demise his widow and three of his daughters, Kate, Virginia, and Isabel, attempted to keep the Lyceum going, but conflicts between Irving and Sidney Bateman finally made a parting of the ways inevitable. Irving took over the Lyceum in 1878, while the Batemans took possession of Sadler's Wells. Debts mounted at the Wells, and when Sidney died in 1881 the daughters were left to deal with the debt. 
Kate continued to tour the British provinces before retiring in 1892, and thereafter ran a stage school in London. Virginia married the actor Edward Compton (1854-1918) on 12 June 1882, and afterwards acted in and co-managed the Compton Comedy Company. Isabel, after paying off the last penny of the debt, left the theatre in 1898 and entered the Anglican sisterhood of St Mary the Virgin in Wantage, Berkshire, in time becoming mother superior of the order. 


@@@@@


doc= 49684


Bateman, Hezekiah Linthicum (1812-1875), actor and theatre manager, was born in Baltimore, Maryland, USA, on 6 December 1812, the fourth child and second son of Amzi Bateman ('c'.1777-1816) and his wife, Catherine Schaeffer Evans Bateman ('c'.1784-1870). Amzi Bateman, a fisherman by trade, was a member of the 6th regiment of the Maryland militia and actively participated in the defence of Baltimore against the invasion of British troops during the Anglo-American War. Following Amzi's death his widow, Catherine, tutored students to support her young family. 
Hezekiah, unwillingly apprenticed as a young man to a firm of Baltimore engineers, left that position in the winter of 1832-3 with the intention of becoming an actor. He played juvenile roles with a neighbour, Junius Brutus Booth the elder, and with Ellen Tree (later Mrs Charles Kean). In 1839 he was employed by the theatrical management team of Noah M. Ludlow and Sol S. Smith for their stock company, and made his debut at their St Louis Theatre on 8 April 1839. Smith thought Bateman 'a good actor for the experience he then had' (Smith, 140). 
At the time Bateman was employed, Ludlow and Smith also took on the comedian Joseph Leathley (Joe) Cowell and his daughter Sidney Frances Cowell (1823-1881) ['see 'Bateman, Sidney Frances]. Bateman and the sixteen-year-old Sidney were married in St Louis on 10 November 1839. Of their eight children, four would be remembered for careers on the stage: Kate Josephine Bateman (1842-1917), Ellen Douglass Bateman (1844-1936), Virginia Frances Bateman (1853-1940), the mother of Fay Compton (1894-1978) and Edward Montague Compton Mackenzie (1883-1972), and Isabel Emilie Bateman (1854-1934). 
When the Ludlow and Smith company experienced financial difficulties at the end of the 1840 summer season in St Louis, the Batemans returned to Baltimore, where Hezekiah entered into a grocery business. This commercial enterprise was short-lived, however, and after several appearances at local Baltimore theatres the family sailed for England. Hezekiah made his debut on a British stage at Osbaldiston's Victoria Theatre, Surrey, on 16 September 1846. Badly received, he was hissed off the stage and returned to America, penniless and in steerage. 
Hezekiah and Sidney next joined James Bates's theatrical company at the Louisville Theatre in Louisville, Kentucky, in October 1847. On 17 December 1847 'Children of the Wood' was announced, but, it was said, the two children scheduled to play were suddenly taken ill, and in their place the two Bateman daughters -- Kate, aged five, and Ellen, aged three -- were quickly taught the roles and went on. The local newspaper reported that they 'performed their parts most sweetly' ('Louisville Daily Journal', 18 Dec 1847). The two little girls earned laurels in subsequent performances in Cincinnati, followed by another season in Louisville. In May 1848 the elder Batemans left the Bates company and became managers of their small daughters. 
Between August and October of 1851 the 'Bateman Children' played London's St James's Theatre during the Great Exhibition, and then toured the British Isles; they returned to America in August 1852. For the next three years Hezekiah Bateman toured with the children throughout the United States, until November 1855, when he briefly assumed management of the St Louis Theatre. Between 1856 and 1859 he managed, toured with, and occasionally acted in Sidney's two plays 'Self' and 'Geraldine'. 
In 1859 the Bateman family settled in Brooklyn, New York. In 1860 Ellen, with no further interest in the theatre, married a French-born silk manufacturer, Claude Greppo, and settled in Paterson, New Jersey. Kate, in the meantime, embarked on a stage career as an adult star. She made her New York debut in her mother's adaptation of 'Evangeline' at New York's Winter Garden. 
Hezekiah Bateman managed Kate's successful tour following her New York appearance, culminating in May 1863 at New York's Niblo's Garden with the wildly popular 'Leah, the Forsaken', an adaptation by Augustin Daly of Mosenthal's 'Deborah'. During the summer of 1863, now with some financial means owing to the success of 'Leah', the family could afford to enjoy a European vacation. Before returning to America, however, Bateman secured an engagement for Kate at London's Adelphi Theatre. 'Leah, the Forsaken', now in an adaptation by John Oxenford, ran for a West End record-breaking 211 nights. 
With America in the throes of civil war, theatrical prospects in the British Isles were more promising than those in the United States. In January 1864 Bateman took Sidney and the two younger girls, Virginia and Isabel, to England, where they settled permanently. Following Kate's Adelphi engagement, Bateman managed her tour of the British Isles and, in 1866, returned with her to America for a tour of the USA. Simultaneously he managed a tour of concert artists, including Mme Parepa and Carl Rosa. Kate's marriage to George Crowe on 13 October 1866 permitted Bateman to turn management duties over to Crowe, and he was free, between 1867 and 1869, to manage the tour of a troupe of French artistes who were introducing the operettas of Jacques Offenbach to America. In January 1869 he sold his interest in the troupe to the American railroad financier Jim Fisk. 
Bateman then returned to England and, on 22 February 1871, assumed management of London's Lyceum Theatre. His plan, initially, was to use the theatre as a showcase for Kate and the younger daughters, Virginia and Isabel, who were then embarking on their own theatrical careers. In April 1871 he saw a young actor named Henry Irving in 'The Dream of Eugene Aram'. Upon his return he announced to his family: 'I have found the greatest actor of the century' ('Black and White', 25 April 1896, 523). 

'Fanchette' and 'Pickwick', the first two Lyceum productions under Bateman's management, fell far short of financial success. On 25 November 1871, however, the future prospects for Bateman's finances improved radically with the presentation of 'The Bells', an English translation and adaptation by Leopold Lewis of the Erckmann-Chatrain tale 'Le Juif polonais'. Irving's weird and wonderful power in the leading role made an indelible mark on the history of British theatre and solidified both Irving's reputation and the financial position of Bateman's Lyceum. 
Bateman and Irving followed the 151 night run of 'The Bells' with 'Charles I', 'The Dream of Eugene Aram', 'Richelieu', 'Philip', and then 'Hamlet'. 'Hamlet', which opened on 31 October 1874, was, from the first night, an unqualified success and a triumph for both the manager and the actor. Five months later, with 'Hamlet' still on the boards, Irving organized a dinner party at a Pall Mall restaurant for Bateman, after which the group repaired to the Westminster Club for further socializing. There may have been sharp words exchanged between Bateman and the management when he was asked to leave the club at the required closing time. Upon rising the following morning, 22 March 1875, Bateman was suddenly seized by sharp chest pains, and he died within hours at his home, Rutland Lodge, Rutland Gardens, Knightsbridge, London. 'The Times', in eulogizing him, stated that 'he stood gallantly forward as the promoter of an intellectual and morally irreproachable drama at a day when the theatrical world was threatened with a deluge of vice and frivolity' ('The Times', 24 March 1875, 8). He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 27 March. 
Following his demise his widow and three of his daughters, Kate, Virginia, and Isabel, attempted to keep the Lyceum going, but conflicts between Irving and Sidney Bateman finally made a parting of the ways inevitable. Irving took over the Lyceum in 1878, while the Batemans took possession of Sadler's Wells. Debts mounted at the Wells, and when Sidney died in 1881 the daughters were left to deal with the debt. 
Kate continued to tour the British provinces before retiring in 1892, and thereafter ran a stage school in London. Virginia married the actor Edward Compton (1854-1918) on 12 June 1882, and afterwards acted in and co-managed the Compton Comedy Company. Isabel, after paying off the last penny of the debt, left the theatre in 1898 and entered the Anglican sisterhood of St Mary the Virgin in Wantage, Berkshire, in time becoming mother superior of the order. 


@@@@@


doc= 49685


Bateman, Hezekiah Linthicum (1812-1875), actor and theatre manager, was born in Baltimore, Maryland, USA, on 6 December 1812, the fourth child and second son of Amzi Bateman ('c'.1777-1816) and his wife, Catherine Schaeffer Evans Bateman ('c'.1784-1870). Amzi Bateman, a fisherman by trade, was a member of the 6th regiment of the Maryland militia and actively participated in the defence of Baltimore against the invasion of British troops during the Anglo-American War. Following Amzi's death his widow, Catherine, tutored students to support her young family. 
Hezekiah, unwillingly apprenticed as a young man to a firm of Baltimore engineers, left that position in the winter of 1832-3 with the intention of becoming an actor. He played juvenile roles with a neighbour, Junius Brutus Booth the elder, and with Ellen Tree (later Mrs Charles Kean). In 1839 he was employed by the theatrical management team of Noah M. Ludlow and Sol S. Smith for their stock company, and made his debut at their St Louis Theatre on 8 April 1839. Smith thought Bateman 'a good actor for the experience he then had' (Smith, 140). 
At the time Bateman was employed, Ludlow and Smith also took on the comedian Joseph Leathley (Joe) Cowell and his daughter Sidney Frances Cowell (1823-1881) ['see 'Bateman, Sidney Frances]. Bateman and the sixteen-year-old Sidney were married in St Louis on 10 November 1839. Of their eight children, four would be remembered for careers on the stage: Kate Josephine Bateman (1842-1917), Ellen Douglass Bateman (1844-1936), Virginia Frances Bateman (1853-1940), the mother of Fay Compton (1894-1978) and Edward Montague Compton Mackenzie (1883-1972), and Isabel Emilie Bateman (1854-1934). 
When the Ludlow and Smith company experienced financial difficulties at the end of the 1840 summer season in St Louis, the Batemans returned to Baltimore, where Hezekiah entered into a grocery business. This commercial enterprise was short-lived, however, and after several appearances at local Baltimore theatres the family sailed for England. Hezekiah made his debut on a British stage at Osbaldiston's Victoria Theatre, Surrey, on 16 September 1846. Badly received, he was hissed off the stage and returned to America, penniless and in steerage. 
Hezekiah and Sidney next joined James Bates's theatrical company at the Louisville Theatre in Louisville, Kentucky, in October 1847. On 17 December 1847 'Children of the Wood' was announced, but, it was said, the two children scheduled to play were suddenly taken ill, and in their place the two Bateman daughters -- Kate, aged five, and Ellen, aged three -- were quickly taught the roles and went on. The local newspaper reported that they 'performed their parts most sweetly' ('Louisville Daily Journal', 18 Dec 1847). The two little girls earned laurels in subsequent performances in Cincinnati, followed by another season in Louisville. In May 1848 the elder Batemans left the Bates company and became managers of their small daughters. 
Between August and October of 1851 the 'Bateman Children' played London's St James's Theatre during the Great Exhibition, and then toured the British Isles; they returned to America in August 1852. For the next three years Hezekiah Bateman toured with the children throughout the United States, until November 1855, when he briefly assumed management of the St Louis Theatre. Between 1856 and 1859 he managed, toured with, and occasionally acted in Sidney's two plays 'Self' and 'Geraldine'. 
In 1859 the Bateman family settled in Brooklyn, New York. In 1860 Ellen, with no further interest in the theatre, married a French-born silk manufacturer, Claude Greppo, and settled in Paterson, New Jersey. Kate, in the meantime, embarked on a stage career as an adult star. She made her New York debut in her mother's adaptation of 'Evangeline' at New York's Winter Garden. 
Hezekiah Bateman managed Kate's successful tour following her New York appearance, culminating in May 1863 at New York's Niblo's Garden with the wildly popular 'Leah, the Forsaken', an adaptation by Augustin Daly of Mosenthal's 'Deborah'. During the summer of 1863, now with some financial means owing to the success of 'Leah', the family could afford to enjoy a European vacation. Before returning to America, however, Bateman secured an engagement for Kate at London's Adelphi Theatre. 'Leah, the Forsaken', now in an adaptation by John Oxenford, ran for a West End record-breaking 211 nights. 
With America in the throes of civil war, theatrical prospects in the British Isles were more promising than those in the United States. In January 1864 Bateman took Sidney and the two younger girls, Virginia and Isabel, to England, where they settled permanently. Following Kate's Adelphi engagement, Bateman managed her tour of the British Isles and, in 1866, returned with her to America for a tour of the USA. Simultaneously he managed a tour of concert artists, including Mme Parepa and Carl Rosa. Kate's marriage to George Crowe on 13 October 1866 permitted Bateman to turn management duties over to Crowe, and he was free, between 1867 and 1869, to manage the tour of a troupe of French artistes who were introducing the operettas of Jacques Offenbach to America. In January 1869 he sold his interest in the troupe to the American railroad financier Jim Fisk. 
Bateman then returned to England and, on 22 February 1871, assumed management of London's Lyceum Theatre. His plan, initially, was to use the theatre as a showcase for Kate and the younger daughters, Virginia and Isabel, who were then embarking on their own theatrical careers. In April 1871 he saw a young actor named Henry Irving in 'The Dream of Eugene Aram'. Upon his return he announced to his family: 'I have found the greatest actor of the century' ('Black and White', 25 April 1896, 523). 

'Fanchette' and 'Pickwick', the first two Lyceum productions under Bateman's management, fell far short of financial success. On 25 November 1871, however, the future prospects for Bateman's finances improved radically with the presentation of 'The Bells', an English translation and adaptation by Leopold Lewis of the Erckmann-Chatrain tale 'Le Juif polonais'. Irving's weird and wonderful power in the leading role made an indelible mark on the history of British theatre and solidified both Irving's reputation and the financial position of Bateman's Lyceum. 
Bateman and Irving followed the 151 night run of 'The Bells' with 'Charles I', 'The Dream of Eugene Aram', 'Richelieu', 'Philip', and then 'Hamlet'. 'Hamlet', which opened on 31 October 1874, was, from the first night, an unqualified success and a triumph for both the manager and the actor. Five months later, with 'Hamlet' still on the boards, Irving organized a dinner party at a Pall Mall restaurant for Bateman, after which the group repaired to the Westminster Club for further socializing. There may have been sharp words exchanged between Bateman and the management when he was asked to leave the club at the required closing time. Upon rising the following morning, 22 March 1875, Bateman was suddenly seized by sharp chest pains, and he died within hours at his home, Rutland Lodge, Rutland Gardens, Knightsbridge, London. 'The Times', in eulogizing him, stated that 'he stood gallantly forward as the promoter of an intellectual and morally irreproachable drama at a day when the theatrical world was threatened with a deluge of vice and frivolity' ('The Times', 24 March 1875, 8). He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 27 March. 
Following his demise his widow and three of his daughters, Kate, Virginia, and Isabel, attempted to keep the Lyceum going, but conflicts between Irving and Sidney Bateman finally made a parting of the ways inevitable. Irving took over the Lyceum in 1878, while the Batemans took possession of Sadler's Wells. Debts mounted at the Wells, and when Sidney died in 1881 the daughters were left to deal with the debt. 
Kate continued to tour the British provinces before retiring in 1892, and thereafter ran a stage school in London. Virginia married the actor Edward Compton (1854-1918) on 12 June 1882, and afterwards acted in and co-managed the Compton Comedy Company. Isabel, after paying off the last penny of the debt, left the theatre in 1898 and entered the Anglican sisterhood of St Mary the Virgin in Wantage, Berkshire, in time becoming mother superior of the order. 


@@@@@


doc= 49686


MacLellan, Angus (1869-1966), storyteller and farm worker, was born at Poll Torain, Loch Eynort, South Uist, Inverness-shire, on 7 July 1869, the youngest son of Angus MacLellan, grass-keeper, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Wilson. The younger Angus was one of the last great traditional Gaelic storytellers of South Uist, Inverness-shire, a crofter-fisherman and a skilled farm worker with horses and sheep; his sister, Mrs Neil Campbell, who lived to be 100, was said to have been the last monoglot Gaelic speaker on South Uist, and was herself the teller of pithy anecdotes and a singer of Gaelic ballads and old waulking songs. 
A collection of forty-five of MacLellan's stories, including his version of 'Fionn saga' and a number of international folk tales, was published in translation in 1961 as 'Stories from South Uist'. Many other stories which he recorded have still to be transcribed and translated. His story of Conall Gulbann was published in volume 44 of the 'Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness' as a Gaelic text with English precis by J. L. Campbell. His version of the 'Cattle Raid of Cooley' was published by Dr Calum MacLean in 'Arv' (20. 160-80). 
Much historical and sociological interest attaches to MacLellan's autobiography, published in 1962 in translation as 'The Furrow Behind Me'. Taken from a recording, the Gaelic text was published in the 'Norsk Tidsskrift for Sprogvidenskap' in 1972 and entitled 'Saoghal an treobhaiche' ('The ploughman's world'). It is the longest text in colloquial Scottish Gaelic and includes his memories of life as a farm worker for Robert Menzies at Tirinie (1889-93) and Thomas MacDonald at Borenich (1893-4) (both farms in Perthshire), for Edward Kane at Rowardennan on Loch Lomondside (1895-7), and for Duncan Fraser at Dalmally, Argyll (1898-1900), in the days when farm workers in the highlands signed on to work for six months for about $15 and potatoes and milk. 
Later MacLellan went home to help his parents in Uist, and in 1908 he obtained the official status of a crofter there. His stories and his memories are told with a wealth of dialogue and characterization which would do credit to a professional novelist. MacLellan was made MBE in 1965 for his great contribution to the preservation of Gaelic oral literature and was also an honorary chieftain of the Gaelic Society of Inverness. He died unmarried at 6 Frobost, South Uist, on 19 March 1966 and was buried at Hanlainn on that island. 


@@@@@


doc= 49691


Cowell, Samuel Houghton (1820-1864), actor and comic singer, the son of Joseph Cowell and his first wife, Maria Murray, was born in London on 5 April 1820. He was taken by his father to America in 1822, and educated in a military academy at Mount Airey, near Philadelphia, where he made great progress in his few years of steady education. In 1829, at the age of nine, he made his first appearance on the stage, at Boston, as Crack in Thomas Knight's 'The Turnpike Gate', singing with his father the duet 'When off in curricle we go'. From that time onwards he earned his own living and was hailed as 'the young American Roscius'. He acted in all the chief theatres of the United States, some of his characters being Chick, Matty Marvellous, Bombastes Furioso, and one of the Dromios in Shakespeare's 'The Comedy of Errors', his father playing the other. 
Cowell went to Scotland, and appeared in Edinburgh at the Theatre Royal and the Adelphi, under the management of his uncle, W. H. Murray. He became an established favourite, not only as an actor, but as a comic singer between the acts. On 5 November 1842 he married Emilie Marguerite Ebsworth (1818-1899), the daughter of Joseph Ebsworth, a highly esteemed dramatist and teacher of music, and the well-known actress Mary Emma Ebsworth. They had nine children, of whom two daughters, Sydney Cowell (1846-1925) and Florence Cowell (1852-1926), and one of the six sons, Joseph, became successful professional actors. After remaining for four years in Edinburgh, Cowell went to London on an engagement for three years, with Benjamin Webster, at the Adelphi, but soon abandoned this, and appeared in July 1844 as Alessio in 'La sonnambula' at the Surrey Theatre. Before 1848 he moved to the Olympic as a stock comedian under Bolton's management, then for two years he was at the Princess's, under James Maddox, playing second to Henry Compton. Next he went to Covent Garden, under Alfred Bunn, and afterwards to Glasgow, under his old friend Edmund Glover, though he took other engagements at Belfast and Dublin. 
Everywhere a favourite, flattered and tempted towards conviviality, and naturally restless, Cowell grew tired of dramatic study, which was always arduous in the provinces, where a frequent change of performances was necessary, and he decided to devote himself to character singing. His 'Billy Barlow', 'The Ratcatcher's Daughter', 'Clara Cline' (considered one of the sweetest and best of his own compositions), 'Robinson Crusoe', and the burlesque ditties of 'Alonzo the Brave' and 'Richard the Third' were embodied with so much dramatic spirit, in appropriate costume, with his rich voice and power of mimicry, that he virtually founded a new class of drawing-room entertainment, and gave such satisfaction that 'Evans's' of Covent Garden ('Paddy Green's') and Charles Morton's Canterbury Hall owed their popularity chiefly to him. He was hailed as the virtual founder of music-hall entertainment. Collections of 'Sam Cowell's Songs' and photographic portraits of him in character used to be both enormously numerous and popular. He joined Conquest at the Royal Grecian, where he enacted Nobody with a 'buffo' song in E. Leman Blanchard's extravaganza 'Nobody in London', which playfully satirized the Great Exhibition excitement of 1851. 
Cowell twice appeared at Windsor Castle before the queen at her court theatricals. In August 1852 he was at St James's Theatre. In 1860, after immense success in provincial towns, he went again to America. The vessel encountered such stormy weather that his health was permanently injured. He had been wonderfully robust, but consumption developed after his return to London in 1862. He was invited to Blandford, Dorset, by his friend Robert Eyers of the Crown Hotel, to recover his health if possible, but soon after moving there he died, on 11 March 1864. He was buried in the cemetery at Blandford on 15 March, and a monument was erected by his friends. His widow died at the age of eighty on 13 January 1899. 


@@@@@


doc= 49692


Cowell, Samuel Houghton (1820-1864), actor and comic singer, the son of Joseph Cowell and his first wife, Maria Murray, was born in London on 5 April 1820. He was taken by his father to America in 1822, and educated in a military academy at Mount Airey, near Philadelphia, where he made great progress in his few years of steady education. In 1829, at the age of nine, he made his first appearance on the stage, at Boston, as Crack in Thomas Knight's 'The Turnpike Gate', singing with his father the duet 'When off in curricle we go'. From that time onwards he earned his own living and was hailed as 'the young American Roscius'. He acted in all the chief theatres of the United States, some of his characters being Chick, Matty Marvellous, Bombastes Furioso, and one of the Dromios in Shakespeare's 'The Comedy of Errors', his father playing the other. 
Cowell went to Scotland, and appeared in Edinburgh at the Theatre Royal and the Adelphi, under the management of his uncle, W. H. Murray. He became an established favourite, not only as an actor, but as a comic singer between the acts. On 5 November 1842 he married Emilie Marguerite Ebsworth (1818-1899), the daughter of Joseph Ebsworth, a highly esteemed dramatist and teacher of music, and the well-known actress Mary Emma Ebsworth. They had nine children, of whom two daughters, Sydney Cowell (1846-1925) and Florence Cowell (1852-1926), and one of the six sons, Joseph, became successful professional actors. After remaining for four years in Edinburgh, Cowell went to London on an engagement for three years, with Benjamin Webster, at the Adelphi, but soon abandoned this, and appeared in July 1844 as Alessio in 'La sonnambula' at the Surrey Theatre. Before 1848 he moved to the Olympic as a stock comedian under Bolton's management, then for two years he was at the Princess's, under James Maddox, playing second to Henry Compton. Next he went to Covent Garden, under Alfred Bunn, and afterwards to Glasgow, under his old friend Edmund Glover, though he took other engagements at Belfast and Dublin. 
Everywhere a favourite, flattered and tempted towards conviviality, and naturally restless, Cowell grew tired of dramatic study, which was always arduous in the provinces, where a frequent change of performances was necessary, and he decided to devote himself to character singing. His 'Billy Barlow', 'The Ratcatcher's Daughter', 'Clara Cline' (considered one of the sweetest and best of his own compositions), 'Robinson Crusoe', and the burlesque ditties of 'Alonzo the Brave' and 'Richard the Third' were embodied with so much dramatic spirit, in appropriate costume, with his rich voice and power of mimicry, that he virtually founded a new class of drawing-room entertainment, and gave such satisfaction that 'Evans's' of Covent Garden ('Paddy Green's') and Charles Morton's Canterbury Hall owed their popularity chiefly to him. He was hailed as the virtual founder of music-hall entertainment. Collections of 'Sam Cowell's Songs' and photographic portraits of him in character used to be both enormously numerous and popular. He joined Conquest at the Royal Grecian, where he enacted Nobody with a 'buffo' song in E. Leman Blanchard's extravaganza 'Nobody in London', which playfully satirized the Great Exhibition excitement of 1851. 
Cowell twice appeared at Windsor Castle before the queen at her court theatricals. In August 1852 he was at St James's Theatre. In 1860, after immense success in provincial towns, he went again to America. The vessel encountered such stormy weather that his health was permanently injured. He had been wonderfully robust, but consumption developed after his return to London in 1862. He was invited to Blandford, Dorset, by his friend Robert Eyers of the Crown Hotel, to recover his health if possible, but soon after moving there he died, on 11 March 1864. He was buried in the cemetery at Blandford on 15 March, and a monument was erected by his friends. His widow died at the age of eighty on 13 January 1899. 


