@@@@@


doc= 49695


Booth, Edwin Thomas (1833-1893), actor, was born on 13 November 1833 near Bel Air, Maryland, fifth of the ten children of the actor Junius Brutus Booth (1796-1852) and his second wife, Mary Ann Holmes (1802-1885) of London, whom he married in 1851. Three brothers and two sisters survived childhood. In 1847 Edwin persuaded the manager of the Holliday Street Theatre, Baltimore, to let him appear, but nervousness spoilt his performance. The same year he began touring as his father's dresser. His official debut was as Tressel in Cibber's version of Shakespeare's 'Richard III', at the Boston Museum Theatre on 10 September 1849. After his father's death in 1852, he performed in California, Australia, and Hawaii. In 1857 he made his first tour of the United States as a star, playing melodrama heroes and villains and Shakespearian tragic leads. Although it was considered highly promising, his work was often criticized for unevenness and threatened by his tendency to drink. Short and slight with dark eyes, long dark hair, romantic good looks, and a warm, musical voice, Booth was attractive to women. In 1860 he married Mary Devlin (1840-1863), and in 1861-2 they travelled to England, where Booth appeared at the Haymarket and his daughter Edwina was born. 
In Manchester Henry Irving played secondary roles to Booth's leads and was influenced by Booth's Hamlet in conceiving his own. England reported Booth 'a sound and sensible actor'. From earlier blood-and-thunder playing, he had begun to develop a quiet, intellectual, lyrical style favoured by cultured audiences. In 1863, devastated by his wife's death, he gave up drink. In 1864-5, at the Winter Garden, New York, he played a 100-night run as Hamlet. The assassination of Abraham Lincoln at Ford's Theatre, Washington, by his brother John Wilkes Booth in April 1865 led to his brief retirement. In 1869 he opened Booth's Theatre in New York as a 'temple to Shakespeare', where he mounted lavish productions, and the same year he married Mary McVicker (1848-1881). Their son Edgar died at birth, and the marriage was strained by Mary's growing mental illness. Booth considered leasing the Lyceum Theatre, London, and alternating between it and Booth's Theatre, but lost the option. He went bankrupt in 1874 and resumed national touring. In 1880-81 he revisited England, and appeared at the Princess's Theatre, London, with inadequate scenery and cast. Aspects of his technique struck English critics as old-fashioned, his gestures and facial expression as excessive, and sometimes he appeared to lack passion. But his elocution and grace were considered exemplary. Henry Irving invited him to the Lyceum, where they alternated Othello and Iago with huge success. Booth's cool, polished Iago was particularly praised (a contemporary rhyme contrasts him with Irving as 'the smooth Mr Booth'). 
Booth's second wife died in 1881, and in 1882-3 he travelled again to Europe. He opened in London at the Adelphi, then toured cities throughout the British Isles. His Hamlet, Richelieu, Iago, Othello, and King Lear were acclaimed in England and in Germany and Austria, where he acted in English with German-speaking companies. From 1886 until retiring in 1891 he worked with Lawrence Barrett in touring management. A champion of actors' social status, he founded The Players in New York, where actors could associate with leaders in other fields. Although he was shy, and often melancholy, his huge correspondence reveals a high-spirited lover of fun, especially word play. His recording of Othello's speech to the senate is intimate, warm, personable, almost colloquial. He contributed perceptive notes to the Furness Variorum Edition of Shakespeare, wrote short memoirs of Edmund Kean and Junius Brutus Booth, and, with William Winter, published his acting versions of Shakespeare's plays. He died on 7 June 1893, after a stroke, and was buried in Mount Auburn cemetery near Boston. Well into the twentieth century he was reputed America's greatest tragedian and foremost exponent of Hamlet. 


@@@@@


doc= 49696


Emery, Winifred (1861-1924), actress, was born on 1 August 1861 at 3 Chatham Street, Manchester, and given the names Maud Isabel. She was the daughter of Samuel Anderson Emery (1817-1881), an actor, and his wife, Emma, 'nee' King (died 1886). She came from a well-established theatrical family and, taking the name Winifred Emery, made her first stage appearance in 1870, as Geraldine in J. B. Buckstone's 'The Green Bushes' at Liverpool's Alexandra Theatre. She first performed in London on 23 December 1874 as Happy New Year in the pantomime 'Beauty and the Beast' at the Princess's Theatre. Her adult career began in a period of innovation and expansion, at the Aquarium Theatre, London, in 1879, with Marie Litton's company; she then joined Wilson Barrett, first at the recently opened Leeds Grand Theatre, then in October of that year at London's Court Theatre, where she later claimed to have 'really started' ('The Sketch', 7 Dec 1911), playing Minnie Heritage in H. A. Jones's one-act piece 'A Clerical Error'. 
After appearing at the Haymarket Theatre in August 1880, as Rosie Laborde in 'A Bridal Tour', and again at the Court Theatre, Emery played at the St James's Theatre under Sir John Hare and W. H. and Madge Kendal. In July 1881 she joined Henry Irving's company at the Lyceum, where she was seen, 'inter alia', as Annette in 'The Bells' and Nerissa in 'The Merchant of Venice'. Engagements followed at the Vaudeville, under Thomas Thorne, where she was particularly successful as Lydia Languish in 'The Rivals', and at Toole's Theatre. In 1884 she returned to the Lyceum to understudy Ellen Terry and to join Irving's tour of the United States, where she appeared as Olivia in 'Twelfth Night', Hero in 'Much Ado about Nothing', and Jessica in 'The Merchant of Venice'. She remained with Irving, starred in October 1885 as W. G. Wills's eponymous Olivia, and went again to America in 1887-8. 
Typically characterized for her 'personal beauty and womanly charm' (Reid and Compton, 77) and her 'sympathy and fidelity' both on and off the stage (Maxwell, 12), Emery gave some of her most memorable performances as Mrs Errol in 'The Real Little Lord Fauntleroy' at Terry's Theatre, London, in May 1888. Shortly before this, on 28 April 1888, she married at Kensington register office Cyril Francis Maude (1862-1951), an actor. For reasons which remain obscure, she married him again at the Chapel Royal, Savoy, on 2 June 1888. They had two daughters and a son. 
Further engagements followed at the Vaudeville Theatre and at Drury Lane, where, under Augustus Harris, Emery had leading parts, including that of Mildred in 'The Royal Oak'. She proved an impressive Clarissa, with a 'virginal air of sweetness' ('The Times', 7 Feb 1890) in Robert Buchanan's version of Richardson's novel at the Vaudeville Theatre in February 1890. There, later that year, she played Lady Teazle in 'The School for Scandal', Kate in 'She Stoops to Conquer', and Fanny Hoyden in Robert Buchanan's 'Miss Tomboy'. 
After starring as Vashti Dethic in H. A. Jones's 'Judah' at the Shaftesbury Theatre in September 1890, Emery rejoined Wilson Barrett at the newly rebuilt Olympic Theatre that December. She returned to the Shaftesbury in May 1891, and in February 1892 took the title role in the first production of Oscar Wilde's 'Lady Windermere's Fan' at the St James's Theatre. She was the leading lady at the Comedy Theatre under Comyns Carr between 1893 and 1895 in Sydney Grundy's 'The New Woman' and 'Sowing the Wind' and A. W. Pinero's 'The Benefit of the Doubt', and returned to the Lyceum, then taken by Sir Johnston Forbes-Robertson, in February 1896. 
When Cyril Maude entered management, at the Haymarket Theatre in 1896, Winifred Emery was his leading lady. Following childbirth and illness between 1898 and 1905, when she appeared only as Muriel in Robert Marshall's 'The Second in Command' in July 1901, her career resumed in February 1905, when she played Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing' at His Majesty's under Beerbohm Tree. In January 1906 she appeared at the Waldorf Theatre as Mrs Pellender in 'The Superior Miss Pellender'. She then formed her own company to tour provincial theatres, and starred in 'Olivia' and 'Her Son', a new play by Horace Annesley Vachell, in which she appeared as Dorothy Fairfax and Cyril Maude as Richard Gascoyne. This opened at Cyril Maude's newly rebuilt Playhouse in March 1907. 
For the next fourteen years Emery continued to play leading, albeit more mature, roles in London's West End, not only under her husband's management at the Playhouse, but also at His Majesty's (Mistress Ford in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'), the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane (Betty Gordon in 'The Bunking of Betty'), the St James's (Esther in 'Caste'), the Lyric (Queen Elizabeth in 'Sir Walter Ralegh'), the Vaudeville (Miss Dyott in 'The Schoolmistress'), the Apollo (Hon. Mrs Stevenson in 'Never Say Die'), the Gaiety (Fairy Berylune in 'The Betrothal'), and the Duke of York's (Mrs Smallwood in 'The Enchanted Cottage', 1922). At the command performance at Drury Lane during the state visit of the German emperor, Wilhelm II, in May 1911, she played Lady Franklin in an excerpt from 'Money', and at the coronation gala performance at His Majesty's Theatre on 27 June, under the direction of Sir Squire Bancroft, she was Queen Elizabeth in Sheridan's 'The Critic'. Her last performance was at His Majesty's Theatre on 26 February 1923, as Nicole in a charity production of 'The Ballad Monger'. 
Winifred Emery died of stomach cancer at the family home, The Corner, Little Common, Bexhill, Sussex, on 15 July 1924, and was buried at St Mark's Church, Bexhill, on 18 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 49697


Aldridge, Ira Frederick (1807?-1867), actor, was probably born on 24 July 1807 in New York city, the son of Daniel Aldridge, a lay preacher. Little is known of his mother, Lurona, who died when he was a youth. He was the first major African-American actor, although virtually all of his appearances were in Britain or on the continent; best known for his tragic roles, he was also successful in a variety of comic parts. 
Aldridge's origins have often been romanticized: an anonymous 1849 publication, 'Memoir and Theatrical Career of Ira Aldridge', tells a tale, often repeated, that he was born in Senegal, the son of a royal family of the Fulah tribe. Based on the evidence, it seems most likely that he and his father were both free-born African-Americans. The 'Memoir' is sometimes attributed to Aldridge, who may have had a hand in creating such a marketably romantic 'history'. 
Aldridge was attracted to the theatre as a child, and attended performances at New York's Park Theatre. While a student at the city's African Free School he became involved in the short-lived African Theatre, where, according to the 'Memoir', he first played the part of Rolla in Sheridan's 'Pizarro', a part to which he would later return. After the closing of the African Theatre, when it became apparent that the opportunities for roles would be severely limited in the United States, Aldridge sailed for England some time around 1824. According to another popular but unconfirmed tale he travelled as a servant to the American actor Henry Wallack. 
Aldridge made his London debut on 10 October 1825, at the Royal Coburg Theatre, playing the part of Oronooko in 'The Revolt of Surinam, or, A Slave's Revenge' (an adaptation of Thomas Southern's 'Oronooko'). During his time at the Royal Coburg he performed in such other works as Thomas Morton's 'The Slave' and J. H. Amherst's 'The Death of Christophe'. From the beginning of his career, reviewers focused on his appearance: he was generally described as tall and well built; it was common for critics to note, with some surprise, that he was not as dark-skinned as actors in 'blackface', but rather was 'almost a light brown', with a 'mulatto tint'. His voice was described as 'rich and melodious', but some reviewers considered it nasal or whiny; the contradiction may be on account of varying responses to an American accent (many critics comment on his 'strikingly un-English' pronunciation, and George Eliot found it intolerable). He was given the sobriquet 'the African Roscius'. 
Much of Aldridge's early career in Britain, when he was known as 'Mr Keene', found him in the provincial theatres, including those at Hull, Brighton, Manchester, Newcastle, Liverpool, and Edinburgh, and in the theatres of London's East End. 'Othello', 'The Slave', and Bickerstaffe's 'The Padlock' were the staples of his repertory. He was married for the first time shortly after his arrival in England, to Margaret Gill ('c'.1800-1864). 
Aldridge made his West End debut at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, in 1833, when he played 'Othello' barely two weeks after the death of Kean, who had been playing the Moor on that very stage. Aldridge was forced to circulate handbills defending his adoption of Kean's part. The reviews were a fascinating mix, indicative of the feelings Aldridge inspired in critics. Some, as in 'The Athenaeum', were unable to get beyond a consideration of his race; the 'Theatrical Observer', in a typical pun, noted that his performance was 'very 'fair' for a 'black''. In general the more even-tempered reviewers focused on his 'naturalness'. Notably, they mention the overwhelmingly favourable response from the audience. After two performances Covent Garden closed for five days, and Aldridge's remaining performances were cancelled, possibly as a result of the hostility of the press. Aldridge sought out new roles beyond those of his standard repertory, and he in fact revived Shakespeare's rarely produced 'Titus Andronicus' at the Britannia Theatre in 1852; in his revision the Moor Aaron became an unlikely tragic hero. 
After continuing his work in the provinces and in Ireland, Aldridge began his first continental tour in 1852, and it was here that he received his warmest welcome from the theatrical community. Appearances in Switzerland and Germany, where he played in 'Othello', 'The Padlock', and 'Macbeth', were met with great acclaim; there and in various parts of the Austro-Hungarian empire he was able to move with ease among aristocrats and artists. On his visits to Russia in 1858 and 1862 he was credited with introducing a more naturalistic acting style and encouraging the production of Shakespeare's plays. It was on one such European tour, in 1857 or 1858, that he met the woman who was to become his second wife, Amanda Pauline von Brandt (died 1915). They married on 20 April 1865, after Margaret Aldridge's death the previous year, and had four children: Irene (1860-1932), Ira Frederick Olaff (1862-1886), Amanda Christina Elizabeth Aldridge (1866-1956), and Rachel Margaret Frederika ('b'. 1868, after her father's death). Aldridge's eldest child, Ira Daniel, was born in May 1847, when his first wife was nearly fifty and already in ill health; the child apparently was not hers. 
Having returned to England in 1855, Aldridge again toured the provinces and appeared in the East End. After a second continental tour had enhanced his reputation he was offered work at the Lyceum, and the response of the London press this time was much more respectful. Still, the theatres and audiences on the continent evidently offered Aldridge greater artistic range and freedom. It was on one such continental tour, when in Lodz, Poland, that he died of an apparent lung infection on 7 August 1867. He was buried on 9 August in the city's Evangelical cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 49698


Forrest, Edwin (1806-1872), actor, was born on 9 March 1806 on George Street, Old Southwark, Philadelphia, the sixth of the seven children of William Forrest (1758-1819), a Scottish-American bank messenger, and his wife, Rebecca Lauman (1763-1847). As a young man he took elocution lessons and performed with an amateur acting society, the conventional route to an acting career in a profession still dominated by English theatrical traditions. He also trained his body by practising acrobatics, a regimen he continued throughout his life. Soon after his debut in 1820, he went west with a travelling troupe and finally arrived in New Orleans, where he performed for two years. In Albany, New York, in 1825 he played several supporting roles for Edmund Kean. His own performance of Othello in New York city the following year boosted Forrest to stardom, the first native-born American to achieve this status. By 1828 he was touring the country with a repertory that included Macbeth, Mark Antony, and major roles in John Banim's 'Damon and Pythias' and Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd'. 
The young star was 5 feet 10 inches tall, with a muscular build and a clear, melodious voice that ranged easily from a low growl to rafter-shaking power. In acting style he combined Kean's passionate outbursts with the deliberate declamation of the Kemble tradition. His powerful performances generally gravitated between long passages of rhetorical restraint with little movement and moments of quick action and emotional release. 
To increase his starring roles, Forrest held the first play competition in America in 1828. John Augustus Stone won the contest with 'Metamora, or, The Last of the Wampanoags', a heroic melodrama featuring a Native American hero. In the eight competitions that followed over the next nineteen years, Forrest awarded prizes to three other plays that he turned into successful star vehicles: 'The Gladiator' (1831), by Robert Montgomery Bird; 'The Broker of Bogota' (1834), also by Bird; and 'Jack Cade' (1841), by Robert T. Conrad. Most of these prize plays featured a hero of primal strength and virtue fighting aristocratic oppression to gain the freedom of his people. 
Because of Forrest's charismatic appeal and republican persona, his performances in the 1830s and 1840s induced hero worship from lower- and middle-class males in American cities. His fame increased after a successful London debut in 1836; the London press disliked his prize plays, but praised his passionate sincerity. While in England, on 23 June 1837, Forrest married Catherine Norton Sinclair (1819-1891), the daughter of a professional singer and actress. He seriously considered an offer from the New York Democrats to run for Congress in 1838. By 1840 his identification with workers and Jacksonian Democrats led most elite playgoers in America to disdain him. 
Upper-class antagonism to Forrest continued through the 1840s, reaching a climax in the bloody Astor Place Opera House riot of 1849. The riot derived from a feud between Forrest and the English star William Charles Macready that began in London in 1845. Forrest believed that Macready had hired a spectator to hiss his Macbeth (a charge never proved) and returned this affront by hissing Macready's Hamlet in Edinburgh (where he was joined by others in the audience). Public exchanges of letters kept the actors' rivalry simmering in the newspapers on both sides of the Atlantic, where both stars had their advocates. When Macready went to New York in 1849, workers claiming Forrest as their hero vowed vengeance. To them, Macready and the opera house where he was scheduled to perform were symbols of English and American aristocratic oppression. In the midst of the riot on 10 May, the state militia opened fire, killing twenty-two and wounding scores of others. Although he probably welcomed the show of support, Forrest took no part in the rioters' plans and actions. The Astor Place riot had begun as a dispute between two actors, but it went far beyond their rivalry to engage nationalistic and class-based antagonisms that sharply divided the pro-English elite who cheered for Macready from the working-class fans of Forrest. 
The breakup of Forrest's marriage and a scandalous divorce trial in 1851 kept the star's name in the headlines. With little evidence, Forrest accused his wife of infidelity, gained a legal separation, and finally sued for divorce. Catherine Forrest brought suit on the same grounds; her lawyers easily proved that Forrest had frequented a house of prostitution and committed adultery with an actress while on tour. The jury upheld Catherine's innocence and Forrest's guilt on every count, and she won her divorce suit, ending their childless marriage. Seeking consolation from his fans, Forrest acted his starring roles at the Broadway Theatre in New York for sixty-nine performances, a record at the time. The Forrest divorce case served as a lightning rod for social antagonisms; it dramatized the division between those who held to traditional patriarchal values regarding family honour and others who favoured notions of mutual responsibility in marriage. 
Beginning in 1857, Forrest cut back on his touring to rest for increasingly long periods at his home in Philadelphia. But the star continued to perform, even after an attack of sciatica in 1865 slowed his still powerful body. He last appeared as a platform speaker shortly before his death, which occurred in Philadelphia on 12 December 1872. He was buried four days later in St Paul's churchyard in Philadelphia. His will established his former residence as the Edwin Forrest Home for retired actors. 


@@@@@


doc= 49699


Baker, Sarah (1736/7-1816), actress and theatre manager, was born in London, the daughter of Ann Wakelin, 'nee' Clark (died 1787), an acrobatic dancer and troupe manager at Sadler's Wells, and James Wakelin ('fl'. 1749-1779), a minor actor. With her sister Mary, she performed as a dancer in her mother's company at Sadler's Wells and on tour in Norwich, Yarmouth, and Bristol. Sarah was also a puppeteer, and Mrs Wakelin's company was regularly fined at Stourbridge fair, Cambridge, between 1762 and 1777, for offering rope-dancing, slack wire, puppet shows, and pantomime. Some time before 1761 Sarah married a Mr Baker, an acrobat in the Wakelin troupe, who may have been the famous clown-tumbler Polander. She had three children, Ann, Henry, and Sarah, before her husband's death about 1769. 
Sarah assumed the management of the Sadler's Wells company, first noted at Canterbury, with rope-dancing, tumbling, musical interludes, burlettas, and all the clothes, scenery, and machinery 'entirely new' ('Kentish Gazette', 19 Nov 1772). The values of the fairground and family touring group were thoroughly instilled in Sarah: 'When Mrs. Baker (who had many years previously only employed actors and actresses of cherry-wood, holly, oak, or ebony, and dressed and undressed both the ladies and gentlemen herself), first engaged a living company, she not only used to beat the drum behind the scenes, in Richard, and other martial plays, but was occasionally her own prompter. (Dibdin, 1.96-7)' Mrs Baker's touring circuit took in Dover, Canterbury, Rochester, Faversham, and Tunbridge Wells, as well as occasional visits to Folkestone, Deal, Sandwich, Lewes, and Sittingbourne. The acting company included many family members: her mother, until her retirement in 1777, her sister Mary, her own children, Ann, Henry, and Sarah, and her cousins the Irelands, some of whom were musicians for the company. She also employed many successful popular entertainers, such as the clown Lewy Owen. A playbill for the 1770s at Bartholomew fair advertises Mrs Baker's company at the Greyhound Yard Theatre, performing Charles Dibdin's ballad opera 'The Waterman', with Rugg as Waterman, Connell as Bundle, Lewy Owen as Robin, Miss Heydon as Mrs Bundle and Miss Wakelin as Wilhelmina. The afterpiece was 'Harlequin's Whim, or, The Mery Medly', with Douglas as Harlequin, Rugg as Lover, and Mrs Baker herself as Columbine. 
After her mother's retirement, in 1778, Sarah started to offer plays, both comedy and tragedy, as well as fairground or variety entertainment. Her acting company gave a start to performers like William Dowton (1764-1851), who joined in 1791 and married her daughter Sarah (1768-1817) in 1794, and was an early employer of Thomas Dibdin and Edmund Kean. Part of the attraction, as Dibdin recalled, was the offer of a regular salary, 'not a joint-stock concern' (Dibdin, 1.91-2), as many other touring managements were. As the company's reputation for serious drama became more established, Sarah and her actor-cum-stage manager Jem Gardner, and later her prompter, Bony Long, tempted such leading London performers as Charles Incledon, George F. Cooke, Dorothy Jordan, and Joseph Grimaldi into occasional, lucrative engagements. 
The repertory Sarah offered included several Shakespeare plays; 'Hamlet', 'Macbeth', 'Richard III', 'As You Like It', and 'The Merchant of Venice' were offered at least once a week during the 1780s, in addition to comic opera and topical interludes, often with local comment, as in Thomas Dibdin's afterpiece 'The Merry Hop-Pickers, or, Kentish Frolicks'. Other favourites were Cumberland's 'The West Indian' and 'The Brother' and Mrs Inchbald's 'oeuvre'. By 1795 the Baker company's repertory was very considerable, and Sarah was advertising pieces direct from London and 'diversity of nouvelle matter' (Hodgson, 76). The success of her policy of celebrity recruitment and an up-to-date repertory maximizing the taste of her provincial audiences was indicated by the returns Joseph Grimaldi recorded for playing Scaramouche in 'Don Juan' for a couple of nights in Maidstone and Canterbury in March 1802. Sarah split the house takings with Grimaldi, after charges, and he netted a very healthy $311 6's'. 6died for four days' work. 
Successful touring managements like Sarah Baker's were often responsible for building permanent provincial theatres in the major towns on their circuits. Her will lists her theatres in the five main circuit towns and small theatres in Folkestone and in Ore, near Hastings. In Canterbury she built her 'great grand theatre' (Hodgson, 70) in 1789 at a cost of $3000 after she had seen off the challenge of a rival manager, Hurst, whose disastrous management dissipated his initial success. However, rivals were not always so easily defeated. At Margate Sarah ran into considerable difficulties with the company run by Charles Mate. Mate had already failed in his attempts to oust her at Dover and Rochester, as he complained in a letter to Winston: 'Mrs Beaker... who had got possession of some of my Inland Towns enved me my little Margate Retret' (ibid., 69). Baker had rented a converted stable from a local banker and magistrate, Mr Cobb. In 1784 Baker wanted to build a better theatre in Margate, but Cobb refused: 'whereupon the gentle fair one entered a remonstrance, and declared her right to murder Shakespear equally with Mate; and told him, for all he was a Justice, she would build in spite of him. Accordingly the following year produced a Baker's company, who exercised their calling near the church, and instituted a theatrical warfare. (Winston, 12)' Cobb and Mate then hatched a plan to establish a patent at Margate, which project garnered support from the local freemasons and nobility and passed, at great expense, through both houses of parliament. With fewer resources than Cobb and Mate, Sarah conceded defeat. She struck her temporary wooden theatre and moved it wholesale to Faversham. However, she learned a valuable lesson, and in Rochester, where she had occupied her newly built Theatre Royal, Star Hill, since 1791, she herself applied in 1798 for a royal patent in order to force the local JPs to grant her a licence after rioting by nearby Chatham sailors had caused her existing licence to be cancelled. In Tunbridge Wells her aspirations to have a permanent house brought her into conflict with Glassington's company at Hunt's Warehouse. But here she had the support of significant local patrons, and she erected a new theatre 'at the request of several of her friends... securing it by lease' (ibid., 16), where she remained unmolested until she upgraded the theatre to a $60 capacity, at a cost of $1600, in 1802. All of the new theatres were simple, rectangular buildings, with pit, boxes, and an upper gallery, and similar dimensions to allow scenery to be directly transferred. The theatres had only one entrance, past the box office, where Sarah herself took money for all the seats. In the larger towns she also built dwelling houses connected to the theatres, which were let out of season. 
Sarah's management style was combative. Dibdin noted her 'usual rapidity of utterance' (Dibdin, 1.102) and, when provoked, her use of 'lingual expression more idiomatic of Peckham-fair technicals than the elegance to be expected from a directress of the British drama' (ibid., 1.94). Her hard-headed financial sense was tempered towards her company members, who record regular payment in full and guaranteed accommodation at reasonable rates. 'She owned an excellent heart, with much of the appearance and manners of a gentlewoman' (ibid., 1.94), and she occasionally bartered toys for tickets with local children. Sarah passed over the management of the highly successful company to William Dowton in June 1815. She died in Rochester, Kent, on 20 February 1816 and was buried in Rochester Cathedral churchyard. Her will left approximately $16,000 in investment and property, in carefully secured trust funds. As Dibdin's epitaph on her gravestone records: '
If industry have claim to moral worth; 

... then she, whose frame 

Decays beneath, with humble hope may aim 

At happiness to come. Alone, untaught, 

And self-assisted, (save by Heaven) she sought 

To render each his own, and fairly save 

What might help others when she found a grave. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 49700


Biddles, James (1815-1871?), actor and theatre manager, was born at Mountsorrel, near Loughborough, the eldest of the seven sons of James Biddles, a Leicestershire farmer, and his wife, Elizabeth. James Biddles the younger married Ann Maria Phillips (died 1843) at St Margaret's Church, Leicester, on 11 December 1831. The couple's first two children died in infancy, but four daughters survived, of whom the older two, Adelaide Helen Calvert ['see under 'Calvert, Charles Alexander] and Clara, became actresses of distinction. Marriage and baptismal records show that during early manhood Biddles engaged in a variety of occupations, including innkeeper, tobacconist, and stage performer. 
By the mid-1830s Biddles featured regularly in the playbills and newspaper announcements for the Leicester Theatre: as Guildenstern to W. C. Macready's Hamlet and as Faldo in the afterpiece 'The Happiest Days of my Life' (26 September 1834); as Petro in Pocock's 'The Miller and his Men' (6 October 1834); and as Robin Roughead in the farce 'Fortune's Frolics' (24 February 1835), which was part of a bill which included 'The Celebrated Infant [Charles] Kean' in 'Richard III'. 
Typically, for the time, Biddles joined a stock company, that of Mr Harvey, who ran the Plymouth, Weymouth, Exeter, Jersey, and Guernsey circuit. In the summer of 1842 both Biddles and his wife appeared in Weymouth, then travelled to Guernsey, and returned to the mainland in January 1843 for a season in Exeter. In Exeter, Adelaide, aged seven, appeared with Henry Betty, son of the 'Infant Roscius', and with Charles and Ellen Kean. In her memoirs Adelaide recalled that her father was 'the low comedian, and very popular' with audiences (Calvert, 5). 
On 1 October 1843 Ann Maria Biddles died from consumption at the age of thirty. With four young daughters to support, Biddles and his brother Tom devised a comic lecture, 'Pickings from Punch', which they toured around the country. At the end of 1844 Biddles had a very different sort of engagement at a leading metropolitan theatre, Covent Garden, where he was a member of the chorus in the elaborate production of Sophocles's 'Antigone'. From the anonymity of the chorus he progressed, early in 1845, to First Gravedigger, then Third Witch, and finally Glavis in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons' -- all part of the aforementioned Henry Betty's none too successful London debut. 
Although Covent Garden conferred status, it offered limited scope for a low comedian and Biddles left to pursue his career elsewhere. During an engagement at Astley's equestrian theatre he met and married his second wife, Malvina Bridges, the daughter of the ringmaster. He then took over the management of the Bower Saloon, a minor theatre near to Westminster Bridge, where he presided from 1845 to 1854, presenting plays suited to the local clientele by, among others, T. E. Wilks, J. T. Blake, J. H. Haines, and S. T. Atkyns. Nautical melodramas, so-called dog dramas, and pantomimes were the specialities of the house, but Biddles also infiltrated more serious fare, such as 'Macbeth' and Sheridan Knowles's 'William Tell'. 
Biddles encouraged the careers of his daughters Adelaide and Clara, and when they reached their teens it must have been apparent to him that his family possessed greater talents than he did himself. In 1854 he 'fee'd' a theatrical agent to induce Thomas Barry, who was in Europe engaging actors for the forthcoming opening of the new Boston Theatre, to attend a performance at the Bower, as a result of which the whole Biddles family was contracted. Following a protracted voyage aboard a small but cheap vessel, the family arrived in Boston. Adelaide and Clara quickly established themselves as leading attractions, but Biddles and his wife were little used. In 1855 he prevailed upon a willing Barry to release himself and his wife from their contracts. Ever resourceful, he then set up a small company with an American actor in order to tour farces. To facilitate this venture he took American citizenship. 
Like her father, Clara Biddles (1840-1905) remained in America; she married first Thomas Barry, who had brought her to the United States and who was her senior by some forty years, and second the English actor William Redmund. Biddles returned to England for Adelaide's marriage to Charles Calvert in 1856, but he spent the rest of his life in his adopted country, where, according to Adelaide's memoirs, he died, in Iowa, in 1871. 
James Biddles's career encompassed a tremendous range of theatrical activity: an important provincial theatre (Leicester); a stock company circuit; one of the major metropolitan houses (Covent Garden); the home of equestrian drama (Astley's); a minor theatre (the Bower Saloon); and, in the New World, initially in Boston and then, as the frontiers rolled back, west as far as Iowa. Personally, Biddles was a man of considerable and diverse talents, great resourcefulness, and profound resilience. Over and above such importance as may be ascribed to him individually, he represents strata of theatrical activity to which the majority of his profession devoted their careers which, for the most part, are unrecorded by posterity. 


@@@@@


doc= 49701


Dillon, Charles (1819-1881), actor, was born in Diss, Norfolk, probably the illegitimate son of Charles James Church, an itinerant actor, and Eliza, who married Arthur Dillon, a minor London actor and theatrical agent, whose name he adopted. 
Until 1856 Dillon played small roles in London's minor theatres, writing plays on demand while at the Marylebone Theatre, and toured provincial towns, including Hull, Sheffield, Wolverhampton, Manchester, and Dublin. During this period he established himself as a Shakespearian actor in roles such as Macbeth, Othello, and Hamlet, roles which he retained for the rest of his career. He married Clara (1824/5-1888), the daughter of a London theatre manager, Benjamin Conquest, and their daughter, also Clara, was born in 1845. With the financial assistance of his father-in-law, Dillon managed the Theatre Royal and, subsequently, the Adelphi, Sheffield, between 1850 and 1856. 
The period 1856 to 1860 was the most successful of Dillon's career. His performance as Belphegor in 'Belphegor the Mountebank, or, Woman's Constancy', adapted by Charles Webb from 'Le Paillasse' by Dennery and Fournier, brought him to the attention of London theatre critics. The play opened at Sadler's Wells on 21 April 1856, and John Oxenford's review in 'The Times' two days later, in which he stated that 'it was not often that we see such rare effects of pathos produced with such a thorough absence of stage trick', made Dillon's reputation. On the strength of his success, and again with Conquest's assistance, he took a lease of the Lyceum Theatre in September 1856, which he retained for two seasons, until March 1858. During this time his performances as D'Artagnan in his own version of 'The Three Musqueteers' (16 October 1856), Claude Melnotte in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons' (10 November 1856), Othello (1 December 1856), and Macbeth, opposite Helen Faucit as Lady Macbeth (25 February 1858), were particularly commended for their geniality, tenderness, and understatement, characteristics which, at his best, became hallmarks of Dillon's acting. His relationship, however, with Eliza Webb, the daughter of Charles Webb, contributed to the breakup of his marriage after the closing of the second Lyceum season. Following a further tour of the provinces he sailed for New York on 22 December 1860. 
The third period in Dillon's career, from 1861 to 1867, was taken up by a tour which included North America, Australia, New Zealand, Peru, and Chile. He began by playing a range of his repertory in New York, Boston, Baltimore, and Philadelphia, including Belphegor and Virginius (in Sheridan Knowles's play of the same name) and also Boucicault's 'Louis XI'. Accompanied by Eliza Webb, he then toured Canada, including Toronto, Quebec, and Montreal. They left for San Francisco and opened there at the Metropolitan Theatre on 21 October 1861. Critical assessment mirrored that of the London critics, but financially the tour was proving disastrous. Dillon left for Australia from Vancouver and arrived in Melbourne, Victoria, in November 1862. 
From 1862 to 1864 Dillon and Eliza Webb (now billed as Mrs Charles Dillon, although there is no evidence that they married) remained in Australia, touring the Victorian country towns of Bendigo and Ballarat, and Adelaide and Sydney, where they spent the greater part of their time. Dillon found himself occasionally in direct competition with Barry Sullivan as well as Charles and Ellen Kean, who were also in Australia in 1863-4. Following a short stay in Tasmania that began in August 1864, the Dillons sailed for New Zealand. Dillon opened as Virginius in Auckland (5 January 1865) and once again included Othello, Macbeth, and Belphegor in his season. After playing in Christchurch and Dunedin, the Dillons left for Peru in July 1865. Although he intended an extensive tour of South America, political instability forced the Dillons to leave Chile hurriedly, and in December 1865 they returned to New York, where Eliza died of typhoid fever. Dillon remained in the United States until the end of 1866, and left for England in early 1867 after a final season in New York. 
Throughout his extended tour Dillon had relied heavily on a repertory that he had developed in London, the British provinces, and on tour in North America, augmented by versions of 'King Lear' and 'Timon of Athens', Byron's 'Manfred', Taylor's 'The Ticket-of-Leave Man', and John Brougham's adaptation of 'The Duke's Motto'. However, there were ominous signs of deterioration in Dillon's performances, which had been noticed by Australasian and, subsequently, American critics. He was increasingly unable to sustain his roles vocally and was losing the ability to play the emotional nuances that earlier critics had applauded. 
The last phase of Dillon's career was marked by an increasing personal sense of disappointment and, critically, by one of irrelevance to contemporary theatre practice. He opened in Manchester as Lear on 7 March 1867. Although he repeated his performance as Lear at Sadler's Wells (17 February 1868) and as Manfred at the Princess's (16 August 1873), he spent his final years in the provinces. He married Bella Mentrup, an actress, in Cardiff in June 1874. His last appearances in London were at Drury Lane, as Leontes in 'The Winter's Tale' (28 September 1878) and as Shylock (7 December 1878). He died suddenly of a stroke in Hawick, Roxburghshire, on 24 June 1881 and was buried in Brompton cemetery on 26 June. 
Although physically unattractive, Dillon embodied a seedy flamboyance perhaps best captured in Mrs Sam Cowell's memory of him at the beginning of his American tour: 'in a threadbare suit, big, dirty boots, and a large, Theatrical ['sic'] cloak (which was braided profusely, and lined with red silk), so ragged, as to hang down on all sides in festoons' (Disher, 325). As an actor, Dillon's lack of technique and his reliance on momentary inspiration rather than on consistency in characterization made his deficiencies more apparent when his vocal abilities deteriorated. Westland Marston described him as 'an actor of great emotional gifts, but very deficient in intellectual ones' (Marston, 308). 


@@@@@


doc= 49702


Chute, James Henry (1808x10-1878), actor and theatre manager, was almost certainly the son of Stephen and Jane Chew (or Chute) baptized at Alverstoke, Hampshire, on 21 August 1808, although his birth is sometimes reported as having taken place at nearby Gosport on 4 July 1810. His first recorded appearance on the stage was at the Bristol Theatre Royal in 1829, during the management of Richard Brunton, and he later played in stock companies on the Lincoln and York circuits before going to the Theatre Royal, Dublin, in the late 1830s. In September 1839 Chute returned to the Bristol Theatre Royal, by then managed by Sarah Macready (or McCready, or M'Cready), the stepmother of the tragedian William Charles Macready, and he divided his time between Bristol and Dublin until 1844, when he advantageously married Mrs Macready's daughter Mazzarina Emily (1824/5-1878). In the following year Mrs Macready took on the additional lease of the Bath Theatre Royal, and in 1848 Chute leased the Bath assembly rooms, where the provision of entertainment consisted principally of balls, card assemblies, concerts, oratorios, exhibitions of panoramas, and the visits of individual entertainers. Chute also assisted his mother-in-law in the management of the Bath and Bristol theatres. 
On Sarah Macready's death in 1853, Chute, whose own two-part adaptation of 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' was particularly successful at this time, took over the leases of both the Bath and Bristol theatres royal. Both were substantially overhauled during the summer recess: at Bath new decoration and lighting eliminated the 'dingy and passe appearance' it had borne for many seasons, while an 'offensive odour' was dissipated by the renewal of gas pipes ('Bath and Cheltenham Gazette', 21 Sept 1853); at Bristol the theatre was redecorated, water was laid on, and the stage was considerably enlarged. Chute assembled a forty-strong stock company, and opened both theatres with Sheridan Knowles's 'The Wife' and his own extravaganza, 'Mr Chute's Ascent of Parnassus'. The company normally played in Bath on Wednesday and Saturday evenings, and at Bristol for the remainder of the week. 
Something of Chute's success can be attributed to the quality of his stock company, which Ellen Terry described as 'something more than strong' ('Ellen Terry's Memoirs', 36) -- although this could vary -- and to his ability to attract and promote the youthful talents of members of his company such as John Coleman, Emily Thorne, Henrietta Hodson, George and William Rignold, Madge Robertson, Ellen and Kate Terry, Marie Wilton, and John Vollaire. His own brother, John Coleman Chute (1819-1913), later lessee of the theatre at Bury St Edmunds, was for a time a member of the company. Chute was a versatile actor and a good singer, and his own most successful roles were as Falstaff, Hawthorn in 'Love in a Village', and the eponymous Fra Diavolo. He was an expert swordsman who enjoyed friendly bouts, especially with Barry Sullivan. A freemason, he was the master of Jerusalem lodge, Bristol, in 1866. He was also a member of the 1st Gloucestershire rifle volunteers, and held the rank of colour-sergeant. William Rignold described Chute as a 'fine looking man, deep in chest and broad in the shoulders, well set up, with a twinkling eye that can be severe, broad massive forehead and large moustache. His hands are Frenchy in their action and he is never seen without a pair of gloves.' Those gloves, other members of the company told Rignold, Chute had never been known to put on (Powell, 113). 
Writing of Bath, Belville Penley noted that Chute mounted productions with 'considerable attention to detail' and that 'the scenery possessed by the theatre was abundant and excellent both in design and execution, while its wardrobe and library ranked among the best in the kingdom' (Penley, 153). Marie Bancroft regarded him as a 'good, kind-hearted severe old manager' (Bancroft and Bancroft, 14). Increasingly, however, the theatres were visited by touring companies: as early as 1854, these included twenty-seven members of Charles Kean's company from the Princess Theatre, London, and others bringing English and Italian opera and continental ballet. 
Chute suffered financially when, on 18 April 1862, fire destroyed the Bath theatre, but he obtained the lease of the new theatre, designed by C. J. Phipps, and opened it on 14 March 1863 with 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and a farce, 'Marriage at Any Price'. Prompted no doubt by the superiority of the new Bath theatre, the limited size of its Bristol counterpart, the social changes which had adversely affected the theatre's immediate neighbourhood, and competition from entertainment offered elsewhere in Bristol, Chute decided to build a new Bristol Theatre Royal, at Clifton, employing Phipps as his architect. Costing $18,000 and seating 2154 -- 500 more than the old theatre -- it was opened on 14 October 1867 with 'The Tempest' and J. B. Buckstone's farce 'A Rough Diamond'. For a time Chute ran both the Bristol theatres and that at Bath, but he relinquished the Bath lease in May 1868 in order to concentrate on his Bristol ventures. The deaths of eighteen people at the new theatre in a crush at the pit and gallery gate on 26 December 1869 clouded his final years, but he continued to run his theatres until his death at 2 Park Row, Bristol, on 23 July 1878, four months after that of his wife. He was survived by nine of his ten children; two of his sons followed him as partners in the management of the Bristol theatres. 


@@@@@


doc= 49703


Saville, John Faucit (1783?-1853), actor, theatre manager, and playwright, was reportedly seventy years old when he died, but neither his date of birth nor his parents' names are known. Perhaps his real name was, as is usually supposed, John Savill[e] Faucit: some early signatures and his initial stage name, Mr Faucit, support this. Yet most official documents, from his marriage record on, give Savill or Saville as surname, often with Faucit as middle name. His career began at Stepney fair, probably in his late teens: here he joined 'Muster [John] Richardson's' company, which toured the fairs with a large, portable booth, acting in pantomimes and abbreviated, highly stereotyped dramas. In 1804, at about twenty-one, the small but personable actor was engaged at the Theatre Royal, Richmond, Surrey, where he played dashing, if secondary, roles such as Frank Rochdale in 'John Bull' and Courtall in 'The Belle's Stratagem'. He and the fifteen-year-old actress Harriet Diddear ['see below'] became mutually attracted; in 1805, when he was again at Richmond and she was in her father's company at Margate, they eloped to London and were married -- under the name Savill -- on 2 September. Shortly afterwards, having been reconciled with the Diddears, they acted at Margate, then Dover, as Mr and Mrs Faucit. 
In 1806 the couple joined the prosperous Norwich circuit, whose company travelled to seven towns and acted throughout the year; except for a brief hiatus (with Macready at Newcastle), they remained with it for seven years. Faucit acted 'second juvenile' roles and 'Country Boys' in conventional drama and principal parts in 'both serious & comic Pantomimes'; Mrs Faucit eventually played all the leading female characters. In 1813 they were engaged at a major London theatre, Covent Garden. Four children had been born during the Norwich years -- John, Harriet, Edmund Henry ['see below'], and Alfred; after the move to London, there were two more -- Helena ['see 'Faucit, Helen] and Charles. All had careers as actors with the possible exception of Charles. At Covent Garden, although his wife was regularly employed, Faucit appeared only sporadically, mostly in minor comic parts such as Old Gobbo in 'The Merchant of Venice'; in 1817, however, he acted Gratiano in that play, winning critical approval for his innovative seriousness in the trial scene. His chief activity was in managing provincial theatres. In Greenwich, where he had his first theatre, he faced opposition from the religious dissenters, but, with the support of prominent citizens, he prevailed. By 1817 he was also operating the Theatre Royal, Margate, becoming its fully-fledged proprietor in 1820. 
Faucit's wife left him in 1821 but continued to bill herself as Mrs Faucit, in consequence of which he reversed his names to Faucit Savill(e). According to an obituary in an unidentified journal (New York Public Library) he obtained a legal divorce from his first wife and remarried twice: his second wife was Mrs Ann Amthos ('nee' Collier), the widow of an actor, and his third, whom he married after Ann's death, was the daughter of a Yorkshire clergyman. The divorce was undoubtedly a polite fiction (the expense alone would have been prohibitive); but a Mrs Faucit Savill was listed in the Margate playbills beginning in 1822, and an Emily Moody was married (whether legally or not) to a John Faucit Saville on 11 April 1829. He had at least two more children, both apparently with Ann Amthos: Ann, who acted for a while, and Phoebe. 
While continuing to manage the theatres at Greenwich and Margate, Saville from time to time undertook the running of others as well -- at Woolwich, Gravesend, Ramsgate, Deal, Dover, Sandwich, and Sheerness. After many fluctuations in success, he was brought near ruin by disastrous fires at Ramsgate (December 1829) and Greenwich (January 1831). But this 'unlucky devil', as he was known, remained resilient: recalling Richardson's booth, he replaced his lost theatres with one ingeniously constructed of cast-iron pieces, put together with screws, which could be disassembled and transported from town to town. After he gave up management (his last season at Margate was in 1840), he held an office for a while in the 'treasorial department' of the City of London Theatre. 
Saville's career as a dramatist, not counting an early Norwich effort, began with a melodrama, 'Justice', first performed at Drury Lane on 28 November 1820. Of some dozen other plays, several achieved considerable popularity. Notable successes were the melodrama 'The Miller's Maid' (English Opera House, 1821), the nautical drama 'Wapping Old Stairs' (Surrey, 1837), and the comedy 'The Aldgate Pump' (Strand, 1841); the first of these had occasional revivals, in London and the provinces, for years afterwards. (A number of his plays and one by his first wife are preserved in the Larpert collection in the Huntington Library in San Marino and among the lord chamberlain's manuscripts in the National Archives.) Later in life he wrote a 'penny-dreadful' novel, 'The Heads of the Headless'. On 28 September 1853 the veteran returned to his old Margate theatre to act Benjamin Bowbell in 'The Illustrious Stranger' for the benefit of his son Edmund. Shortly afterwards, on 31 October 1853, he died during his sleep at the home of his widowed daughter (probably Ann Wilkins), 31 Primrose Street, Bishopsgate, London. 






@@@@@


doc= 49704


Harriet Elizabeth Savill (1789-1857), actress, was the daughter of provincial theatre manager John Diddear and his wife, Elizabeth. When not quite seven she made a successful debut at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, under her father's management, as Edward in 'Everyone has his Fault'. She continued to act during childhood and adolescence, at Brighton, Dover, Richmond, and Margate. Mrs Faucit's London debut, as Desdemona in 'Othello', was at Covent Garden on 8 October 1813; critics approved her appearance and voice but deplored her tendency to play to the audience and to turn Desdemona into an arch, vivacious Congreve heroine. Her most important part that season was Cleopatra in a lavishly mounted 'Antony and Cleopatra', with a text combining Shakespeare and Dryden. Although overshadowed by Eliza O'Neill, who arrived in 1814, she had a substantial metropolitan career for more than two decades, always at Covent Garden, Drury Lane, or the Haymarket. In 1821, after an unsuccessful attempt to have her marriage to John Faucit Saville annulled, she became the common-law wife of the eminent comedian William Farren, with whom she lived from then on. Their two sons, William Farren and Henry Farren, also became actors. On 16 November 1853, shortly after Saville's death, she and Farren were legally married. Mrs Faucit was very successful in certain comic parts (such as Celia in 'The Humourous Lieutenant') and as the heroine of melodramas and musical plays. Her serious acting, which seemed meretricious in characters such as Lady Macbeth, was genuinely affecting in Meg Merrilies and similar roles; her handsome face and Junoesque figure were assets in regal parts such as Elizabeth in 'Richard III', Gertrude in 'Hamlet', and the empress in 'The Exile'. She died in London on 16 June 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 49705


Edmund Henry Faucit Saville (1811-1857), actor, was, next to Helen Faucit, the most prominent of John Faucit Saville's children. Although he was trained in medicine, he chose the family profession. After several years of mainly provincial acting, he made his first important London appearance at the Surrey Theatre on 8 May 1837, as Abelard in Buckstone's new drama 'Heloise and Abelard'. For sixteen years, until incapacitated by alcohol-related liver disease, he was a leading actor at the London 'minors', especially the Surrey, the Victoria, and the City of London, primarily in melodramatic roles such as the bold sailors in his father's nautical dramas and the villainous Bill Sikes in 'Oliver Twist'. Occasionally he acted legitimate parts, including Hamlet and Othello, but his concentration on melodrama had coarsened what was evidently a genuine tragic talent. Saville was married twice, each time to an actress: with his first wife, Anne, he had a son, Edmund, and with his second, Clementina Sobieska Grant, he had a daughter, Harriet, who acted when young, and a son, Henry, who became a dramatist. 


@@@@@


doc= 49706


Wind, Edgar Marcel (1900-1971), philosopher and art historian, was born at 5 Passauerstrasse, Charlottenburg, Berlin, on 14 May 1900, one of two children of Maurice Delmar Wind (died 1914), a well-to-do Argentinian merchant of Russian Jewish extraction who exported optical instruments to South America, and his Romanian wife, Laura Szilard (died 1947). Wind grew up in a cosmopolitan and polyglot environment, attending the Kaiser Friedrich Schule in Charlottenburg (1906-18), and also benefiting from his father's excellent library. In 1918 he commenced studies at the University of Berlin in classics, philosophy, and art history, supervised by Adolph Goldschmidt. The following year he attended the lectures of Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger in Freiburg, and those of Max Dvorak, Julius von Schlosser, and Josef Strzygowski in Vienna. Unimpressed, however, with the 'reigning sovereigns', Wind turned to Hamburg University where he became Erwin Panofsky's first pupil, and engaged with the neo-Kantianism of Ernst Cassirer. 
In his doctoral thesis of 1922 Wind rejected Romantic and formalist approaches to art which emphasized aesthetic response over historical analysis. He would later summarize his approach as one which demonstrated that the intellect aided, rather than thwarted, the imagination in producing great works of art: 'I have tried to develop a method of interpreting pictures which shows how ideas are translated into images, and images sustained by ideas' (application for a Guggenheim grant, 1950, Wind Archive, Department of Western Manuscripts, Bodl. Oxf.). 
At the height of the German depression in 1924 Wind left for the United States. After briefly teaching French and mathematics in New York high schools, he was appointed lecturer in philosophy at the University of North Carolina, where he encountered and was profoundly influenced by the pragmatism of C. S. Peirce. From 1926 to 1934 he was married to Ruth Hatch. On his return to Hamburg in 1927 Wind met Aby Warburg, becoming his personal research assistant at the Bibliothek Warburg. Warburg's example had a decisive impact on Wind's development as a scholar, encouraging him to concentrate on significant historical detail and its creative transformation into cultural imagery. Warburg, in turn, was impressed by Wind, remarking 'Ich vergesse immer dass Sie ein geschulter Kunst-historiker sind. Sie haben es ja so nett mit dem Denken' ('I always forget that you are a trained art historian. You know how to think so nicely'; Buschendorf, 'Auf dem Weg nach England', 85). In 1930, after Warburg's death, Wind delivered an important lecture entitled 'Warburg's concept of 'Kulturwissenschaft'' (reprinted in translation in the posthumous collection of essays 'The Eloquence of Symbols', 1983). 
Wind became a 'Privatdozent' at Hamburg University following the completion of his 'Habilitationsschrift' of 1930, 'Das Experiment und die Metaphysik' (translated as 'Experiment and Metaphysics' [forthcoming]), in which he strove to recover Kantian notions of geometry, space, and time in the wake of twentieth-century physics. It was at this time that he produced his first major art historical work: a study associating the different portrait styles of Reynolds and Gainsborough with James Beattie, Edmund Burke, and Samuel Johnson on the one hand, and with David Hume on the other ('Humanitatsidee und heroisiertes Portrat in der englischen Kultur des 18. Jahrhunderts', 1932, reprinted in translation in the posthumous collection 'Hume and the Heroic Portrait', 1986). 
Wind was dismissed from his post at Hamburg shortly after Hitler's rise to power in 1933. Nazi antisemitism endangered the Bibliothek Warburg, and Wind played a decisive role in negotiating the transfer of Warburg's library to London. From 1934 he was deputy director of the Warburg Institute, and in 1937 became founding editor with Rudolf Wittkower of the 'Journal of the Warburg Institute' in which he published his first iconographical studies of Renaissance works of art. In lectures given in London at this time he advanced interpretations of the works of Michelangelo and Raphael with which he was absorbed for the rest of his life. His studies on these subjects were posthumously published as 'The Religious Symbolism of Michelangelo' [forthcoming] and 'The Raphael Papers: on the 'School of Athens'' [forthcoming]. 
At the outbreak of war in 1939 Wind found himself on sabbatical leave in America, where he then unexpectedly remained. He lectured widely at American institutions -- the Pierpont Morgan Library, Yale University, the Frick Collection, and at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, where he applied his historical method to twentieth-century art. In 1940 he met Margaret, the daughter of the physicist G. A. Hermann Kellner; she became his research assistant, and they married in 1942. As his literary executor after 1971 she was the driving force behind the publication of his papers. Wind was lecturer at the Institute of Fine Arts, New York University (1940-42), professor of art at the University of Chicago (1942-4), and then Neilson research professor at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts, in 1944. 
At the end of the war Wind chose to remain at Smith as professor of philosophy and art, and he became an American citizen in 1948. At Smith he continued to develop his research into Renaissance art, publishing studies of the iconography of the Sistine ceiling (1947) and Giovanni Bellini's 'Feast of the Gods' (1948). In 1952 he advanced a sophisticated interpretation of Leonardo da Vinci as a Heraclitan magus in a series of radio broadcasts for the BBC's Third Programme. He also engaged in contemporary debates about art and ideas during this period. A visit by Jean-Paul Sartre to Smith College in 1946 provoked an impassioned statement against existentialism as a revival of Heidegger's 'thoroughly evil' philosophy in the journal 'Polemic'. Wind's commitment to intellectual integrity was again demonstrated in 1953 when he organized and contributed to a symposium on art and morals, one consequence of which was the dedication to Wind of W. H. Auden's poem 'The truest poetry is the most feigning'. 
The idea of creating a chair in the history of art at Oxford University had been promoted for some time by scholars who had known Wind since the 1930s, including Richard Livingstone, Ernest Jacob, Maurice Bowra, and Isaiah Berlin. In 1954 Wind was invited to give the Chichele lectures at All Souls College and chose as his subject 'Art and scholarship under Julius II'. When the chair was created in 1955 Wind was appointed to it, becoming a professorial fellow at Trinity College. He faced the difficult task of establishing a new discipline in an ancient institution. In order to promote a cultural historical approach to the study of art, as distinct from the curatorial interests of the Ashmolean Museum, he argued for the creation of a new department with its own research library. He amassed a noteworthy collection of books, including many early editions, which, together with his own personal library, subsequently became the Wind Reading Room in the Sackler Library. 
It is, above all, as a brilliant and charismatic lecturer that Wind is remembered at Oxford. He spoke without notes, showing only one black and white slide at a time. The popularity of his lectures made it necessary for the Playhouse Theatre to be used as a venue; the long queues for his series of lectures on modern art were even reported in the 'Oxford Times'. In his 1957 inaugural lecture, 'The fallacy of pure art', Wind argued that the art historian should make observations which are 'aesthetically relevant without being aesthetic observations' (manuscript draft, Wind Archive, Department of Western Manuscripts, Bodl. Oxf.). The list of subjects to which Wind applied this maxim in his regular lectures demonstrates the wide scope of his learning. In particular, he gave classes with other scholars to promote interdisciplinary research on subjects as diverse as Kant and Hegel, Manet and Mallarme, Renaissance medals, and Renaissance poems and their visual counterparts (with Stuart Hampshire, Austin Gill, Humphry Sutherland, and John Sparrow). 
It was while he was professor of the history of art at Oxford that Wind published the two works for which he is now best-known: 'Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance' (1958; rev. edn, 1967) and 'Art and Anarchy' (originally given as the 1960 BBC Reith lectures). The former is a brilliant scholarly work in which Wind elucidated the obscure neo-Platonic mysteries which inspired some of the greatest works of the Renaissance. Wind anticipated the criticism that he attributed to artists such as Botticelli a depth of learning which they never possessed. He argued that the historian has to be more erudite than the artists he studies because 'we no longer enjoy the advantages of Renaissance conversation' (E. M. Wind, 'Pagan Mysteries', 1967, 15). In 'Art and Anarchy' he explored the causes and effects of the marginalization, mechanization, and mass distribution of art in contemporary society. He examined the polarities of 'art for art's sake' and 'art engage', deplored the dissociation of the artist from the educated and informed patron, the ever-widening gap among modern artists between imagination and learning, and the transformation of the work of art into an object of 'interest'. All these trends, he argued, have served to tame the anarchic energies of art and dilute the imaginative forces of both artists and their audience. 
Wind's presence was imposing, even magisterial: he dressed formally and spoke a very elegant English, tinged with a German accent. The high standards of scholarship which he maintained, and expected from others, could seem daunting; but those who came to him for advice, whether students, colleagues, or friends, were treated with kindness, patience, and understanding. He retired from the chair at Oxford in 1967. He had been suffering from leukaemia since 1965 but, despite ill health, continued to work on his book on Michelangelo's theological sources. A shorter work on Giorgione's 'Tempesta' was published in 1969, offering an ingeniously simple explanation for the famously enigmatic work. Edgar Wind died in London on 12 September 1971, and was cremated in Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 49707


Coward, Sir Cecil Allen (1845-1938), lawyer, was born on 27 December 1845 at 11 Minerva Terrace, Islington, London, the second child and only son of John William Smith Coward (1815-1888), surgeon, and his first wife, Anna Eliza, 'nee' Bemfield (died 1847). John Coward was born in Canada where his father was serving with the British army and qualified as an apothecary in 1838, the year before he married. Three years after the death of his first wife John Coward married again. 
In 1856 the Coward family -- John and his second wife, Jane ('nee' MacFarlane), Cecil and his sister Emily, and the three young daughters born to John and Jane since they married in 1850 -- left England for New Zealand. There, after a brief and unsuccessful foray into sheep farming, John Coward established himself as a medical practitioner in Christchurch. He later also became Christchurch's coroner and medical officer to the lunatic asylum, the gaol, and the police. Cecil, who was eleven years old when the family emigrated, was educated at Mrs Alabaster's school in Christchurch where he was coached by her husband, the Revd Charles Alabaster, a noted Latinist. Coward was then articled to his brother-in-law, W. H. Wynn-Williams, another emigrant from Britain who had recently established himself in practice in Christchurch. 
In 1865 Cecil Coward left Christchurch for England and when he arrived in London he entered the Inner Temple to read for the bar. It was then customary for would-be barristers to spend some time in a solicitor's office to gain experience and accordingly Coward went to the City firm of Thomas and Hollams (better known in the twentieth century as Coward, Chance & Co. and, since 1987, Clifford Chance), whose offices were then in Mincing Lane. The work and the prospects there, it seems, attracted Coward more than the bar and although he was called in 1867, he applied immediately to be disbarred and took articles with Griffith Thomas, senior partner of Thomas and Hollams. In 1870 Coward was admitted a solicitor and in 1873 he became a partner in the firm. 
In 1874 Coward married Catherine Thomas, then aged twenty-six, the younger daughter of his former principal who had been the firm's senior partner from 1862 to 1873 and who was now a director of the Central Bank, a long-established client of the firm. Between 1875 and 1881 five children -- four daughters and a son, Cecil Robert -- were born to Cecil and Catherine Coward. The family lived in Kensington, where Coward's income from the firm's very profitable practice enabled them to enjoy a comfortable way of life: according to the census returns in 1881 they employed five servants. 
The firm, which now became Hollams, Son, and Coward, had been established in the City in 1802 and had built up a large mercantile, shipping, banking, insurance, and corporate practice. John Hollams was its senior partner from 1873 until 1910 and both his own and the firm's name stood high in the profession and in the City. The firm's clients included the Midland Bank, the Commercial Union insurance company, and the Imperial Bank of Persia (later the British Bank of the Middle East). Coward's own work for banking and corporate clients as well as distinguished individuals such as James Bryce (1838-1922) soon brought him a reputation for professional ability and integrity, enhancing that of the firm. Coward was appointed to Lord Macnaughten's judicature committee in 1906, to the royal commission on delays in the King's Bench Division in 1913, and to the royal commission on the civil service in 1915. 
In 1910 Coward succeeded Sir John Hollams as senior partner of the firm. Dignified and autocratic, Coward was, as senior partners usually then were, aloof and remote from the staff. A hard worker himself, he would tolerate 'neither laziness, shiftiness, nor incompetence in others' ('The Times') and he was a stickler for punctuality. He was not without a sense of humour, however, and those who got to know him found him just and kind. It was Coward as senior partner who decided to offer a partnership to Crompton Llewelyn Davies, in whom were combined great intellectual brilliance and anarchic tendencies. Davies, a Cambridge Apostle and friend of Bertrand Russell, had been articled with the firm and in 1912 had been appointed solicitor to the Post Office. However, in 1920 when his support for his wife's involvement with Sinn Fein in Ireland and their friendship with Michael Collins were revealed, Davies was dismissed by the Post Office. 
Over 6 foot tall, Coward had a fine physique. A keen sportsman all his life, he regularly rode to hounds. He was also a keen golfer and a member of Woking Golf Club. A contemporary recalled that when the train arrived at Woking Station, all that could be seen of Coward, moving at great speed onto the course, was his 'coat of indefinably horsy cut with voluminous tails... flying down the fairway to the first hole' (Darwin, 82-3). 
Like Sir John Hollams, Coward was active in the Law Society, becoming a member of its council in 1910 and serving as president in 1927-8. In 1928 he was knighted, as was then customary for those holding the office. He was also a member of the Justinians, a legal dining club, and of the Reform Club. In 1928, at the age of eighty-two, Coward retired from the firm and from professional life. His son, Robert, who was then aged fifty and a bachelor still very much under his father's thumb, had been a partner in the firm since 1910 and retired at the same time. Cecil Coward died at his home, 10 Melbury Road, Kensington, London, on 27 July 1938, at the age of ninety-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 49709


Heelis, Stephen (1801-1871), lawyer, was born in Bolton. Articled to the firm of Sharpe, Eccles, and Cririe (antecedents of the present Slater Heelis solicitors) he was admitted as an attorney in the Hilary term of 1826. Heelis remained with the firm and became a partner in 1833. Credited as the founder of the Manchester Law Association, he became its president in 1843 and again in 1867. He was elected alderman for the Seedley ward of the borough of Salford. He is said to have been offered and refused a knighthood. He was mayor of Salford in 1855-6 and again in 1856-7. A strong Conservative supporter, he worked on several parliamentary election campaigns in Manchester and was a generous subscriber to the funds of the local Conservative association. He was also an early member of the Salford volunteer corps to which he also made generous financial contributions. As solicitor for John Owens, the Manchester industrialist, Heelis became one of the first trustees of Owens College (subsequently the Victoria University of Manchester). William Heelis, the husband of Beatrix Potter, was the great-grandson of a cousin of Stephen Heelis's father. Heelis died on Saturday 26 August 1871 at his house, Above Beck in Grasmere. 


@@@@@


doc= 49710


Slater, William (1796-1889), solicitor, was born at Somerville, Pendlebury, on 18 December 1796, the son of a cotton manufacturer. Slater was educated at the private school of the Revd J. Bell in Alderley, Cheshire, and later at another private school near Halifax. In 1815 he was articled to the firm of Sharpe, Eccles and Cririe, of King Street, Manchester, and was admitted as an attorney in the Hilary term of 1820. He became a partner in the firm in 1823 (a firm whose founder, William Fox, also a partner in the banking firm of Jones Loyd & Co., left $150,000 on his death). 
During his long and successful legal career, Slater dealt with private clients, public bodies, and corporations. According to one of his clients, Sir Charles Shaw, a former police commissioner for Manchester, Slater's talents in conveyancing were generally considered to be without equal in Lancashire. He was solicitor to the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, and from 1839 to the Manchester and Birmingham Railway. When the two companies became part of the North Western Company in 1847, Slater was one of the few people to be issued with a life pass to travel anywhere on the railway system. In his capacity as solicitor to the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, he was present at the opening ceremony of the company on 15 September 1830 and witnessed the first railway accident, which resulted in the death of William Huskisson the tory politician. 
As a parliamentary lawyer Slater's formidable legal skills ensured that he was much in demand, and to him was entrusted the legal work connected with the promotion of the 'Manchester Rectory Division Act' of 1850, which he piloted through parliament on behalf of the churchwardens of Manchester. He included the Byrom family of merchants and bankers among his clients, and he also acted as solicitor for the Bridgewater and Clowes estates. He was solicitor to the Wilton family and was a personal friend of Thomas, earl of Wilton. Slater also acted as legal adviser to the Mersey and Irwell Navigation Company, the Old Quay Company, Manchester grammar school, Henshaw's Blind Asylum at Old Trafford, Henshaw's Blue Coat School at Oldham, and a variety of other charities and turnpike trusts. Renowned for his phenomenal memory, in 1885 Slater was called to give evidence before the vice-chancellor of the palatine court of Lancaster regarding certain deeds. This he did 'viva voce' and included all the details as to time, place, and even the room in which certain interviews occurred -- events which had happened some forty-five years before. 
Slater was a founder member of the Manchester Law Association and was elected its president in 1868. He was also a member of the Solicitors' Benevolent Society and for some years was a director of the London and Provincial Law Insurance Society. He was a member of the Union Club, a devout Anglican, and a liberal supporter of the church and its schools. He married Fridiswid Charlotte Worthington, the daughter of W. H. Worthington of Sandiway Bank, Chester; she died in 1849, leaving him with three sons and one daughter. In 1856 the eldest son, William Slater, became a partner in his father's firm. The other sons became farmers, and his daughter, reflecting the circles in which the family moved, married the Revd Thomas Daniels, rector of St Paul's, Stretford Road, Manchester. 
In appearance, Slater was a tall, upright figure, even in his later years. An unostentatious and private man, he was noted by family and colleagues for his temperance and his methodical habits. He lived at Park Lane, Higher Broughton, at a distance of about 3 miles from his office and club in Manchester. An early riser, he regularly walked the distance from his home to his work, where he appeared for the last time on the Friday before his death on 12 November 1889. He was ninety-two years of age. His longevity and vast knowledge of the law won him the unofficial title of 'father of the legal profession in Manchester'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49711


Herford, Edward (1815-1896), lawyer and public servant, was born in Birmingham on 10 February 1815, the eldest surviving son of the nine children of John Herford, a wine merchant, and Sarah, only daughter of Edward Smith of Birmingham, notary public and Presbyterian dissenter. His younger brothers and sisters included William Henry Herford, Brooke Herford, and Anne Laura Herford. 
While an articled clerk in the firm of Kay and Darbishire, Marsden Street, Manchester, Herford became one of the founding members of the Law Students Society in 1833. An active and enthusiastic supporter of the incorporation movement, Herford was one of the first members of the Manchester town council (after incorporation in 1838) at the age of twenty-three. As assistant town clerk he was required, among his other duties, to act as public prosecutor. One of the first prosecutions he undertook was brought in 1840 against Chartists, including Bronterre O'Brien. Herford married, at the Cross Street Unitarian Chapel, Manchester, on 18 September 1846, Harriet (1822/3-1890), daughter of Fenton Robinson Atkinson, solicitor, in whose Manchester legal practice he became a partner. They had four sons and one daughter. 
From March 1849 until his death, Herford held the post of Manchester borough coroner. His decision to continue in his role as assistant town clerk as well as acting as borough coroner caused disagreement between himself and the Manchester Law Association and led to his resignation from that body in 1850. Herford resigned as assistant town clerk in August 1851. He became secretary to the coroners' committee of the northern counties. 
Edward Herford was an active supporter of the movement to establish lyceums and played a part in the establishment of the Manchester Statistical Society to which he contributed many papers. He was a founder member of the English Church Union formed in 1859 to defend and promote high-church principles in the Church of England; in 1861 he became chairman of the National Association for Promoting the Freedom of Worship. He sought to make the endowments of the established church available to all denominations, and opposed pew rents and the purchase of livings; in 1879 he was the first chairman of the National Committee for Abolishing Purchase in the Church. An often controversial figure, he was a prolific author of pamphlets on economic and financial questions, most of which were published in the 'Transactions of the Manchester Statistical Society'. A founder of the Lancashire and Cheshire Association of Mechanics Institutes, he was also an organizer of the Young Men's Anti-Monopoly Association (an offshoot of the Anti-Corn Law League). 
In 1882 Herford suffered a stroke, and his work as Manchester coroner was thereafter undertaken by his deputy. He died at his residence, West Bank, Upton, near Macclesfield, on 8 May 1896. After a funeral service in Macclesfield parish church he was buried in Macclesfield cemetery. His eldest son became a Church of England clergyman. 


@@@@@


doc= 49712


Heron, Sir Joseph (1809-1889), lawyer and town clerk, was born in Deansgate House, Manchester, the fourth of the ten children of James Holt Heron (1777-1847), a cotton merchant, on 3 January 1809 (or, according to one source, in January 1807). Heron was educated at the Moravian school, Fairfield, and Mr Hulme's school, Burnley. He was articled to John Hampson, a Manchester attorney, and afterwards became a pupil in London of Nassau Senior, the political economist. Heron was admitted as an attorney in 1830 at the age of twenty-one, and set up practice with his brother William at 21 Princess Street in Manchester. In 1838, after the battle for the incorporation of the city had been fought and won, Richard Cobden proposed Joseph Heron for the new post of town clerk. This was a position which Heron held for forty years, earning the epithet 'father of the town clerks in England'. 
An acknowledged authority on English municipal law, Heron was reputed never to have lost a case for the corporation and was recognized as one of the leading parliamentary lawyers of his day. As an attorney he was precluded from pleading his cause directly before a parliamentary committee -- that task fell to a barrister. Heron, however, always instructed the counsel (whom he had employed) to call him as a witness, and in this way he was able to plead and invariably win the case in hand. In 1858, in recognition of the prominent part he played in procuring the 'Mersey Conservancy and Docks Act', which effectively stopped Liverpool benefiting from the taxation of shipping houses in Lancashire, Heron was awarded a silver casket and the sum of $5000. His salary as town clerk was raised from $1500 to $2500 per annum, and after his retirement in 1877 he continued to receive $1500 per annum until his death. Knighted by the queen in 1869, Heron was acknowledged by Manchester borough council in a formal resolution which testified to the high character, ability, and long services rendered that had earned him the honour. 
Joseph Heron, sometimes known as Joe Heron, was a flamboyant figure. In his youth he was described as 'a swell', who wore kid gloves, tight boots, glossy curls, and all the adornments of a ladies' man. Listening to Joseph Heron on public occasions was said to have been like hearing the opinions of a consummate man of the world. He had the ability to express the most complex issues in a clear and colloquial manner. It was claimed that many a man entered the council chamber with the purpose of teaching Joe Heron his place but was converted to full acquiescence by Heron's undoubted eloquence. In answer to an exasperated councillor who exclaimed 'What right have you to speak -- what ward do you represent?', Heron retorted 'A larger ward than yours, sir -- I represent the entire city!' ('Manchester Faces and Places', 1889-90). 
Joseph Heron eventually married in 1881, at the age of seventy-two. His bride was Susan Preston Willert ('b'. 1809/10), 'nee' Beale, of Headington Hill, Oxford, the widow of an old friend and colleague. During the winter months they resided in the Hotel Californie at Cannes, where Heron died on 23 December 1889. According to his wishes he was buried in the cemetery at Cannes. 


@@@@@


doc= 49713


Paine, Sir Thomas (1822-1908), lawyer, was born in Yarmouth, the only child of a retired naval officer and his wife. His education, at a private school in Yarmouth, was minimal, for his father's income at that time had been much reduced by unfortunate investment, but he was, by his own account, a voracious and omnivorous reader. 
In 1837, at the age of fifteen, Paine was articled to Harry Verelst Worship, senior partner of a well-known Yarmouth firm of solicitors. His professional education was the responsibility of Worship's partner, his younger son, William, who was ten years Paine's senior and became the boy's mentor and his lifelong friend. Paine completed his articles and was admitted in 1843. He then spent a year in the chambers of the eminent conveyancing barrister Francis Turner before finding a position as a managing clerk with Timothy Tyrrell's practice in Guildhall Yard, London. Tyrrell had a large number of private clients and Paine recalled that as soon as he arrived he was placed in charge of the firm's railway business and conducted it largely unsupervised. 
In August 1847 Paine married Anna Neave (died 1893), to whom he had been engaged for a year. She was a Norfolk girl, sister of a friend of his at home. There were seven children of the marriage, five of whom survived to adulthood, three boys and two girls. In 1849 Tyrrell offered Paine a partnership in the firm and until 1857 they practised together, accompanied from 1852 by Thomas Layton. In 1857 Tyrrell was obliged to retire when it emerged that he had, in what Paine described as 'a serious breach of duty', shared the profit made by a property speculator on the sale of a building in Threadneedle Street to the newly established Bank of London, a client of the firm. Paine became, therefore, senior partner of the firm at a much younger age than he might ever have anticipated. His ability and probity ensured the continuation of the firm without loss of clients, even the Bank of London. 
The firm, now Paine and Layton, moved to Gresham House in Old Broad Street and developed a considerable City practice, with clients among the railway companies (the North London Railway Company was one of the most significant), the breweries -- in both the UK and the USA -- and, in the 1880s, investment trusts and the London and Lancashire Life Assurance Company, of which Paine himself became a director. Well respected in the City, Paine was a member of the select dining club, the City Law Club, from 1863. Despite his increasing professional duties, Paine always found time for his holidays, usually spent walking and climbing in the Alps. He was a member of the Law Society's council from 1871 to 1889, serving in 1882-3 as the society's president. In December 1882, following the opening by Queen Victoria of the new Law Courts in the Strand, Paine was knighted, the first president to be so honoured. Of Paine's three sons (educated at Rugby School), the eldest, Tyrrell ('b'. 1849), went to the bar while the two younger sons, Edgar ('b'. 1851) and William ('b'. 1861), were articled at the firm and became their father's partners. Edgar left the firm in 1893 and practised alone so that it was William who succeeded his father as senior partner when he retired in 1898, five years after the death of his wife. Paine enjoyed ten years of retirement, spent mainly at Broomfield, Westcott, near Dorking in Surrey, the house he had had built in 1868. He died on 12 February 1908. Ten years later his son, William, left the firm to become legal adviser to Lloyds Bank; he was instrumental in arranging for the firm to merge with another City practice, Linklater & Co., to create Linklaters and Paines, making it then and ever since one of the largest City firms of solicitors. 


@@@@@


doc= 49715


Crisp, Sir Frank, first baronet (1843-1919), lawyer and microscopist, was born in London on 25 October 1843, the only child of John Shalders Crisp (1811-1896), a printer, and his first wife, Harriet (died 1846), daughter of John Filby Childs, the Congregationalist campaigner against church rates and owner of the printing business for whom her husband worked. His mother died when he was not yet three and he was brought up by his grandfather. He was educated at private schools, then at University College School. Shortly before leaving school he decided to take up law and, having been introduced to John Morris by his uncle, he was articled to the firm of Ashurst and Morris at the age of sixteen. Besides his duties with the firm, Crisp studied privately for the London University examinations; he matriculated in 1862, graduated BA in 1864 and LLB in 1865, and found time to take holidays in Switzerland. On 27 August 1867 he married Catherine (1845/6-1931), daughter of George Durrant Howes of St Mary Bungay, Suffolk; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Crisp was admitted as a solicitor in 1869, with honours. As his legal reputation grew, he was brought into partnership in 1871, and in 1877 the name of the firm became Ashurst, Morris, Crisp & Co. His interest lay in company law, and he acted for such important clients as foreign railway companies and the Imperial Japanese Navy (in the purchase of its first British-built battleship). He wrote the contract for the expert who was to cleave the Cullinan diamond. He sat on two commissions for the revision of company law, and for his part in connection with the 'Companies (Consolidation) Act' of 1906 he was knighted on 7 November 1907. Crisp was legal adviser to the Liberal Party and for this service he received a baronetcy on 5 February 1913. 
Besides his town house in Lansdowne Road, Holland Park, Crisp acquired in 1895 the house and gardens of Friar Park, Henley-on-Thames. He was lavish in his hospitality, entertaining King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, King George V, and other royalty during Henley week. Crisp's passion for landscape gardening preceded his purchase of Friar Park; he was a member of the Linnean Society from 1870 and in 1904 his wife was among the first women to be elected fellow. He served as vice-president and was treasurer from 1881 to 1905. Over the years he was a generous benefactor, meeting various costs including that of the installation of electric light at the society's rooms in Burlington House and endowing awards for research. His garden was divided into the usual specialist areas, but the alpine garden was further embellished with a 20 foot high model of the Matterhorn, to scale, capped by a piece of rock from the original, and there were three highly decorated underground caverns. The public were admitted during the summer, with proceeds from ticket and guide sales going to charity. His weekend hobby was to gather material for a book on medieval gardening, which was seen through the press by his daughter after his death. In 1919 he received the Royal Horticultural Society's Victoria medal of honour, its highest award. 
In parallel with his horticultural activities, Crisp joined the Royal Microscopical Society in 1870, was elected to its council in 1874, and was appointed one of its secretaries in 1878, holding that office until he took up the treasurership in 1890 before serving as vice-president between 1893 and 1897. From 1879 he laboured to expand and improve the society's journal, organized a supply of specimens for the meetings, and over the years donated more than one hundred books and various items of furniture. Aware that English scientists were failing to advance their understanding of the theoretical principles involved in microscopy and also the systematic investigation of microscopic phenomena, he set about translating the revised edition (1877) of the three-volume standard German text, 'Das Mikroskop', by C. Nageli and S. Schwendener. A fire at the printers destroyed all but the first 374 pages and a few of the numerous woodcuts, but as Crisp was by this time occupied elsewhere, this partial account was issued in 1887 as 'The Microscope in Theory and Practice', with a second edition in 1892. 
By 1890 Crisp had acquired a notable collection of microscopes and related material. But although he wrote description sheets for many of these, and had numerous engravings made, no complete list exists of instruments which passed through his hands. At his death Stevens auction house disposed of his holdings in five sales, but no proper catalogue was made for that event. It seems that between his death and the sales many instruments and their parts had become separated or were wrongly combined, and that the instruments were not accompanied by their descriptions. Crisp attended to his law work until a few days before his death, at Friar Park on 29 April 1919. He was buried at Henley parish church. His eldest son, Frank Morris Crisp (1872-1938), succeeded as second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 49716


James Joseph William Freshfield (1775-1864), the first member of the family to enter the legal profession. 
Of James Joseph William's early life and education nothing is known. In 1790, at fifteen, he was articled to a London attorney and in 1795 he was admitted to the profession. Freshfield practised on his own, first at New Inn and then in Aldermanbury, until early in 1800. In that year he joined, as a partner, the firm then known as Winter and Kaye at 29 St Swithin's Lane. The firm, whose origins can be traced to a partnership in the early eighteenth century, was in 1800 one of the most significant in the City. It counted among its clients not only the Bank of England, a connection dating back almost to the establishment of the bank, but also the Royal Exchange Assurance and the banking houses of Smith, Payne and Smith (in London, Nottingham, and Hull). The Smiths, notably Robert Smith (1752-1838), created Baron Carrington by William Pitt in 1796, were closely connected with the Wilberforce and Thornton families and belonged to the influential evangelical group within the Church of England. James Joseph William was an active member of the Church Missionary Society in its early years -- it was established by the evangelicals in 1799 -- and it is likely that this connection helped him, an able and ambitious young man of humble origins, to join such a prestigious firm. Freshfield soon formed a close working relationship with Joseph Kaye, one of the two senior partners, and in 1808 the partnership between Kaye and Winter was dissolved. Winter and his two sons established themselves separately in practice and Kaye and Freshfield retained most of the clients including the highly prized business of the Bank of England. 
On 27 February 1799 Freshfield had married Mary Blackett 
(or Blacket; 1776-1819)
, daughter of John and Abigail Blackett of West Smithfield. Born into a respectable nonconformist family, it seems unlikely that she brought either wealth or connection to the marriage; John Blackett came of a well-established dissenting Durham family of farmers involved in the wool trade. James Joseph William and Mary Freshfield had a family of eleven children, nine of whom survived to adulthood. Of their four surviving sons, three became solicitors. Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49717


James William [i] Freshfield (1801-1857), was sent at the age of five to a dissenting academy in St Neots, Huntingdonshire, most probably through his mother's connections in that part of the world. From 1809 until 1816 he attended Dr Heathcote's school in Hackney. Until 1813 the Freshfields and their growing family lived in Hackney but in that year Freshfield senior bought the Manor House (also known as Abney House) in Stoke Newington, an old and spacious house set in considerable grounds. In 1816 his son James William completed his schooling and joined the firm as an articled clerk. He was admitted as a solicitor in 1822 and became a partner in the firm in 1824. The retirement of Joseph Kaye in 1823 and the departure, in 1825, of his son Charles Kaye when his dubious financial transactions, amounting in effect to fraud against his partners, were discovered left the firm in the hands of the Freshfields. 


@@@@@


doc= 49718


Charles Kaye Freshfield (1808-1891) and 


@@@@@


doc= 49719


Henry Ray Freshfield (1814-1895), James William's younger brothers, were both educated at Charterhouse School and joined the firm in 1825 and 1830 respectively; they did not, however, become partners until 1835 and 1839. The burden of running the firm in the 1820s and 1830s therefore fell very much on James William, who, unlike his brothers, enjoyed the confidence of his father who embarked during this time on an attempt, unusual for a solicitor at that time, to become a member of parliament. 
In 1819 James Joseph William's first wife, Mary, had died. Two years later he married his second wife, Frances Sims, for some time a friend of the family. In 1825, probably through his connection with William Manning, a West Indies merchant and former governor of the Bank of England, Freshfield was invited to stand for election in the constituency of Penryn, then a notorious Cornish rotten borough. He failed to be elected in 1826 but stood again -- this time successfully -- in 1830. Freshfield, a Peelite tory (the Peels were clients of the firm), unsuccessfully contested the constituency of Falmouth and Penryn in 1832, but was its MP from 1835 to 1841 and again from 1852 to 1857; he was also MP for Boston for a year, 1851-2. In Cornwall he was actively involved in the struggle to keep the mail packet trade at Falmouth and he introduced and piloted through parliament a measure to reform rates. He continued to be, at least in name, senior partner of the firm until 1840 when he finally retired. He died on 27 June 1864. 
In 1828 James William had married Mary Anne Dawes (1800-1875), daughter of Thomas Dawes, a well-known and respected City solicitor who counted among his many clients the Rothschild banking house. Between 1829 and 1837 six children were born at New Bank Buildings, where the couple lived in accommodation over the firm's offices. Two of their sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 49720


William Dawes Freshfield (1831-1903) and 


@@@@@


doc= 49721


Freshfield family (per. 1800-1918), lawyers, were partners in the City of London firm of solicitors which since 1800 has always used the Freshfield name in its title. Eight members of the Freshfield family, spanning four generations, held this position. 
The Freshfield family's origins are obscure until the mid-eighteenth century when James [i] Freshfield, born at Newport, Isle of Wight, in 1727, is recorded as working in London as a watchcase maker. He was not, apparently, very successful since he was declared bankrupt twice, in 1755 and in 1774, and, to the mortification of his grandson, spent some time in the Fleet prison. The son of James [i], James [ii] (1751-1803), was a watchmaker and from 1774 until his death a freeman of the Clockmakers' Company. In 1775 this James Freshfield married Elizabeth Snow of Windsor. Their eldest son (the first of nine children, not all of whom survived) was 


@@@@@


doc= 49722


Forster, Frances Egerton Arnold- (1857-1921), ecclesiastical historian, was born on 7 August 1857 at Dharmsala, Punjab, India, the fourth child of William Delafield Arnold (1828-1859), director of public instruction in the Punjab, and his wife, Frances Anne Hodgson (died 1858). Her grandfather was Thomas Arnold of Rugby. Following the death of their mother in India in 1858, Frances, her sister, Florence Mary, and her brothers, Edward Penrose and Hugh Oakeley Arnold-Forster, were sent to England. Their father died at Gibraltar in 1859 before their arrival. They were adopted and brought up by their maternal aunt, Jane Martha Arnold, daughter of Thomas Arnold, and her husband, W. E. Forster, at their home at Burley in Wharfedale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. They took the surname Arnold-Forster in adult life. Frances was initially educated at home, then at a private girls' school. As an active member of the Church Missionary Society and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, she was involved in the work of the school and mission connected with the Anglican church of St James-the-Less, Lillington Street, west London. Most of her published several works, notably 'Heralds of the Cross' (1882), containing stories of missionary work abroad, and 'The King's Business' (1909), also a biographical compilation based on missionary society reports, were intended for young readers. However, her 'Studies in Church Dedications, or, England's Patron Saints' (3 vols., 1899) was the product of independent scholarly research in diocesan and county records. It stemmed from her interest in a topic she pioneered: the significance of church dedications for local history. It was the first systematic study of its subject, on which it long remained the standard authority. The book combines statistical analysis with pious but lively commentaries on the lives of the saints and church fathers. It was written in conditions of considerable domestic difficulty while the author was nurse and companion to her widowed aunt and looking after her sister's young children. She herself suffered from mental stress and had often to lay her work aside. Frances Arnold-Forster died unmarried at Belmont Grove, Leeds, on 8 July 1921. 


@@@@@


doc= 49723


Charles Gabriel Beale (1843-1912), though based in Birmingham, had many similarities with that of his elder brother. Born on 10 May 1843 at Courtlands, Harborne Road, Birmingham, and educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, he became solicitor to the Birmingham and Midland Bank and a legal adviser to the Midland Railway. His attributes as a negotiator were also acknowledged and after retirement he was appointed a member of the royal commission on the working of the railway conciliation scheme in 1911. The business experience and legal expertise gained in professional life were also valued in Beale's later years when he became heavily involved in the conduct of municipal affairs in Birmingham in the post-Chamberlain period. He served on many of the corporation's important committees and was thrice mayor in consecutive years between 1897 and 1900. He was active in many areas of public life. On the founding of the University of Birmingham he became vice-chancellor, and, like his father, he was a principal organizer of the music festivals. Beale moved within the influential Unitarian circle and on 7 August 1868 married Alice, daughter of Timothy Kenrick, a local manufacturer, whose sisters married Joseph Chamberlain and Thomas Martineau. He died in Birmingham on 1 September 1912. 
By the end of the nineteenth century the Beales were firmly placed in the professional middle class, having built a dynasty based on the practice of law. However, their professional activities demonstrate how the worlds of law and business could overlap. 
The firm of Beale & Co. was carried on by the two sons of Charles Gabriel: Hubert (1869-1954) and Edmund (1872-1952). The brothers also introduced their sons into the firm during the inter-war years. James's eldest son, John Beale (1874-1935), though qualified as a solicitor, pursued a successful career in the iron and steel industry. The last member of the family connected with the firm was Charles Beale (1913-1989) of Birmingham, a grandson of Charles Gabriel Beale. The London office remained, but with no family representative. 


@@@@@


doc= 49724


William John Beale (1807-1883), the founder of Beale & Co., solicitors, of Birmingham and London, was the younger son of William Beale (1770-1843), a leading figure in Birmingham. William's eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49726


James Samuel Beale (1840-1912), born on 5 December 1840 in Birmingham, became head of the London office and was intimately involved in the affairs of the Midland Railway as its solicitor from 1867 until his retirement in 1905. His knowledge of railway law, and his skill in negotiations and the conduct of parliamentary procedure were widely recognized. This expertise was frequently called on by royal commissions, departmental committees, and the Railway Companies Association, of which he was solicitor for some time. In later years he was a director of the Midland Railway and president of the Law Society (1908) and built Standen in Sussex (acquired by the National Trust in 1972). He married Margaret, daughter of Algernon Sydney Field, another solicitor, on 19 April 1870. He died at Standen on 28 August 1912. 
The professional career of the third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 49727


Sir William Phipson Beale, baronet (1839-1922), born on 29 October 1839 in Birmingham, was called to the bar in 1869 after a scientific education and a brief spell at the Sheffield ironworks, of which Samuel Beale was a director. He married Mary, daughter of William Thompson, on 5 August 1869. William Phipson was elected member of parliament for South Ayrshire (1906-18), having earlier bought an estate in the county. He was created a baronet in 1912, and died in Dorking on 13 April 1922. 
The other two sons succeeded to their father's firm; one remained in Birmingham, while the other took over the running of the London office. 


@@@@@


doc= 49729


Beale family (per. c.1836-1912), lawyers, businessmen, and politicians, were already a well-established merchant family in Birmingham by the late eighteenth century. 



@@@@@


doc= 49731


Chamberlain, Basil Hall (1850-1935), Japanologist, was born on 18 October 1850 in Southsea, Hampshire, the eldest son of William Charles Chamberlain (1818-1878), an admiral in the British navy, and his wife, Eliza Jane (1825?-1856?), daughter of Captain Basil Hall RN, travel writer. Houston Stewart Chamberlain was his brother. His upbringing was cosmopolitan. He started travelling and learning a foreign language from the age of two. In 1856, after his mother's death, Chamberlain and his two brothers moved from England to Versailles, where his paternal grandmother lived. He was educated at the Lycee Imperial there and passed the 'baccalaureat' examination. In Versailles he also received instruction from a German governess. 
Due to a change in the family plans Chamberlain started working for Barings Bank in London in 1869, instead of going to Oxford University. Within a few months he had a nervous breakdown and left the bank. It was in the hope of regaining health that in November 1872 he boarded a sailer from the Thames, and started on a voyage which finally brought him to Yokohama, Japan, in May 1873. Japan in 1873 retained enough of her traditional civilization to fascinate Chamberlain. At the same time there were modernizing trends which ensured a strong demand for Western teachers, and Chamberlain remained in Japan as a teacher at the naval academy. Already a polyglot, he started learning Japanese with great enthusiasm. Within three years he knew enough Japanese to undertake serious work as a Japanologist. 
With his numerous publications, such as 'The language, mythology, and geographical nomenclature of Japan viewed in the light of Aino studies' ('Memoirs of the Literature College, Imperial University of Japan', 1887), 'A Handbook of Colloquial Japanese' (1887), and 'Essay in aid of a grammar and dictionary of the Luchuan language' ('Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan', 23, 1895, suppl.), Chamberlain made a pioneering and pivotal contribution to the study of the Japanese language. His translation of 'Kojiki' ('Records of ancient matters' -- Japan's oldest extant book dating back to AD 712), published in 1883, was also a very important contribution to the study of ancient Japanese history because of the rigorous critical scrutiny of the earliest Japanese records that appeared in his translator's introduction. 
Chamberlain became professor of Japanese and philology of the Imperial University (later the University of Tokyo) in 1886. It was a reflection of the exceptionally high regard he had won from the Japanese that, still in his early forties and having taught at the university for only four years until 1890, he was made an emeritus professor in 1891. 
From around 1890 the focus of his writing shifted to books for the general reader. 'Things Japanese' (1890), for a long time the most handy and reliable guidebook on Japanese culture, and 'A Handbook for Travellers in Japan' (a Murray's handbook originally written by E. M. Satow and A. G. S. Hawes, and revised by Chamberlain and G. B. Mason from the third edition published in 1891), were updated repeatedly. He also published several volumes of translations of Japanese fairy tales. He returned to Europe for good in 1911 and retired in Geneva, Switzerland. A few months after completing the manuscript of the sixth edition of 'Things Japanese' (published posthumously in 1939), he died, unmarried, at the Hotel Richemond, Geneva, on 15 February 1935. He was buried in the St Georges cemetery on the 18th. 
Chamberlain was one of the rare European intellectuals of real stature who devoted the best part of their lives to the study of Japan. He was not a rebel against his own civilization. His two French books published during his retirement, 'Huit siecles de poesie francaise' (1927) and '... encore est vive la souris: pensees et reflexions' (1933), amply demonstrate how well he was grounded in European culture. His appearance -- he was tall and wore a beard -- was also that of a typical British gentleman. However, his remarkable command of Japanese, coupled with his kindly, tolerant, democratic personality, enabled him to establish a wonderful rapport, not only with intellectuals but also with common people of Japan, such as his servants. He also visited almost every prefecture in Japan. His solid knowledge and appreciation of Japan has tended to be underestimated because of the impression, more apparent than real, that he was Eurocentric. It is true that he candidly criticized some aspects of Japan, but awareness of the existence of more than one legitimate point of view made him free from any rigid Eurocentrism. His unpublished letters reveal that his attachment to Japan had an intensity hitherto unsuspected. His world was an ellipse with two foci -- Japan and Europe. He became uprooted because he could not choose between Europe and Japan, both of which he loved, and he continued to swing between the two (he made six journeys to Europe during his years in Japan). Intense expressions of homesickness for Japan, found in his letters written after his retirement in Geneva, show that his return to Europe did not mean a renunciation of Japan and a spiritual return to Europe, as it was often interpreted. His unpublished letters, together with two volumes of his published letters to Lafcadio Hearn, a talented popular writer on Japan whom he befriended, document a fascinating drama of cultural contact played out in the soul of an individual. 


@@@@@


doc= 49732


Thomson, Sir Godfrey Hilton (1881-1955), educational psychologist and psychometrician, was born at 19 Corporation Road, Carlisle, Cumberland, on 27 March 1881, the son of Charles Thomson, a domestic machinery agent, and his wife, Jane Hilton. Shortly after the birth his mother left the marital home, taking the infant Godfrey with her, and settled with her mother and sisters in Felling, Northumberland. Godfrey attended the local board elementary school and then, aged thirteen, he won a scholarship for a free place for secondary education at Rutherford College in Newcastle upon Tyne. A full-time pupil there from 1894 to 1897, he then attended evening classes in science while employed as a pupil teacher at his old school at High Felling, passing the London University intermediate BSc examinations in 1899. 
In 1900, having won a queen's scholarship, Thomson embarked on a full-time science course, while training as a teacher at the normal department, at the Durham College of Science (soon renamed Armstrong College) in Newcastle, then part of the University of Durham. He achieved a BSc with distinction in mathematics and physics in 1903, having obtained his teaching certificate the previous year. He was appointed Pemberton fellow of the University of Durham in 1903, which enabled him to travel to the University of Strasbourg to study under Professor Ferdinand Braun, the foremost German expert in wireless telegraphy. After obtaining his PhD in 1906 for research on Hertzian waves, Thomson returned to Armstrong College as assistant lecturer in education, fulfilling a condition of the queen's scholarship that he should teach for a certain period 'in an elementary school, the army, the navy, or the workhouse'. As his duties included lecturing on educational psychology, Thomson threw himself into learning about psychology and, as he put it in his autobiographical sketch of 1952, 'felt the change pleasant from studying only dead matter' (Thomson). 
A turning point came in the summer vacation of 1911, which Thomson spent at C. S. Myers's laboratory in Cambridge. He was introduced to William Brown's book 'The Essentials of Mental Measurement' (1911), a work whose subsequent editions (1921, 1925, 1940) Thomson co-authored with Brown. At first, the psychophysical aspects caught his interest, leading to publications in the 'British Journal of Psychology' and a DSc in 1913. But it was Brown's criticisms of Spearman's two-factor theory of intelligence, and especially his insistence on a single underlying general factor, that really caught Thomson's mathematical eye. With the aid of dice and a house slipper, Thomson generated at his fireside artificial test scores whose correlational structure still satisfied Spearman's theory even without any general factor. The eventual publication of this finding in the 'British Journal of Psychology' in 1916 sparked off a long-running, sometimes vituperative, but essentially unresolved, dispute with Spearman. None the less, it marked the start of Thomson's many significant contributions to the debates on intelligence and the newly emerging method of factor analysis. Thomson's own theory of intelligence evolved into his 'sampling hypothesis', which supposed that the mind consisted of numerous 'bonds' and that, inevitably, overlapping samples of these connections would be invoked by tests of different mental abilities. Hence, in Thomson's view, the resulting correlational structure indicated a statistical rather than a mental phenomenon. His most important work on factor analysis, 'The Factorial Analysis of Human Behaviour', ran to five editions between 1939 and 1951. 
Thomson married, on 16 July 1912 at the Primitive Methodist Chapel, Kingsley Terrace, Newcastle, Jane Hutchinson ('b'. 1882/3), a graduate of Armstrong College and an assistant lecturer in the department of education; she was the daughter of Thomas Hutchinson, a builder and contractor. They had one son. Before his marriage Thomson was a volunteer with the Northumberland Fusiliers; he re-joined Armstrong College's Officers' Training Corps in 1915 and was engaged in military duties until 1919. In 1920, newly promoted to the chair of education at Newcastle, he began devising 'mental' tests for Northumberland county council designed to identify children in more underprivileged schools who might benefit from secondary education. 
Thomson's growing reputation brought an invitation to visit E. L. Thorndike at Columbia University, and the family spent the academic year 1923-4 in the USA. The lectures he gave there were published in 1924 as 'Instinct, Intelligence and Character'. Soon after returning to Newcastle, Thomson was offered a chair of education at Edinburgh University which carried with it the directorship of Moray House teacher training college. The tests that Thomson developed after moving to Edinburgh in 1925, known as the Moray House tests, became widely employed throughout the UK and elsewhere. Selection for secondary education was not the only use to which the tests were put. Thomson and his many collaborators also carried out large-scale investigations on Northumbrian and Scottish schoolchildren, relating the test results to social factors such as family size and father's occupation. 
Among Thomson's many honours in his later years were a knighthood in 1949, vice-presidency of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and presidency of section J of the British Association for 1949, as well as membership of several foreign academies and learned societies. He was an honorary fellow of the British Psychological Society and its president for 1945-6. Even after retirement from his Edinburgh chair in 1951 Thomson was still busy with the Scottish survey material and his writing. His last book, 'The Geometry of Mental Measurement', appeared just a year before his death, and not until 1953 did he relinquish the editorship of what became the 'British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology', a journal he had edited jointly with Cyril Burt from its founding in 1947. 
Colleagues and former students described Thomson as forthright in his speech and opinions, a brilliant teacher, and a man of integrity, though to students, who nicknamed him 'God Thom', his manner could seem rather haughty and remote. He died from cancer in Edinburgh Royal Infirmary on 9 February 1955, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49734


Valentine, James (1815-1879), engraver and photographer, was born on 12 June 1815 in Dundee, the second of the five children of John Valentine (1792-1868), linen weaver, and his wife, Mary Watson ('bap'. 1790, died 1866), daughter of Andrew Watson, a Dundee shipmaster and his wife, Elizabeth Elder. After schooling in Dundee, he was sent to Edinburgh to study art. He returned to Dundee in 1832 to set up an engraving and copperplate printing business with his father, who had taken up a new trade cutting wooden blocks for linen printing. On 28 August 1837 he married Christina Marshall (1812/13-1842), daughter of John Marshall, shoemaker. In June 1838, days before the birth of his first child, he announced that he was no longer a partner in Valentine & Son and was setting up on his own account as an engraver and copperplate and lithographic printer in the Overgate in Dundee. After giving birth to their third child in November 1841, his wife died on 3 May 1842 of lung disease. The only son of this marriage, John (1841-1867), became a pioneer photographer in Hawaii. On 5 December 1843 James Valentine married his second wife, Rachel Dobson (1817-1879), in Glasgow. 
Valentine prospered; he rarely described himself in the same way twice in the Dundee directory, but the mainstay of his business was the engraving, printing, and supplying of business stationery. In 1840 he became a member of the guildry and in 1845 a burgess, both evidence of his progress in the Dundee business establishment. About 1849 he met the colourful American social campaigner Elihu Burritt; he was involved in publicity for Burritt's visit to Dundee, producing engraved illustrated envelopes supporting his varied causes, which included universal brotherhood, arbitration for war, freedom of commerce, and (more mundanely) penny postage overseas. By 1851 Valentine had fourteen employees; in that year he decided to add portrait photography to his firm's activities, having become interested in this new invention as an aid to engraving. To equip himself, he studied 'in M. Billoch's photographic academy in Paris' and corresponded 'with some of the best French and English photographers' (Dundee Public Library, Lamb MS 215 (2)). 
This enterprise proved to be so profitable that in 1855 Valentine erected one of the largest photographic glasshouses in Britain. By the end of the decade portrait photography came first in his advertisements and he was retailing photographs of local worthies. In the early 1860s -- after instruction in the studio of Francis Frith in Reigate, Surrey -- he added landscape photography to his repertory, aided by the ingenious conversion of a barouche into a mobile dark-room and by the entry into the business of his eldest son by his second marriage, William Dobson Valentine. In 1864 he solicited the Queen Victoria's attention with topographical photographs, including one of Queenswell in Glen Mark, and was rewarded with commissions for views of Scottish scenery. In 1868 he obtained the royal warrant as 'photographer to the queen', the second in Scotland to do so after George Washington Wilson of Aberdeen. This side of his business rapidly developed: the sale of view scraps for prices ranging from 1's'. to 3's'. 6died and elegant albums from half a guinea to 12 guineas gave rise to a large printing works at 152 and 154 Perth Road, Dundee. The 12,000 wet-plate collodion negatives which Valentine prepared were not markedly different in quality from those of his competitors in the landscape photograph trade aiming at upper- and middle-class tourists, but he excelled in the organization of his business and the presentation of his products. 
James Valentine was a staunch member of the Congregational church, initially attending the Castle Street Chapel and from 1867, after a disagreement when he headed a list of eighty-three dissident members, becoming a member of the Panmure Street Chapel. (His son James (1846-1918) became a Congregational minister at Peterborough.) He died at his home, 19 Thomson Street, Dundee, on 19 June 1879 and was buried in Balgay cemetery in Dundee. His second wife survived him by seven weeks. He had laid the foundations of a firm which, under his sons and grandsons, became the longest-surviving and possibly the largest of British photographic publishers. He was immediately succeeded by his sons William Dobson Valentine (1844-1907) and George Dobson Valentine (1852-1890). The main collection of James Valentine's photographs is in the Valentine archive in St Andrews University Library, but examples are also found in most general photograph collections in Britain and in many overseas. 


@@@@@


doc= 49735


Walker, Sir Alexander (1869-1950), whisky blender and industrialist, was born on 22 March 1869 at Wallace Bank, Kilmarnock, the third and youngest son of Alexander Walker, chairman of John Walker & Sons, and his wife, Isabella ('nee' McKemmie). Educated at Ayr Academy he subsequently had a legal training as well as a trade apprenticeship with Robertson and Baxter Ltd, wine and spirit merchants of Glasgow. In 1888 he joined the family business, one of the largest and oldest blending houses, and two years later was elected to the board. In 1895 he married Rosaline, daughter of Arthur S. Josling of Arkley, Hertfordshire; they had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1908 Walker commissioned the artist Tom Brown to portray his grandfather, the original Johnnie Walker, in a sketch for advertisements; in different forms it continues in use today. In 1913 Walker became joint managing director of John Walker & Sons. He worked for the Ministry of Munitions during the First World War, was a member of the munitions disposal board, and was knighted in 1920 for his wartime service. When Walkers became a public company in 1923 Sir Alexander became chairman, and when two years later the firm merged with the Distillers Company Ltd (DCL), along with Buchanan-Dewar Ltd, he was elected to the board of DCL. 
Walker was renowned for his independent views on trade matters, especially when he attempted, unsuccessfully, to persuade the royal commission on whisky (1908-9) that whisky should be made from a mash containing not less than 30 per cent of malted barley and that blended whisky should contain at least 50 per cent malt whisky. At the royal commission on licensing (1931) he rejected the view that the trade should refrain from exporting to the USA during prohibition. His independence, and the need to consult other family members, prolonged the negotiations leading to the amalgamation with DCL in 1925, much to the irritation of the other parties. 
As one of DCL's younger and more dynamic directors Walker played a prominent role in the group's development. With a declining demand for whisky and gin, DCL moved into the production of industrial alcohol and solvents and via this into a range of organic chemicals. Many complex problems accompanied diversification. These included DCL's relations with much larger competing firms like ICI and I. G. Farben; the large capital investment which was required; and a highly unsettled technology in which the choice of raw material lay between molasses, where DCL had invested heavily, oil, where petroleum producers were firmly ensconced, and coal, the only domestically produced raw material. The most sensitive issue was the appropriate form of organization, because the capital for diversification had to come from DCL's potable activities. This meant that diversification required the approval of the blenders, the dominant group on the board, and not all were prepared to take a long-term view of the chemical business. Several blenders saw diversification as a short-term insurance policy which could be discarded when the potable spirits market recovered. Ranged against them were those who had built the chemical business and wanted DCL to adopt a divisional structure, splitting it into two divisions, whisky and industrial. 
When, in 1931, DCL's chairman was absent through illness a small finance and executive committee was established as a temporary expedient. Walker was a member and argued successfully for greater centralized control. The new management structure in 1935 rejected the divisional approach and established a management committee in which each member controlled a group of subsidiary companies and departments. Walker took charge of research and development and many of the chemical interests. His chairmanship of the management committee (from 1937 to 1939) saw DCL move into the marketing of finished products in addition to the production of raw materials and intermediates. DCL negotiated a 'spheres of interest' agreement with ICI and initiated joint research with the Royal Dutch Shell and Anglo-Iranian Oil companies for synthetic alcohol production. Joint ventures with the British government for the production of strategically important chemicals were also started well before the outbreak of war. 
Walker's great contribution was his perception of the problems accompanying DCL's late entry into chemicals, especially his desire to avoid 'encirclement', a situation where DCL did not control the markets for chemical products. Although his technical knowledge sometimes fell short of what the technical staff desired, his presence on the research and development committee reassured the blenders and, in the context of the 1930s, he bridged the gulf between potable and non-potable activities. Later in 1967, DCL was to dispose of much of its industrial division to British Petroleum. 
Walker had many other interests. He was a member of the Ayrshire Electricity Board, chairman of the Ayrshire gas supply committee, and chairman of a Board of Trade investigation into the feasibility of a gas grid for the west of Scotland, as well as holding several directorships. A trustee of C. K. Marr's bequest for the erection of a further education college at Troon, he became chairman of the governors of Marr College when it opened in 1934. Walker gifted land to the burgh and promoted the Troon bathing pool. In 1944 he donated $10,000 to the town council for a centre for the treatment of rheumatism. He was rewarded in 1946 for his services to the town with the freedom of Troon, the first person to receive this honour. By then he was the only survivor of the nine commissioners appointed to govern the burgh when it was formed in 1896. Predeceased by his wife in 1948, Walker died at Piersland, Troon, on 13 May 1950 from a coronary thrombosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 49736


Waterston, George (1911-1980), ornithologist and conservationist, was born on 10 April 1911 in Edinburgh, the oldest of the seven children (four boys and three girls) of Robert Waterston (1878-1969), director of George Waterston & Sons, Edinburgh, stationers and printers (founded by Robert's great-great-grandfather), and his wife, Winifred, 'nee' Sandeman (1889-1978). He was educated at the Edinburgh Academy, where he gained colours for rugby football and cricket, later playing for the Academicals and captaining the second fifteen. On leaving school he joined his father's firm, remaining there until he became a full-time ornithologist in 1955. During the Second World War he served with the Royal Artillery and was captured in Crete. 
Waterston's interest in birds was evident when he was a small child; while still at school he gave a lecture on bird-watching, during which he roundly denounced the hobby of egg collecting. He was a founder member of both the Inverleith Field Club and the Midlothian Ornithological Club, and in 1934 was the chief instigator of the Isle of May Bird Observatory, the first co-operative bird migration centre to be set up in Britain. In 1936 he became the primary force behind the formation of the Scottish Ornithologists' Club, and was elected its first honorary secretary in 1955. 
Waterston had a deep interest in Fair Isle, an important resting site for migratory birds. He first visited the island in 1935; in 1943, having been repatriated from Germany because of kidney trouble, he was on board a hospital ship crossing the North Sea from Sweden when he sighted the Sheep Craig at Fair Isle -- his first glimpse of his homeland. These experiences bound him fervently to the island: he was one of the instrumental forces behind the foundation of the Fair Isle Bird Observatory. In 1955 Waterston not only took on the secretaryship of the Scottish Ornithologists' Club, but became Scottish officer for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). In time he so greatly developed this position that he was appointed full-time director (Scotland) of the RSPB, a post which he held for thirteen years. During his years in post he travelled all over Scotland and dealt with the full gamut of bird protection issues. 
In 1947 Waterston married Nancy Ritchie ('b'. 1914). The couple had a son, William, who became a solicitor. However, the marriage was ultimately dissolved, and in 1958 he married Irene Kinnear (1914-1984), who shared his interests and activities to the full, and whose deep interest in Arctic botany led to the establishment of the couple as a formidable research team in Arctic wildlife; they undertook several expeditions to Greenland and Ellesmere Island. Irene jointly with George organized the first Scottish bird islands study cruise, part of the International Ornithological Congress of 1966, when over 900 ornithologists from thirty-two countries visited a number of Scottish islands. 
In 1948 Waterston was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and in 1964 he was appointed OBE for his services to British ornithology: specifically for bird protection in Scotland. In 1974 he received an honorary degree (LLD) from the University of Dundee, and was elected president of the Arctic Club in 1978. 
Waterston's active life in the field and as an organizer precluded the production of much published work, but he co-produced a long paper with James Fisher on the fulmar ('Journal of Animal Ecology', 10, 1941, 204-72) and the chapter on the gannet in Bannerman's 'The Birds of the British Isles' (1959). With Philip Brown he wrote 'The Return of the Osprey' (1962), and with Roy Dennis, 'The Osprey and Speyside Wildlife' (1969). His last book, 'Fair Isle: a Photographic History' (1983), was completed after his death by Jean Jones. 
On Waterston's retirement he and his wife moved to Keith Bridge, Humbie, East Lothian. In the early 1970s he began to suffer increasingly from kidney trouble; after a failed transplant attempt, he became dependent on a dialysis machine at home. Despite this logistic burden, he still managed to visit Fair Isle three times; the last time in June 1980. He died three months later, on 20 September 1980, at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, and was buried on 24 September in the churchyard of the old parish church at Humbie. 
Waterston arguably did more than anyone else to establish ornithology in Scotland, despite his lack of formal training. He was, additionally, a gregarious and kind man, with friends in all walks of life, who much enjoyed his great sense of humour. He was a determined and organized operator, who would ardently pursue an end product with keen verbal proddings, or (when this was impossible) a continual stream of 'George's memos'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49739


Edward Adolphus Ferdinand St Maur (1835-1869), was born on 17 July 1835 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 19 May 1853. Styled Lord Seymour and, from 1863, Earl St Maur, he attended the coronation of Alexander II as Lord Granville's attache, and fought in Persia with Sir James Outram, and with Sir Colin Campbell in India in 1857. As 'Captain Sarsfield' he took part in Garibaldi's campaign in Sicily in 1860. He and Rosina Elizabeth Swan of Higham, a Gypsy and the daughter of a bricklayer, had two illegitimate children, Richard Harold ('b'. 1869) and Ruth Mary Cavendish-Bentinck, the suffragist. St Maur died, unmarried, in Dover Street, London, on 30 September 1869. In 1872 Rosina married Francois Tournier of Bordeaux, but died shortly afterwards of consumption. 


@@@@@


doc= 49742


Kendall, Larcum (1719-1790), watchmaker, was born on 21 September 1719 at Charlbury in Oxfordshire, the elder of two sons of Moses Kendall, mercer and linen draper, and Anne, 'nee' Larcum, of Chipping Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. His parents were both Quakers. On 7 April 1735 Larcum was apprenticed to the watch, clock, and repeating-motion maker John Jefferys for seven years, at which time he was living with his parents in St Clement Danes in Westminster. In 1736 his maternal grandfather, Nicholas Larcum, a salesman of Chipping Wycombe, left property in trust for him, through his mother, and he inherited a reasonable private income. 
In 1742, immediately after his apprenticeship had ended, Kendall set up on his own, working almost exclusively for the great watch and clock maker George Graham (1685-1751) as an escapement maker specializing in the horizontal (cylinder) escapement. Kendall was brought up a Quaker, but once his own master he no longer stayed as one of their brethren, though, according to his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', he 'never quitted that simplicity of manners for which that sect is so generally admired; and a man more inflexibly upright, either in person, word or deed, perhaps scarcely ever lived'. He was highly respected as a craftsman, too: working under Graham and with his contemporary Thomas Mudge, he was part of the finest watchmaking team of the day. He appears, though, to have remained something of a loner in the trade; he was not a member of the Clockmakers' Company and probably not among the group of talented London watchmakers who met at the Devil tavern during the last quarter of the eighteenth century. 
Through Jefferys and Graham, Kendall had connections with John Harrison, the great pioneer and inventor of the marine timekeeper and precision watch. In June 1765, by which time he was established at 6 Furnival's Inn Court, near Holborn Bars, the board of longitude selected him as one of six experts to witness the explanation by Harrison of the construction of his fourth timekeeper (H4), an event which took place between 14 and 22 August that year. During these deliberations the board also decided that a copy of the timekeeper must be made and Harrison recommended Kendall, who may have contributed to the making of the fourth timekeeper itself in the preceding years. Kendall agreed to make the copy 'part for part', but made it clear he had little faith in its design; he would make no guarantees of its good performance. The copy (later known as K1) was completed in 1769 and the following year was inspected by the same group as before, including Harrison's son William, who admitted that it was even better made than his father's original. Kendall was paid the agreed $450, plus an 'ex gratia' payment of $50 for 'the extraordinary trouble in adjusting it for 9 months' and taking it and H4 to pieces. In 1772 K1 was sent for trials with James Cook on his second voyage of discovery to the south seas (1772-5), during which time it performed so well that Cook learned to rely on his 'trusty friend the watch', his 'never failing guide'. 
Nevertheless, Harrison's design was too complex and expensive and in 1769 the board commissioned Kendall to create a simplified version. The result, K2 of 1771, which cost $200, was later famous for being on the 'Bounty' when the notorious mutiny took place. The watch was taken to Pitcairn Island, only returning to England in 1840. It employed many of the features of H4, but Kendall omitted the essential remontoir mechanism, thus prejudicing its chances of success, and it never performed well. Further simplified designs by Kendall, including a type of escapement said to be his own invention, resulted in K3 of 1774 (costing $100), which was sent with Cook on his third, ill-fated voyage (1776-9). This watch also failed to perform as well as Harrison's, being fundamentally no better than K2. (These three timekeepers were all preserved at the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich.) 
After this Kendall, following the lead of the great pioneer John Arnold, began making pocket timekeepers with 'detached' (pivoted detent) escapements; the collection of the Clockmakers' Company, Guildhall, London, included an example. The quality of his work was second to none, as is shown by the few watches, signed by him, which survive, but he never showed any real ingenuity of his own. He was primarily a watchmaker to the top retail trade, producing first-rate products to the design of those with greater imagination; the majority of his work, which also included some clocks and precision regulators, would appear to have been sold under other retailers' names. 
Kendall died at Furnival's Inn Court on 22 November 1790, and was buried in the Quaker burial ground, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 28 November. As well as leaving a large sum in trust for his brother Moses and his family, his will, written on 6 November 1790 and proved on 8 December, also leaves his 'implements in trade' and personal effects to Moses, who arranged for them to be sold by auction; the contents of his workshop, and his household furniture and other effects, were sold by Christies on 23 December that year. It is not known whether Kendall ever married. No wife or children are mentioned in his will and the furniture and effects sold strongly suggest the home of a lifelong bachelor. 


@@@@@


doc= 49743


Aufrere, George Rene (1715-1801), merchant, was born on 7 November 1715 in Suffolk Street, near Charing Cross, London, the youngest of the five children of the Revd Israel Antoine Aufrere (1667-1758), the minister of the Savoy church, and Sarah Amsincq, the daughter of a wealthy Amsterdam merchant. His paternal grandfather was chased out of France after the revocation of the edict of Nantes (1685) for being a follower of Calvin; he moved to Holland and later, in 1700, to England. Aufrere spent his childhood in Suffolk Street until 1724, when his family moved to Conduit Street and one year later to Poland Street, in Soho. In 1728 his father became the minister of the Chapel Royal in St James's Palace. In 1734 he was apprenticed to William Smith, a linen draper in Cornhill and one of the City's principal merchants. After his apprenticeship, he became a junior partner in the firm and, as such, managed its daily cloth-trading operations, overseeing the work of the apprentices and clerks and the moves to Leadenhall Street and later to Mincing Lane. And he expanded the business into new markets, supplying the African forts with English arms and ammunition and Indian cloth goods. In 1746 he married Arabella Bate (1720-1804), a daughter of William Bate of Foston, Derbyshire, and a niece of the eighth countess of Exeter. She was rumoured to have brought $90,000 to the marriage, but it is more likely to have been $9000. 
Two years after Smith's death Aufrere joined forces with John Sargent (1714-1791), a cousin by marriage, and from 1754 the two men conducted a profitable cloth-trading business out of Mincing Lane. Aufrere also served as one of the Admiralty's fourteen commissioners for the sale of French prizes, responsible for the sale of enemy ships and goods captured by the British between 1756 and 1764. He was a director of the London Assurance Company from 1761 to 1777. He represented Liverpool on the nine-man board that governed the newly formed company of merchants trading to Africa in 1764-5 and he sat on the committee of the lieutenancy for the City of London. 
Governmental work consumed a greater share of Aufrere's time as the 1760s progressed. His direct involvement in parliament began in January 1765 when, backed by his wife's cousin the ninth earl of Exeter, he entered the Commons as the representative for Exeter's home town, Stamford in Lincolnshire. In parliament he sided with Rockingham's whigs and, even after Rockingham's fall, continued to support their causes. As a friend of the opposition, he voted against the government on such issues as the land tax question in February 1767, the 'nullum tempus' issue in February 1768, and Glynn's motion to inquire into the administration of justice in 1770. He left parliament in 1774. 
In 1767, by which time Aufrere had retired from trade, George III appointed him a gentleman of the privy chamber. He had handed over the Mincing Lane operation to Sargent and retreated to the magnificent Chelsea mansion and gardens that had once been the home of Sir Robert Walpole and which he had purchased in 1759. Surrounded by a widely acclaimed collection of paintings and statues that he and Joshua Reynolds assembled (contemporaries considered it one of the best private collections in Britain at the end of the eighteenth century), Aufrere supervised the affairs of the London Assurance, supported the many exploratory schemes of his nephew Sir Joseph Banks, struggled to extricate himself from the snares of bankrupted friends such as Sir George Colebrooke, and monitored the activities sponsored by the London Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, of which he was a member. He died at his home, Walpole House in Chelsea, on 7 January 1801; his remains were 'interred in a decent but private manner'. A life interest in his estate went to his wife, who died three years later. His only daughter, Sophia, having died in 1786, the residue of the estate then passed to her husband, Charles Anderson Pelham, Baron Yarborough (1749-1823), in trust for their sons. The extensive art collection was moved to Brocklesby Park, in northern Lincolnshire, where a special gallery was built to house it. 


@@@@@


doc= 49744


Boddington, George (1646-1719), merchant and Independent lay leader, was born on 15 October 1646, the first surviving son of George Boddington (1611-1671), packer, of St Margaret, Lothbury, London, and Hannah, daughter of Thomas Adams, of Philpot Lane, St Clement, Eastcheap, London. He was educated at various schools in London. Acquiring a zeal for trade from his father, Boddington also absorbed the piety of a puritan mother, who instilled good principles of religion and morals in all her children. He came of age in the late 1660s, at a time of great uncertainty caused by the conjunction of plague, fire, and war and the persecution of protestant nonconformists. Dating his spiritual conversion to the plague-time renewal of visible dissenting ministry, Boddington was admitted to the congregation of Thomas Vincent, which by the end of the decade worshipped in a purpose-built meeting-house. In 1669 the elder George Boddington was chosen for the common council of the corporation as the dissenting civic elite of the protectorate re-established their presence in London affairs. In 1670 the younger Boddington's pastor was among those dissenting clergy whose convictions under a new 'Conventicle Act' prompted street confrontations in the City. Boddington's marriage on 19 December 1671 also indicated the political and religious milieu of the family. His wife, Mary Steele, who brought him a portion of $2000, was the daughter of William Steele, radical lawyer, Independent recorder of London (1649-55), lord chief baron of the exchequer (1655-6), and lord chancellor of Ireland (1656-60). 
Despite these early indications of outspoken dissent, Boddington seems always to have preferred his trade and family to a public life. Admitted freeman of the Levant Company in 1666, he was comfortably established by his father in the Turkey trade, despite the latter's considerable fire losses. The young merchant also entered the Clothworkers' Company and learned the Baltic trade as bookkeeper to an Eastland merchant. After his first wife, Mary, died in childbirth in 1673, Boddington married on 2 July 1674 Hannah (died 1699), daughter of John Cope, Cannon Street haberdasher, who brought him another significant portion and with whom he had fourteen children. By 1677 he had settled in the parish of St Helen's, Bishopsgate, where he remained throughout his career. In 1678, when Thomas Vincent's successor compromised the congregational order of Boddington's church, he left for the Lime Street meeting, in which he remained active thereafter. 
Like many other prominent City dissenters, Boddington signed the London petition of May 1679 intended to encourage parliamentary consideration of exclusion. His brother James (1652-1731), a packer, signed a subsequent London whig petition; but George Boddington is not known to have taken any further part in London politics during the exclusion era. He was, nevertheless, one of more than 300 Londoners temporarily incarcerated in 1685 at the time of Monmouth's rebellion. 
The London port books for the 1680s and 1690s show Boddington importing silk, mohair, and cotton from Iskenderun, Leghorn, and Smyrna and exporting cloth to the Mediterranean and the Levant, to the Baltic, and to Hudson's Bay and New England. The volume of his trade was considerable, but not exceptional. 
The revolution of 1688 and the financial developments that followed the establishment of the Bank of England in 1694 found Boddington at the zenith of his career. Like many other City nonconformists grateful for the 'Toleration Act', he subscribed to the post-1689 corporation of London loans to the new government of William and Mary. In 1694 his subscription of $2000 to the bank brought him election to its first court of directors. Finding that the bank took up too much of his time, however, he disposed of his stock. He was similarly diffident about political office. Although repeatedly nominated for the London common council by the vestry of his parish between 1688 and 1692, he refused to take the sacramental test when actually chosen for 1689/90. Whether Boddington had changed his mind about the test by the time of his return to parliament, as a whig, representing Wilton, Wiltshire, in July 1702 is unknown. In any case he was unseated by the Commons; and the tory uproar about dissenting activism in Wilton in this election was instrumental in launching the first 'Occasional Conformity Bill' under Queen Anne. In the meantime Boddington had served his parish, as churchwarden, and his congregation, as an officer of two funds for the support of the dissenting clergy: the short-lived Common Fund (1690-93) of Presbyterians and Independents and the subsequently established Congregational Fund. He was also Greenland Company governor (1693), Levant Company assistant (1695, 1701, 1703), and Clothworkers' Company master (1705). 
Reflecting upon his career near its conclusion, Boddington dwelt upon none of this recognition but rather upon the providential preservation of his eldest son, George, and much of his trading stock in the Smyrna fleet disaster of 1693. But his final years were troubled by family misfortunes. He rescued his bankrupt brother; and he blamed personal losses upon the mismanagement of his son George, his Turkish factor, and a Smyrna consul, who also married a Roman Catholic. The career of a promising son-in-law, Robert Wakeman, a marine insurer, was clipped by the West Indies fleet loss of 1703 and closed by a premature death as consul in Cyprus. 
Boddington died at his house in the parish of St Helen's in London on 10 May 1719, mentioning in his will almost $20,000 in previous or new bequests and several City properties. He had invested the family future not in land, as did some successful mercantile contemporaries, but rather in three sons (Thomas, Isaac, and Benjamin), who succeeded him in the Levant trade. Still embarrassed by the public extravagance of his first wedding, he ordered a 'private and frugall' night burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 49745


Boyd, Sir John, first baronet (1718-1800), merchant, was born on 29 December 1718 on St Kitts in the Leeward Islands, the only child of Augustus Boyd (1679-1765) and Lucy, daughter of Judge John Peters and Elizabeth Henderson. Augustus Boyd was a native of northern Ireland who, about 1700, left co. Donegal for St Kitts, the home of a maternal uncle. There he purchased and managed several sugar estates, and established a business supplying European goods to planters. Failing to win a seat on the St Kitts council, he moved to London and established a trade with eastern Caribbean planters. In 1735 Augustus Boyd took lodgings with his brother-in-law, James Pechell of Broad Street. There, as Pechell's partner, he immersed himself in commission merchandising. 
John Boyd, however, expressed little interest in overseas trade. Soon after the family's arrival in London, he enrolled at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1737, to read classics. Only after completing his studies and touring the continent did he reluctantly return to the counting-house. In 1749 he married Mary Bumstead, the daughter of a prominent Warwickshire landowner. He subsequently acquired the lease to a 304 acre estate named Danson Hill in north-west Kent to accommodate their growing brood. After purchasing the freehold in 1759, he employed William Chambers to design a new Palladian villa. 
In national politics Boyd cut a low profile, opting to petition and inform parliament rather than enter its ranks as a member. He commented on the taking of British ships by the Spanish and the protection of mercantile interests in the Tortola trade. At most times he was an ardent supporter of the king, the administration, and their efforts to expand and defend the empire. Characteristically, he endorsed George II's war against France in the late 1750s, and embraced George III's peace in 1763. Boyd was a stronger presence in company politics. In April 1753 he was elected a director of the East India Company, and he served on its court until 1764. In Leadenhall Street he took an active part in Indian affairs. He was a member of nine different committees, attended them regularly, and served as the company's deputy chairman in 1759-60. During the 1760s he allied himself with Laurence Sulivan. In 1763, for instance, he created ten new votes for Sulivan's consortium by splitting larger shareholdings into $500 lots, each of which entitled its holder to a vote, and, in the following year, successfully ran as one of Sulivan's supporters. He supported Sulivan's stand on the appointment of John Spencer as the company's president in Bengal, complained about the extraordinary powers given to Clive's select committee in Bengal, and resigned when Sulivan failed to secure the chairmanship. In April 1765, and again the following year, Sulivan placed Boyd on his list of approved candidates, but the support proved costly, and Boyd lost. Frustrated with the directors and aggrieved by the unwillingness of those he had helped to repay him, Boyd retired from the company. 
More personal matters now came to the fore. Boyd's first wife having died in March 1763, he had assumed the charge of the upbringing of his children. Although he married Catherine Chapone (died 1813) on 1 August 1766 and raised three children with her, they never replaced his first wife and children in his affections. After the death of his father, Boyd passed to his son-in-law John Trevanion and William Wood the management of the family's trading business, and himself turned to more congenial pursuits. As befitted a man who had risen above the world of the counting-house, he broadened his sights. In late 1772 he visited Spain, France, Belgium, and the Netherlands, he learned new languages, and he purchased works of art for his villa. George III created him a baronet in 1775 and more significant travel and collecting followed in 1775 and 1776. Despite such honours and pleasures, however, his life was not untroubled. Chief among his concerns were the Caribbean plantations he inherited from his father and grandmother. Always a drain on time, energy, and money, these estates ran him aground in the 1770s. Early in the decade, political intrigues swept the island; a hurricane destroyed many of his buildings, and fire destroyed much of what remained. The capture of the island by the French in 1779 eventually stopped the flow of all proceeds. On account of such tribulations, his finances fell into disarray. In 1771, desperately needing money to manage his affairs, he turned for immediate relief to Richard Oswald, a partner in a Sierra Leone slave trans-shipment factory, but the loan did little to solve his long-term financial problems, which were complicated by the bankruptcies of several merchants who owed him substantial amounts of money. Gloom shadowed him, professionally and personally, and he began to see everything in the blackest colours. The deaths of loved ones crushed his spirit: his son Augustus died in 1772, and his favourite, Mary Jane, in 1779. Relations with those who survived became increasingly strained. He withdrew entirely from London society, and spent most of his time at Danson, hidden away in one wing of the mansion. He spoke in monosyllables. He constantly wept. Only the arrival of Paul Benfield, a clerk in his office who had gone out to India and made a fortune, and Benfield's loan of $90,000 in 1779 steadied Boyd's affairs. 
By the end of the American War of Independence Boyd had repaid his debts, but by that time he had lost all taste for business or society. He retired to the country and lived in virtual isolation with his wife, daughters, and servants. He turned inward, focusing on religious subjects and good deeds and administering local charities. But the philanthropies did not ease his mind, and he died, plagued by fear and loneliness, on 24 January 1800 at Danson Hill, where he was buried. To his second wife he left an annuity of $1200, $3000 cash, and his personal effects. His daughters received generous annuities and legacies. The residue of the estate went to his son John (1715-1815), who subsequently auctioned off the extensive collection of paintings and drawings. 


@@@@@


doc= 49747


Buchanan, James (1696-1758), merchant, was born and baptized on 31 May 1696, the second of four sons of Archibald Buchanan of Drumhead in the parish of Cardross, Dunbartonshire, a minor Scottish laird, and his wife, Jannet Anderson. It was common for the younger sons of lairds thereabouts to be put into trade, and, like his eldest and youngest brothers, Buchanan's initial career was as a merchant in Glasgow. He may have spent some time in America at the beginning but, if so, he soon returned to Glasgow. In 1725, when he was twenty-nine, he was one of the original members of the Buchanan Society of Glasgow, which was founded to provide for poor members of the clan Buchanan, and is described in their records as a merchant of Glasgow. Scottish firms in Virginia needed London correspondents for commercial and banking services and by 1727 Buchanan had settled in the capital, where he acted at first for the Glasgow firm of John Luke & Co., major tobacco importers. He was soon a respected figure in the London Virginia trade, if never himself a tobacco importer of the first rank. In his later years he was the London financial agent of Lieutenant-Governor Robert Dinwiddie of Virginia and a member of the policy committee of the London association of merchants trading to the Chesapeake. In the latter capacity he participated in negotiations with the secretary of state, William Pitt, and other ministers on matters relating to their trade and navigation. 
While his Glasgow kin engaged in a direct trade to the Chesapeake through stores maintained there, Buchanan in London was a merchant factor, acting on commission for principals in Virginia who consigned him tobacco for sale, and drew bills of exchange on him for the proceeds or authorized him to make purchases for them of return goods. Only half his correspondents were planters, the remainder being mostly country merchants. His planter correspondents were a select group, including many with names prominent in Virginia, while at least three-fifths were justices of the peace or higher officials. However, his dealings with country traders were more substantial. After his death, more than 70 per cent of the sums owing to his firm in Virginia was from merchants. Buchanan's activity in this cargo trade with American merchants placed his among the more progressive houses in the London Chesapeake trade. In addition to his Virginia business, Buchanan developed some West Indies trade in his last years. In 1756 he was also one of the bondsmen or guarantors for the army forage contract of Richard Oswald, a fellow Glaswegian migrant to London. Such sureties usually had a financial interest in the contract guaranteed. 
Buchanan at various times had places of business in Mincing Lane, Mark Lane, and Crutched Friars in the south-east corner of the City. In addition he possessed a country residence in Highgate. He married Jane Crichton on 17 October 1733 in Dunstable; they raised a son, Archibald, and two daughters, Jane and Rebecca. Finding himself in ill health and his only son still a minor, in December 1757 Buchanan reorganized his business as James Buchanan & Co., a partnership involving himself (with a half share), John Hyndman (a third), and Richard Lancaster (a sixth). Lancaster had been his chief clerk, while Hyndman, a Scot, had been in business at Smithfield in southern Virginia, corresponding with Buchanan and some of the Glasgow Buchanans. Less than a year after this reorganization, Buchanan died at his country residence at Highgate on 24 August 1758. By his will, a third of his estate went to his widow, a third to his son, and a sixth to each of his two daughters. Since his daughter Jane's portion was $10,000 when she married in 1762, it seems likely that Buchanan's total estate was in the vicinity of $60,000, of which only a tenth was invested in the capital of his new firm. Hyndman capably managed the affairs of that concern (in which Buchanan's estate retained its half interest) and expanded both its general turnover and its activity in the West Indies. The old partnership was wound up after 1768, though Hyndman and Lancaster continued a similar business in partnership with Thomas Main (Hyndman's nephew) and Robert Bunn. The firm lasted under Main until about 1810. 


@@@@@


doc= 49749


Duckett, Sir Lionel (d. 1587), merchant and local politician, was the son of William Duckett of Flintham, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Jane Redman, of Harwood Castle, Yorkshire. His first wife was Mary, the daughter of Hugh Leighton, of Leighton, Shropshire, with whom he had one son, George, who died young, and his second was Jane, the daughter of Humphrey Packington and the wealthy widow of Humphrey Baskerfeld (or Baskerville) of London, who had four daughters from her first marriage and with whom he had a son, Thomas. 
In 1537, after his apprenticeship to John Colet in London, Duckett gained the freedom of the Mercers' Company. Thereafter he developed extensive commercial and business interests and became one of the most successful merchants in the city of London. He was a prominent member of the Company of Merchant Adventurers, trading extensively in cloth at Antwerp and other markets in northern Europe and importing wine in exchange. In 1557 he secured a patent for the import of felts and hats from Spain and Portugal in partnership with Henry Viner. During his career he was a powerful supporter of new commercial initiatives. He was a founder member of the Russia Company in 1555, and served as an assistant in 1569 and a governor in 1575 and 1577. He was involved in promoting trading ventures to Guinea in 1558 and 1562. He was also a backer of John Hawkins's slaving voyages of 1562 and 1567. He was a member of the Spanish Company in 1577, and a supporter of Martin Frobisher's attempts to find a north-west passage from 1577 to 1579. Although Frobisher's voyages failed, Duckett later joined Adrian Gilbert's abortive fellowship for the discovery of the passage. In 1577 he was a leading promoter of the Russia Company's attempts to establish a whale fishery in the Arctic, with the help of certain Biscayan mariners skilled in whaling. 
Duckett acquired other business interests in the city, which brought him into close contact with the court. With a small group of leading merchant adventurers, which included his close business associate Sir Thomas Gresham, he advanced money to the crown, including a loan of $30,000 to Elizabeth in 1560 at 10 per cent interest. He loaned $160 to the crown in 1562 to pay for an English garrison in Normandy, and other royal loans were arranged in 1569 and 1570. In 1560 or 1561 he was involved in a loan of $12,000 to the king of Sweden, though it remained unpaid in 1582. He was associated with Gresham in building the Royal Exchange from 1565 to 1568, and with Gresham he served as a commissioner for clearing the accounts for Frobisher's north-west ventures. In 1567 he became heavily involved in the attempt to mine and smelt copper at Keswick, using the expertise of German miners. He was a shareholder in the Company of Mines Royal, and was appointed governor of the company in May 1568. The venture brought Duckett into close contact with Sir William Cecil, who was an investor in the company. In 1568 he became involved with Geoffrey Duckett, possibly a kinsman, in the manufacture of light cloth at Coventry. 
Commercial success enabled Duckett to become a leading figure in the city of London. He was master of the Mercers' Company in 1567, 1572, 1578, and 1584. He served as an auditor for the city from 1559 to 1561 and again from 1585 to 1586. In 1564-5 he served as one of the city's sheriffs. He was elected alderman of Aldersgate ward in 1564, but moved to Bassishaw during 1567, and served there in this capacity until 1587. He was mayor of London in 1572-3 during a difficult period of dearth and discontent. To maintain good order in London he advised that the issue of writs of habeas corpus be restricted for cases brought by the city authorities against disturbers of the peace. As mayor he attempted also to curb excessive feasting and drinking in the city, especially by the meaner sort, though at the risk of encouraging personal criticism and complaint. He was knighted on 2 February 1573. That same year he was elected president of St Thomas's Hospital; and he served as president of Bethlem and Bridewell hospitals from 1569 to 1573 and from 1580 to 1586. In 1576 he was appointed to a commission investigating criminal activity throughout the realm. 
Although several of his business ventures were unprofitable, Duckett became one of the wealthiest merchants in London during his lifetime. He also acquired wide-ranging landed interests. He began purchasing former monastic and chantry lands in Surrey, Staffordshire, and Derbyshire in 1553, additional lands in Somerset and Devon were acquired in 1556 and 1557, and by the time of his death he owned other property in Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, Berkshire, and Kent. His wealth was so great that he reputedly gave 8000 marks to each of his four stepdaughters, and would have given them more had it not appeared unbecoming. He died in August 1587 in London. By the terms of his will, drawn up in 1585 but later modified, he left $200 to the Mercers' Company to provide loans for its younger members, $100 to Christ's Hospital, and various smaller bequests to the poor. The bulk of his personal estate was left to his wife and only son, Thomas, though the latter's share was reduced because of his marriage to Margaret Nelson without his father's approval. 


@@@@@


doc= 49750


Eyles, Sir Francis, first baronet (c.1650-1716), merchant and financier, was the son of John Eyles (died 1662), wool-stapler and mercer of Devizes, and his wife, Mary (died 'c'.1666). He was the younger brother of Sir John Eyles. On 26 May 1669 he was apprenticed to Thomas Cooper, haberdasher of London, and he took his freedom in that company on 28 February 1677. The date of his marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Ayley of London, merchant, is unknown, but his son and heir, John, was born in 1683. 
Eyles was a commission agent in the Atlantic sugar trade in partnership with his brother John, dealing principally with Barbados, where dissenters had built up an effective business network. Although John probably founded the firm of Eyles & Co. and was the senior partner, both brothers are named in documents pertaining to the firm among the records of the Royal Africa Company. On 13 September 1689 they jointly lent $4000 to the new government. The privy council registers mention in passing a Francis Eyles trading to Barbados on 15 November 1690, and the Treasury papers of 1690 describe him as one of the most considerable traders to Barbados in the same year. 
Eyles, however, had multiple economic interests. In July 1691 he petitioned the Treasury to pay him out of the funds allocated to reduce Ireland for providing shipping for army stores needed in Ireland. The commissioners of transportation had issued certificates for half the money due, but he had received nothing in eight months. In September 1692 he was engaged in the trade to Madeira and from 1697 onwards he was a director of the Bank of England. From 1695 to 1698 he also served as a director of the East India Company. On 1 July 1697, as deputy governor, he was called in to explain what arrangements the company had made for the provisioning of naval escorts supplied by the Admiralty, and he appealed unsuccessfully for the need for secrecy. 
From 1697 Eyles also acted as agent for Barbados, presenting accounts and petitions and supplying information. On 2 November 1697 he petitioned the Board of Trade to maintain the ratio of white to black people in Barbados. On 9 May 1698 he tried to secure payment to Francis Bond, president of the council of Barbados, of an allowance of $600 out of the 41/2 per cent duty. On 5 November 1700 he was reappointed agent for two years by the assembly in Barbados. 
Eyles's major fortune was probably made as a financier during the French wars, supplying bills of exchange to maintain the army in Flanders. In 1696 he proposed to provide $100,000 in bills of exchange payable in Amsterdam at a rate of 10 guilders 8 stivers. He also volunteered to speak to possible subscribers at Mercers' Hall to see what rate on bills would attract lenders. On 24 April 1697 he was made a trustee for managing subscriptions for circulating exchequer bills of credit, which had been authorized by parliament to remedy a shortfall in several funds. 
On 11 May 1697 Eyles supplied 330,000 guilders in return for $30,000 in tallies and orders charged on the 3's'. aid plus $4500 in satisfaction for loss or discount. On 1 April 1698 he was one of those questioned when the Lords investigated false endorsements of exchequer bills by Marriott and Knight. But he was still listed, on 4 April, among those providing bills of exchange (repaid in exchequer bills) for the earl of Ranelagh to send to Flanders. Eyles claimed on 8 April 1698 that he had supplied $21,000 to Mr Schuylenberg. 
On 18 May 1698 Eyles and his brother were among several merchants who received payment for jointly providing 480,000 florins. On 22 February 1699 he was a member of a syndicate which advanced $300,000 at 8 per cent. On 11 June 1701, together with his brother, he proposed to give letters of credit for the continental army payable in Amsterdam or Rotterdam at sight at a rate of 11 guilders current money for every pound. The Treasury accepted the offer, but for a minimum period of twelve months. On 18 March 1704 he was named one of the three commissioners of account and on 21 March 1706 he was named one of the seven managers appointed to remit $250,000 to Prince Eugene in Italy. 
Eyles was elected an assistant of the Levant Company (1703-4) and was a director of both the Old East India Company (1709-10) and of the New East India Company (1702-5, 1706-9). He continued to serve as a director of the Bank of England until 1715 and was deputy governor (1705-7) and governor (5 April 1707 to 1709). He took no position on the question of whether a rapprochement between the bank and the new tory ministry in 1710-13 required a change of leadership at the bank. 
Eyles was elected alderman for the London ward of Bridge Without on 23 January 1711 and he stayed on the court until 1716, serving as sheriff in 1710-11. The court of aldermen chose to co-opt a whig merchant prince to balance John Cass. On 1 December 1714 Eyles was created one of the first Hanoverian baronets. His wife predeceased him and was buried on 14 February 1716. Eyles himself died on 24 May 1716 and was buried on 5 June in the family vault at St Helen, Bishopsgate, London. Three sons and one daughter predeceased him: Samuel was baptized on 21 October 1688 and buried on 4 September 1689, another son named Samuel, baptized on 7 June 1691, died before reaching adulthood; Edward was buried on 24 July 1697; and Mary, who was born on 21 November 1695, was buried on 5 November 1698. 
None the less, Eyles founded a London business dynasty. His first surviving son, John, second baronet, of Gidea Hall, Essex, became a director of the Bank of England and of the East India and South Sea companies; he was also an MP. He cleared up the mess of the South Sea Bubble and became lord mayor of London in 1726-7. Eyles's second surviving son, Joseph ('b'. 'c'.1690), also became an alderman, was knighted by George I, and served as sheriff of London in 1734-5. 


@@@@@


doc= 49751


Eyles, Sir John (d. 1703), merchant and financier, was the first son of John Eyles (died 1662), a mercer and wool-stapler with a shop in Devizes from 1640 onwards, and his wife, Mary (died 'c'.1666). Eyles chose to pursue a career in London and it has been widely assumed that, like his brother Francis Eyles, he was a haberdasher. But his name does not appear in the Haberdashers' Company's records and it is doubtful whether he was ever a freeman of London. 
An original subscriber of $400 to the Royal Africa Company in 1671, Eyles's principal business from at least 1674 onwards was as a commission agent and broker in the Barbados trade in sugar and slaves. Although he was in business with his brother Francis, as Eyles & Co., John was the senior partner and he alone was listed in the 'London Directory' of 1677. The Africa Company's records list 126 bills drawn on him from Barbados. Eyles handled the sugar exported to England by the Barbados planters and purchased their return cargoes. Since the planters usually needed to settle outstanding liabilities and make purchases in advance of receipts from sales, Eyles provided them with credit. 
The firm acted for fourteen years as agent for John Hothersall of Barbados who, in his will of 1694, appointed the Eyleses receivers of the product of his estate and guardians of his children. When a ship captain seized some people of the island of Johanna and sold them in Barbados, the East India Company approached Eyles to redeem them at $25 apiece. Two petitions to the Treasury from Eyles, one in May 1686 and the other on 7 July 1689, suggest that he acted as spokesman for Barbados. His West Indies commission business does not, however, appear to have passed to the next generation. 
Eyles, who supported the exclusion of the duke of York from the throne, was elected a member for Devizes by popular outcry in October 1679, but the return was challenged by Sir Walter Ernle and George Johnson, who had been elected by the corporation, and he does not seem to have taken his seat in the Commons. Eyles unsuccessfully again contested Devizes in 1681 and 1689. Despite his political stance, he seems to have remained in favour with the government. He was asked by Henry Guy to report on the accounts of the farmers of the Barbados 41/2 per cent sugar duty. The thorough and generally favourable report, which was presented on 26 April 1679, pointed out that the wastage on sales was 4 to 5 per cent higher than among private merchants and that the practice of selling to the same buyers probably brought down prices below market levels. After investing $9000 in a lease of the alnage duty with his son-in-law in 1680, he became a principal farmer of the alnage and his allegedly oppressive tactics in that office became the subject of a committee of inquiry. 
Although he obtained a pass for the Netherlands on 28 September 1683, Eyles does not seem to have left England for political reasons. When James II turned to the dissenters, Eyles became one of the whig collaborators. After the Anglican aldermen of London were ejected in August 1687, Eyles was made an alderman of Broad Street by royal commission on 12 August 1687 and he sat until September 1688. He was also knighted on 15 August 1687. Although he never served as sheriff, he did serve as temporary lord mayor, when Sir John Shorter died in office, from 8 September until the restoration of the charter on 3 October 1688. He was also recommended as an honest and fit dissenter in his native county and he became deputy lieutenant for Wiltshire from 1687 until October 1688 and a JP from June to October 1688. 
During the French wars, Eyles moved into government finance and exploited his contacts on the continent. In July and September 1689 the Treasury books record total advances of $29,000 on the 12died aid. In the 1690s, together with his brother, he remitted funds to the English army in Flanders. The contractors in London made arrangements with bankers in the Netherlands so that the Dutch paymaster of the army could draw bills on the English paymaster-general, the earl of Ranelagh. They supplied Ranelagh with letters or bills of credit drawn in Flemish current money (the unit of pay for the soldiers), payable in sterling in London at an agreed rate. In return for a substantial discount, Eyles assumed the risk of exposure to a fluctuating market rate of exchange, with the additional risk of delays in repayment by the government. On 23 July 1690 Eyles was still owed $13,600 and the forces in Flanders lacked subsistence and were in danger of melting away. In 1694, however, the $20,000 which he provided was repaid the same year and, in 1695, Eyles and his brother remitted a further $33,800 for Schuylenberg to be repaid in tallies. 
Eyles married Sarah Cowper (died 1705) of London and they had two sons: the heir, John, married in 1702 Mary, daughter of John Eyles of Chalford, Gloucestershire; the other son, Francis ('c'.1679-1735), became a major figure in the business world of eighteenth-century London. Eyles and his wife also had five daughters, the eldest of whom, Sarah, married Joseph Haskins-Stiles, the nephew of a Dutch tycoon. The second daughter, Mary, married on 22 September 1691 Sir John Smith, bt, of Islewood, son of Sir John Smith, alderman and sheriff of London. 
Sir John Bramston in his 'Autobiography' (315) repeated rumours that Eyles was an Anabaptist and he was certainly a strict Baptist who, according to Luttrell (1.459, 467), shut the chapel at Guildhall when he was lord mayor. He left bequests to Baptist chapels in London and Devizes and gave the Baptists of Devizes the lease of 22 and 23 The Brittox. 
Success in London allowed Eyles to acquire landed property in his native county. In 1683 he purchased 2 acres near Devizes from Edward Hope and ultimately he acquired an estate at South Broome in Wiltshire, which served as a country seat for what became a London whig mercantile dynasty. Eyles was buried in the family vault at St Helen, Bishopsgate, London, on 6 July 1703. 


@@@@@


doc= 49752


Gracedieu, Sir Bartholomew (c.1657-1715), merchant and colonial agent, was the son of Thomas Gracedieu (died 'c'.1679), 'citizen and dyer' of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, London. In September 1671 he was apprenticed to Thomas Collet, a salter by trade and a member of the Vintners' Company. He became a freeman of London in 1679, and, although he found considerable success as an overseas merchant, he appears to have maintained an interest in salting. His master's influence also extended to his choice of domicile, since he became a long-term resident of Collet's parish, St Magnus the Martyr. By 1692 he had married Frances (died 1720), with whom he had at least three children, including two daughters. 
By March 1686 Gracedieu had entered the trade to Jamaica, thereby consolidating his family's connections with the island -- his brother Daniel having resided there in 1678. He dealt extensively in sugar, indigo, and logwood, the colony's main exports, and also invested in shipowning. By 1692 the council of Jamaica was prepared to use him for the remittance of its payments to England, and his standing with the planters and merchants of the island led to his eventual appointment as official agent, a role in which he served from 1693 to 1704. 
Gracedieu's prominence in the capital was clearly a recommendation for such office. He was a notable figure in the nonconformist community, having been appointed as one of the managers of the Presbyterian Fund in 1690, and he later became a member of the New England Company, which maintained strong links with London dissenters. Despite his religious beliefs he made rapid strides in political circles, serving as a common councillor for Bridge ward in 1693, and being chosen a City lieutenant in 1694. The following year his income was assessed at more than $600 per annum, and his commercial prominence was recognized by the government in 1696, when he was nominated as one of the commissioners for taking subscriptions to the ill-fated land bank. In June 1697 he was elected sheriff, and in that capacity attended the king to offer the City's congratulations on the signing of the treaty of Ryswick. Such was the king's gratitude that Gracedieu and his fellow sheriff were knighted in the royal bedchamber at Kensington. In 1698 he assumed the mastership of the Vintners' Company, but his hopes for greater civic status went unfulfilled, for he lost an aldermanic election at Bridge ward in June 1700 'by a majority of three to one' against the tory Charles Duncombe (Luttrell, 4.651). This defeat did not blunt his political ambition, and in July 1701 he helped to stage a City welcome for the Kentish petitioners, who had embarrassed the ministry by urging parliament to pursue a more aggressive policy against the French. 
Gracedieu's fear of French aggrandizement may well have been animated by his interest in Jamaican affairs, especially as the island was perceived to be vulnerable in the wake of a series of natural catastrophes. Indeed, in 1701-2 Gracedieu headed the cartel which undertook the remittance of payments for the island's newly strengthened garrison. With the advent of renewed Anglo-French conflict, he campaigned hard for more efficient convoys and better fortifications to protect the island and its trade, with some success. However, in these fraught times he even managed to fall out with fellow agent and vintner Sir Gilbert Heathcote, when a major controversy arose concerning a proposed removal of trade from Port Royal to Kingston. Gracedieu and his allies feared this innovation would weaken the island even further, and after much acrimony their arguments prevailed to save Port Royal. 
Gracedieu's status was further enhanced in 1705 when he was returned to parliament for the Cornish borough of St Ives. Although trading connections may have recommended his candidacy, he could not boast any obvious association with the town or its electoral patrons. Nevertheless, he performed very strongly, topping the poll. Given his nonconformist credentials, it is unsurprising that he was subsequently regarded as a supporter of the whig ministry, and backed the administration in divisions concerning the election of the speaker and the 'Regency Bill'. He proved an inactive member, although in July 1706 he presented an address on behalf of his constituents to the queen in recognition of the victory at Ramillies. His unspectacular Westminster career ended in 1708 when he chose not to seek re-election, a decision perhaps influenced by the financial problems which bedevilled his last years. 
Following his retirement from parliament Gracedieu limited his public role to colonial affairs. In 1709 he lent his support to a campaign for the settlement of impoverished palatine refugees in Jamaica, an issue which again stirred up divisions between rival island interests. Thereafter he even ceased to figure in the West Indian theatre, an anonymity which can be attributed to business difficulties, it being reported in January 1710 that 'Sir B -- -- Grace -- --, a great merchant in the City, has stopped payments' (newsletter, 19 Jan 1710, BL, Add. MS 70421). The precise cause of his commercial downfall is unclear, although he had suffered the misfortune of losing a ship to privateers in 1699, and as recently as 1707 he had complained of the inadequate protection afforded to colonial shipping. Electioneering expenses may also have further stretched his personal resources. One contemporary simply described him as 'broke', and by early February 1710 a commission of bankruptcy had been served against him ('Le Neve's Pedigrees of the Knights', 459). Such penury effectively undermined his public career, and it is probably significant that as early as 1708 he had ceased to play an active role on the vestry of St Magnus the Martyr. Although a spent political force, he remained true to his party, voting for the four whig candidates at the bitter London election of 1710. 
The exact date of Gracedieu's death has not been ascertained, but doubtless occurred shortly before 30 March 1715, when his body was 'carried away' from the parish of St Andrew, Holborn, in preparation for burial in the nonconformist cemetery at Bunhill Fields on 3 April (Guildhall Library, MS 6673/6). Letters of administration over his estate were granted to his widow, Lady Frances, who in turn was succeeded in 1720 by the couple's only surviving daughter, Eleanor. Both mother and daughter were interred at Bunhill. 


@@@@@


doc= 49755


Gowing, Sir Lawrence Burnett (1918-1991), painter and art historian, was born on 21 April 1918 at 53 Stamford Hill, London, the son of Horace Burnett Gowing (died 1944), master draper, and his wife, Clara Louise Lawrence. His grandfather was a treasurer of the Pawnbroker's Benevolent Society. Gowing's oil painting 'Mare Street, Hackney' (1937-8) shows a no. 31 double-decker tram going past the family drapery shop as well as the newly introduced Belisha beacon. He attended the Quaker preparatory school the Downs, Colwall, from 1927 to 1932, where the ex-Slade student Maurice Feild arrived to teach art in 1928 and encouraged the boys to paint outdoors in oil on 15 by 11 inch strawboard during their Wednesday afternoon hobby time. From 1932 he studied at another Quaker school -- Leighton Park, Reading -- until in 1935 he was privately coached for matriculation, living at home at Oakleigh Park, London. At this stage his parents intended him to become an insurance clerk. But at Leighton Park he had heard Feild's friend W. H. Auden (who taught at the Downs from 1932 to 1935) lecture on film as a career, and Gowing wrote to him for advice. Auden replied from Iceland: 'You only want to become a film director because you think it is the art of the future. It isn't. Art is the art of the future' (Laughton, 176). Auden introduced Gowing to the painter William Coldstream, whose pupil he became in 1936 at 12 Fitzroy Street, London. 
This location became the home of the School of Drawing and Painting, set up by Coldstream, Claude Rogers, Victor Pasmore, and Graham Bell. It became known eponymously, after its move in February 1938 to a vacant motor showroom at 314/316 Euston Road, as the Euston Road School. Inspired by Cezanne and Degas, and rejecting what they saw as the false realism of the Royal Academy, the pupils struggled to find an objective, verifiable, and, indeed, measurable approach to the painting of their everyday surroundings. Gowing closely identified with Coldstream's penchant for discrete paint strokes, 'tache' against 'tache'. He befriended another pupil, the ballet critic and writer on art Adrian Durham Stokes, whose literary executor and editor of his collected works Gowing became. Stokes's 'Colour and Form' (1936-7) profoundly influenced Gowing, not only for its discussion of 'surface colour' and the carving and modelling of space, but also for its championing of Cezanne. Stokes's concern for a 'sense of the existent world' was equally influential ('Critical Writings', 11). Both contributed to Coldstream's retrospective exhibition at the South London Art Gallery, Camberwell, in 1962. 
The sale of 'Self-Portrait in Oakleigh Avenue' (1936) to Kenneth Clark, director of the National Gallery and also a backer of the School of Drawing and Painting, persuaded Gowing's father to let him become a painter. Having moved into Stokes's old top-floor studio at 6 Fitzroy Street at a rent of $78 a year, Gowing painted chest patients lying out on the iron balconies of University College Hospital, theatrical backdrops, nudes, and portraits, including one of a young Alfie Bass. He survived by selling work and writing for the 'Dancing Times'. He was drawn into the life of adjacent Bloomsbury and met Julia Frances Strachey (1901-1979), daughter of Oliver Strachey, codebreaker, widow of Stephen Tomlin, and author of the minor novel 'Cheerful Weather for the Wedding' (1932). She was seventeen years his senior. Julia's impression of Gowing -- 'With his long, slender legs and arms, Lawrence reminded me of a daddy-long-legs' (Partridge, 162) -- did not prevent them moving into 88 Charlotte Street and living together from 1940 to 1948. They married on 28 March 1952, although they then spent much time apart. 'Lady with Book' (1941-2), now in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, is a portrait of Julia reading Percy Lubbock's 'Art of Fiction' in the sitting room at Chilton Foliat, Wiltshire, warmed by a slender white enamel oil stove. 
The Second World War broke up the Euston Road School. Gowing's Quaker schooling and Bloomsbury connections lay behind his conscientious objection: remarkably, the tribunal gave him total exemption on condition that he continued to paint! Bombing led to his abandoning London in favour of, first, Chilton Foliat, then Shalbourne, Wiltshire, where the countryside became his prime subject matter. This engagement with landscape was fuelled not only by his various reading of Sturt, Grigson, Piper, and Gilbert White, but by his admiration for Cezanne and Courbet. Writing too became the adjunct to painting: he contributed anonymously 'Notes of a Painter' to John Lehmann's 'Penguin New Writing' series, and in 1945 the eccentric dialogue 'Painter and apple', based on a series of fourteen still lifes entitled 'Green Apples' (1940-46), to 'Arts'. Gowing and his wife returned to London in 1943, first to Paultons Square, then 25 Wellington Square, Chelsea; they were fire-watchers based at Chelsea Public Library. 
Before the end of the war, Gowing started to teach at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts, where Coldstream and Pasmore were recreating the Euston Road School. In 1945 he received his first portrait commission, 'Lord Lindsay', for Balliol College; other portraits included 'Cecil Day-Lewis', 'Lord Halifax', and 'Clement Attlee'. The summers of 1946 and 1947 were spent landscape painting in Sutton, between Pulborough and Petworth; he later described his confrontation with nature, stripping off his clothes to make himself 'defenceless against the place' ('Lawrence Gowing', 30). In 1947, after a chance encounter with Robin Darwin on a bus, he applied for, and in 1948 was somewhat surprisingly appointed to, the post of professor of fine art, Newcastle, where he remained until 1958. In 1948 he had a very successful one-man exhibition at the Leicester Gallery, run by Oliver Brown. In 1949 he was diagnosed as tuberculous and underwent sanatorium treatment. He used this opportunity to write a book on Vermeer, published in 1952, that established his reputation as an art historian. John Pope-Hennessy remarked that the difference between the unrevised and revised versions was that 'in the interval... Lawrence had transposed his text into the key of Adrian Stokes' (Wollheim, 22). In 1954 he organized a major Cezanne exhibition, shown in Edinburgh and the Tate Gallery, in which he controversially challenged the conventional dating of several major works. 
In 1959 Gowing became principal of the new Chelsea School of Art, formed from the merger of the Chelsea and Regent Street polytechnics. Under Gowing, Chelsea became a model for art education: art history was integrated with studio practice; an option programme ranging across science, music, philosophy, and literature was introduced; and with Michael Doran's help the foundations of a specialist modern art history library were laid. His lectures were always engaging: for example, he divided, Ruskin-style, painters into those who used red and blue (expressionists) or green and yellow (himself). 
Gowing resigned from Chelsea in 1965 in order to become keeper of the British collections and deputy director of the Tate Gallery (despite some chagrin at his failure to become director). The highlights of this period were his re-hanging of Turner's work and two exhibitions in America, 'Turner: imagination and reality', connecting the colour explorations of Turner's later works with the abstract expressionists through the simple expedient of removing their frames, and 'Matisse', both shown at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, in 1966. A preoccupation with Matisse also resulted in an exhibition at the Hayward Gallery (1968) and a film for the Arts Council, 'Matisse, a Kind of Paradise' (1969). During this period Gowing's own painting attained its most abstraction in such works as 'Wood: Parabolic Perspective' (1963) or 'Track through Willis's Wood V' (1964): the abstract qualities were translated into his later, much looser landscapes, which seemed to imitate the effects of watercolour in oil paint. 
In 1967 Gowing became professor of fine art at Leeds University, where he remained until 1975. Having divorced his first wife earlier in the year, on 22 December 1967 he married Jennifer Akam Wallis ('b'. 1927), lecturer, and daughter of Sydney Herbert Wallis, civil servant with the Board of Trade. He and his second wife set up home at 49 Walham Grove, Fulham, where they brought up three daughters. 
After arranging the Hogarth exhibition at the Tate in 1971, Gowing organized in 1973 the 'Watercolours by Cezanne' exhibition at Newcastle and London, which led to his involvement in 'Cezanne: the Late Works', an exhibition (accompanied by a book) at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, the editorship of Cezanne's Basel sketchbooks, and 'Cezanne: the Early Works' (1988). He was a member of the Arts Council from 1970 to 1972 and from 1977 to 1981. In 1975 he began a ten-year spell as Slade professor of fine art. This coincided with a stylistic development in his own painting: in 1976 he embarked on a series of figurative painting, using his students and studio assistants to cover his body with paint or spray paint around its naked Vitruvian shape: these were shown to less than critical acclaim at his 1982 retrospective at the Serpentine Gallery. On retirement in 1985 he went to the National Gallery, Washington, as a research fellow, later becoming a curator at the Phillips Collection. Appointed a CBE in 1952, he was made a knight in 1982. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1978 and a Royal Academician in 1989. He died on 5 February 1991 at Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, London; he was survived by his second wife and three daughters. 
Gowing's enthusiasms were catholic and sometimes eccentric -- the minor Welsh landscape painter Thomas Jones, Joseph Beuys, Francis Bacon's use of medical illustration, Lucian Freud, as well as Matisse and Cezanne. His visible and audible enthusiasm, emphasized by his peculiar taste for black leather trousers and a rhetorically effective expectorative stutter, made him a remarkable advocate for painting as seen by a painter: this proved attractive to the wider audience of his three BBC television series, 'Three Painters' (1984, 1986, and 1987), on Massaccio, Vermeer, Brueghel, Goya, Matisse, Rembrandt, Turner, Giotto, and, inevitably, Cezanne. 


@@@@@


doc= 49757


Graham, Angus Charles (1919-1991), Sinologist and philosopher, was born on 8 July 1919 at 31 Clive Place, Penarth, Glamorgan, the elder of two sons of Charles Harold Graham (1893-1928) and his wife, Mabelle, 'nee' Booker. At the time of his birth, his father was a coal exporter, but in 1925 he moved to Malaya to work as a rubber planter; he died of malaria three years later. From 1932 to 1937 Graham attended Ellesmere College in Shropshire, and in 1937 he went to Oxford University to read theology at Corpus Christi College, graduating with a second-class degree in 1940. He then joined the Royal Air Force for his compulsory wartime service and in 1944 he was put on a Japanese language course at London University; he served as a Japanese interpreter in Malaya and Thailand until he was released from the air force in 1945 with the rank of flying officer. 
Graham had lost his religious faith a few months after leaving Oxford and in any case had never intended to enter the church. In 1946 he enrolled at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) at London University for a three-year course in Chinese, graduating with first-class honours in 1949, followed by a PhD in 1953. It was not modern Chinese but the Chinese classical language and the classical texts which profoundly interested him and which he continued to study for the rest of his life. In 1950 he was appointed a lecturer at SOAS and in 1971 professor of classical Chinese; he remained in that post until his retirement in 1984. During those years and in retirement he also held a number of visiting fellowships and professorships both in America and the Far East, which took him abroad for parts of the year. On 23 January 1956 he married Der Pao Chang ('b'. 1932/3), daughter of Yuan-po Chang, general merchant; their daughter, Dawn, was born in 1964. 
Graham regarded the two greatest periods in the history of Chinese thought as being the last years of the Zhou dynasty, 500-200 BC, and the period of the Song dynasty, AD 960-1279. For the subject of his PhD, which he expanded and published as his first book in 1958, he chose two Chinese philosophers of the eleventh century, the Cheng brothers, who questioned orthodox Confucianism and whose ideas influenced the leaders of neo-Confucianism. He then turned to the earlier period, when the loss of power of the Zhou kings had led to a breakdown of the traditional feudal system. The sage-kings of old had claimed the authority of heaven, whose Dao, or 'way', they confidently followed, but now every school of thought proposed its own way, and Graham decided to study 'the variety of modes of thinking inside the tradition' (Graham, 4). In 1960 he published a new and for the first time complete translation of the 'Book of Liezi' ('Lieh Tzu'), drawing attention to the Daoist concept of 'spontaneity', the importance of responding to circumstances without prior thought, spontaneously following the way. He also worked for many years on the text of the anti-rationalist Zhuangzi (Chuang-tzu); he disentangled and then reunited the different strands of philosophical ideas by comparing the grammatical structure of the passages, and when he had completed the textual revision he re-translated the whole work and published it in 1981. 
Graham's interest in the structure and use of the classical Chinese language was always an important part of his studies: he believed that an understanding of the language was the way to gain access to the meaning of a text. He was especially respected for his work on the rationalist Mozi (Mo-Tzu), the logical and scientific chapters of whose text had for 2000 years been known to be incorrect because the manuscript had been damaged and the bamboo strips left in the wrong order. By patient study and devotion to the task Graham succeeded in revealing the correct text, which he then translated and analysed for its scientific value and published in 1978, with the title of 'Later Mohist Logic, Ethics and Science'. 
Poetry was a further interest and Graham reached a wide audience with his 'Poems of the Late T'ang', first published in 1965 and continually in demand since then; he felt that the increasing complexity of language in the seventh and eighth centuries made the poets of that period the most interesting of all Chinese poets and that late-Tang poetry 'explores the Chinese language to the limit of its resources' ('Poems of the Late T'ang', 22). 
In 1989 Graham published his most acclaimed and popular book, 'Disputers of the Tao' [Dao], a general history of philosophy in China during the classical age, 500-200 BC, providing a wealth of information about the wide variety of philosophers and schools of thought of that period. In a book of essays written to celebrate his seventieth birthday, 'Chinese Texts and Philosophical contexts' (1991), Graham himself was invited to contribute by writing a commentary on each essay: this he was glad to do, showing not only his continuing lively interest in the discussion but also the warmth of feeling between him and his former students. He was widely respected as the leading Western authority on classical Chinese when he died of cancer in the City Hospital, Nottingham, on 26 March 1991. He was survived by his wife, Der Pao, and their daughter, Dawn. 


@@@@@


doc= 49758


Gray, Sylvia Mary (1909-1991), businesswoman and women's institute leader, was born on 3 July 1909 at 44 Clifton Road, Rugby, Warwickshire, the daughter of Henry Bunting Gray, a racquet maker, members of whose family had been rackets coaches at Rugby School since 1867, and his wife, Elizabeth Mary Frost. She was educated at Wroxall Abbey. 
Sylvia Gray joined her local women's institute (WI) in 1929 and served as chairman of the Oxfordshire Federation of Women's Institutes from 1951 to 1954. A rural organization, based in the villages, the WI had a democratic structure, with committees elected at each of the three levels -- village, county, and national -- and Sylvia Gray was one of many members who went on to other things after gaining confidence on a WI committee. In 1935 she bought the Bay Tree Hotel, an old coaching inn in Burford, Oxfordshire, and after the war she bought a second hotel, in Moreton-on-Marsh, another Cotswold town, and formed Bay Tree Hotels Ltd. She remained chairman of the company until 1983. At the Bay Tree Hotel she employed only female staff and trained women for careers in hotel management. At the same time she began to participate in local affairs, and was a member of Witney rural district council from 1943 to 1954, the last four of these years as vice-chairman. She also chaired the board of governors of Burford grammar school. She was appointed MBE in 1952 for her services to local government. 
After serving on the executive committee of the National Federation of Women's Institutes (NFWI), to which all the county organizations were affiliated, Sylvia Gray was elected chairman of the NFWI in 1969, the first chairman who was also a professional woman. She presided over a fundamental change in the constitution of the WI, a change she believed was the most important thing that happened during her chairmanship. Enshrined in the constitution was the rule that 'the character of the movement is non-sectarian and non-party political', but a resolution passed at the 1971 annual conference redefined the rule to make it clear that this should not be interpreted as preventing the village women's institutes from concerning themselves with political or religious issues, 'provided the movement is never used for party-political or sectarian propaganda'. While some feared that the WI was becoming apathetic, there were others who knew that, with the government intruding more and more in people's lives, many WIs were already discussing what the government was doing. The conference was reminded that in times of stress Lady Denman, first chairman of the NFWI, had always said 'trust the institutes'. Sylvia Gray anticipated that the debate on the resolution would be heated, but she knew that the WI must move with the times, sensing that 'the time seemed just right to rely on the common sense of the members not to allow themselves to be used for party political purposes' (Goodenough, 53). This change paved the way for the WI to comment more publicly on government legislation affecting women, especially those in the countryside, although the WI officially remained non-political. 
At the beginning of her chairmanship, a national appeal, launched in 1965, had just reached its target of $500,000, and Sylvia Gray made sure that the NFWI became aware of the need for sound financial management. In 1970 the appeal fund helped to finance the building of new accommodation and teaching blocks at Denman College, the WI adult education college, opened in 1948. She was also responsible for bringing in management consultants to advise on improvements to the administrative structure of the organization, and she created a public relations position. After the success of 'The Brilliant and the Dark', composed for the WI by Malcolm Williamson, and performed in the Royal Albert Hall in 1969 by a choir of a thousand people selected from the village WI choirs, plans were laid for a permanent WI national choir, and, with the encouragement of the conductor Anthony Hopkins, Sylvia Gray started the WI Music Society. She also inaugurated the NFWI/Green Shield Stamps tennis championship. When she retired as chairman in 1974 the membership of the WI had grown to nearly half a million. 
Sylvia Gray was also on the executive committee of the Keep Britain Tidy Group from 1969 to 1978, chairman of the south midlands regional committee of the National Trust from 1975 to 1981, and a member of the National Consumer Council from 1975 to 1977 and of the Redundant Churches Committee from 1976 to 1984. She was appointed CBE in 1975. She died, unmarried, on 27 April 1991 at her home, St Winnow, High Street, Burford. A memorial service was held at the church of St John the Baptist, Burford, on 21 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 49762


Halstead, (Lambert) Beverly (1933-1991), palaeontologist, was born in Pendleton, Lancashire, on 13 June 1933, the son of Lambert Halstead (1907-1983), painter and decorator, and his wife, Elizabeth (Betty), 'nee' Waring (1911-1991), railway clerk. He was brought up in circumstances of social isolation. His mother was the dominant parent; she believed in treating children without overt affection and as young adults. Moreover, she was an atheist and practising communist, at a time when such views were anathema to Lancashire country folk. His father was a talented artist and a much gentler person, without such strong views. When, during the Second World War, Betty met Maurice Tarlo, a young solicitor who shared her ideals, she abandoned her husband and moved south to Eastbourne, Sussex, to live with him, soon marrying him and insisting that her son adopt the surname Tarlo. Halstead's upbringing was thus harsh, forcing him to be independent and a loner. However, he did gain from his mother a capacity for intellectual exploration and the courage to endure unpopularity when standing up for his beliefs. This did not endear him to the headmaster of Lewes grammar school; the report on him was so adverse that he had trouble in finding a university place. However, its virulence intrigued Professor Leslie Moore of the University of Sheffield, where Halstead was admitted as an honours student in geology -- fortunately, since Halstead's interest was in palaeontology, a discipline in which (exceptionally at that time) Sheffield excelled. Upon finding plesiosaur bones during a field excursion on the Yorkshire coast, Halstead determined to specialize on fossil vertebrates. A fellow student, John R. L. Allen, became his close friend; they were soon undertaking joint researches on the Old Red Sandstone strata of the Welsh borderland. By that time Halstead was not only a prominent member of the student Communist Society, but also contributing notes on rocks and fossils to the 'Daily Worker'. His political sympathies facilitated a visit in 1955 to Poland, during which he contrived to visit classic Devonian fish localities, making discoveries that culminated in two massive monographs published in 'Palaeontologica Polonica' in 1964 and 1965. However, he was not impressed by Poland's social climate -- a first stirring of the doubts that caused him to abandon the Communist Party, following the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956. 
Upon gaining his honours degree Halstead moved to London, to study Jurassic pliosaurs at University College. He elected to present, for his doctorate, a group of published papers instead of a thesis -- a permissible alternative, but unpopular with his departmental superiors; their hostility delayed until 1959 the award of his PhD but before then Halstead had gained a three-year research fellowship at the British Museum (Natural History) and resumed research on Palaeozoic fishes. His studies of fossil teeth next earned him a Nuffield research fellowship, enabling researches at the Royal Dental Hospital and the Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre in Oxford. A series of important papers on Palaeozoic fishes and their dentition culminated in two books, 'The Pattern of Vertebrate Evolution' (1969) and 'Vertebrate Hard Tissues' (1974). 
Halstead's early papers were published under the name L. B. Tarlo, but he had never become close to his stepfather. By 1965 he was styling himself L. B. Halstead Tarlo and by 1968, he had reassumed his born name, L. B. Halstead. He had also, on 27 November 1957, married a dentistry student, Beryl Joan Morris ('b'. 1920/21), daughter of Rex Alfred Shalson, musician, and a divorcee with two daughters from her earlier marriage. In 1963 they moved to Reading University where Halstead had gained a joint appointment in the departments of geology and zoology -- a congenial move, since John Allen was already there. Halstead proved an excellent and inspiring teacher, beloved by his students and very supportive of them. These were years of high scientific productivity, with visits to Estonia and Russia to study fossil fishes (1961) and writings on such diverse topics as Triassic reptiles and protomammals, a supposed Eocene whale, and amino-acids in Oligocene tortoiseshell. His personal life proved less satisfactory. After some years of increasing marital strife he and Beryl separated, but the divorce proved long and costly; it was not achieved until 1975. 
Halstead's restlessness caused him to travel to Nigeria in 1967 at the time of its civil war. Undeterred by an episode of arrest and interrogation, he conceived a liking for its people. He went also to Tunisia (1968) and then to Rhodesia and South Africa (1969), where his defiance of racial prejudices brought both admiration and problems. Desiring to develop co-operative researches between Reading and the University of the Witwatersrand, he returned again to South Africa in 1970, but was instantly expelled as a political subversive. Predictably, this made him a hero among black Africans. A second, brief visit to Nigeria (1970) was the prelude to a three-year appointment as head of zoology at the University of Ife (1971-4), during which he also spent three months at the Punjab University, Chandigarh, India. At both universities he strove to develop low-budget research projects -- in Nigeria on the ecology of lizards and fruit-bats and, in India, on the geology of the Siwalik Hills. An expedition into the Sokoto region, north-western Nigeria, brought the discovery of a new fossil crocodile ('Sokotosuchus'). 
Halstead had met in 1970 a talented medical illustrator, Jennifer Anne (Jenny) Middleton ('b'. 1941/2), daughter of Wilfred Middleton, a surveyor. They collaborated on a book on the functional and artistic significance and folklore of bones, 'Bare Bones' (1972) and, when she joined him at Ile-Ife, on a series of dissection guides for students. They were married on 23 May 1975, after Halstead's return to Reading: their son and only child, Thomas Atlay James, was born on 2 September 1980. Endeavouring to alleviate the straitened circumstances resulting from divorce and remarriage, Halstead began to write books on palaeontology for a general audience, often illustrated by Jenny. They included 'The Evolution and Ecology of the Dinosaurs' (1973), 'Fossil Hunting' (1977), 'The Evolution of the Mammals' (1978), 'Hunting the Past' (1982), and four fictionalized biographies of extinct creatures for children. He also contributed to a number of compilative volumes, such as 'Elsevier's Animal Encyclopaedia' (1972) and Hallam's 'Atlas of Palaeobiogeography' (1973). 
Eager for further discoveries, Halstead conducted an international palaeontological expedition to Nigeria in mid-December 1977 with fourteen members (including his wife). Upon arrival in Sokoto, however, they were arrested by the military governor and sent in custody to Lagos. Though soon released and permitted to proceed, the expedition fell apart. Not until late January 1978 did its residual three members -- Halstead, Jenny, and Cyril Walker -- return to Sokoto where, with belated official assistance, significant discoveries of fossil turtles were made. A journey to China in 1979 resulted not only in the discovery of a new group of Palaeozoic fishes (galeaspids), but also of mineral replicas of their internal anatomy. In 1983, against Jenny's advice, Halstead went again to Nigeria, on official invitation. All went well until he was leaving but then, between air terminal and plane, he was arrested by the security police and sent to prison in Lagos. Though he was released after a week it was a frightening ordeal which aged him considerably. His appearance -- slim and intense, with black hair and fiery eyes -- had always been mephistophelean; henceforward, with hair prematurely white and lessened energy, he seemed more like an elder satanic statesman. 
Yet Halstead's concerns did not diminish; rather, they diversified. He became an increasingly vocal opponent of creationism, engaging in a much-publicized debate with the creationist Duane Gish and writing many critical articles. A visit to Japan in 1984 caused him to challenge the equally erroneous concepts of Kinji Imanishi, in a book published only in Japanese (1988). He opposed the concept of a catastrophic cause for dinosaur extinction and castigated Fred Hoyle's idea that life on earth had an extraterrestrial origin. He was also a participant, always outspoken and courageous, in many other controversies: the efficacy of underground nuclear testing; cladistics as a means for determining evolutionary relationships; the administrative and scientific structure of the Natural History Museum; the concept of 'test-tube' nuclear fusion; the Piltdown hoax; the dangers of AIDS; and, more lightheartedly, the reality of the Loch Ness monster. 
Other professional activities continued apace. Halstead was editor for seven years of the 'Nigerian Field', co-editor of 'Palaeontology' for five years, and a highly innovative editor of 'Modern Geology' from 1983 until his death. He addressed many national and international meetings and was a proud member of London's Athenaeum. His enthusiasm for informing the public at large about geology made him a vigorous and enterprising member of the Geologists' Association and the British Association for the Advancement of Science. At one of its meetings, in 1985, he encountered a psychologist from the University of Bath, Helen Haste; he travelled with her to Canada and the United States in 1987 and shared his latter years with her, although he never completely severed his relationship with his wife, Jenny, and son, Tom. The physical stresses of that North American visit perhaps hastened the onset of cancer of the bladder, shortly after their return to England. Though Halstead's recovery was slow, he was soon involved in fresh controversies. His vigorous advocacy of the abandonment of thesis-writing as a PhD qualification and of the Thatcher government's plans for 'rationalizing' geology departments outraged his Reading colleagues. There was also a confrontation with that university's vice-chancellor, whose actions Halstead had criticized; his formal apology was manifestly insincere. Consequently, when the teaching function of Reading's geology department was eliminated, Halstead lost his academic base. Thereafter, he commuted between Reading, Bath, and London, where he had gained an honorary research position at Imperial College, writing articles on the train. 
Halstead's career should have attained its apogee in 1991. He was president of the Geologists' Association and president-elect of section C (geology) of the British Association. He was to be a principal speaker at a special session at the Plymouth meeting, to commemorate the sesquicentennial of Richard Owen's first recognition of the dinosaurs. Instead, driving to Bath on the evening of 30 April 1991, he died in a motor accident caused by the error of a lorry driver. 
Halstead's researches transformed understanding of Palaeozoic fishes and of the environment of the earliest vertebrates. His popular writings and lectures on palaeontology and evolution brought scientific enlightenment to many, while his willingness to challenge dogmas stimulated thought among students and public alike. His published bibliography lists 414 publications. The many tributes paid to him at his funeral on 9 May 1991 showed how he had surmounted all the controversies and become widely beloved. 


@@@@@


doc= 49767


Hart, Judith, Baroness Hart of South Lanark (1924-1991), politician, was born at 51 Ennismore Street, Burnley, Lancashire, on 18 September 1924, the daughter of Harry Ridehalgh, linotype operator, and later secretary of a mechanics' institute, and his wife, Lily, 'nee' Lord, schoolteacher and Baptist lay preacher. Baptized Constance Mary, at the age of twelve she adopted the name Judith. She was educated at Burnley primary school and Clitheroe Royal Grammar School, where she was head prefect, before a scholarship took her to the London School of Economics (LSE). The mass unemployment she had witnessed in 1930s Lancashire converted her to socialism and at eighteen she joined the Labour Party, becoming secretary of the Cambridge University Labour Club during the LSE's wartime evacuation to Cambridge. After receiving a first-class degree in sociology in 1945 and teaching briefly at a training college in Portsmouth she married Dr Anthony Bernard (Tony) Hart (1917-1999), research chemist, on 17 April 1946; they later had two sons. They had met at a meeting where he gave a speech against the nuclear bomb. His similar political views (he was later a Richmond borough councillor) and support for her career were important to her throughout her life. Soon after their marriage his work took them to Dorset where she became a researcher for the Ministry of Health and a co-opted member of the Dorset county council public health committee. 
Hart entered politics in Dorset, running unsuccessfully for Parkstone municipal council at twenty-five and for the parliamentary constituency of Dorset West in 1951. Four years later, after the Harts had moved to Scotland, she reduced Lady Tweedsmuir's majority in the hard-fought 'battle of the housewives' in Aberdeen South, where her beauty was the source of some comment. During this time she made broadcasts on BBC's 'Woman's Hour', wrote articles on Scottish affairs for 'The Tribune' (she was an early devolutionist), and lectured in sociology. When offered the more promising constituency of Lanark she decided that she could do more for people's welfare as an MP than as a lecturer. 
After Judith received the nomination for Lanark, Tony withdrew as PPC for Glasgow Hillhead to campaign for his wife. She was elected in October 1959 and her family eventually joined her in London, where her mother-in-law helped raise her two sons. Although her own mother had died when Hart was fifteen she had imparted to her a strong pacifist philosophy, and the issue of disarmament dominated Hart's early parliamentary career. She served on the national committee of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, joined the first Aldermaston march, and tried to initiate parliamentary debates on the Christmas Island nuclear tests and the police raid on the offices of the controversial anti-nuclear Committee of 100. The 'Glasgow Herald' retracted its claim that she belonged to the committee after she sued the editors, but some still found such views as her opposition to Britain's membership of NATO immoderate. 
None the less when Labour came to power in October 1964 Prime Minister Harold Wilson appointed Hart a joint parliamentary under-secretary of state for Scotland, partly as she had been one of the few Scottish MPs to support him for the leadership over George Brown. Her responsibilities included health, children, and education and she energetically promoted school-building in Scotland, but she felt it was important to have responsibility for areas outside women's traditional sphere in order to be seen as a credible politician. One of her interests was decolonization, and after Labour's re-election in April 1966 she was made minister of state at the Commonwealth Office. As minister she sought African leaders' support for sanctions against Rhodesia, and assured her party that the government would not capitulate to Rhodesia's illegal white minority regime. After only one year in this portfolio she became minister of social security, in July 1967, to implement spending cuts resisted by her predecessor, Margaret (Peggy) Herbison. She surprised colleagues with criticism of 'work-shy young people who think they are God's gift to poetry and guitar playing' ('Daily Telegraph', 9 Dec 1991). Her role at social security caused ill-feeling in Lanarkshire, where Herbison was her very popular constituency neighbour. 
In October 1968 Hart entered the cabinet as paymaster general, but frequently quarrelled with Wilson and especially irked him with her assertion that she had overall responsibility for government announcements (Crossman, 3.368). Following her attack on the government's plan for union reform, 'In Place of Strife', she was dropped from the cabinet in October 1969 and was moved to the Ministry of Overseas Development, which Wilson had created in 1964. Her decision to award pensions to expatriate colonial officers living in former dependencies won praise, but she served for less than a year before Labour was defeated in June 1970. The election also ended her brief tenure as first co-chair of the Women's National Commission. 
In opposition Hart retained the overseas development portfolio and published 'Aid and Liberation' (1973), based on her first-hand research in the Third World, where she became known and respected. This book called for 'socialist' aid to replace 'neo-colonial' aid, the cancellation or rescheduling of Third World debt, and an end to private investment in the Third World which primarily benefited the investors. She warned about the impact of EEC membership on British aid, and tried to amend the 'European Communities Bill' to safeguard Britain's more generous aid programme. 
After returning to her old ministry in March 1974 Hart spent over 200 hours negotiating with her EEC counterparts to achieve the Lome convention, signed in 1975. This provided for aid from members of the community to forty-six of the world's poorest countries, and was her foremost accomplishment. Her book, 'Aid and Liberation', had also recommended using aid to support left-leaning governments and destabilize oppressive right-wing governments, and she was instrumental in cancelling aid to Chile after Labour's return to power. She welcomed many Chilean refugees into her home and hosted the widow of the slain Marxist president, Salvador Allende, but her association with communists and her speech at a rally organized by the 'Morning Star' in 1974 attracted the interest of MI5. Her telephones were tapped, partly because of confusion with a communist, Mrs Tudor Hart, but nothing was uncovered which Wilson felt warranted her dismissal. He did demand an assurance that she and two colleagues would uphold the principle of collective ministerial responsibility after they had supported resolutions of the party's national executive committee (NEC) criticizing the government over arms sales to Chile and a joint naval exercise with South Africa. 
To a certain extent Hart's interest in overseas affairs came at the expense of attention to local concerns, and despite her sympathy with radical and left-wing causes some felt that she lacked the common touch, though many constituents still remembered her fondly. Contemporaries described her as cool and efficient, though sometimes as aggressive and strident in public speeches, lacking in humour, and elegant in appearance and dress. In Richard Crossman's view 'she is a competent, efficient woman, not tremendously creative in mind, lacking many good ideas and a bit slapdash, but she is dashing, courageous, with a good political instinct for being on the right side' (Crossman, 3.311). Her sometimes grand manner and sense of self-importance led her to disregard the Foreign Office when making policy, which contributed to her department's being brought under its auspices. Although she had demonstrated how Britain could co-operate with European partners she urged withdrawal from the EEC in the referendum of June 1975, warning that it would lead to a federal Europe and threatened parliamentary sovereignty. Shortly after the referendum Wilson demoted the anti-marketeers in a cabinet shuffle and she refused to accept the Ministry of Transport. Her subsequent personal statement to the house was emotional and defensive, though from the back-benches she was now free to criticize the government over spending cuts and the abandonment of plans for a new town at Stonehouse near Lanark in 1976. 
Yet Hart remained influential within the party and the NEC, on which she served from 1969 to 1983, and returned to the overseas development portfolio in February 1977 under Prime Minister James Callaghan. During her final term she increased both the quantity and the quality of aid, converting interest-free loans into permanent grants for countries which met a minimum standard of human rights. However, she did not establish similar criteria when she chaired the Labour Southern Africa Solidarity Fund, and there was criticism over its backing of Marxist guerrillas. She replied that the violence used by dictatorships could not be equated with that used by freedom fighters. 
To a mixture of amusement and dismay Hart became a dame of the British empire in the government's resignation honours list in May 1979, as recognition for her work for the Lome convention but perhaps also in compensation for her failure to attain more senior office. No doubt her talents could have taken her even further had it not been for her independent streak and her tendency to annoy her superiors. She continued as party spokesman on overseas aid until 1980 and was appointed an honorary fellow of the University of Sussex's Institute of Development Studies in 1985. During her final years in the Commons she chaired the NEC (1981-2) and remained one of the voices of the Labour left, opposing the Falklands War and the expulsion of the 'militant tendency' from the party. She left the Commons at the general election of 1987. In 1988 she was elevated to the House of Lords as Baroness Hart of South Lanark and delivered her maiden speech on the security services before ill health prevented her from taking any further active part. Shortly after the end of the Pinochet regime she was to receive the order of merit from the new Chilean government, but before it could be presented she died of cancer at Queen Mary's University Hospital, Roehampton, London, on 7 December 1991. She was survived by her husband and their two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 49769


Drummond, George Henry Charles Francis Malcolm, Viscount Forth (1834-1861), dipsomaniac, was born on 13 May 1834, in Naples, the only surviving child of George Drummond (1807-1902), soldier, and his first wife, the Countess Rapp, 'nee' Baroness Albertine von Rothberg Rheinweiler Coligni, (died 1842). In 1853 his father was restored as fifth earl of Perth and second earl of Melfort, but failed to recover the Drummond Castle estates from the Willoughby de Eresby family. From this date George Henry Drummond took the title Viscount Forth. He joined the 42nd highlanders in December 1853, and reached the Crimea on 14 September 1854. At the battle of the Alma (20 September) he carried the regimental colours. He served on trench and picket duty before requesting leave to sell out as soon as Sevastopol was taken. He then clashed with his commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel D. A. Cameron. By Forth's account, having not eaten for twenty-four hours, he refused to accompany a covering party until he had dined. Cameron, however, charged him with cowardice or insubordination. Forth resigned his commission on 17 October 1854. Detrimental versions of this incident circulated widely. 
Forth married on 24 October 1855, at St Peter's Church, Pimlico, Harriet Mary (1836-1868), daughter of the Hon. Adolphus Capel. They lived with her parents at Wroughton in Wiltshire, where Forth soon manifested delirium tremens. He was violent and abusive to his wife, and threatened to contract syphilis so as to infect her and their only child, a son ('b'. 1856). She separated from him in 1858, and in 1860 petitioned for divorce on the grounds of his cruelty and adultery. After the queen's proctor intervened (1861) to prevent her suit on the grounds of her adultery with Edward Cholmeley Dering, Sir Cresswell Cresswell ruled that a wife 'guilty of adultery' could not petition for relief on account of cruelty ('The Times', 19 April 1861, 11d). Shortly afterwards Forth (who wished to avoid his creditors in London) settled at the Spa Hotel in Gloucester under the name of Captain Drummond, together with a woman who passed as his wife. She fell ill after delivering a daughter on 19 September 1861, and was devotedly nursed by Forth in a hotel room. Following her death on 8 October of that year he raved with grief, drank three-quarters of a pint of brandy, and swallowed a half bottle of laudanum, dying at the hotel from its effects after a few hours. A verdict of suicide was recorded. Forth was buried at Gloucester. The lives of his widow and son also ended miserably young. 


@@@@@


doc= 49771


Heaney, Sheila Anne Elizabeth (1917-1991), army officer, was born on 11 June 1917 at 5 Canning Street, Liverpool, the second of the four children of Francis James Strong Heaney (1874-1950), a consultant general surgeon who specialized in the use of radium, and his wife, Anne Summers, 'nee' McBurney (1886-1974), an American citizen. Sheila's childhood holidays were often spent in Cornwall, the Lake District, and the counties of Wexford and Kerry. Riding was a favourite pastime, and before the war she enjoyed following hounds. She was educated at Huyton College, Liverpool, and then, in 1935, went to Liverpool University, from where she graduated in 1938. She did a short course at Loughborough College of Technology before joining the personnel department of Marks and Spencer in Liverpool. Her interest in sociology was generated by visiting the less salubrious areas of Liverpool in the company of her father. 
Heaney joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) in January 1939 and persuaded many of her staff to enlist also. She was posted to 1st west Lancashire platoon as D-company assistant. She was called up for service on 2 September 1939 and promoted junior commander in November 1940. In May 1941 she was given an emergency commission in the ATS as second lieutenant. Thereafter she spent a year at the ATS training centre before becoming second-in-command, Salisbury Plain district group. The first four months of 1944 saw her at the United States Army Staff College in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, USA. On her return she was posted to ATS clerical group in east Africa and in 1946 to Palestine group. Following this service she was awarded the territorial efficiency medal, the war medal (1939-45) and the general service medal with Palestine clasp. In February 1947 she was promoted captain. She returned to the UK in July 1948 where, following three months at Donnington headquarters, she was posted to the War Office as a deputy assistant adjutant-general. 
Heaney decided to make her career with the army and in 1949 was granted a regular army commission with the rank of substantive captain in the Women's Royal Army Corps (WRAC), formed on 1 February that year. In 1951 she was awarded the territorial decoration. She continued at the War Office until 1952 when she went to headquarters 79 anti-aircraft brigade, Royal Artillery, with the rank of major. In 1955, after two years at western command, where her potential as a trainer was recognized, she was appointed MBE. She then went on to 1 independent company, WRAC, followed by another two years at 140 provost company. September 1959 saw her back at the War Office, following which in July 1961 she was posted to the depot and training centre of the WRAC school of instruction. In April 1962 she joined the medical services and WRAC records office, and in February 1963 she was promoted lieutenant-colonel. In October 1965 Heaney was sent to headquarters northern command as assistant director, WRAC, and in June 1967 she was promoted colonel. A month later she became assistant adjutant-general at the Ministry of Defence. 
Heaney's promotion to brigadier came in June 1970, and later in the year she was appointed director, WRAC. This was also the year in which she was appointed an honorary aide-de-camp to the queen. In 1972 she visited the USA, where she studied the move towards the integration of servicewomen in the regular army and the campaign for equality in the armed forces. She believed strongly that women should be given more opportunities to achieve their ambitions in the army and prepared the groundwork for women's promotion outside the WRAC. However, she urged caution, and called for evolution rather than revolution. It was largely as a result of her efforts that women were given the chance to fulfil their potential in their chosen arm or service of the army and so achieve greater career opportunities. In February 1973 she was made CB. Her retirement from the WRAC in June 1973 did not lessen her interest in young officers. She served on the military education committee of Edinburgh and Heriot-Watt universities' Officers' Training Corps for some years. 
After being widowed Heaney's mother had moved to Edinburgh, and during her years at the War Office, Heaney travelled by train nearly every weekend to care for her. On her retirement she made her home with her mother. But idleness never appealed, so she joined the Women's Royal Voluntary Service (WRVS) and became district organizer for Edinburgh, steering the group through a difficult period of local government re-organization. In 1977 she agreed to become chairman of the WRVS in Scotland. Her genuine interest in people, coupled with her wise judgement and compassion, made her a loved and respected leader. While serving in Kenya she had nearly died as a result of eating tropical mushrooms. Her substantial lameness in later life may have been attributable to this illness; 1981 was the year of the disabled and, with personal knowledge, she was able to set up new projects to help this group. 
During her busy life Sheila Heaney managed to find time to give individual help to those who needed it, delivering meals-on-wheels, shopping, and driving the elderly. When she retired from the WRVS in 1981 she became involved in the work of St Columba's Hospice, Edinburgh, serving on its executive committee and providing much of the essential impetus for its development. Having been a heavy smoker during all her adult life, she eventually developed lung cancer, and she spent her last few days in the care of the hospice. She died there on 1 February 1991. She never married. Her funeral and memorial service took place at St James's Episcopal Church in Goldenacre, Edinburgh, on 6 February 1991, and there her ashes were later interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 49773


Heffer, Eric Samuel (1922-1991), politician, was born on 12 January 1922 in Hertford, the son of William George Heffer, a poor bootmaker and shoe repairer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Nicholls, who, in Heffer's words, 'cooked for the gentry' (personal knowledge). Since he was the grandson of a brickmaker and a railway signalman, he could boast 'I am completely proletarian in background' (ibid.). His early life was heavily influenced by churchgoing, three times every Sunday. As a choirboy, at eight he led a strike for better pay. He remained a high-church Anglican, whether his politics were communist, syndicalist, or hard-left Labour. He was educated at the Bengeo junior school and, until fourteen, at the Longmore senior school in Hertford. He was then apprenticed as a carpenter. He later studied with the Workers' Educational Association and the National Council of Labour Colleges. He became a serious reader, glorying in his collection of 12,000 books crowding his large house in Liverpool. 
Heffer joined the Labour Party at sixteen in 1938, but left it for the Communist Party in 1941, where he met and, on 15 December 1945, married Doris Murray, daughter of Herbert Murray of Liverpool. She was also at that stage a communist. He was expelled from the Communist Party in 1946 for leading an unauthorized strike of shipboard carpenters. The Communist Party even tried to persuade his wife to leave him. He rejoined Labour in 1949, but left it to form a semi-syndicalist Socialist Workers' Federation with Harry McShane in 1954. This failed, and Heffer rejoined Labour in 1956. His early progress was in trade unions. He became vice-president of the Liverpool Trades Council in 1958, and its president in 1959. He caught the attention of a local MP, Harold Wilson, in 1960, when he settled an unofficial seamen's strike. He was runner-up for assistant general secretary of the Woodworkers' Union (later embraced in the Union of Construction, Allied Trades, and Technicians) in 1962. In 1960 he was elected to Liverpool city council. 
In October 1964 Heffer captured Walton constituency from its Conservative MP, Sir Kenneth Thompson. Walton was the northernmost working-class seat in Liverpool, and housed two football grounds, Anfield and Goodison Park. It was also the cradle of Militant Tendency, Liverpool's Trotskyist movement. From the beginning, warm-hearted but truculent Heffer backed all left-wing causes as an MP: in 1966 he demonstrated against the use of napalm in Vietnam before the American embassy, and against the 'wage freeze' implicit in the 'Prices and Incomes Bill'. In 1967 he urged the end of Polaris submarines. An animal lover, he repeatedly sought to ban hare coursing. His short fuse led him to threaten tories Nicholas Winterton and Norman Tebbit. He accurately warned against an impending Liverpool dockers' strike, but refused Harold Wilson's offer of a post as parliamentary secretary for technology in September 1967. He preferred opposition: voting against curbs on the entry of Kenyan Asians with British passports, urging reform or abolition of the Lords, and especially campaigning against Barbara Castle's 1969-70 'In Place of Strife' effort to curb unions. Although initially pro-EEC, by 1971 he had voted against Edward Heath's entry effort. The joint runner-up with Barbara Castle in the elections to the shadow cabinet, when a vacancy occurred he insisted on an election, which he lost in March 1972. A deputy spokesman on employment from 1970, he quit in disagreement with spokesman Reg Prentice, who later became a Conservative. 
When Labour unexpectedly became the government in March 1974, Heffer agreed to become minister of state for industry, but was sacked by Wilson when he insisted on making an anti-EEC speech during the 1975 referendum, a privilege the prime minister had limited to cabinet ministers. On his eighth attempt in October 1975 he was elected to Labour's national executive committee (NEC), squeezing off Denis Healey. As chairman of its organization committee, he invited those who did not accept clause 4 to leave the party. He always opposed any action against Militant. He urged Commons reforms, including a freedom of information act. He opposed Scottish devolution. In January 1980 he boasted: 'I was the only [Labour] Opposition Member who attacked the Soviet Union for going into Afghanistan' (personal knowledge). He was also prominent in support of the solidarity movement in Poland. Egged on by his ego and the Militants in his constituency -- who he feared might turn against him -- he aimed higher. In 1980 he wanted to contest Labour's leadership against James Callaghan, until Michael Foot became the left's accepted candidate. He came close to contesting the deputy leadership against Denis Healey in 1981, but did not want to cut into the vote of Tony Benn, who came close. That year Heffer came third in the constituency section of the NEC and was also elected to the shadow cabinet, becoming Michael Foot's spokesman on Europe. In 1983 he stood as the hard-left candidate for the leadership, winning 6.3 per cent of the vote, against 72.3 per cent for Neil Kinnock and 19.3 per cent for Roy Hattersley. His political decline began when, at Labour's 1985 annual conference, Kinnock launched his blitz against Liverpool's Militant Tendency. Heffer walked indignantly off the platform, prompting Kinnock to remark that 'he was looking for a walk-out part'. Next year he lost his seat on the NEC. The following year, complaining Labour was being 'sold to the public like soap powder', he was the third runner-up. Next year he teamed up under Tony Benn to challenge Labour's Kinnock-Hattersley leadership. Against Hattersley's 66.8 per cent and John Prescott's 23.7 per cent, he won 9.5 per cent. 
In 1989 Heffer announced he would not stand again, letting friends know that he had terminal cancer. He made his peace with friends on the left he had alienated by becoming the puppet of Militant. But he died battling against Labour loyalists such as his successor as MP for Liverpool Walton, Peter Kilfoyle. In his last two years he wrote four books, including an autobiography, 'Never a Yes Man' (1991). He died of cancer of the stomach at his London home, 704 Keyes House, Dolphin Square, Pimlico, on 27 May 1991. He was survived by his wife; there were no children of the marriage. A memorial service was held at St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 10 July 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49774


Henniker, Sir Mark Chandos Auberon, eighth baronet (1906-1991), army officer and author, was born at Northmoor, Minehead, Somerset, on 23 January 1906, the only son and older of the two children of Frederick Chandos Henniker (1866-1953) of the Indian Civil Service, and his wife, Ada Russell (died 1958), daughter of Arthur Pearce Howell, also of the Indian Civil Service. He was educated at Marlborough College, the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and King's College, Cambridge, and was commissioned into the Royal Engineers in 1926. He was in India from 1928 to 1934 and was awarded an MC in the campaign against the Mohmands in 1933 when serving with the Bengal Sappers and Miners, for his skill and courage while supervising the building of a road up the Karappa Pass from the Vale of Peshawar, a distance of some 20 miles in conditions of considerable danger. In 1939 he went to France as adjutant of 2nd divisional engineers. In the retreat to Dunkirk he was given command of a field company in 3rd division and defended a sector of the perimeter of the port. With the evacuation virtually completed he set off back to England with the remainder of his company in two rowing boats. On the way they encountered an abandoned, damaged naval pinnace which they boarded and from which they were picked up by a British gunboat, which landed them at Dover. 
Back in Britain, Henniker was selected to command the sapper element in the 1st airborne division, which was in the process of formation. In this capacity he trained the sappers and took part in the Bruneval raid. Bruneval, near Le Havre, was known to be the site of a radar unit which was using new equipment and thus causing heavy losses among British bombers. A force of 120 from the parachute regiment of Royal Engineers parachuted in, escorting a radar expert who knew what to take out; the raid was successful, as were also the resultant counter-measures the RAF adopted. Henniker subsequently served in north Africa and then took part in the invasion of Sicily in July 1943. He crash-landed by glider near Syracuse, but was unhurt. Later he was wounded in seven places and also sustained a broken arm, but he managed to take part in the capture of the important bridges at Ponte Grande and Primasole, though swathed in bandages. He was with 1st airborne in their landing and occupation of Taranto, which he subsequently organized into a base for the future campaign in Italy. He was appointed OBE in 1944. 
In 1944 Henniker was appointed commander, Royal Engineers, in 43rd (Welsh) division and distinguished himself in the aftermath of the Arnhem disaster of September 1944, when he rescued many of the survivors of 1st airborne division by ferrying them across the Rhine in assault boats, a process that the Germans were doing their best to prevent. He was immediately appointed DSO. Subsequently he fought through the remainder of the north-west Europe campaign, including the Rhine crossing, the Ardennes, and the capture of Bremen and Cuxhaven. At Nijmegen he drove over a bridge five minutes before it was blown up by German frogmen. On 5 September 1945, three days after the formal conclusion of hostilities in the Far East, Henniker married Kathleen Denys Anderson ('b'. 1909/10), second daughter of John Cousmaker Anderson, barrister, of Pilgrim's Way, Farnham, Surrey. They had two children, Adrian Chandos ('b'. 1946) and Fiona Jane ('b'. 1951). 
In 1946 Henniker returned to India and in 1947 he was engaged in trying to preserve lives in the turbulence which followed partition. He was then posted to Malaya as commander of 63rd Gurkha infantry brigade, a period about which he subsequently wrote a book entitled 'Red Shadow over Malaya' (1955), in which he described the brigade's successful operations against elusive communist terrorists. He was appointed CBE in 1955. In the same year he returned to Europe to be commander, Royal Engineers in 1st (British) corps, and was involved in the Suez operation, for which he was mentioned in dispatches. He retired from the army in 1958, and on 19 February became eighth baronet on the death of his cousin Sir Robert John Aldborough Henniker. 
Honker was no ordinary soldier. A brisk, enquiring mind, and a tendency to reject the first or obvious solution to a problem, enabled him to tackle numerous problems successfully, often to the irritation of his contemporaries, who thought along more orthodox lines. With red hair and a piercing gaze he was not a person to suffer fools gladly, but he had a philosophic sense of humour. He published four volumes of autobiography. 'Memoirs of a Junior Officer' (1951) was followed by 'Red Shadow over Malaya' in 1955. 'Life in the Army Today' came in 1957, and 'An Image of War' in 1987. He also contributed regularly to 'Blackwood's Magazine'. 
After retiring from the army Henniker founded a private oil company, from which he retired in 1977. He was honorary colonel of the parachute engineer regiment (Territorial Army) from 1939 to 1968, and honorary colonel of the Corps of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (Territorial Army) from 1964 to 1968. He was deputy lieutenant, Monmouthshire, in 1963. He died of a cerebrovascular haemorrhage at the Avenue Road Nursing Home, Avenue Road, Abergavenny, Monmouthshire, on 18 October 1991. He was survived by his wife and two children, and was succeeded as baronet by his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 49775


Heyworth, Peter Lawrence Frederick (1921-1991), music critic, was born on 3 June 1921 in New York city, the son of Lawrence Ormerod Heyworth (1890-1954), a rubber dealer, and his wife, Ellie, 'nee' Sterne (1891-1927). He was educated at Charterhouse School (1935-9) and, after six years' army service that included a period in Vienna, at Balliol College, Oxford (1947-9), from where he graduated with a second-class degree in politics, philosophy, and economics. He next spent six months at the University of Gottingen, where his leanings towards German culture and music received the firm grounding that gave his subsequent work much of its character. In 1952 he joined the 'Times Educational Supplement'. His ambitions then lay with a career in political journalism or as a foreign correspondent, and his writing remained marked by strongly pro-European attitudes but also a political stance well to the right of centre: he later treasured a signed photograph of Margaret Thatcher. However, tuberculosis, followed by the diagnosis of Addison's disease, set too great a constraint on his energies, which throughout his life were harboured with self-discipline and courage. Music was an enthusiasm, an art for which he never had any formal training, but he now discovered an ability for applying his sharp intelligence to concert criticism. 
After moving to 'The Observer' Heyworth at first wrote concert reviews, inheriting the paper's championship of new music from a predecessor, William Glock, but coming into conflict with his more traditionalist senior, Eric Blom. He succeeded Blom as chief critic in 1955. Now with greater liberty to develop his own critical stance, he made the paper a pioneer in the cause of new music, especially when it was of sufficient intellectual and imaginative energy and was detached from what he saw as insular establishment values. This brought great allegiance to Tippett, little or none to Britten. An article attacking Walton led the composer to strike him with a walking stick at a concert, and it was typical of both men's qualities that this sealed a burgeoning personal friendship in which no quarter was given on either side. Heyworth was one of the first critics to champion Harrison Birtwistle, to whose music he remained loyal throughout his life (he commissioned a David Hockney drawing of Birtwistle, who dedicated the opera 'Gawain' to him). He also welcomed Glock's appointment of Pierre Boulez as conductor of the BBC Symphony Orchestra, writing eloquently of the invigoration of English musical life which this brought about. His lack of musical training denied him technical appreciation of the scores of these composers, and this he always admitted, claiming that instead he could hope to lead the equally untutored reader towards experiences that had excited and moved him. His scrupulous background work, which included assiduous attendance at rehearsals, prepared him well for such a role. 
Heyworth's devotion to the German tradition found another strong focus in the Beethoven concerts given in London by Otto Klemperer from the mid-1950s. His admiration led to personal friendship and, mutual trust established, to radio interviews later published in book form as 'Conversations with Klemperer' (1973). These in turn led to Heyworth's most enduring achievement, the full-scale critical and biographical study of Klemperer which overtook tentative previous plans for a study of music under the Weimar republic. Immensely thorough, alert to political considerations and to the predicament of a Jewish conductor making his career in a Germany turning towards Nazism, the book also recorded a tempestuous, depressive character whose interpretations of new music, especially at the Kroll Opera in Berlin, and of the Austro-German classics were among the greatest of their time. Volume 1 of 'Otto Klemperer: his Life and Times' was published in 1983; the second and concluding volume was completed after Heyworth's death by John Lucas (1996). 
Heyworth was by nature a demanding man, quick to compare aspects of British public life unfavourably with German orderliness, capable of severity to those who fell short of his high standards, from performers and composers to secretaries and waiters. Welcome as his enlivening company always was, these qualities could make him an exacting guest; he was the best of hosts and travelling companions. His highest standards were reserved for himself, and no trouble was too great in the preparation of his weekly article or in the selection of the correct wine at his table. He was a man of deep and perceptive generosity, loyal, thoughtful about his friends' tastes, sympathetic to the problems of others and reticent about his own. In turn he inspired great loyalty and affection. Among his warmest friends was W. H. Auden, whom he met in Berlin in 1964 and who dedicated 'City without Walls' to him: '
At Twenty we find our friends for ourselves, but it takes Heaven 

To find us one when we are Fifty-Seven. 

' He died in Athens, of a stroke, on 2 October 1991, and was buried in Hinton St Mary, Dorset, on 12 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 49777


Hill, Robert (1899-1991), plant biochemist, was born on 2 April 1899 at Normanhurst, Warwick New Road, New Milverton, Leamington Spa, the son of Joseph Alfred Hill, accountant in the family metalwork firm and later amateur scientist, and his wife, Clara Maud, daughter of Frank George Jackson, lecturer on principles of ornament and advanced design at the Birmingham Municipal School of Art and illustrator of J. A. Hill's 'Ferns and the Microscope' (1893). 
Taught botany by Elizabeth Gamble, his paternal grandmother's cousin, and watercolour drawing by his aunt Mary (Jackson), Robin Hill -- as he was known -- was educated at Bedales School, where A. E. Heath, later professor of philosophy at University College, Swansea, was science master. Encouraged by Heath to take an interest in natural dyes, Hill joined the Bedales dyeing club, grew dye-plants, and wrote articles on them for the school magazine. Heath also encouraged him in astronomy, and his first published paper (1917) was on sunspots. 
In April 1917 Hill was admitted a scholar to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and joined the university's Officers' Training Corps, but had time to carry out experiments on the colour reactions of the indole residue of tryptophan. In the autumn he was deemed unsuitable as an officer and was drafted to an infantry regiment -- a dispiriting experience -- but in February 1918 he was transferred to the anti-gas department at University College, London. In January 1919 he returned to Cambridge, where he read chemistry, physics, and botany in the natural science tripos, specializing in chemistry in part two, and gained first class in both. Because he was inquisitive about cloud formations he designed a 'fish-eye' lens to photograph them, his system giving a projection of slightly more than 180 degree -- better than modern fish-eye cameras. Despite his shyness he was an active member of the college's Natural Science Club and was proposed a member of the university's Biological Tea Club by E. J. H. Corner and Barton Worthington. 
Hill's first independent research, under F. Gowland Hopkins in the department of biochemistry, was on the relation between structure and spectra in inorganic pigments; his desire to study plant pigments had to be relegated to his spare time. His scientific reputation was built on his studies of haemoglobin's chemical and spectroscopic properties. David Keilin invited him to help with work on cytochrome in the Molteno Institute, where Hill was the first to characterize the porphyrin from cytochrome 'c' and demonstrate its relation to haematoporphyrin, and thus to the porphyrin of haemoglobin. 
In 1932 Hill went into deep depression, and Worthington suggested he travel to Singapore to visit Corner. They explored the forests of Johore together, and besides seeking new dye-plant sources Hill sketched plants, one of his drawings being published in Corner's 'Wayside Trees of Malaya' (1940). Restored, he returned to Cambridge, where he devised a spectrocolorimeter to measure the oxygen dissociation curves of haemoglobin. On 18 March 1935 he married Amy Priscilla ('b'. 1906/7), daughter of Edgar Worthington, a railway engineer, and sister of Barton. Shortly afterwards he bought Vatches Farm, at Barton, in Cambridgeshire, where he and his wife brought up two sons and two daughters. There, also, Hill wrote his papers and conducted an extensive correspondence. 
In 1936, when nothing was known about the biochemical mechanism of photosynthesis, Hill began studying oxygen production from chloroplasts freed from leaves (the 'Hill reaction'); others in the laboratory had studied oxidation-reduction reactions in cell-free extracts of animal tissues, but Hill's novel approach in plants revolutionized the study of photosynthesis. In experiments he showed that the 'light' and 'dark' reactions are linked by a redox reaction but are otherwise independent. He maintained his interest in dyes, working on the anthraquinone pigments of madder and its allies, and as part of the war effort he joined the group in the department concerned with chemical warfare, and studied vesicants, notably protoanemonin. From 1943 he was employed by the Agricultural Research Council, and although not on the university staff he gave lectures, but he was not good at it. 
Hill worked with Kamala Bhagvat on the presence of cytochrome oxidase in plant tissues, the first experiments to demonstrate a particularly respiratory system in plants, but from 1950 photosynthesis was the focus of his research. From 1944 he kept notebooks concerned with thermodynamics, and in 1960, in a paper with Fay Bendall, he proposed an arrangement of the cytochromes (the Z scheme) that harmonized photosynthetic and oxidative phosphorylation, providing a framework for the whole electron transport system of the chloroplast. It made clear the thermodynamic basis of the conversion of light energy to electrical energy to chemical energy in green plants, the basis of the organic world. 
Hill scorned applied science, though he went to what became Malawi, in the late 1950s, to study tea fermentation. He retired in 1966 but retained his chaotic room in the laboratory, synthesizing dyes and studying the history of work on photosynthesis; though good at devising simple equipment Hill was at a loss with modern instruments. He was elected FRS in 1946, and his honorary degrees included one at Sheffield (1990), where his impact was such that the Robert Hill Laboratories -- later known as the Robert Hill Institute -- were established. 
Hill was a modest, unassuming person, intolerant of pomposity, but he was not easy to work with and could explode with indignation, though he had a puckish sense of humour. He died at Hope Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 15 March 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49826


Mayett, Joseph (1783-1839), agricultural labourer and autobiographer, was born on 12 March 1783 at Quainton, Buckinghamshire. He was the second of the eight children born to Mary ('c'.1749-1829/30), the wife of Joseph Mayett (1743/4-1826), a day labourer, though his father had had two children from a previous marriage. Most of these ten children died in their infancy, and 'four was the most that ever was living at one time' ('Autobiography', 1). It was a nonconformist family whose house in Quainton was licensed for preaching first by the Methodists and after 1801 by the Baptists, though until the second decade of the nineteenth century the family attended the Particular Baptist Chapel at Waddesdon Hill. 
Mayett was taught to read by his mother at about the age of four from a chapbook -- 'The Reading Made Easy in a Variety of Useful Lessons' -- and later from the 'Bible', 'Pilgrim's Progress', and Isaac Watts's 'Hymns'. His education continued from 1794 onwards at Sunday school, though he was still trying to perfect his writing and to grasp punctuation in the militia when he was twenty-three. He learned lace making at the age of seven, but then followed his father as a labourer and farm servant for various masters in Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire. His autobiography depicts a young man trying to square the competing claims, in a poor rural community, of a fundamentalist religion and the desire for physical pleasure, and, feeling himself often misunderstood or misrepresented, he enlisted in 1803 in the Royal Buckinghamshire militia. 
For the next twelve years Mayett saw service in various parts of England. He experienced the Luddite riots in Nottinghamshire and Lancashire in 1812, and served in Ireland from 1812 to 1814. He survived smallpox, suffered permanent eye damage, and, according to the autobiography, veered from periods of religious rectitude to those of licentiousness. In May 1815 he obtained his discharge as the oldest soldier in the regiment and returned to Quainton, where, despite initial prosperity and happiness, he was soon on hard times again, scraping a living as a pedlar, gathering rags, and selling tapes and laces. He married, on 18 December 1815, Sarah Slade ('bap'. 1784, died 1844), another member of the Waddesdon Hill church, and he was formally accepted into the congregation there in May 1816. Five months later, however, seventeen members formed a separate church at Quainton with Joseph Mayett as deacon. They built a new chapel, and later Mayett and his wife began a Sunday school, which was initially very successful. Numbers fell away, however, when they could no longer offer cash prizes for good work to match those at the rival church school. 
The last twenty years of Mayett's life were a struggle to find work and keep it, to obtain parish relief when out of work, and, when unable to work through sickness, to obtain payment from his friendly society. He was also constantly in dispute over family and church matters with his brother William ('b'. 1786) and his wife and then, after William's death in 1827, with his remaining brother Thomas ('b'. 1790), who subsequently emigrated to America. His father's death in 1826 is unrecorded in the autobiography though that of his mother, in 1830, is. He continued to live in Quainton, in declining health, and died there, childless, on 17 February 1839. His wife died on 18 August 1844. 
The autobiography records the principal events in Mayett's life until the end of 1830, and seems to have been written up between 1828 and 1831, perhaps from a journal or notes made earlier. It was published by the Buckinghamshire Record Society in an edition by Ann Kussmaul in 1986. A rare survival from a level of rural society not frequently documented, its naive and misspelt narrative, described by Kussmaul as a 'late example of confessional writing, in the Puritan tradition' ('Autobiography', xv), provides a picture of a man struggling to survive and to find salvation at a time of rural economic depression. 


@@@@@


doc= 49827


Willoughby, Sir Francis (1546/7-1596), coalowner and industrialist, was probably born at Woodlands, Dorset, the third child of Henry Willoughby (died 1549), a Dorset landowner, and his wife, Anne (died 1548), daughter of Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset. Henry Willoughby had come into the very considerable family inheritance built up at Wollaton, Nottinghamshire, including its lucrative coal pits, on the death of his uncle, Sir John Willoughby, on 10 January 1549; but on the outbreak of Kett's revolt he took a contingent of supporters from Nottingham to Norwich and was killed on 27 August 1549 on Mousehold Heath. His wife had died the previous year, and he left three orphans: the eldest, Margaret; Thomas, aged eight; and Francis, aged two. Thomas succeeded to the family inheritance, his guardian being named as his uncle, Henry Grey, marquess of Dorset, whose importance at the court of Edward VI was soon to be recognized by his elevation as duke of Suffolk. Grey's involvement in the plot to thwart Queen Mary's succession and place his daughter, Lady Jane Grey, cousin of the Willoughby children, upon the throne, not only cost both of the Greys their lives in February 1554 but also brought those associated with them under suspicion, and the guardian of Francis and Margaret, George Medley, was taken to the Tower of London for a time. If psychological explanations are to be sought for Francis Willoughby's subsequent waywardness and instability, one factor may have been the troubled circumstances of his childhood, having already lost both parents. 
Willoughby's education was carefully supervised and in addition to private tuition he was at school in London, Saffron Walden, and Cambridge. He was taught Latin, Greek, Hebrew, arithmetic, and how to write in italic script. He was also instructed in social accomplishments and was taught to play on the virginals, and to dance and sing. He duly succeeded his brother, Thomas, after the latter's death in August 1559, and his wardship was conferred upon Sir Francis Knolles. He refused Sir Francis's daughter in marriage, and the executors then bought the wardship in June 1564 for $1500. Now independent at seventeen and with a great estate, Willoughby applied himself to finding a wife and soon informed his uncle, Lord John Grey of Pirgo, that his choice had fallen upon Elizabeth (died 1595), the daughter of Mr Littleton of Frankley, Worcestershire, whom he married the same year. Elizabeth's mother was the daughter of the judge Sir John Pakington (died 1551). 
With the revenue from the coal pits handsomely supplementing the receipts from his estates Willoughby was able to maintain a lordly style of life. His wealth required that he maintained a number of gentlemen retainers, who with no real function were quick to take advantage of the antagonism which began to grow between Willoughby and his wife; she being, according to Cassandra, duchess of Chandos, 'a woman of great wit and virtue but of a turbulent spirit' (Smith, 'Sir Francis Willoughby', 14). Despite their quarrels the Willoughbys had several children in an attempt to produce a male heir, and it is not surprising that Elizabeth was frequently ill. 
While his domestic affairs worsened, Willoughby's fortunes continued to flourish. Coal revenues rose in the 1560s and 1570s, and about 1570 he made his first industrial venture when he set up a forge for making wrought iron at Middleton, Warwickshire, the alternative family seat. When the queen made her famous visit to Kenilworth Castle in 1575, he was advised by George Willoughby when planning his attendance that his 'number of servants should be no wise less than fifty, as well because heretofore he had not shown himself to the Queen, as that his estate was very well known both to her majesty and to the whole Council to be nothing inferior to the best. (Smith, 'Sir Francis Willoughby', 17)' He was knighted at Kenilworth and it seems that the possibility was entertained that the queen might spend two days at Middleton, but in the event this did not happen, probably because the manor house was not considered grand enough after Kenilworth. If so, it may have been an important factor in Willoughby's decision to build a new hall at Wollaton five years later. 
Willoughby chose a high position for his new seat, dominating the countryside all around in what William Camden was later to call 'a foolish display of his wealth' (Camden, 20). Wollaton's architect, Robert Smythson, had established his reputation on Longleat in Hampshire, and was later to build Hardwick Hall, but we may be sure that Willoughby played an important part in the design; he had amassed a collection of contemporary style manuals, and the result was an eclectic, eye-catching building which Mark Girouard considered 'undoubtedly something of a monster... He [Willoughby] was not a balanced man, nor did he build a balanced building' (Girouard, 108). There is no evidence that Willoughby accumulated any capital before embarking on his new building, nor that he attempted to curb his lavish style of living. He may have relied on the profits from his coal pits, but these declined as the workings were increasingly beset by intractable drainage problems. In 1581 he contracted his first loan, for $300, from John Rotherson of London; it was the first of a long line of ever-increasing borrowings, all at 10 per cent compound interest. 
Willoughby had separated from his wife, who was living in London, when in 1580 the death was announced of his infant son, leaving six surviving daughters. Lady Willoughby wrote to her husband, stating that though she was over forty she was willing to try again to produce a male heir, and suggesting reconciliation. There seems to have been no answer, and in 1582 the queen formalized the separation by an order allowing Lady Willoughby $200 a year for her maintenance. Willoughby now decided that his eldest daughter, Bridget, should marry Percival Willoughby, of Bore Place, Kent, who was distantly related to the Wollaton Willoughbys. The marriage took place in 1583. As Percival was clearly intended to succeed to his father-in-law's estate, Bridget's dowry was only 2000 marks, but Willoughby also settled the ancestral manors of Wollaton with Sutton Passeys, Cossall, and Trowell, in Nottinghamshire, and Middleton and Kingsbury in Warwickshire, first for use by himself and his own heirs male, and second, in default of a male heir, to Percival and Bridget. It must have been expected that most of the other estates would descend to Percival in due course, but he was soon involved in his first clash with Willoughby over a misunderstanding engineered by the gentlemen retainers. 
It was against a background of mounting debts that Willoughby entered into his major speculative ventures, no doubt intended as rescue operations. The first involved a proposal put to him by an agricultural prospector in 1585 to grow and process woad at Wollaton, but difficulties with sales were insuperable, and the scheme failed, as did an attempt to establish a 'plantation' in Ireland. His next ventures took place around 1590 when he established two blast furnaces, at Middleton and at Oakamoor, Staffordshire, and acquired a third at Codnor, Derbyshire, all of them probably on borrowed money. All were profitable after delays caused by lack of working capital, but it is not possible to say whether they repaid the borrowed capital. Indeed Willoughby's debts became so pressing that he passed over all his ironworks to Percival Willoughby in 1594 in return for his taking over $3000 of his debts. Relations seem to have improved, but with the extent of the debts this could only be temporary. In order to repay them, in May 1595 Willoughby demanded that Percival should make available the six manors bestowed on him upon his marriage, along with the dowries for his daughters (estimated at $25,000) and a yearly allowance of $1100. Percival could only answer this with silence. In the midst of this crisis Lady Willoughby, who had been reconciled to her husband, died on 4 June 1595. Willoughby was so incensed with Percival that he sent a steward to London to find him a wife. He chose an astute widow, Dorothy Tamworth, whom Willoughby immediately married. He then spent most of his time in London, and set about tackling his debts, but in ways that were deeply damaging to Percival's prospects; at the same time he lavished jewels and plate on his new wife. 
It was in London, after being married for a mere fifteen months, that Willoughby died after a short illness on 16 November 1596. He was buried the same night in St Giles Cripplegate. He died intestate and well might his family suspect that he was poisoned, for he died most conveniently for his new bride, leaving her pregnant, so that if she should give birth to a son the boy would inherit virtually the entire estate. This final blow to Percival was avoided when on 3 May 1597 a daughter, Frances, was born, but Percival faced endless litigation before inheriting a greatly reduced estate encumbered with debts. 


@@@@@


doc= 49834


Jackson, Daphne Frances (1936-1991), physicist and champion of women in science and engineering, was born on 23 September 1936 at 34 Willesden Avenue, Peterborough, the only daughter and second child of Albert Henry Jackson (1893-1951), an engineering fitter and turner, and Frances Ethel, formerly Elliott (1897-1985), a dressmaker and designer until she married. She was educated at Peterborough county grammar school and Imperial College of Science and Technology; she graduated BSc (special physics) and became an associate of the Royal College of Science in 1958. 
In 1958 Jackson was invited by L. R. B. Elton to join him as his first research student when he was appointed to the headship of the physics department at Battersea College of Advanced Technology. Two years later she was appointed to the academic staff as assistant lecturer (1960-62), earning her (University of London) PhD in 1962. She was appointed lecturer (1962-6) and with Elton helped to lay the foundations of an internationally respected group studying the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus. Together they did important work on the theory of nuclear reactions and nuclear structure and Jackson soon began to publish individual contributions to the interpretation of nuclear reactions in which protons and other particles are knocked out of nuclei by a high-energy proton beam. Such studies yield important information about the constituents of nuclei. Her contributions were recognized by the award of a University of London DSc in 1970. In 1966 Battersea College was granted a royal charter and became the University of Surrey. Jackson was made reader in nuclear physics and leader of the nuclear physics group, which given this lead grew into the largest and most strongly supported such group in the UK, while the University of Surrey advanced into one of the UK's major research-led universities. 
In 1971 Jackson was appointed professor and head of the physics department, the first woman to hold either post in the UK; she retained both until her death. It was a source of great frustration to her that she was the UK's only woman professor of physics for the first fifteen years of her appointment. Jackson proved a worthy successor to Elton. Her leadership qualities and wide perspective were recognized when the university appointed her dean, first of the faculty of mathematical and physical science during 1977-80, and thereafter of the faculty of science during 1984-8. 
From about 1978 onwards Jackson's physics interests began to move away from fundamental questions and towards applications of nuclear physics, especially in medicine. She played an important role in strengthening these areas in physics at Surrey as well as serving on various relevant national committees. The department's two MSc courses in medical physics and in radiation and environmental protection, which came to prominence during her headship, soon attracted students from all over the world, providing an important source of trained personnel for hospital physics departments and industry, especially the nuclear industry. 
The breadth of Jackson's interests is indicated by her publications -- some eighty articles on nuclear physics (as well as four books and contributions to others), fifty-five articles on medical physics and its applications, and almost as many (forty-six) on issues of science and society. In 1965 she became the Institute of Physics's youngest fellow and later its vice-president. She was also fellow of the American Physical Society and the Institution of Electrical Engineers, a senior member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (of which she was a member of council), and a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Engineers. Various public bodies on which she served included the board of the Meteorological Office Agency, the Schools Examinations and Assessment Council, the Advisory Council on Research and Development for Fuel and Power for the Department of Energy, the BBC science consultative group, various boards of the Science and Engineering Research Council, the metrology and standards requirements board of the Department of Trade and Industry, the West Surrey and North East Hampshire District Health Authority, committees of several regional health authorities, the National Radiological Protection Board and the civil service commission final selection board. At various times she held visiting appointments in nuclear physics at the universities of Washington, Maryland, Louvain, and Lund, as well as at the Institute for Cancer Research of the Royal Marsden Hospital. She was also active in many roles within the Women's Engineering Society, most notably as its president. 
In parallel with her interests in physics, Jackson found herself becoming increasingly active in 'encouraging women in science and engineering', which was listed as a recreation in her entry in 'Who's Who' of 1991. This recreation had outstanding consequences, some with an importance equal to or exceeding that of her contributions to nuclear physics. Using her presidency of the Women's Engineering Society in 1983-5 as a springboard, she was instrumental in helping establish the national WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) initiative to attract schoolgirls into science and engineering. In the same period she conceived and launched the Women Returners' Fellowship scheme for women who had had to give up careers in science or engineering because of family commitments. These fellowships made it possible for such women to make an effective return to high-level technological or scientific careers, something many people had thought impossible. Her genius was to identify a genuine need in society, to plan an effective way of meeting this need, and to carry out that plan, raising the substantial funds needed and proving her many sceptics wrong in the process. Official recognition of these and related efforts came when she was appointed OBE in 1987. She was also awarded honorary degrees by the Open University and the universities of Exeter and Loughborough. Jackson's initiatives continued to flourish after her death, an effective testament to her vision and determination. 
It was particularly poignant that, at a time when her professional interest was focused so much on the diagnosis and treatment of cancer using nuclear physics and other techniques, Daphne Jackson was herself diagnosed as having the disease. Throughout a long struggle with cancer she continued to work and make contributions both to science and society at university, national, and international levels. Her dedication to the Women Returners' scheme was particularly evident at this time. She died at her home in St Omer Road, Guildford, on 8 February 1991, having been involved only hours before in counselling one of her PhD students, and was cremated at Guildford six days later. Her memory has been perpetuated through her former research students, who hold positions as scientists all over the world, and through the Daphne Jackson Memorial Fellowships Trust which administers the Returners' Fellowship scheme she did so much to create. 


@@@@@


doc= 49835


Jackson, Kenneth Hurlstone (1909-1991), Celtic scholar, was born on 1 November 1909 at Melville, Lavender Vale, Beddington, Surrey, the younger child of Alan Stuart Jackson (1877-1964), stockbroker, and his wife, Lucy Jane, 'nee' Hurlstone (1879-1970). While his father's family included clerics and civil servants, his mother's contained several artists, notably Frederick Young Hurlstone (1800-1869). His sister Christine trained at the London College of Art. His early education, which was interrupted by ill health, was at Hillcrest School, Wallington (1916-19). He attended Whitgift Grammar School, Croydon, between 1920 and 1928. There his linguistic gifts blossomed, and he won an open scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1928. 
Jackson did phenomenally well at Cambridge. After taking the classical tripos he transferred in 1931 to a new course on the cultures and literatures of north-west Europe, which was then being pioneered by Hector Munro Chadwick and Nora Kershaw Chadwick. Here, too, Jackson carried all before him. On being awarded a travelling studentship he opted to go to Ireland and Wales, to study with the most eminent Celtic scholars of the day -- Osborn Bergin and Gerard Murphy in Dublin and Ifor Williams in Bangor -- and to immerse himself in modern Irish and Welsh. It was through visiting the Blasket Islands that he met the great story-teller Peig Sayers, many of whose tales he published. 
Jackson returned to Cambridge in 1934 as a lecturer in Celtic. He built up the Celtic curriculum and established the parameters for his own scholarly career: a multi-disciplinary synthesis of philology, literary criticism, and history; a comparative approach, drawing in other traditions and languages; and recognition of the value of material collected in the field, such as place names, dialects, and folklore. In 1939 he moved to Harvard, where he soon became associate professor (1940). Harvard proved congenial, and it was there that he launched his most important scholarly work. Nevertheless, he missed the modern Celtic speakers, manuscript collections, and fellow Celticists of Britain and Ireland. He was considered for the chair of Celtic at Oxford in 1947 and, although promoted to a full professorship at Harvard in 1948, accepted the Edinburgh chair when it was offered to him in 1949. 
While at Edinburgh (1950-79) Jackson emerged as the most respected of a brilliant generation of Celticists. He published on the ancient Celts, on the dark and middle ages, on all six modern Celtic languages, on folklore, place names, and dialects. Thus he spent much of his vacations during the 1950s recording Gaelic dialects for the Linguistic Survey of Scotland. Although he disliked academic politics he served his turn in other ways: in the university, as a fellow of the British Academy (elected 1957), and as a commissioner for the ancient and historical monuments of Scotland. When he retired he held honorary degrees from universities in England, Wales, Ireland, and Brittany. In 1985 his unique pre-eminence in Celtic studies was acknowledged with the honour of being made CBE. 
On 12 August 1936 Jackson married Janet Dall Galloway (1909-2004), whom he had met at Cambridge. She was a psychiatric social worker, and daughter of Alexander Galloway, farmer. Her family came from Kinross, and she combined a robustly practical outlook with a lifelong devotion to the arts, especially literature. Her support underpinned Jackson's productive but punishing work schedule throughout his life. Their children Alastar and Stephanie were born in the USA, but brought up and educated in Edinburgh. 
To Jackson his most important work lay in the history of the Celtic languages, building on the achievements of the nineteenth-century philologists. His monumental 'Language and History in Early Britain' (1953) traced the emergence of Welsh, Cornish, and Breton from the ancient British tongue. 'A Historical Phonology of Breton' (1967) scrutinized Breton from the earliest British colonists to the modern Breton dialects. Jackson also planned a matching history of the Gaelic languages. His 'Contributions to the Study of Manx Phonology' (1956) fed into this grand plan. Many of his shorter works were also philological; but they included in addition influential contributions in folklore (for example, 'The International Popular Tale and Early Welsh Tradition', 1961), literature (for example, 'The Gododdin: the Oldest Scottish Poem', 1969), and text edition (for example, 'The Gaelic Notes in the Book of Deer', 1972). His popular 'Celtic Miscellany' (1951), containing translations from all the Celtic languages, showed high critical intelligence and the verbal sensitivity of a poet 'manque'. 
As a scholar Jackson was outstandingly good at sorting complex things out. In all his best work he was comprehensive in grasp, penetrating in analysis, and lucid in exposition. Celtic studies needed all these qualities to counteract misunderstanding and ignorance -- on Arthur or the Picts or 'Celtic twilight'. The degree of seriousness with which Celtic studies were treated by the time of his retirement owed much to the authority and force of Jackson's writing. Although subsequent research has altered scholarly understanding in many specialized areas, Jackson's works frequently contain the best statement of the case, and form the starting point for continuing scholarship. Few can claim such durability. His 'Guardian' obituarist aptly placed him in an intermediate position between the nineteenth-century comparativists and the specialized scholars of today: they were the Gods, we are the mortals, and Jackson was a Hero. 
Physically Jackson was slight but wiry; he coxed an eight while at St John's. He was an indefatigable walker, who harnessed his love of exercise and the countryside to his historical, archaeological, and place name interests. He enjoyed good food and wine in moderation, though in latter years moderation became extreme on account of persistent migraines. He had a keen eye for truth and beauty in art and literature. He drove others as hard as himself, but could see 'the other side', and even tell a story against himself, as when, in the early days of the Linguistic Survey, his attempts to interview Sutherland crofters on the sabbath met with a firm rebuff. 
Jackson boasted that his job paid him to do what he enjoyed doing. Retirement consequently meant 'more of the same', and he had earmarked place names and Cornish studies as retirement projects. Since his big book on the Gaelic languages had eluded him, however, he decided to concentrate on that area. The result was his edition of 'Aislinge Meic Con Glinne' (1990). Although he suffered a stroke in 1984, and could not work with the same intensity as before, this edition was sufficiently advanced for others to see it through the press. He died at the City Hospital, Edinburgh, on 20 February 1991 after a short illness. He was survived by his wife and two children. His funeral service, on 26 February, had been prescribed in all its details by himself. With typical modesty, he had instructed that a small chapel be booked, expecting that few would attend; in fact, the chapel was packed to overflowing. His remains were cremated at Mortonhall crematorium, Edinburgh, and his ashes were interred soon afterwards at the Surrey and Sussex crematorium, Worth, near Crawley, Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 49838


Joyce, Eileen Alannah (1912-1991), pianist, was born Eileen Joyce (she acquired her middle name, Alannah, later) on 21 November 1912 near Zeehan, Tasmania, the only child of Joseph Joyce, a failed mining prospector and itinerant labourer of Irish descent, and his wife, Alice, of Spanish descent. She was reportedly born in a tent, her only home during her earliest years, and went barefoot with only a pet kangaroo named Twink for company. Later she was taken by her parents to the Australian mainland, where the family lived in an iron shack in the outback of Western Australia, between Perth and the town of Boulder. A priest found her a place at the Loreto Convent School, Osborne, where one teacher was Esther Pickering (mother of Sir John Drummond, controller of BBC Radio 3 and director of the Henry Wood Promenade Concerts). She was obliged to sit with other non-paying pupils at the back of the class and was usually known as Ragged Eilie. An instinctive musicality began to appear unbidden whenever she was near a piano, and she soon learned the rudiments of music (and of civilized living) from the instruction she received there. The school authorities brought her to the attention of the Australian composer-pianist Percy Grainger when he was visiting the area in 1926 (she was then aged fourteen). The 'rebellious redhead' (as Esther Drummond remembered her) was to Grainger 'the most transcendentally gifted child' he had ever heard, an opinion endorsed by the famous German pianist Wilhelm Backhaus while on an Australian tour. 
Backhaus urged that Joyce should be sent to his own alma mater, the Leipzig conservatory, an idea that could not be entertained in her existing circumstances until Grainger added deeds to words and took it on himself to lead a fund-raising campaign for her. In due course the inexperienced girl was shipped out alone to what must have been the terrifying environment of a leading European music centre, where not merely the language was alien; she regrettably left no account of how she adjusted to this change. She spent three years in Leipzig as a pupil first of Max Pauer, the conservatory director, and then of the redoubtable Robert Teichmuller, a martinet-style teacher whose methods almost broke her spirit but effectively laid the foundations of her astonishing technical facility. This was polished later in London by Tobias Matthay (Uncle Tobs to her) and Adelina de Lara, the last surviving pupil of Clara Schumann, who featured Eileen Joyce in some duet performances, then by the distinguished Artur Schnabel in Berlin. 
Joyce's brief but brilliant professional career began in earnest when Teichmuller introduced her to the conductor Albert Coates, for whom she performed Prokofiev's third concerto, then a rarity on account of its technical difficulty. Much impressed, Coates recommended her to Sir Henry Wood, with whom she made her major debut at his 1930 Promenade Concerts playing the same concerto, followed some months later by the even rarer Busoni 'Konzert-Fantasie' for piano and orchestra, and then by Franck's 'Symphonic Variations' under Sir Thomas Beecham. During the 1930s her repertory multiplied at a prodigious rate and came to number some seventy-five concertos and over 500 solo works. 
Joyce had begun to make gramophone records even in advance of her formal concert debut as a result of the odd circumstances of her fortuitous introduction to the medium. To prepare herself for an audition she went to the Parlophone studios to make a private recording of the Liszt F minor etude, 'La leggierezza', to check on her performance. Returning to collect the disc and pay the fee, she was politely refused and instead invited by the label's director to record something else for the other side. This she did, playing a dazzling flamboyant study in A[flat] by Paul de Schlozer. Parlophone, amazed, paid her a fee and turned the recordings into her first public issue. Her performances of both pieces were included on a CD issued much later by EMI Records, 'The Eileen Joyce Album'. 
On 16 September 1937 Joyce married Douglas Legh Barratt (1899/1900-1942), stockbroker, son of Legh Barratt, stockbroker. They had one son before Barratt's death in 1942. After her marriage, Joyce continued performing under her maiden name. Shortly before the destruction of London's Queen's Hall in an air raid in 1941, she appeared there in the 'manifesto concert' devised by J. B. Priestley to stimulate support for cultural activity in wartime and to boost the ailing London Philharmonic Orchestra. She later toured with the orchestra to a succession of blitzed cities, often to perform in the most improvised conditions at best. During this time she developed a liking for playing three (sometimes four) concertos in one programme, accompanied by corresponding changes in the glamorous concert gowns she favoured to set off her striking physical image, a tactic which somehow drew sceptical critical views of her musical achievement. (According to Sir John Drummond, she 'had destroyed her serious standing through her obsession with changing her dresses. It was a bonus for the popular press, but did nothing for the music' (Drummond, 495).) She countered such views by claiming to suit the colour of her dress to her own esoteric views of the music concerned, as well as to relieve habitual nervousness before the next item. Most in demand were the more popular classics, notably the concertos of Grieg, Chopin, and Rakhmaninov, but she kept an interest in some newer trends, and gave the UK premieres of both the concertos by Dmitry Shostakovich. 
After the war ended in 1945, Joyce moved on to the international circuit, returning as a celebrity to her native Australia in 1948. She later visited South Africa, the USA (where she was dubbed by a leading New York critic 'the world's greatest unknown pianist'), the Soviet Union, India, and many areas in the Far East, where in 1960 she suddenly announced her impending retirement. Her heavy performing schedule (she sometimes gave fifty concerts a season in London alone) took its toll: her fingers at times required taping for their protection, and associated muscular stress obliged her to seek increasing medical attention. Apart from giving an isolated charity concert in 1966, she moved into retirement with her second husband, Christopher Mann (whom she had married in or before 1951), on a farm near Sir Winston Churchill's old home at Chartwell, Kent. In 1981 she was appointed CMG, an unusual distinction for a performing artist. Her academic honours included honorary degrees from Cambridge and from the universities of Western Australia and Melbourne. She died on 25 March 1991, and was survived by her husband and the son of her first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 49842


Kilmartin, Terence Kevin (1922-1991), journalist and translator, was born on 10 January 1922 at Church Road, Greystones, Delgany, co Wicklow, Ireland, the seventh of the eight children of Ambrose Joseph Kilmartin, an Irish civil servant, and his wife, Eva, 'nee' Hyland. His Oxford-educated father was the Irish Free State's first deputy commissioner for forests and died when Terry, as he was always known, was a year old. A scholarship was secured for him to attend Xaverian College, a Catholic school in Sussex, which he left at the age of sixteen to tutor the children of a French provincial family in English, Latin, and German. Thus began a lifelong love affair with France and French culture. The scholar and translator J. G. Weightman, a blunt Northumbrian who worked with Kilmartin, once remarked: 'I never heard Terry talk nonsense about France -- or anything else' (personal knowledge). 
After returning to England when the Second World War broke out, Kilmartin (who carried a British passport) was found unfit for military service because he had lost a kidney as a child. But in 1940 he was recruited through an elder sister in the Foreign Office to what became the French section of the Special Operations Executive. Because he knew too much about intelligence operations, he never became an undercover agent, but it was there that he developed his diffident, deceptively patrician air and a distrust of what he saw as the devious, bungling British establishment. It was through the Special Operations Executive that he met David Astor, future editor and proprietor of 'The Observer', then an officer in the Royal Marines. In 1944 he and Astor undertook a secret mission worthy of Evelyn Waugh's 'Sword of Honour' trilogy to meet French Resistance leaders behind German lines in the Jura. They were ambushed, Astor was wounded (Kilmartin recalled cigarette smoke curling out of a bullet hole in Astor's neck), and the incident was hushed up. 
After the war Astor encouraged Kilmartin to embark on a career in journalism, and following spells with Edward Hulton's short-lived 'World Review', an Arab radio station in the Middle East, and the BBC's French service, he joined 'The Observer''s foreign news service in 1949. Appointed deputy literary editor in 1950, he became literary editor in 1952, a post he occupied until his retirement in 1986. When he took up his new post, John Hayward, the waspish critic and T. S. Eliot's then flatmate, cornered him at a publisher's party and asked: 'Is it true you got your job because you saved David Astor's life?' (private information). 
Astor's post-war project was to transform 'The Observer' into a world-class liberal newspaper, and when Kilmartin joined him there he was surrounded by major European writers such as Arthur Koestler, Sebastian Haffner, and Isaac Deutscher. Following his predecessor, Jim Rose (who had left 'The Observer' to become director of the International Press Institute in Zurich), Kilmartin did a similar job in buttressing the paper's cultural sections. He was instrumental in bringing in such critics as Angus Wilson, Philip Toynbee, Maurice Richardson, and Al Alvarez (who became the paper's first poetry editor) to the books pages, and Kenneth Tynan, Penelope Gilliatt, and Clive James as arts critics. 
Randall Jarrell characterized the post-war years as 'the age of criticism', and central to this era in Britain were Kilmartin on 'The Observer' and J. W. (Jack) Lambert as his opposite number on the conservative rival, the 'Sunday Times'. Both were largely self-taught (neither went to university), strikingly handsome provincial intellectuals with distinguished war records (Lambert had risen through the ranks in the Royal Navy to become a lieutenant-commander in charge of a motor torpedo boat). Both placed great value on literary style, lucidity, serious judgement, and unostentatious erudition. They also stood out against what they saw as a debasing pop culture and in the 1960s opposed, ultimately unsuccessfully, their papers' populist cultivation of young readers. But sartorially and temperamentally they stood far apart. Lambert, who had unsuccessfully sought a job at 'The Observer' on leaving the navy in 1946, was a suave, articulate, immaculately dressed club man, a public figure, frequent broadcaster, theatrical first-nighter, and member of numerous committees. Kilmartin was charming, witty, but essentially a private man: left-wing, bohemian, and legendary for communicating with great effectiveness using grunts, 'ums', 'ers', and similar sub-locutions. Clive James worked for Karl Miller at 'The Listener', Ian Hamilton at the 'New Review', and Kilmartin at 'The Observer', and he once observed: 'Karl edits with a snarl, Ian with a sneer, Terry with a smile' (personal knowledge). 
Kilmartin belonged to a heavy-drinking generation of journalists, whose passion for good prose was matched only by their unquenchable thirst for hard liquor. They developed a colourful reputation for carousing and left a trail of tales about encounters with the police and nights in the cooler in London and France. Some drank themselves into early graves, leaving little behind them except fading legends and yellowing newspaper cuttings. Kilmartin survived, gradually becoming more temperate in his behaviour and creating something more substantial in the way of a literary legacy. For this his handsome wife, 
A fellow Francophile, Joanna Kilmartin was born in London on 17 August 1929, the daughter of James Townsend Pearce, army officer and landowner, and his wife, Olive, 'nee' Sainsbury. From a raffish, upper-middle-class background, well-acquainted with riding to hounds, she was brought up in Rutland and educated at Micklefield School. She was a self-taught naturalist, and later became a wide-ranging journalist, her work for 'The Observer' encompassing cookery, sailing (she was the paper's sailing correspondent when it sponsored the single-handed trans-Atlantic race), and nature reserves. She and Kilmartin married on 16 April 1952 and had two children, a son, Christopher, who later worked as a painter in Paris, and a daughter, Olivia, later employed by a music publishing company in London. Kilmartin was never, however, truly tamed and domesticated. He was a convivial drinking companion, holding court every Friday evening at bars near 'The Observer''s various offices with his colleagues and contributors. On one celebrated occasion he ran from a boozy dinner table infuriated by a remark by his friend, the Irish novelist Edna O'Brien, and stormed out into the night. Not until the door had slammed behind him did he realize that he was the host and this was his own house in Chelsea. 
Terry and Joanna Kilmartin eventually acquired a house in France, and during the 1960s and 1970s he translated novels by Henri de Montherlant and memoirs by Andre Malraux and Charles de Gaulle, while Joanna translated novels by Patrick Modiano and Francoise Sagan. Both won numerous prizes. Terry Kilmartin's most remarkable achievement, however, was his revision of Scott Moncrieff's translation of 'A la recherche du temps perdu' ('Remembrance of Things Past'). He once remarked that Proust 'has written better than anyone else about what Freud called the psychopathology of human life, about human behaviour in all its minutiae', and regarded le Baron de Charlus as 'the greatest comic character in world literature since Falstaff' ('The Times', 16 Aug 1989). This commission began as a way of helping Chatto and Windus retain their copyright in what had come to be regarded as the standard English translation of Proust's 'roman-fleuve'. But Kilmartin's revision steadily evolved into something rather different, in effect what some regarded as a new, more accurate, and more nuanced version of the book. After completing this task and writing a 'Guide to Proust' (1983) as a labour of love, he embarked on a three-volume collection of Proust's letters, which Joanna Kilmartin completed after his death at the Lister Hospital, Westminster, from prostate cancer on 17 August 1991. He had been appointed CBE in 1987. Joanna Kilmartin died at Meadbank nursing home, Battersea, London, also of cancer, on 31 March 2005, and was survived by their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49846


Edward Massey senior (1740-1813), clock- and watchmaker, and his wife, Ann (died 1805). He had two sisters and five brothers, three of whom died before reaching maturity. The family were Roman Catholics, and Edward senior moved to Newcastle in 1763, having served his apprenticeship elsewhere. Although declared bankrupt in 1778, he was clearly a competent and versatile mechanic who supplied tools such as cutters and Lancashire files to the pottery manufacturer Josiah Wedgwood, and maintained the machines in his factory. Edward junior was made a freeman of Newcastle on 17 March 1790, having served an apprenticeship with his father, and married Jane Roulstone (died 1841) on 2 November that year. He had seven sons, all of whom became watchmakers or nautical instrument makers, and one daughter, who married William Poynter, a watch pallet jeweller and nephew of the recusant Bishop Poynter, at Prescot, Lancashire, in 1828. 
Soon after he became a freeman of Newcastle, trade directories list Edward junior as a clock- and watchmaker in the nearby pottery towns of Burslem and Hanley, but by 1806 he had returned to Newcastle to manufacture mechanical logs and sounders, to designs patented by him in 1802 and 1806. Accounts of Massey's patent sea log and sounding machine were published in Liverpool (1805) and London (1806), and a German version was published in Danzig (1818). An important forty-one page statement 'of the Case of Mr Edward Massey of the City of Coventry and of Scholes near Prescot Lancashire, Most respectfully offered to the notice of every Member of Parliament' was published in 1820. This contained details of the development and trials of his sounding machines and the number of machines purchased by the Navy Board, testimonies of sailors who had used the machines, and his objections to the lords commissioners of the Admiralty's discontinuing the purchase of his machines in favour of less satisfactory devices. Massey claimed that $700 paid by the board of longitude and the treasurer of the navy was 'not equivalent to half the travelling expenses he has incurred in bringing this machine to maturity'. Letters from Earl St Vincent, admiral of the British fleet, and Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Cotton, dated 1807, commend the machine, and Cotton adds that: 'Mr. Massey, having now been embarked more than two months (in consequence of the long detention of the squadron in Torbay by the westerly gales) and being very anxious to return to his wife and numerous family, I intend, in compliance with his earnest request, to send him into port by the first opportunity.' Additional patents for nautical instruments were taken out by members of the Massey family in 1834, 1836, 1844, 1848, 1854, 1857, 1858, 1860, 1865, 1868, 1876, and 1884. These include designs for taffrail logs, electric logs, and deep-sea sounders. As well as being used by merchant and national navies throughout the world, Massey nautical instruments were used on the great early nineteenth-century voyages of discovery, by the US coast and geodetic survey, and for deep-sea sounding for the transatlantic telegraph cables, beginning in 1857. 
The Massey family continued to develop and manufacture mechanical logs and sounders on the same basic principle until the firm was taken over by Thomas Walker & Son Ltd, Birmingham, early in the twentieth century, after the death of the unmarried grandson of Edward junior, 


@@@@@


doc= 49847


Edward Massey junior (bap. 1768, d. 1852), who was baptized on 18 August 1768 in Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire, the first of eight children of 


@@@@@


doc= 49854


Adams family (per. 1734-1817), makers of scientific instruments and globes, came to prominence through 


@@@@@


doc= 49855


Dollond family (per. 1750-1871), makers of optical and scientific instruments, were established in London by 


@@@@@


doc= 49856


Grant, Sir Alexander, fifth baronet (1705-1772), merchant and politician, was born at the Mains of Dalvey, Inverness-shire, on 1 July 1705, the eldest of the three children of Patrick Grant ('c'.1654-1755), a barber and farmer, and his wife, Lydia, of Borlum, a daughter of William Mackintosh and a sister of Brigadier-General William Mackintosh. Little is known of Grant's childhood. Late in his teens he enrolled in an introductory medical course at the University of Aberdeen and upon its completion left for Jamaica. There, in the mid-1720s, he practised medicine and surgery; later he took up the work of a planter. His first recorded land patent appears in May 1730, when he received 300 acres in St Elizabeth parish; one month later he leased 1 acre in Westmoreland parish and opened a store for medicines and provisions. In the same year he entered into a planting partnership with Peter Beckford of Spanishtown. Over the next few years he continued to buy more land in the outlying parishes and in Kingston, where he transferred his medical practice in 1734. There he met and married Elizabeth Cooke (1717-1792), the daughter of Robert Cooke, who had emigrated from Bristol and become a prominent planter. 
By 1740 the profits from Grant's merchandising trade were sufficient for him to return to Britain. He settled in London, operating as a general merchant. Initially he entered into a partnership with the Scottish wholesale druggist Alexander Johnston (1698-1775) and worked out of Johnston's shop in Magpie Alley, Fenchurch Street. Johnston supplied food, medicine, and cloth to West Indians, and Grant marketed their sugar. He lived above the counting-house until 1741, when he moved his family to Hatton Garden and in 1746 to Billiter Lane. The partnership lasted until 1753, when they divided their cash and stock. After the dissolution Grant pushed the sale of sugar and the supply of provisions with new vigour and from 9 Billiter Lane built up a global merchandising empire. In addition he moved into two activities that complemented his West Indies trade: slaving and contracting. In 1748 he joined Richard Oswald, Augustus and John Boyd, John Mill, and John Sargent in establishing a slave 'factory' on Bance Island, near the mouth of the Sierra Leone River in west Africa. Somewhat later, during the Seven Years' War, Grant began to provision the India Company squadrons; at the end of the 1750s he contracted to victual his majesty's ships at the Halifax naval station. And, after the war, he continued to provision the West India squadron. Grant's enterprises were broad: characteristically he plunged heavily into the funds, development of Scottish forests and fisheries, Greenland whaling, and speculation in Scottish, Nova Scotia, Florida, and Jamaica land, even as he pursued more traditional lines of trade. 
In 1748 and 1749 Grant claimed the title to a Nova Scotia baronetcy that had been granted to an ancestor four generations before but had fallen dormant. Towards this end he received from the chief of the clan a grant of the barony of Grangehill, which he renamed Dalvey. But confirmation of the title dragged on until August 1752, when his father was retoured heir. When his father died three years later Grant inherited the title. At this time a prosperous merchant in the City and an affluent member of society with close friends at court, Grant felt free to cultivate political interest. He had previously turned to politics in the early 1750s, but had been defeated in the contest over the Inverness burghs in April 1754, due in large measure to the diffidence of the clan chief and the betrayal of supposed friends. Several years later, when George II died, Sir Alexander found himself 'somewhat distinguished' by his friendship with the king and Lord Bute. Helped by such acquaintances, he was unanimously elected as the member for the Inverness burghs in April 1761. 
In parliament Grant worked behind the scenes as an adviser and lobbyist. During the 1760s the former sugar planter and navy contractor was widely regarded as one of the best sources on West Indian and Canadian affairs. Yet he was neither vociferous nor visible: he went two years without speaking in the house and, when he did, on 24 March 1763, he merely provided expert testimony on the possible economic effects of the cider tax. He attended the house almost every day that it was in session, and was an inveterate committee-goer. For most of his tenure he was loyal to the ministry in power: initially he sided with Bute and supported Bute's peace; after Bute's fall in 1763, he sided with Grenville, although he maintained close ties to Bute's party; he opposed John Wilkes and the repeal of the cider tax; and after Grenville's fall in 1765 he sided with Rockingham. Yet, in a display of independence, he opposed the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in February 1766. But by that time he was already under fire in Scotland. Due to the machinations of an aspiring nabob, Colonel Hector Munro, Grant was stripped of the provostship of Nairn in October 1765 and of his seat on the Nairn council one year later. Ultimately he filed a complaint in the court of sessions, but to no avail, and he lost his seat to Munro in the general election of 1768. 
In 1770 Grant turned his business over to three relatives, but almost immediately he felt he had made a mistake and one year later returned to the counting-house. Yet his presence was fleeting. In June 1772 he was 'in a dangerous way', and in late July he was speechless. He died on 1 August at his house in Great George Street, Westminster, of 'a total and gradual decay of nature'. His body was carried on a fishing smack to his home at Dalvey House, near Forres, and buried on 1 September alongside his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 49857


Haistwell, Edward (c.1658-1709), merchant, was the son of Thomas Haistwell of Orton, Westmorland. An active Quaker, he was at the age of nineteen or twenty employed as an amanuensis by George Fox, the founder of the Society of Friends. During this engagement, lasting from March 1677 to June 1678, he accompanied Fox on missionary journeys through England, Holland, and Germany and kept his employer's journal. William Penn and Robert Barclay also accompanied Fox to the continent and thus Haistwell would at an early age have been well acquainted with many of the emerging leaders of the Quaker movement. 
At the end of his service to Fox in 1678, Haistwell became an informal apprentice or clerk to James Claypoole (1634-1687), a Quaker merchant of Scotts Yard, Bush Lane, in the parish of St Mary Bothaw, London, whose business included the importation of sugar from the West Indies, linen and beer from Germany, wine from Bordeaux, and furs from Hudson's Bay. When Claypoole decided to emigrate to Pennsylvania in 1683, he turned over his premises and his not too large merchant business to Haistwell, who continued Claypoole's activity in the 'open', or unregulated, trades, particularly that to the West Indies. It is likely that the young man received financial help from his father with whom he afterwards had some joint ventures. 
The customs records for 1686 (TNA: PRO E 190/143/1) show that Haistwell's principal importation was sugar from Barbados, though he also entered ginger from there and Nevis, and much logwood from Jamaica. He also imported wine from the Canaries, wine and brandy from Bordeaux, Brunswick mum (beer) from Bremen, linen from Bremen and Amsterdam, and tallow from Ireland. Some of these imported commodities, particularly linens, were almost certainly intended for re-export in his West Indian trade. 
In 1687 Haistwell married Rachel, daughter of Richard Marsh, a merchant of London but originally from Lyme Regis. Marsh was a more important merchant than Haistwell, whose business and affluence began to grow noticeably following this alliance. His grander style of living soon attracted unkind comments from some offended Quakers, and, to mollify them, Haistwell removed the pictures he had recently hung on his walls. His higher status was reinforced when, on 11 February 1692, he was admitted a freeman of the prestigious Grocers' Company. In the 1690s, supported by the greater resources of his father-in-law, Haistwell ventured into the tobacco trade on a large scale, importing from Virginia and Maryland and exporting to the continent -- primarily to Rotterdam, but also in some volume to Germany and Spain where his father-in-law also traded (he sometimes acted jointly with his father, Thomas, and with Anthony Haistwell, presumably a kinsman). 
Haistwell owned shares in the old East India Company by 1696 and bought more in the following years, but this investment did not constitute a partisan commitment. In 1697 he also acquired shares in the second subscription to the Bank of England and, when Richard Marsh died in 1704, Haistwell's wife, Rachel, inherited from her father over $6000 in additional bank shares. These holdings seem to have brought Haistwell into a co-operative relationship with Gilbert Heathcote and other important directors of the Bank of England. Haistwell subscribed $1000 to the $250,000 loan which several of the bank directors managed for the Habsburg emperor in 1706. In 1698 eight prominent City figures in the Heathcote group, directors of both the bank and the new East India Company, took advantage of Peter the Great's visit to England to obtain from the tsar an exclusive privilege of importing tobacco (formerly banned) into Russia. As none of them had much experience in tobacco, they welcomed the participation in their adventure of Haistwell, now quite familiar with that commodity, who became a manager of the undertaking. This adventure lasted on paper until 1723 but quite early found its privileges unenforceable in Russia and its earnings disappointing. In retrospect, the only lasting achievements of the adventurers were their successes in persuading parliament in 1699 to open the hitherto closed Russia Company and in influencing the ministry to send the first resident English minister to Moscow in 1705. 
Haistwell died of fever, intestate, on 4 January 1709 in London and was buried on 7 or 8 January in the Quaker burial-ground, Ratcliff. His post-mortem inventory of 21 January shows that in addition to his fairly large house in Scotts Yard, Haistwell had a smaller suburban residence in Hampstead. Both appeared to be furnished in solid comfort but without pictures or other ostentatious items, except for a coach and chariot, two coach horses, and over $250 worth of silver plate. His business interests then embraced shares in four ships, one chartered to the transport service, one to the East India Company, with two engaged in private trade to the East Indies. He was also partner with Anthony Haistwell in a firm that had large bill-of-exchange operations. On his own, he had an unspecified interest in mines at Tor Bay, Devon, and owned all or part of shipments of tobacco to Alicante and Bilbao and other goods at Barbados, Antigua, Virginia, and Archangel. Besides his part of the Russian Tobacco Company, Edward Haistwell had shares in the Bank of England, the new and old East India companies, and the Blue Paper Company, plus some Million Lottery tickets and exchequer annuities paying $186 p.a. In addition to the loan to the German emperor, he was owed money by sundry persons in England as well as in Barbados, Lisbon, Alicante, Bremen, Konigsberg, and Narva. 
In 1698 Haistwell had become a fellow of the Royal Society -- as a patron rather than as an active scientist. William Penn's records show that Haistwell had been one of the eminent Friends who advanced $100 each to a fund that enabled Penn to buy out the Ford family interest in the Pennsylvania grant. Haistwell had obviously advanced much more to support Penn's undertaking, for his own inventory showed $1000 owed by Penn. Throughout his life, Haistwell remained an active Friend, contributing to the society's work. His most important services were as a member of the meeting for sufferings, a standing committee of the yearly meeting which in 1696 obtained the important parliamentary act permitting Friends to affirm rather than swear to proceedings in civil suits. 
Haistwell's loyalty to the Quaker movement was not continued by his only surviving child, Edward (1696-1744). Three years after his father's death, the son was admitted to the Middle Temple on 1 March 1712 and subsequently called to the bar on 23 May 1718. He also continued some of his father's investment interests, eventually becoming a major shareholder in and ultimately a director (1733-42) of the post-Bubble South Sea Company. There is evidence that some of the money owed by the British government to the Russian Tobacco Company (primarily for hemp) was converted after the elder Edward Haistwell's death into shares in the new South Sea Company and thus provided part of the basis of his son's later role in that company. Neither the oaths required of barristers nor the slave-trading activities of the South Sea Company were compatible with the expectations of the Society of Friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 49858


Jeffreys, Sir Jeffrey (c.1652-1709), politician and merchant, was the third son of Walter (or Watkin) Jeffreys of Llywel, Brecknockshire. He is reported to have been 'educated and adopted' by his rich bachelor uncle, Alderman John Jeffreys of London. When, in the late 1670s, Jeffrey married Sarah (died 1725), daughter of Nicholas Dawes, goldsmith and citizen of London, his alderman uncle provided a significant share of the property or commitments covered by the marriage contract. Jeffreys studied law at the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in 1676. However, upon the death in 1680 of his uncle's partner, Thomas Colclough, he left the law and became a half-share partner in his uncle's merchant house, the largest importer of tobacco and the most important North American merchant company in the kingdom. 
When John Jeffreys died in 1688, he left his remaining half of the business to Jeffrey's younger brother John, later an MP, but much of his metropolitan real estate to Jeffrey. With the start of the War of the League of Augsburg in 1689, the two partner brothers decided that in such hazardous times the likely rewards of the Chesapeake trade were not sufficiently attractive, and fairly rapidly withdrew their name from that commerce. Jeffrey Jeffreys, however, retained correspondents in the Chesapeake and was for a number of years in the early 1690s the London agent for Virginia; it is therefore possible that his firm retained some interest in the Chesapeake trade carried on by other firms. He was admitted to the Eastland Company in 1690 and thus was able in the 1690s to export tobacco to Riga and elsewhere in the Baltic, as well as to Spain. He tentatively returned to the tobacco-import trade with the peace of 1697, but detailed import data after that date have not survived. Although they withdrew from the Chesapeake, the brothers continued and expanded their late uncle's trade in the West Indies, including Barbados, Jamaica, and the Leeward Islands (for which Jeffrey Jeffreys was London agent, 1690-97). Their firm also had contracts for victualling the navy in Jamaica and remitting funds to the garrison in New York. The brothers further supported their Caribbean trade by continuing their uncle's active interest in the slave-trading Royal African Company, and both served as 'assistants' (directors) in the company -- Jeffrey in 1684-6 and 1692-8, John in 1690-91 and 1693. During the war, letters of marque were issued for ten vessels in which Jeffreys was interested, the largest being the 'Hannibal', 450 tons, 100 men, 36 guns, which was leased to the Royal African Company in 1693. The other nine had crews too small for privateers and were probably also used in the slave trade or in Jeffreys's West Indian contract work. During the period 1702-9 Jeffreys, as a licensed 'separate trader', sent three private ventures to the west African coast. He was also a shareholder in the East India Company ('c'.1690-91) but was not conspicuously involved in the struggle between the old and new companies in the ensuing decade. 
Unlike his uncle, Jeffreys was interested in a more prominent public activity than the merely philanthropic service he gave as a commissioner for the Greenwich Hospital in 1695 or even the lieutenancy commission to which he and his brother John were named in 1689. From the heiress of the (unrelated) Colonel John Jeffreys of Brecon, he purchased The Priory there. This significant acquisition facilitated his return to parliament as a tory for the borough of Brecon in every parliament between 1690 and his death in 1709, except for that of 1698-1701, when his petition against a hostile return was rejected by the House of Commons. In parliament Jeffreys was particularly active on colonial and commercial questions. He continued his family's tory loyalties, an affiliation consistent with his association with the Royal African Company and the old East India Company. Nevertheless, as a merchant he found it prudent to mute his partisanship. After his death, both his son Nicholas and his daughter Sarah married into the whig Eyles family. 
Jeffreys's political activity did not at first extend to the City of London, but in 1699, by which time he was thought to be worth $300,000, he was elected sheriff. He surprised the City then by agreeing to serve, instead of fining to be excused as his uncle had done when elected alderman in 1660. In 1699 he was also knighted as sheriff and elected master of the Grocers' Company (1699-1701). This sudden spurt of activity was followed by his election as a common councillor for Aldgate ward (1700-01) and alderman for Portsoken ward in 1701. The lieutenancy commissioners named him colonel of the Yellow regiment of the trained bands in 1707, but forced him out the next year when they refused to accept the lesser officers he had nominated. He stood unsuccessfully for the mayoralty in 1703 but, it was thought at the time, would have been elected in 1709 had he not then been on his deathbed. 
Jeffreys inherited from his uncle a large town house on unusually extensive grounds in St Mary Axe. (After his death, his heirs cleared the property for the construction of Jeffreys Square.) For his greater comfort, he purchased Roehampton House, Surrey, from the estate of the countess of Devonshire. Here he resided until his death, which occurred at Marlborough on 25 October 1709, while he was returning home from a visit to Bath. He left extensive real estate, including several thousand acres acquired in Brecknockshire and the inherited prebendary lease (from St Paul's Cathedral) of the manor of Kentish Town outside London, including a demesne of 210 acres. Sir Jeffrey and his wife, who died in 1725, raised two sons and six daughters. On the death without male issue of both sons, Edward (1680-1740) and Nicholas (1683-1747), Jeffreys's real estate passed to Nicholas's daughter and heir, Elizabeth, who in 1749 was to marry the rising lawyer, Charles Pratt, later lord chancellor and first Earl Camden. On the Kentish Town demesne lands their son, the first Marquess Camden, developed the neighbourhood known as Camden Town, where Jeffreys Street and Brecknock Road recall the former owner. 


@@@@@


doc= 49859


Jeffreys, John (c.1614-1688), merchant, was the third of six sons of Edward Jeffreys (died 1642) of Llywel, Brecknockshire, a minor country gentleman of an ancient if decayed family. (The merchant is often confused with the unrelated Colonel John Jeffreys (1623-1689), of The Priory, Brecon, MP, brother of Herbert Jeffreys, lieutenant-governor of Virginia.) As a younger son in a family of limited resources, he was in 1632 placed apprentice with a merchant member of the London Grocers' Company. From the beginning of his independent activity, he devoted his attention primarily to the Virginia tobacco trade, then just beginning to be of commercial importance. In the 1630s and 1640s the London customs records show him importing modest amounts of tobacco from Virginia. His emergence as a leader in the trade came in the dynamic 1650s following the adoption of the 'Navigation Act' and the reconquest of royalist Virginia by a parliamentary fleet. (Though a royalist by sentiment, he was not above contracting to carry Cromwell's Irish prisoners to Virginia.) From at least the 1650s, he conducted his business in partnership with Thomas Colclough (1619-1680) from a Staffordshire gentry family. By 1660-61 Jeffreys was sufficiently prominent to be named (as a representative of the Chesapeake trade) a member of a panel of merchants advising the lords of a committee of council on foreign trade. His tobacco-import business was great enough for him to lose a reported $20,000 in leaf in the great fire of 1666. Thereafter, until his death in 1688, his firm was indisputably the leading importer of tobacco in London and in the country. As tobacco was the major commodity returned from North America, this made it the leading English merchant house trading to the continental colonies. 
Jeffreys also developed other trades of significant volume, if less important to him than tobacco. The London port book for 1686 shows him importing wine and raisins from Spain and Madeira, as well as iron and hemp from the Baltic (probably in return for tobacco) and linen from Hamburg. The last was probably intended for re-export to North America or the West Indies, whence he had also developed a significant import trade in sugar and logwood. 
As early as the 1650s, Jeffreys and Colclough maintained a 'principal factor' in Virginia, who supervised the selling and buying of lesser factors acting on commission. This basic trade was supplemented by a commission (or consignment) trade with local merchants, merchant planters, and a few greater planters in the tobacco colonies. The company was the London correspondent of governor Lord Howard of Effingham and of leading planter or merchant planter families such as the Chicheleys, Lees, Ludwells, and Wormeleys. Jeffreys was also active in the tobacco re-export trades. In the 1670s and 1680s, he and Alderman Jacob Lucie of London, an Eastland merchant, had contracts to supply tobacco to the monopolist Royal Tobacco Company of Sweden. These contracts involved them in frequent recourse to English ministers for help in obtaining payment from the monopoly company and from Andre Onkell, their factor in Stockholm. They were helped in getting such assistance not only by the fact that both were good tories, but also in part because Jeffreys was very close to his fellow Welshman, the secretary of state, Sir Leoline Jenkins, who admitted, 'I have subsisted 4 or 5 years in my Employment abroad by the Credit he [Jeffreys] gave me.' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 52). Also relevant for Jeffreys's American trades was his election in the 1670s as 'assistant' (director) of the slave-trading Royal African Company. In the 1680s his collaborator Lucie was both an assistant and deputy governor of this company, while Jeffreys's nephews were to continue this participation in the 1690s. Since the Royal African Company was reluctant to ship slaves to Virginia on its own account, the Jeffreys and their associates contracted in the 1670s and 1680s to buy from the company whole shiploads of slaves delivered by it in Virginia. 
Jeffreys's status in the London trading world was acknowledged by his election as master of the Grocers' Company in 1661. The year before, he had been elected alderman for Bread Street ward but paid $820 to be permitted to resign immediately. His family associations were all ultra-royalist and later tory but he may have judged a non-political stance commercially necessary. Tobacco was a highly taxed commodity and all who dealt in it had to be on civil terms with those in authority. Jeffreys on occasion spoke for the whole trade as well as for his private concerns. In 1685, for example, he led a delegation of the London Chesapeake trade testifying before the House of Commons (in committee of the whole) against the proposed new tobacco impost. Even so, in his old age Jeffreys accepted inclusion in the London lieutenancy commission of 1685. His closest competitor in his last years, Micaiah Perry, also avoided public office except for the lieutenancy. 
When Thomas Colclough died in 1680, Jeffreys replaced him as partner with his own nephew Jeffrey Jeffreys, son of his brother Walter (or Watkin) of Llywel. Like most successful merchants of his day, Alderman John Jeffreys accumulated considerable real estate both in his native county and in England, particularly in Gloucestershire and in and around London -- including the manor of Kentish Town. He was unmarried and following his death at Llywel on 5 November 1688 (the day William III landed in England), his will transferred most of his real estate in Brecknockshire to Lewis, son of his brother Thomas, and to Edward and Evan, the elder two sons of his brother Walter. The other half of his London firm was left to John, Walter's youngest son. His real estate in England went to his nephews Jeffrey and John, who were continuing his London business. A sister and other relatives were also remembered but the most interesting bequests were $2000 to Lord Chancellor Jeffreys (who was no relation), and another $2000 to his lordship's eldest son, John, the alderman's godson. Thus John Jeffreys's will suggests much about both his wealth and his adherence to his family's tory loyalties. 


@@@@@


doc= 49861


Marshe, John (c.1516-1579), mercer and merchant, was either the eldest son of Walter Marshe of London and his wife, Eleanor, or of John Marshe his namesake, with whom he is sometimes confused, who died in 1565 or 1566. He was a lawyer by training, and in 1536 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. As a young man he may also have been a sewer in the chamber of Henry VIII, a position either he or his namesake held by 1543. In that year he married Alice, the daughter and heir of William Gresham, and a cousin of Thomas Gresham, with whom he had at least three sons and one daughter. 
During the 1560s and 1570s Marshe became one of the most prominent and well-connected merchants in London. His main interest in overseas trade was in the export of wool and cloth to Flanders and northern France. He was also a shipowner and occasional moneylender. By 1559 he was a merchant of the staple, and served as one of its constables in 1561-2. He was a founder member of the Russia Company in 1555 and a leading figure in the Company of Merchant Adventurers. He served as governor of the company from 1555 to 1556, and for much of the period from 1559 to 1572. He was a warden in the Mercers' Company from 1558 to 1559 and from 1565 to 1566. Though he did not trade with Spain, he played a leading role in the establishment of the Spanish Company in 1577, claiming to have been the 'first mover' behind its incorporation ('CSP dom.', '1566-79', 'addenda', 505). 
As governor of the Merchant Adventurers, Marshe was determined to protect the privileges of the company against the threat of interloping. He was a key figure in the complex international crisis of 1563 and 1564 when trade was severely disrupted by an embargo on English wool and cloth in the Netherlands. His resolute leadership, and his support for government plans to move the Merchant Adventurers' mart from Antwerp to Emden, enabled the company to ride out the crisis. His influence with Sir William Cecil was instrumental in the issue of a new charter in 1564 which regularized the move to Emden, though the company returned to Antwerp in 1565. 
In addition to these commercial positions, Marshe held a number of important posts in London. As common sergeant from 1547 to 1563 he was responsible for much of the City's legal business. After retiring from that office in 1563 he became a judge in the sheriff's court. He served as an under-sheriff in Middlesex from 1545 to 1546 and from 1563 to 1566. He was on the commission of the peace for Middlesex from 1547 to 1554, and during 1562 and 1564. His experience enabled him to pursue a long and active parliamentary career; he may have sat as MP for Reading in 1547, though it is possible that this refers to his namesake. He was MP for London in 1553, 1554, 1558, 1559, 1563, 1571, and 1572. In 1555 he sat for Old Sarum. His strong protestant convictions led him to oppose Catholicism in the parliaments of Mary's reign. During the Elizabethan parliaments in which he sat, Marshe used his influence to support mercantile and corporate interests in London. He was put in charge of a variety of bills in 1559 and 1563, and was appointed to serve on a wide range of committees in 1566, 1571, 1572, and 1576, including the committee to examine Peter Wentworth in February 1576. During 1572 he made speeches on subjects including the Commons' right to freedom of speech; Mary Queen of Scots, against whom he spoke on 9 June; the bill dealing with the export of leather; and the bill for dyeing cloth. He whole-heartedly opposed the last measure, particularly as the proposed restriction on the export of undyed cloth struck at the commercial privileges of the Merchant Adventurers. 
Marshe was one of a small group of merchants who fostered the connection between the court and the City. He was close to Cecil, whom he provided with valuable diplomatic information when he was overseas on company business in 1559, 1565, 1568, and 1570. It was probably at Cecil's prompting that he organized the abduction of Dr John Story from the Netherlands in 1570, on the grounds that he was treasonably conspiring against the queen. Through Cecil's influence he was appointed to numerous commissions dealing with a wide range of matters. He was also involved in handling the commercial problems arising from the Anglo-Spanish crisis from 1568 to 1573. 
Although he was not among the wealthiest elite of merchants in London, Marshe was comfortably off. He owned land in Northamptonshire, including the manors of Bozeat and Sywell. In 1571, 1574, and 1576 he was awarded grants of concealed lands. A capable, trustworthy, and discreet man of business, he was acknowledged by Walsingham as 'a great favourer of the common cause to the utmost of his power' ('CSP for.', '1577-8', 609). He died in London in 1579, leaving Bozeat to his eldest son, William, and Sywell to his son-in-law, Anthony Jenkinson, the pioneer of English trade with Persia. John Stow records that a monument to him was placed in the parish church of St Michael in Wood Street, where he was buried, and the advowson of which he had purchased from Sir Thomas Gresham in 1565. 


@@@@@


doc= 49862


Moulson, Sir Thomas (c.1568-1638), merchant and politician, was the second son of Thomas Moulson of Hargrave Stubbs, Cheshire, and his wife, Alice, the daughter of John Aldersey of Spurstow and his wife, Anne. It is reputed that he received an education at Tarvin grammar school. Some time before 1590 he left his native Cheshire for Stade in northern Germany, where he traded for several years as a cloth merchant. During this time, in 1593, he was admitted to the freedom of the London Grocers' Company. After returning to England he married, on 15 December 1600, Ann (1576-1661) ['see 'Moulson, Ann, Lady Moulson], the daughter of Anthony Radcliffe, a merchant taylor of London. He settled in the London parish of St Christopher-le-Stocks and continued his business through factors. The couple had two children, but both died in infancy. By 1606 Moulson was the biggest exporter of northern kerseys in London, and as such became a leading member of the Company of Merchant Adventurers; he served as its treasurer in 1616-17 and rose to the governorship by 1624, a position which he held until his death. He was also a founder member of the revived French Company in 1611 and was admitted to the court of assistants of the Grocers' Company in 1613; two years later he served as the company's third warden. 
As a successful and therefore wealthy cloth merchant, Moulson was naturally absorbed into the ranks of London's ruling elite. Appointed an assistant of the City's company for the plantation of Ireland in 1615, he was a common councilman by 1617, a member of the prestigious Bridgehouse committee by 1618, and the City's auditor from 1620 to 1622. In 1623, then in his mid-fifties, he was named an alderman and appointed sheriff. Five years later he was elected an MP for London (even though he had not yet achieved knightly status or served as mayor) after London's voters rejected the corporation's own candidates for having supported the forced loan of 1626-7. During his time in parliament he drew attention, among other things, to the threat to England's cloth trade posed by recent Catholic military successes in Germany and spoke of his fear for the safety of protestantism at home. In 1634 he served as lord mayor and was knighted at Greenwich. 
Moulson's religious sympathies were clearly Calvinist -- in his will of 1636 he described himself as a member of the elect -- and perhaps even puritan, for during the mid-1630s he and his fellow vestrymen of St Christopher-le-Stocks resolved not to hold meetings on the Sabbath and to appoint a lecturer, Mr Hood, to whom Moulson later bequeathed 40's'. Shortly thereafter he fell ill. He declined to serve as president of Christ's Hospital in February 1637, and died on 6 December 1638. He was buried in the vault of St Christopher's on 10 January 1639. A generous benefactor of the poor, and of the companies to which he belonged, he also remembered Hargrave, the parish where he was brought up, and its combined school and chapel, which he had built at his own cost in 1627. 


@@@@@


doc= 49868


Lawrence, Arnold Walter (1900-1991), archaeologist, was born at 2 Polstead Road, Oxford, on 2 May 1900, the fifth of five illegitimate sons of Thomas Robert Lawrence and Sarah Lawrence, the names adopted for purposes of parentage by Sir Thomas Robert Tighe Chapman (1846-1919), bt, and Sarah Junner (1861-1959). Thomas Edward Lawrence (1888-1935) was one of his brothers. He was educated at the City of Oxford School and New College, Oxford, and graduated with a third in 'literae humaniores' in 1921, having acquired the diploma in classical archaeology the year before. Blessed with private means, he was a student at the British Schools at Rome and Athens from 1921 to 1926, the last two years as Craven fellow of Oxford University, and travelled widely to examine Greek and especially Hellenistic sculpture. A season at Ur in 1923 under Leonard Woolley convinced him that excavation was not his line. In 1925 he married Barbara Innes (1902-1986), daughter of the Revd Edgar Wesley Thompson, and a fellow student. They settled at Hermitage in Berkshire. Their daughter, registered as Helen Thera, but soon renamed Jane, was born in 1926. At Hermitage, Lawrence put together the results of his studies and 'Later Greek Sculpture', the principal subject of his research, appeared in 1927. It was followed two years later by 'Classical Sculpture', a wider survey. In 1930 he was elected to the Laurence readership in classical archaeology at Cambridge, where he built a then very modern house on Madingley Road, the architect being his friend Marshall Sisson. Lawrence's interest had now turned away from sculpture and his next book, published in 1935, was 'Herodotus', a revision of George Rawlinson's translation with copious new notes. 
Lawrence had always been close to his brother T. E. Lawrence -- the eldest brother had become a missionary and the two others were killed in the First World War -- and T. E. Lawrence's death in 1935 saddled him with a literary executorship which he performed long and faithfully, and with an embarrassing exposure to the devotees and denigrators of his famous brother. During the Second World War he was employed in generally futile jobs. In 1944 he succeeded A. J. B. Wace as Laurence professor of classical archaeology at Cambridge and as such was elected to a fellowship at Jesus College. In 1951 he obtained a Leverhulme research fellowship for the study of ancient fortifications, a subject inherited from T. E. Lawrence. The same year he resigned his Cambridge post to go to the Gold Coast (later Ghana) to be what was in effect archaeological supremo -- professor of archaeology at the University College, director of the National Museum, and secretary and conservator of the monuments and relics committee. He resigned these posts in 1957 and soon after settled at Pateley Bridge in Yorkshire, later moving up the dale to Bouthwaite. His 'Greek Architecture' had appeared in 1957 and in retirement he wrote 'Trade Castles and Forts of West Africa' (1960), 'Greek and Roman Sculpture' (1972), a much revised version of his earlier book, and 'Greek Aims in Fortification' (1979), which was followed by a long paper on Byzantine fortifications in the 'Annual of the British School at Athens', 1983. Eventually, when neither he nor his wife could any longer drive, they moved to Langford, near Biggleswade, where soon -- in 1986 -- his wife died unexpectedly (his daughter having already died in 1978). Without her Lawrence lost interest and was quietly pining away, until Peggy Guido, an old friend, took him off to her house at 44 Long Street, Devizes, Wiltshire. There he revived and started working again on Herodotus. He died suddenly at Peggy's home on 11 March 1991. 
Lawrence -- he did not like to be called by either of his forenames -- was a good-looking and active man, in character conscientious, hard-working, modest, and basically shy. In company, though, he liked to shock, and indulged an impish humour so that casual acquaintances tended to consider him shallow or frivolous. In contrast or reaction to his mother's doctrinal fervour Lawrence was conscientiously anti-religious. He did not seem troubled by his illegitimacy, which indeed few knew of before Richard Aldington's 'Lawrence of Arabia' appeared in 1955. His marriage was a happy one. Barbara was an intelligent and attractive woman, with -- fortunately -- a less insistent conscience: she regularly accompanied him on his many travels. As a teacher, Lawrence was for long handicapped by his shyness and it was not until he went to Ghana that he became a confident lecturer. He was, though, a good judge of students and a helpful adviser. He was also, when he had the opportunity, a capable and energetic organizer, as he showed at Cambridge in the Museum of Classical Archaeology (of which as professor he was curator) and on a grander scale in Ghana. Lawrence's writings were on subjects unfashionable in Britain and he did not advertise himself by lecturing in other institutions or attending conferences, and his often unorthodox views made him suspect to some elder scholars, so that he was for long undervalued and his fellowship of the British Academy was disgracefully belated. But he was one of the more original classical archaeologists of his time, with an exceptional knowledge of other cultures, which he used with disconcerting effect. Deservedly, his later books became standard works. 


@@@@@


doc= 49869


Lean, Sir David (1908-1991), film director, was born at 38 Blenheim Crescent, Croydon, on 25 March 1908, the elder of the two sons of Francis William Le Blount Lean (died 1973) and his wife, Helena Annie Tangye (died 1962). The Tangyes and the Leans were both old-established Quaker families, and after attending a preparatory school in Croydon David was sent to Leighton Park, a Quaker school in Reading. He was an undistinguished scholar, but the school's liberal regime allowed him to pursue his enthusiasm for photography and overlooked his illicit visits to the local cinemas. At the age of nineteen he began work as a ledger clerk at Viney, Price, and Goodyear, where his father worked as a chartered accountant. It was obvious, however, that he had no aptitude for figures, and his father arranged for him to be taken on at the Shepherd's Bush studios of the Gaumont-British Picture Corporation. 
Protected by the 'Cinematograph Films Act' of 1927, British film production was expanding rapidly, and Lean grasped the opportunity to gain experience as an assistant cameraman, assistant director, and -- after being demoted for accidentally exposing a series of close-ups of Madeleine Carroll to white light -- wardrobe assistant. It was as an editor, however, that he established his reputation. He adjusted more easily than many of his older colleagues to the coming of sound and the problems of synchronization it entailed, and was made editor of Gaumont Sound News in 1930. On 28 June 1930 he married his cousin Isabel Mayo Lean ('b'. 1907/8), daughter of Edmund Wylde Lean, chartered accountant; their son, Peter, was born in October. 
Lean's career progressed rapidly. Early in 1931 he moved to British Movietone News, the most prestigious of the newsreel companies, and while there he supplemented his income by editing low-budget feature films, most notably 'Money for Speed' (1933) and 'The Ghost Camera' (1933), both of which were directed by Bernard Vorhaus. His marriage progressed less happily, and in August 1932 Lean left his wife and son. 
Lean's speed in decision-making and his comprehensive memory for visual images made him an extremely good newsreel editor, but he was increasingly in demand as an editor of feature films. When Dr Paul Czinner was invited to Britain to make prestige films starring his wife, Elizabeth Bergner, Lean was recruited as editor. From a starting salary of 10's'. a week at Gaumont-British he was able to command an unprecedented $60 a week for cutting 'As You Like It' (1936). After editing the last of the Czinner-Bergner films, 'Dreaming Lips' (1937), however, Lean, like many others, was thrown out of work by the disastrous slump which hit the industry. He had saved nothing during his years of plenty and was in a perilous financial situation. 
Lean was helped through this crisis by his younger brother, Edward, then a reporter on the 'News Chronicle', and the actress and dancer Kathleen (Kay) Walsh (1911-2005), daughter of James Walsh, an engineer, with whom he began a relationship in 1936. Lean edited 'The Last Adventurers' (1937), a low-budget film about Grimsby trawlermen in which Walsh had a part, but his big break came when he was recommended to Gabriel Pascal, an expatriate Hungarian who had persuaded George Bernard Shaw to let him make a film adaptation of 'Pygmalion'. The film was a big success, and Lean went on to work with the director, Anthony Asquith, on 'French without Tears' (1939) and with the producer, Pascal, on 'Major Barbara' (1940). 
Lean, a dedicated and reliable craftsman whose advice was often sought when a film seemed to be in trouble, had been offered the chance to direct several times. However, he was wary of directing low-budget films where there was little opportunity for creative expression and the danger of being blamed for the shortcomings of a poorly developed script, skimpy sets, and miscast actors. On 'Major Barbara' Pascal's inexperience led Lean and the 'dialogue director' Harold French to direct much of the film themselves. With this experience behind him, Lean felt able to accept Noel Coward's offer to help in the direction of 'In which we Serve' (1942), a prestigious naval drama based on the experiences of Earl Mountbatten as the commander of a destroyer, and to insist on being credited as co-director. 
Coward and Lean worked well together, and Coward (who had written the script and was playing the leading role) was increasingly content to leave directorial duties to Lean. 'In which we Serve' went on to become a critical success and the most popular British film of the war years. Coward encouraged Lean to form a production company, Cineguild, with the film's producer, Anthony Havelock-Allan, and cinematographer, Ronald Neame. Three very different Coward adaptations followed: 'This Happy Breed' (1944), 'Blithe Spirit' (1945), and 'Brief Encounter' (1945). 'This Happy Breed', which follows the fortunes of a typical English lower-middle-class family between the wars, was another huge commercial success; but it was the much smaller-scale 'Brief Encounter', a success only in what the film trade termed 'the better-class halls', which established Lean's international reputation as a director. At the time, critics praised it for its realism, and for the emotional honesty of its portrayal of an unconsummated love affair between two married, middle-class, middle-aged people. But in retrospect its expressive use of Rachmaninov's second piano concerto, its 'noir'-ish lighting, and its convoluted use of flashbacks look typical of a romantic stylization which became characteristic of Lean's films. 
The ending of 'Brief Encounter' sees the triumph of duty and conformity over romantic self-expression, but for both Lean and Coward the film was fuelled by creative empathy rather than personal experience. Unlike Laura and Alex, Lean repeatedly broke out of his commitments to begin a new life with a new love. According to Ronald Neame, 'David always had a girl on any film he worked on' (Brownlow, 213). In August 1936 Lean had been divorced by his wife, Isabel, and on 23 November 1940 he married Kay Walsh, but this marriage survived only because she was prepared to overlook his persistent infidelity. In 1946 he left her for the costume designer Margaret Furse, although they continued to have a fruitful working relationship, Walsh writing the conciliatory ending of 'Great Expectations' (1946) and the dramatic opening of 'Oliver Twist' (1948). 

'Great Expectations', the first film Lean made without Noel Coward, was rapturously received: Richard Winnington in the 'News Chronicle' asked his readers 'to pay attention to the first big British film to have been made, a film that confidently sweeps our cloistered virtues into the open'. There was a degree of disappointment, however, when Lean chose to follow up his success with another Dickens adaptation, and although 'Oliver Twist' was popular in Britain, in the USA it became caught up in the political wrangles over Britain's handling of the Palestine mandate and was boycotted by Jewish groups objecting to Alec Guinness's portrayal of Fagin. 
Cineguild shared in the declining fortunes of the British film industry in the late 1940s, and Lean's next two films, 'The Passionate Friends' (1949) and 'Madeleine' (1950), were both commercial failures. Both films starred Ann Todd (1907-1993), who, following international success in a modestly budgeted melodrama, 'The Seventh Veil' (1945), had been invited to Hollywood to star in Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Paradine Case' (1948). Lean, who had taken over the directing of 'The Passionate Friends' from Ronald Neame, found it difficult to work with an actress who regarded herself as a star, but during location shooting at Lake Annecy they fell in love. After Lean was divorced by Kay Walsh and Todd by her husband, Nigel Tangye (Lean's second cousin), they married on 21 May 1949. 
Apart from 'Ryan's Daughter', 'The Passionate Friends' and 'Madeleine' are Lean's most under-rated films probably because they are unabashed melodramas which concentrate on the psychology and dilemmas of their heroine in a way which was untypical of British cinema at the time. Celia Johnson's Laura Jessop in 'Brief Encounter' could be seen as an ordinary woman (if only by upper-middle-class film critics); Mary Justin and Madeleine Smith are disturbingly unusual women and manifestations of Ann Todd's star persona. A third film with Todd followed, 'The Sound Barrier' (1952), but this is much less of a melodrama, and her role, important though it is, is as part of an ensemble rather than as a star. The film's setting in the brave new world of British aviation helped to make it a commercial success, but Lean's relationship with his third wife was severely strained. Henceforth they pursued their careers separately. 
Cineguild's films had all been made for J. Arthur Rank, but when Rank cut back on production budgets in response to the adverse financial conditions at the end of the 1940s, Cineguild was dissolved, and Lean made 'The Sound Barrier' and his next film, 'Hobson's Choice' (1953), for Alexander Korda. It was Korda who initiated the next phase in Lean's career by sending him to India to research for a film about the Taj Mahal. Lean was enchanted by India, stayed a month, and began a romance with an unhappily married Indian woman, Leila Matkar (died 1998). The Taj Mahal film never materialized, and instead Lean went to Venice to make 'Summer Madness' (1954), an Anglo-American co-production between Korda and United Artists starring Katharine Hepburn. Ann Todd stayed in London playing Lady Macbeth at the Old Vic. 

'Summer Madness', Lean's favourite film, marked a shift in his style of film-making. It was his first film aimed at an international audience and his first film shot on location. Hitherto, apart from excursions for exterior shots (such as Carnforth station in 'Brief Encounter' and Lake Annecy in 'The Passionate Friends'), Lean's films, with their chiaroscuro lighting and meticulously prepared sets, were very much a product of the studio system in which he had served his apprenticeship. With 'Summer Madness', Lean discovered that, given a big enough budget and a dedicated camera and set design team, he could mould the external world to his vision. Quintessentially English though he was, he also found that he enjoyed living abroad. His wanderlust was enhanced when, after separating from Ann Todd, he was told that he would be liable for the tax debts of her company, Glendorgal, were he to stay in England. After the premiere of 'Summer Madness' in May 1955 he began an exile from Britain which lasted for thirty years. 
Lean returned to India, where he was reunited with Leila Matkar, and worked with Richard Mason on an adaptation of his novel 'The Wind Cannot Read', a wartime romance between an RAF officer and a Japanese woman set in India and Burma. Unfortunately, Korda thought the script unacceptably sentimental and refused to finance the film. The script then passed to Betty Box and Ralph Thomas, who made the film for the Rank organization in 1958. By this time Lean had made an adaptation of Pierre Boulle's best-selling novel 'The Bridge on the River Kwai' for the American producer Sam Spiegel. Boule's critique of the British military ethos was very different from the subdued, respectful heroism of British war films like 'The Cruel Sea' and 'The Dam Busters', and Lean quickly fell out with Carl Foreman, the exiled American writer whom Spiegel had commissioned to write the script. As Lean told Spiegel: 'The subject is pretty tricky at the best of times. If it misses it will be a bad miss. To put it over, one has to have a real understanding of the British mentality or it will be offensive. Mr Foreman hasn't got the first glimmer and he is offensive. (Brownlow, 350)' Foreman was replaced with another blacklisted American writer, Michael Wilson, with whom Lean forged a much better relationship. Nevertheless, in the harsh conditions of location filming in the jungles of Ceylon, Lean encountered a degree of hostility from his cast and crew, who assumed he was making an anti-British film. In fact, with the sympathetic performance of Alec Guinness and the clever use of the popular band tune 'Colonel Bogey' Lean maintained a delicate balance between criticizing and celebrating British courage and intransigence. The film was internationally successful, and in 1958 won several American academy awards, including that for best director. Lean was inundated with offers to make films in Hollywood, but he preferred to maintain his independence, and began a collaboration with Emeric Pressburger on a film about Gandhi, which was to star Alec Guinness. The resulting script, however, was a disappointment, and Lean and Spiegel switched to a film about T. E. Lawrence. 
Attempts to make a film about Lawrence's exploits in Arabia went back to the 1930s, when Korda had attempted to persuade Lawrence to allow Leslie Howard to play him in a film to be directed by Lewis Milestone. Lawrence was killed in a motorcycle crash in 1935, and all subsequent attempts to make a film about him had been thwarted by his brother and literary executor, Professor A. W. Lawrence. Spiegel's charm and money, Lean's impressive record of film-making, and a thoughtful analytical treatment written by Michael Wilson now persuaded the professor to allow a film to go ahead. The film's gestation period was a troubled one, with the playwright Robert Bolt eventually replacing Wilson as writer and Peter O'Toole playing the role for which actors as various as Marlon Brando and Albert Finney had been proposed. After four months' shooting in the Jordanian desert, Spiegel forced Lean to suspend production, and the remaining sequences were shot in Spain and Morocco, Seville standing in for Cairo, Jerusalem, and Damascus. Lean shared Lawrence's passion for the desert, and his experience of shooting the film was enriched by his harmonious relationship with the cinematographer, Freddie Young, and his romantic involvement with the New Zealand-born Barbara Cole, who handled continuity on the film. Ann Todd had divorced Lean in July 1957, and in July 1960 he married Leila Matkar. But it was with Barbara Cole that he spent most of the next seven years. 
Though 'Lawrence of Arabia' (1962) had gone considerably over budget, its intelligent approach to a far-from-conventional hero and the visual splendour of the desert imagery made it a genuine modern epic; the film was awarded seven American academy awards in 1962. The partnership between Lean and Spiegel had been severely strained by tensions over the shooting schedule for 'Lawrence of Arabia', and for his next film, an adaptation of Boris Pasternak's Nobel prize-winning novel 'Doctor Zhivago', Lean turned to a less intrusive producer, Carlo Ponti. The commercial success of his last two films had given Lean considerable power, and he was allowed to make a hugely expensive film (production lasted 232 days) with the two main parts filled by relatively unknown actors. Lean and his scriptwriter Robert Bolt resisted pressure from Ponti to cast his wife (Sophia Loren) in the part of Lara and instead chose Julie Christie. After considering Paul Newman, Max von Sydow, Burt Lancaster, and Peter O'Toole, Lean took a chance on Omar Sharif, the Egyptian actor who had made a strong impression as Sherif Ali in 'Lawrence of Arabia'. When 'Doctor Zhivago' opened in New York in December 1965 press reviews were mixed, some critics objecting to it as a shallow and sentimental rendering of Pasternak's novel. But after the first few days public reaction shifted decisively in the film's favour. It was nominated for ten American academy awards, winning five, and became an international box-office success. 'Doctor Zhivago' made Lean rich and allowed him virtual carte blanche to make what he wanted. He had also decided to make a permanent break with Leila and settle down with Barbara Cole, but in November 1966, while he was in India for the release of 'Doctor Zhivago', he met and fell in love with Sandra Hotz, a twenty-year-old Swiss South African whose family owned the Laurie Hotel in Agra, which Lean had patronized regularly since his first visit to India in 1954. They lived together for the next nineteen years, though for twelve of them Lean remained married to Leila. 
Rejecting Bolt's attempt at the Gandhi project and his idea of adapting 'Madame Bovary', Lean encouraged him to write an original story which would transpose Flaubert's account of a woman's tragic search for sexual self-expression in a repressive society from nineteenth-century France to somewhere with more dramatic potential. Bolt responded with 'Ryan's Daughter', set in a remote Irish village shortly after the Easter rising of 1916. Lean had been angered by the accusations that he had lost the ability to make small-scale, intimate films, and planned to shoot it in ten weeks. With the production plagued by the weather on the Dingle peninsula in the far south-west of Ireland, the costs escalated rapidly, and when the film was finally completed it was dismissed by most critics as an overblown and old-fashioned melodrama. Lean, unused to such critical mauling, was bitterly upset, and it was fourteen years before he made another film. The film's length (over three hours), the seeming flimsiness of the story, and the odd casting of Robert Mitchum as the gentle, flower-loving cuckolded husband combined with the film's poor critical reception to alienate audiences. With hindsight, 'Ryan's Daughter', with its beautifully judged performances, spectacular imagery, and boldly sympathetic focus on female sexuality, can be judged less harshly, but it was out of time with a new mood in film-making which stressed fast pace, urban environments, and a much cheaper and more improvisatory style of film-making. 
Lean's absence from film-making was not something he intended, and over the next fourteen years he was involved in a number of interesting projects -- most notably a lavish two-part dramatization of the events surrounding the mutiny on the 'Bounty' -- which failed to come to fruition. After a long sojourn on the South Sea islands of Tahiti and Bora Bora, he returned to London in June 1981 and was approached by Lord Brabourne to direct 'A Passage to India'. Lean agreed but insisted on writing his own script, which departed significantly from E. M. Forster's novel in the more sympathetic role allotted to its female protagonist, Miss Quested. Though Lean faced the usual accusations of extravagance during the shooting of the film, it was generally well received both in Britain and in the USA when it was released in December 1984. 
In 1983 Lean had received one of the first British Film Institute fellowships. In June 1984 he was knighted. In 1990 he received an American Film Institute lifetime achievement award. Amid these honours, however, Lean's personal life remained turbulent. In August 1978 he was finally divorced from Leila, and in October 1981 he married Sandra Hotz. In November 1985 the couple were divorced, and in December 1990 Lean married Sandra Cooke, an art dealer, with whom he had been living since 1985. Shortly after the wedding Lean was diagnosed with throat cancer. He responded well to radiotherapy, but in February 1991 he developed pneumonia, and he died at his home at Sun Wharf, 30 Narrow Street, Limehouse, London, on 16 April. He was buried at Putney Vale crematorium on 22 April. A memorial service was held at St Paul's Cathedral on 3 October 1991. 
Lean's thorough apprenticeship gave him a confidence in his own abilities which made it possible for him to handle large-scale productions without being panicked into rushed decisions. He was prepared to accept the embarrassment of having large numbers of people standing idle while he made his mind up because he was convinced that there was only one way to film a sequence and that even the most rigorous pre-planning could not always predict what that best way was. 
Lean's Quaker background, though it failed to implant in him deep religious beliefs, gave him an austere seriousness which made him impatient of the sybaritic lifestyle favoured by many people in the film industry. Though his early success accustomed him to wealth and luxury and he was always immaculately and expensively dressed, he seemed happiest among the hardships of location filming. He was a handsome man who liked and was liked by women, and he regarded a satisfying sexual relationship as a priority. 
Though there is still a tendency to judge Lean's modest English black and white films as superior to his lavish epics, the intelligence, flair, and visual splendour of the latter were what made him an internationally renowned director, and their achievements have proved difficult to emulate. 


@@@@@


doc= 49872


Lewis, Sir (William) Arthur (1915-1991), economist, was born on 23 January 1915 at Castries, St Lucia, the fourth son of George Ferdinand Lewis (died 'c'.1922) and his wife, Ida, both schoolteachers who had immigrated to St Lucia from Antigua. He later claimed that an illness that kept him from school furthered his education immensely and that his year spent in the civil service before he went to university taught him the importance of filing and method. After his time at St Mary's College, Castries, and in the civil service, he obtained a scholarship in 1932 and moved to Britain to study at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE). He gained BComm first-class, and obtained another scholarship to do his PhD there. In 1938 he was appointed to its faculty. He married in 1947 Gladys Jacobs, Grenadan by birth, a teacher. They had two daughters. 
Lewis remained at LSE until 1948, by which time he was a reader, and in 1948 he took up a chair in economics at Manchester University. He stayed there until 1958, becoming the principal of the University College of the West Indies and then its vice-chancellor when it became a fully-fledged university in 1962. He was a close spectator of the collapse of the West Indian Federation. After being knighted in 1963, he moved to Princeton University, where he remained until his retirement in 1983. From 1943, when he joined the Board of Trade, Lewis worked directly for governments or as a consultant for various governments or quasi-governmental organizations, the last of these being as president of the Caribbean development bank from 1970 to 1973. 
Lewis's original research was on the problems of the industrialized world. In 1940 he produced his first substantial work, 'Economic Problems of Today', soon after the war 'Monopoly in British Industry', and in 1949 'Overhead Costs: some Essays in Economic Analysis' and 'Economic Survey, 1919-1939'. In the last of these he had argued that the growing inter-war protectionism had exacerbated economic problems and prolonged the depression. In his last major purely economic work, 'Growth and Fluctuations, 1870-1913' (1978), he returned to examine an earlier period when trade was much freer. He was, however, to become better known for his work in development economics, of which he was regarded as one of the founders and for which he received the Nobel prize in 1979 (shared with Theodore Schultz of the USA). The origins of this side of Lewis's work can be discerned in his early writings on the British West Indies. In 1936 he had written an analysis of the non-plantation sector of agriculture in those territories; in 1939 he published his discussion of the labour disturbances ('Labour in the West Indies: the Birth of a Workers' Movement') and their economic causes and submitted a memorandum to the royal commission that was investigating those events. 
Lewis's opportunity to do something practical came in 1944, when he moved from the Board of Trade to the Colonial Office. In 1945 he published a devastating critique of the proposals by another economist for the development of Jamaica. His own proposals grew out of his own earlier examination of the West Indies and his time as a consultant to the Caribbean commission, when he reflected upon the policies to develop Puerto Rico. In 1950 his 'Industrialization of the British West Indies' built on those policies. Described somewhat inaccurately as industrialization by invitation, the main policies were adhered to by most of these governments but they failed to take sufficient note of Lewis's warning that a federation was the prerequisite for their success. At the University College of the West Indies his attempts to make the institution more relevant to the social and economic needs of the region were not always well received. He found the end of the federation disheartening. His continuing concern with the West Indies was demonstrated when he headed the Caribbean development bank, allegedly threatening to resign from Princeton University if he could not get an extra year's leave. 
Lewis's major contributions to development economics were made in the early 1950s. By this time he had broadened his West Indian experience by working on the United Nations report 'Measures for the Economic Development of Underdeveloped Countries' (1951), his membership of the board of the Colonial Development Corporation (1951-3), and as consultant to the Gold Coast and western Nigeria governments and for the United Nations in Asia and the Far East. He returned to Ghana from 1957 to 1958 as adviser to the prime minister, Kwame Nkrumah, though the relationship ended badly. His major, purely theoretical, statement of the major problems of development was 'Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour' (1954). Here he identified a capitalist sector of the economy that needed to expand if economic development was to be successful; it would do this by drawing labour from the stagnant traditional sector, thereby expanding and producing the investment needed for further economic growth. This article reintroduced the concerns for long-term growth and its effects on different sections of society that nineteenth-century classical economists maintained; it also served to demonstrate Lewis's recognition that neo-classical economics had severe limitations in dealing with the problems of developing countries. His summation of his experience appeared the next year as 'The Theory of Economic Growth'. Here Lewis showed his knowledge that development was not a mere exercise in applied economic theory but had to take into account political, social, and cultural influences. In an appendix he even broached the topic of the links between growth and welfare. In 1966 he wrote 'Development Planning: the Essentials of Economic Policy', which displayed his usual humane good sense and returned to the ground that he had traversed in 1949, when dealing with developed economies. In 'Politics in West Africa' (1965) he wrote about the problems of democracy in ethnically divided societies, a subject that has recently become more fashionable. In 1964, when most aid had a political agenda, he raised the issue of its effective use. In 1985 his lectures on 'Racial Conflict and Economic Development' were published; there his concerns with the wider context of economic problems were once more clearly set out. 
After his retirement from Princeton in 1983 Lewis moved to Barbados but continued to lecture. His last years were marred by illness and he died, in Bridgetown, Barbados, on 15 June 1991. He was buried on 22 June in the grounds of the Sir Arthur Lewis Community College in St Lucia. He is also commemorated by the Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and Economic Studies (SALISES) on each of the three campuses of the University of the West Indies. 


@@@@@


doc= 49873


Lewy, Casimir (1919-1991), philosopher, was born in Warsaw, Poland, on 26 February 1919, the son of Ludwik Lewy (1887-1919) and his wife, Izabela, 'nee' Rybier (1892-1942). His father, who was a medical doctor, died when he was in infancy, so that he grew up in his mother's large and talented family. In 1927 he was sent to a fashionable private school in Warsaw owned by the Lutheran congregation, the Mikolaj Rej School, which was attended by a number of gifted people with whom he became friendly. At fifteen he read an article in a literary weekly by Tadeusz Kotarbinski, and his interest in philosophy was aroused. Characteristically he not only bought a copy of a book by Kotarbinski, but also started to attend lectures in philosophy at the University of Warsaw. 
Lewy came to England in 1936 in order to improve his English but, concluding that this would be insufficiently stimulating, he matriculated at Cambridge and read philosophy as well. Although he had intended to return to Warsaw after a year, he decided to continue with his studies in Cambridge under the supervision of John Wisdom at Trinity College. He graduated in 1939 with first-class honours, having already published four papers in the journal 'Analysis', a remarkable achievement for a man of twenty whose native language was Polish. The outbreak of war made a return to Poland impossible, and Lewy registered for a PhD on 'Some philosophical considerations about the survival of death' under the supervision of G. E. Moore. The degree was awarded in 1943, and from January 1943 to 1945 he lectured in Cambridge, taking as his theme an influential remark made by John Wisdom in his paper 'Metaphysics and verification' that the statements of philosophers are in a certain sense 'verbal'. Shortly after marrying Eleanor Ford ('b'. 1923/4), daughter of Percy Ford, a university professor, on 28 July 1945 Lewy took up a lectureship in Liverpool, where Eleanor also held a lectureship in economic history. They went on to have three sons: Nicholas, Sebastian, and John Dominic. 
In 1952 Lewy returned to Cambridge as university lecturer in moral sciences. He was appointed Sidgwick lecturer in 1955, becoming a fellow of Trinity College in 1959. In 1972 he was appointed reader in philosophy, a post he held until his retirement in 1982. Lewy held visiting professorships at the University of Illinois in 1951-2, at the University of Texas at Austin in 1967, and at Yale in 1969. He was elected to an honorary fellowship of the Polish Society of Arts and Sciences Abroad in 1968, and to a fellowship of the British Academy in 1980. In 1985 'Exercises in Analysis', which included papers by nine of his former pupils, was published as a token of gratitude for the passionate work that had gone into his supervisions. 
During the first period at Cambridge, as well as attending many of Moore's lectures, Lewy attended all the lectures Wittgenstein gave between 1938 and 1945. He became friendly with both men, but it was Moore whom he chose as his PhD supervisor. His respect and affection for Moore were very great; in the preface to 'Meaning and Modality' he says that he learned more from Moore's lectures on metaphysics in 1938-9 and in the preceding year than from any other course he attended. During the war he assisted Moore with the editorial work for the journal 'Mind', and after Moore's death he prepared two volumes of his papers for publication. The first, 'Commonplace Book, 1919-1953', was published in 1962, followed by 'Lectures on Philosophy' in 1966. He also prepared for publication two books based on the lecture notes of C. D. Broad, Moore's successor at Cambridge, 'Leibniz' (1975) and 'Kant: an Introduction' (1978). The time devoted to meticulously preparing these volumes partly explains why he published so little after his return to Cambridge. However, his publications include 'Meaning and Modality', which though it was published in 1976 had grown out of the lectures he first gave in Cambridge during the war, for all that they were revised many times. Attacking reductive accounts of abstract entities, Lewy argues that many influential theories in the philosophy of language and logic -- for example, that necessary truths are so by convention -- are based on the mistaken supposition that such an account is possible. The book concludes with two dense chapters on entailment, the topic he wrote about most, concluding that any attempt to reconstruct an intuitive concept that avoids the paradoxes of strict implication will have aspects which are as anti-intuitive as the paradoxes themselves. 
Lewy was an exceptionally able teacher, and many of his pupils went on to distinguished academic careers. To give of oneself as he did in lectures and tutorials must have been exhausting, and further explains why he published relatively little work of his own after 1952. His lectures and supervisions were devoted to a passionate and exhausting pursuit of the truth -- the key point was invariably one of logic and meaning. It became apparent that it is easy to make mistakes, and difficult to live up to the standards set for one. But demanding though this was, supervisions could also be fun. Lewy had a superb dramatic talent, and loved telling stories delivered in a Polish accent with a strong vibrato and accompanying winks and gestures. Many concerned the extraordinary things other philosophers had said, culminating with such comments as 'If that's what his logic is like, I don't want to know about his moral philosophy' (personal knowledge). He died in Cambridge, of a heart attack, while being operated on for cancer of the colon, on 8 February 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49875


Lipson, Henry Solomon (1910-1991), physicist, was born on 11 March 1910 at 107 Wavertree Road, West Derby, Liverpool, the third and last child of Israel Lipson, shopkeeper, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Friedlander. All his grandparents were Polish Jewish emigres who settled in Liverpool at the end of the nineteenth century. Shortly after his birth his father's business failed and, to support his family, Israel used his only asset, his considerable physical strength, and became a steelworker at Shotton, Flintshire. Lipson's mother managed the home well and also encouraged her children to become educated. From 1921 to 1927 Lipson attended Hawarden grammar school where he developed his lifelong interest in physics. At the age of seventeen he was awarded the Henry Neville Gladstone scholarship and a Flintshire county exhibition, and began studying physics at Liverpool University, eventually obtaining a first-class honours degree and the Oliver Lodge prize in 1930. The award of a demonstratorship enabled him to stay in Liverpool to do research. Lipson teamed up with another research student, one year his senior, C. A. Beevers. They were set the task of solving crystal structures from X-ray diffraction data and they had to make all their own equipment. Since they had no idea how to use their data they sought advice from Professor Lawrence Bragg, who had set up a world centre for crystallography in Manchester. With his help they solved a number of structures, including that of copper sulphate. This required extensive calculations, and Beevers and Lipson invented an aid to calculation, the Beevers-Lipson strips, which were widely used and immortalized their names in crystallography. 
As a demonstrator Lipson continued to do research in Liverpool, together with some teaching, until 1936 when Bragg invited him to work in Manchester with Dr J. A. Bradley on the structure of metals. However, in 1937 Bragg became director of the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington and just one year later he replaced Lord Rutherford as the Cavendish professor at Cambridge. Bradley and Lipson accompanied him on each of these moves. It was while at Teddington that, on 12 December 1937, Lipson married Jane 
(Jenny; 'b'. 1909/10)
, an invoice clerk, and daughter of Samuel Rosenthal, master tailor. 
Lipson was, 'de facto', in charge of the crystallography group in Cambridge. Many young researchers -- for example Max Perutz (later a Nobel laureate) -- benefited from the care and effort he lavished on them. Lipson also tried to instil in them a sense of serving the needs of other scientists and of society at large. In his turn Lipson was influenced by others at the Cavendish. In particular, contact with P. P. Ewald made him realize the importance of the Fourier transform in relation to X-ray crystallography -- something that influenced all his subsequent research. Lipson's stay in Cambridge was scientifically successful but he was never fully integrated into the life of the university. He was awarded a Cambridge MA in 1942, adding to the DSc awarded by Liverpool in 1939, but he never became a member of a college. 
In 1945 W. H. Taylor became head of the crystallography group at the Cavendish and Lipson moved with his family to take over Taylor's vacant post at the Manchester College of Technology (later the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology). The post to which Lipson moved, head of the physics department, carried with it little status and no title. Lipson built up crystallographic research so that within a few years the college became an important world centre. He began a new optical approach to solving crystal structures, based on ideas first suggested by Bragg and exploiting the Fourier transform theory he had learned from Ewald. Initially the physics department was wholly involved in service teaching but in 1951 Lipson established an applied physics degree course. He believed in establishing a sound foundation to the learning process and he particularly enjoyed giving first-year courses. In 1954 he was given the title of professor and in 1957 he became a fellow of the Royal Society. By 1967 the character of the department began to change and new areas of research, such as meteorology and plasma physics, had been introduced. By the time he retired, in 1977, the department was established as a centre of high quality and varied research. 
Lipson was active, in different ways, in both the international and local spheres. He served as the British co-editor of 'Acta crystallographica' for twenty years, and he served two terms as president of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, the only person to have done so in the twentieth century. He was also an enthusiastic voluntary worker at the local Withington Hospital. He strongly believed that science should be used for the benefit of mankind and he was a supporter of Pugwash (the movement among scientists to promote the peaceful application of scientific discoveries) and of SANA (Scientists Against Nuclear Arms). For his many services to society he was appointed CBE in 1976. His many activities did not detract from his central interest in life -- his family. His three children, Ann ('b'. 1938), Stephen ('b'. 1941), and Judith ('b'. 1943) all became scientists, although he did not coerce them in any way. The death of his younger daughter from leukaemia in 1990 devastated both Henry and Jenny Lipson. 
In 1991 the Lipsons were visiting their son, Stephen, a professor of physics at the Technion in Haifa, Israel. After a happy family day with grandchildren, Lipson went to bed and shortly after suffered a heart attack from which he died the same night, on 26 April. He was buried the next day in Haifa, close to his son's home. 


@@@@@


doc= 49879


Lockwood, Sir Joseph Flawith (1904-1991), businessman, was born on 14 November 1904 in Southwell, Nottinghamshire, one of the four sons of Joseph Agnew Lockwood (1883/4-1910/11), miller, and his wife, Mabel, 'nee' Caudwell, the daughter of his employer, the fifth generation in a long line of millers. He was educated at Newark grammar school and left in 1920 to train at his grandfather's mill, but as his two older cousins were in line to run the business he went to Chile in 1924 and became manager of a flour mill in Santiago. He returned to England in 1928 and joined Henry Simon Ltd, a company which designed and built mills, in Manchester. As technical manager of the company's operations in Brussels and Paris he worked there until 1933, when he was appointed a director. He was also made a director of Henry Simon Ltd in Buenos Aires, and chairman of the Australian subsidiary, Henry Simon (Australia) Ltd. As a result of a visit he made to Minneapolis, Henry Simon Ltd won a contract to modernize a number of mills in the United States and Canada. Just before the war Lockwood published 'Provender Milling -- the Manufacture of Feeding Stuffs for Livestock' (1939). 
During the war Lockwood was in charge of the protection of factories, warehouses, docks, and other key installations in the north-west civil defence region, under the regional commissioner Hartley Shawcross, and from 1944 he was part of a working party planning food supplies for Europe after the war. As a civilian officer attached to the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force from 1944 to 1945, Lockwood was in charge of the rehabilitation of flour mills that had been damaged during the war, and the transport of wheat in liberated Europe. He returned to Henry Simon Ltd in 1945 and was appointed chairman and managing director in 1950. He published 'Flour Milling' (1945), which became a standard text, with four editions by 1960 and in several languages. While still at Henry Simon Ltd he was appointed a director of the National Research Development Corporation (1951-67). 
Lockwood left Henry Simon Ltd and the milling business in 1954 to become chairman of EMI (Electrical and Musical Industries Ltd), the gramophone company formed in 1931 with the merger of HMV, Columbia, and Parlophone. EMI had been losing $0.5 million a year, in part because of a decision by the board, led by the chairman, Sir Ernest Fisk, in 1952, not to develop the long-playing record, pioneered in the United States by CBS and first made by Decca in 1950. The directors were happy with the existing 78 r.p.m. records, with a maximum playing time of 4 min. 45 sec. per side, believing that no one would want to endure the tedium of a long-playing record. They were also worried about the capital expenditure that would be involved. One of the first things Lockwood did at EMI, realizing that there was a future in long-playing records, was to reverse this decision. EMI already had a good reputation for classical music recording, thanks to Walter Legge, producer of classical music at Columbia, who had brought in such internationally famous musicians as Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau (from 1951 to 1960) and Herbert von Karajan (from 1946 to 1959). Lockwood was the first to try to persuade Legge that this was not enough, and that the classical music side must also be commercially viable. He realized that the company must also expand its popular music department in order to succeed, and he appointed George Martin, a popular music producer at Parlophone since 1950, as head of the Parlophone label in 1955. At the EMI recording studios in Abbey Road, St John's Wood, London, Martin brought in popular artists including Ruby Murray, Dickie Valentine, and the trumpeter Eddie Calvert, whose 'Oh mein Papa' in 1954 was the first EMI single to top the charts after twenty-three years of making records. 
Lockwood was very much involved with the Abbey Road studios in his early days at EMI, though he was unpopular at first because of his ruthlessness. Realizing the importance of the American market, in 1955 he bought Capitol records, a small American company, which went on to record Frank Sinatra and to become the largest music company in the United States in the 1960s. Although his own preference was for classical music, especially Mozart, Lockwood encouraged the Beatles, signed up by George Martin in 1962; that decade they became the leading recording group in the world. In 1963, as 'Beatlemania' swept Britain, Lockwood entertained the Beatles to lunch at the EMI headquarters in Manchester Square in central London. He gave them an increasingly free hand, while they always respected him, affectionately calling him 'Sir Joe'. 'She Loves You' (1963) became the first single to exceed sales of 1.5 million in the United Kingdom, and in one week in 1964 the Beatles held the top five positions in the hit parade. By 1966 they had earned eleven gold LPs. The government realized their importance for Britain's balance of payments, and created them MBEs in 1965. 
Despite the value of the Beatles to EMI, records were only part of the company's operations, and it was less successful in other fields. Although it had been in the forefront of developing television sets, it relinquished making HMV televisions to Thorn, and in the early 1970s EMI made a large loss in marketing the CAT (computerized axial tomography) body-scanner it had developed for use in hospitals. Lockwood retired as chairman of EMI in 1974, but remained as a non-executive director until 1979. The company was taken over by Thorn in 1980, becoming Thorn-EMI. 
Lockwood served on several public bodies, including the Engineering Advisory Council of the Board of Trade in 1959, the Export Council for Europe from 1961 to 1963, the Export Credits Guarantee Advisory Council from 1963 to 1967, and the Industrial Reorganization Corporation from 1966 to 1971 (as chairman from 1969 to 1971). He was knighted in 1960. A director of several large engineering companies, including the Hawker Siddeley Group, Smiths Industries Ltd, and the Laird Group, he was also involved in racecourse management as a director of Sandown Park Ltd, United Racecourses Ltd, and Epsom Grandstand Association from 1969 to 1983. 
Lockwood's great passions were ballet and the theatre, and as chairman of the Royal Ballet from 1971 to 1985 and a member of the South Bank Theatre Board from 1968 to 1984 (chairman, 1977-84), he was very influential, especially in the building of the National Theatre, which opened on the South Bank in 1976. He was also chairman of the governors of the Royal Ballet School from 1960 to 1977, chairman of the Central School of Speech and Drama from 1965 to 1968, chairman of the Young Vic Theatre Company from 1974 to 1975, and a member of the Arts Council from 1967 to 1970. As with the recording activities at EMI, Lockwood took a detailed interest in all the activities with which he was involved, visiting the institutions, attending performances, and talking to performers and students. In addition, as treasurer of the Cancer Research Campaign from 1962 to 1967, he helped to build up a $1 million reserve fund, enabling the campaign to guarantee scientists continuous funding for at least three years, instead of the previous one-year funding. He died at his home, Hatchet Wood Farm, Skirmett, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, on 6 March 1991. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 49881


McAlpine, Alfred James (1908-1991), contractor and businessman, was born on 15 June 1908 at Lindisfarne, Lundin Links, Fife, the eldest of three children of Sir Alfred David McAlpine (1881-1944) ['see under 'McAlpine family], contractor, and his wife, Ethel May Williams (1887-1961), daughter of James Williams of Aboyne, Aberdeen. His father was the fourth son of Sir Robert McAlpine (1847-1934) ['see under 'McAlpine family], the founder of Sir Robert McAlpine & Sons; Alfred David McAlpine was a partner in the firm. The family moved from Scotland in 1911 and took up residence in Glan Ceirw, Cerrigydrudion (Merioneth), after the birth of the second child, Gladys Gwendoline (1910-1978); McAlpine's father had been made partner in charge of the construction of the Alwen dam and reservoir in north Wales. The third child, Ethel Mary (1915-1989), was born at Glan Ceirw, and in 1918 the McAlpines moved again, to Marchwiel Hall, near Wrexham. Sir Alfred and Lady McAlpine eventually bought the property, and lived there until their deaths; it was then inherited by Ethel Mary, who lived there with her husband, Peter Henry Bell (1911-1977). 
McAlpine was educated at Sandroyd preparatory school (1919-22) in Cobham, Surrey, and then at Repton School (1922-6). There he was a member of Orchard House and a keen cricketer, playing for the first eleven in 1926. He then enrolled at Pembroke College, Cambridge, but did not graduate, and in 1928 he took up employment with Sir Robert McAlpines at its site on the Great West Road at Brentford, Middlesex -- the Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co. Ltd. He was employed as a timekeeper. It was quite normal for the young members of the McAlpine family at that time, and subsequently, to take up very junior positions on company construction sites, which reflected the founder's view that potential partners needed the knowledge that site works gave them so that they had an improved understanding of their ultimate management roles within the company. McAlpine worked on a number of sites during the late 1920s and 1930s, when there were financial difficulties within the construction industry brought on by the depression. There was a general lack of work even though the company managed to secure contracts in the north-west and midlands, where his father was mostly involved, but in 1930 the company established a subsidiary company and opened offices in Manchester. McAlpine's father was made chairman of this company, which was styled Sir Robert McAlpine & Sons (Midlands) Ltd and secured work for, among others, Bowater and the Manchester Ship Canal Company, and its largest contract was the construction of the Birkenhead section of the Mersey Tunnel. 
After the death of Sir Robert McAlpine in 1934 and the death of his eldest son in the same year, owing to the continued worldwide depression the partners decided to close their midland subsidiary and invited Sir Alfred (knighted in 1931) and his son, Jimmie, to move to the south-east, where it was considered there were better work opportunities. This offer was refused, for by now the McAlpine family were settled in north Wales and had become important members of the social, political, and sporting communities. Father and son therefore decided to take their chances with their subsidiary business and gave up all interests in the parent company. This severance took place in 1935, and in 1940 the 'Midlands' name was transferred back to the parent company and the new company of Sir Alfred McAlpine & Son was formed, with Jimmie McAlpine as vice-chairman. He became chairman on the death of his father in 1944 and held this position until retirement in 1985, when he became life president and when his surviving son, Robert James McAlpine, became chairman. 
McAlpine married five times. He first married, on 24 June 1931, Peggy Barbara Sanders (1910/11-1986), daughter of John Ernest Sanders, an exporter. There were two sons: Robert James ('b'. 1932) and Alfred William (1935-1962). McAlpine's second marriage was to Mary Kinder Read (1916-1993), daughter of Frank Hargrave Read, manager of a shipping company, on 1 April 1940. There was one daughter, Valerie Anne ('b'. 1942). McAlpine married thirdly Rosemary Lavery (1913-1983), divorced wife of James Harold Lavery, and daughter of Charles Hugh Gregory-Hood, army officer, on 17 September 1951. Again there was one daughter, Sally Dorothy ('b'. 1952). McAlpine's fourth marriage, on 27 October 1959, was to Eleanor Margaret Wallace ('b'. 1932/3), daughter of John Nicholson Wallace, merchant. There were no children of this marriage, which, like its three predecessors, ended in divorce. McAlpine married finally, on 31 October 1979, Cynthia Greenaway ('b'. 1941), daughter of Harry Whitney, a master baker. McAlpine's residence from 1931 to 1939 was at Barnfelde, Burton Road, Rossett, near Wrexham; next he moved to Tickwood Hall, Much Wenlock, Shropshire. From 1958 until his death he lived at Gerwyn Hall, Marchwiel, near Wrexham. 
McAlpine often remarked that it was the war that had put the company onto a firm financial footing and that he had been lucky to have taken over when he did. He was, however, also quick to acknowledge that the senior staff he took with him when the companies split were an important, if not the most important, factor in the successful growth of the company. McAlpine's lack of technical training and the fact that his father ran the business autocratically could easily have isolated him from his senior staff, but he performed his role as chairman with a light hand on the tiller, suiting his temperament and training. All but one of the managers who transferred to the new firm with McAlpine remained with him until their retirement, which provides some indication of the loyalty engendered by McAlpine and the family name. 
Post-war construction -- airfields, opencast coal production, power stations, industrial building -- kept the company busy during the 1950s. At the end of the decade, motorways -- which were to carry the company through until McAlpine's death -- were just beginning to feature; the company built these first in the Belfast region, and then, in 1961, it constructed 26 miles of the M6 between Warrington and Preston, Lancashire. McAlpine had distinct reservations about tackling a job of this size and it is well recorded that he worried that this contract, almost equal in value to the annual turnover of the company at that time, was a risk which could prove, in the business sense, fatal. His early work experience during the depression had made him extremely cautious and throughout his forty years as chairman he insisted that the company maintain a high level of liquidity, having substantial cash reserves and minimum borrowings. Fortunately the job was successful and this gave McAlpine confidence to allow the company to develop further motorway teams. Indeed, within his lifetime McAlpine saw the company become the country's leading motorway builder. His love of large civil-engineering projects was never in doubt, as was his rather dismissive attitude to other sectors of the construction industry. He was fortunate that while he was chairman sufficient civil-engineering work became available for the company, keeping the business not only viable but also highly successful. 
Since leaving school McAlpine had maintained his interest in all sports and in particular cricket. During the seasons of 1930 and 1931 he captained Denbighshire County Cricket Club, then a member of the Minor Counties League, and he also played for the Free Foresters. He was a lifelong supporter of the game, a member of the I Zingari and the Northern Nomads, and, most importantly, an enthusiastic sponsor of his local village team, Marchwiel, and of the many cricket festivals organized at Marchwiel Hall. He was a lover of the five-day game and liked nothing better than watching Geoff Boycott craft -- albeit sometimes slowly -- one of his many centuries. He expressed the view that one-day cricket was well and good but that 'proper cricket' was the game he most enjoyed. He was a keen golfer all his life, though he regarded golf as a mere game. 
McAlpine was part of an industry which was well known for its characters and he was undoubtedly one of them, but throughout his working life he kept very much out of the industry limelight and was little known outside the company. He was a shy man who shunned publicity except within his own company, where he was known by everyone by the slightly feudal title of Mr Jimmie. It was part of the received wisdom within the company that he was able to pick the right person for the job, but indeed it is more likely that he had a complete trust in the abilities of his senior managers to engage competent staff. He did, however, have the skill to engender an almost childlike loyalty to him, as the clan leader, and to the company. This loyalty extended to his workforce, whom he insisted on talking to and encouraging every time he visited the sites, which he did regularly until a short time before his death. He was aware that this patriarchal role was one which he could do with ease and which was of substantial importance: his actions bound together his directors, staff, and workers in a way which was, even then, quite unusual for a chairman of a multi-million pound business. He was always relaxed and very much at ease with his staff and was genuinely pleased to share their leisure time. He talked to them in language they understood and in ways that made them feel valued, praising their qualities rather than criticizing their faults, and taking a broad and tolerant view of their mistakes. 
McAlpine died of heart failure at Macelor Hospital, Wrexham, on 6 November 1991, and was buried later in the month in St Garmon's churchyard, Llanarmon Dyffryn Ceiriog, an area he loved and where for many years he had enjoyed shooting. His grave is alongside that of his younger son, who was killed in a car crash in 1962. He was survived by his fourth and fifth wives, and by three of his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49883


McEvoy, Sir Theodore Neuman (1904-1991), air force officer, was born on 21 November 1904 at 3 Claremont Road, Cricklewood, Middlesex, the second son and youngest of three children of the Revd Cuthbert McEvoy (1870-1944), Congregational minister, and his wife, Margaret Kate (1871-1961), daughter of John Birt Ulph and his wife, Laura Louise Daniell. Advances in aviation during the First World War attracted the teenage McEvoy to flying. Also, his much loved elder brother was an air 'ace' on the Italian front, transferring later to the newly formed Royal Air Force. The new service's cadet college at Cranwell opened in 1920, but the fees were prohibitive amounting to half McEvoy's father's stipend. After leaving Haberdashers' Aske's School in May 1922, McEvoy started overhauling aero engines at the Aircraft Disposal Co. near Croydon, hoping that the work would lead to flying lessons. However, his qualities were recognized at the firm and he was encouraged to try again for the RAF. His failure of a cadet test was challenged and the War Office found he had in fact passed with high marks. Benevolent relatives then offered to pay for a crammer course and, if necessary, Cranwell's fees. From the Kensington Coaching College, McEvoy gained first place into Cranwell (or Sandhurst had he wished), winning a full scholarship. 
Aircraft between the wars were by present-day standards much affected by weather and regular engine failure. However, they could be landed in any suitable field, which was fortunate for McEvoy, who survived nine forced landings, two while he was still training. Graduating with the sword of honour, he served his apprenticeship in front-line fighter squadrons on his way to becoming an exceptional fighter pilot and taking part in the Hendon air pageant with 41 squadron. At this time McEvoy began to suffer pain from a progressive and crippling disease of the spine which eventually fused, giving him a pronounced stoop. That he was able to continue piloting until his retirement despite this permanent affliction reflected his determination and the flexibility of medical and air staffs who recognized his value to the service. 
A two-year engineering course developed McEvoy's analytical and logical skills and allowed time for sport; he became the RAF sabre champion. Next came a two-year posting to Iraq in charge of the aircraft servicing depot, where he tested aircraft and was involved in technical development and parachute trials. He also flew with 55 bomber squadron carrying out air control of the fractious tribes in the area. On the ship returning from UK leave he met Marian Jane Benson ('b'. 1913), daughter of William Alfred Coxon, a medical practitioner working in Egypt. They married on 17 September 1935. 
The period of mounting tension as the Second World War approached saw McEvoy at the peak of his piloting skills in two elite squadrons -- 1 and 43 -- at Tangmere. In 1937 he widened his experience at the RAF Staff College. His two children, Jill ('b'. 1938) and Robin ('b'. 1940), saw less of their father than they would have liked as the intensity of the war increased. His considerable flying experience led to his transfer to the Air Ministry in operational and intelligence posts, from which he emerged in 1941 as a group captain to command the fighter station at Northolt with its Polish squadrons. True to form, he flew with the squadrons when shortage of pilots justified, and on a 'sweep' over France was wounded by cannon fire, managing to nurse his damaged Hurricane back to the English coast. Appointed OBE, he was also recognized by the Poles for his moral and practical support for their pilots by his appointment as a commander of the order of Polonia Restituta. 
Inevitably McEvoy's staff appointments reflected his background of fighter operations. As senior air staff officer of 11 fighter group, and of 84 group in the Tactical Air Force, formed to support the invasion of Europe, he had ample scope for his administrative skills, particularly in the entirely new organization of mixed-role squadrons in the tactical groups. Planning and supervising the achievement of air superiority over the bridgehead, and the subsequent move of squadrons to the temporary landing grounds on the continental toehold, McEvoy moved with the victorious armies until virtually the end of the war. By now an air commodore, he was mentioned in dispatches for his part in the success of the Tactical Air Force and advanced to CBE in the victory honours. From now on increasingly senior staff appointments were inevitable, although he made every effort to keep in flying practice, which maintained the confidence and respect of those he commanded. After the course in 1948 at the Imperial Defence College came command of 61 group involving the reserve units of the RAF, particularly the squadrons of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force, whose Spitfires he was well qualified to fly. 
Promoted to air vice marshal in 1950 as assistant chief of the air staff (training), McEvoy convinced the service of the need to adopt all-jet-engined flying training, in spite of the cost and the high ability required of the cadets. In the post-war era this helped the RAF to maintain professional excellence as the majority of experienced pilots were demobilized; this was recognized by his appointment as CB. Following two years as an instructor at the Imperial Defence College came a return to Europe as chief of staff of allied air forces, central Europe. This involved air planning for the event of a Soviet attack on the central front and ensuring that NATO squadrons based there were at the highest level of efficiency. Promoted to air marshal and knighted (KCB) in 1956, he epitomized the concept of deterrence -- 'being ready, able and willing to fight so as not to have to do so'. The last three years until McEvoy retired in 1962 were spent as air secretary and as an air aide-de-camp to the queen. The former involved identifying and grooming 'high flyers' in the service (its future leaders) as well as filling the day-to-day senior appointments, where his understanding of people made him an ideal choice for this task. 
Retirement in Buckinghamshire gave McEvoy the opportunity to continue flying -- this time in gliders. He attained a considerable facility at this sport and became vice-president of the British Gliding Association. The precision he had learnt as an engineer and his co-ordination of hand and eye produced a skilled calligrapher, glass engraver, and golfer. His anti-communist stance through the organization Common Cause enabled him to expose the myths of this political system, and he lived to see the ultimate collapse of the USSR. He died at his home, Hurstwood, West Drive, Aldwick Bay Estate, Bognor Regis, on 28 September 1991; his wife survived him. After cremation at Chichester crematorium his ashes were interred in Tangmere churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 49886


MacLeod, George Fielden, Baron MacLeod of Fuinary (1895-1991), Church of Scotland minister and founder of the Iona Community, was born on 17 June 1895 at 4 Park Circus Place, Glasgow, the younger son and youngest of the three children of Sir John Mackintosh MacLeod, first baronet (1857-1934), an accountant and Unionist MP for Glasgow Central (1915-18) and Kelvingrove (1918-22), and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Fielden (died 1942), daughter of Joshua Fielden, a wealthy Unitarian mill owner and Conservative MP for the West Riding of Yorkshire (1868-80). MacLeod, commonly known simply as George, was among the most flamboyant and charismatic Scottish church leaders of the twentieth century, and possibly the most influential. He belonged to a distinguished lineage of highland ministers of the established Church of Scotland, stretching back for several generations and including a remarkable number of moderators of the general assembly, royal chaplains, and doctors of divinity. He was very much aware of this ministerial heritage, and of his highland and Celtic roots, although his own upbringing and education made him a thoroughly Anglicized Scottish aristocrat. From early on he felt a destiny to be a leader of men. He inherited from his mother's side of the family considerable personal wealth, and was for most of his life a prominent Christian socialist, with a remarkable ability to relate to all sorts of people -- borstal boys at the Iona Community's centre at Camas, unemployed men on the streets of Govan, or students on campuses throughout Britain, North America, and Australia. He was a passionate patrician, and his enthusiasm and commitment were infectious; several generations of young Scots, and many others as well, fell under the spell of his preaching, with its imaginative and romantic weaving of words, and its call to costly and relevant discipleship. 
After education at Cargilfield School, Edinburgh, Winchester College, and Oriel College, Oxford (where he passed the examination in classical moderations), at the start of the First World War MacLeod enlisted in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. He served with enthusiasm, courage, and distinction in Greece and on the western front, becoming captain and adjutant, and being gazetted MC in 1917 and awarded a Croix de Guerre with palm in 1918. He seems at the time never to have questioned the morality or necessity of the war, or of the way it was being waged in the trenches. Indeed his war diary was peppered with unqualified jingoism, as in the entry for 21 June 1918: 'A Battalion in our Brigade did a splendid show last night, and killed 80 Bosche, taking 19 prisoners! This is the spirit that will 'Win the War'' (MacLeod papers, folder 37). 
From the later 1930s MacLeod was a prominent pacifist, but the story that his pacifism was the result of horror at what he had experienced in the trenches is a myth, one which MacLeod was not beyond encouraging himself. As late as 1928, in a published sermon on the occasion of the funeral of Field Marshal Earl Haig, there was no hint of unease at war as such, at the First World War, or indeed at the way that war was fought. Haig 'was not only valiant, he was Valiant for Truth'; and without qualification MacLeod cited 'The Lord your God, it is he that hath fought for you' (G. F. MacLeod, 'Earl Haig, KT', 1928, 7, 9). 
MacLeod was a member of the Fellowship of Reconciliation from 1934, but it was only by 1937 that he had 'come out' as an absolute pacifist. Early in the Second World War John White, at that time the dominant figure in the Church of Scotland, expressed great concern that the Iona Community under MacLeod's leadership had become 'a nursery of pacifists'. Throughout the Second World War, and the cold war that followed, MacLeod adopted a thoroughgoing pacifist stance, which was sometimes divisive in the community he founded, and after the Second World War led to annual ritual debates in the general assembly, when a pacifist motion proposed by MacLeod was regularly rejected. Only in 1986 did the assembly adopt a motion proposed by MacLeod, in the following terms: 'As of now this General Assembly declares that no church can accede to the use of nuclear weapons to defend any cause whatever. They call on Her Majesty's government to desist from their use and stop their further development' (Ferguson, 'George MacLeod', 409). 
MacLeod's experience of the First World War may not have made him a pacifist, but it undoubtedly stimulated the young man who had intended to make a career in the law to recognize instead that he had what was almost hereditary in his family -- a vocation to the ministry of the Church of Scotland. After graduating BA from Oxford under war regulations in 1919, he returned to Scotland to study theology at Edinburgh University. Then, as throughout his later life, MacLeod was rather impatient with academic theology, preferring a few simple truths that spoke to the heart and were relevant to the needs of the world, to the work of careful scholarship. Working in Edinburgh slums such as the Pleasance was for him, as for many others, formative in developing his passion for justice and his ability to communicate with all sorts and conditions of people. From Edinburgh he went for a year to Union Theological Seminary in New York, then a bastion of the social gospel. Thus started MacLeod's long love affair with North America, which he later visited frequently, mesmerizing students in campuses all over the United States and arousing much enthusiasm and support for his various projects, particularly the Iona Community. 
While he was in America MacLeod encountered 'Tubby' Clayton, the founder of Toc H. Clayton recruited MacLeod to establish Toc H in America, and eventually to direct Toc H work in Glasgow. Clayton's personality deeply influenced MacLeod, and Toc H reminded him of the depth of fellowship he had enjoyed during the war. In 1924 he was ordained by the presbytery of Glasgow to be a full-time Toc H padre in Glasgow. 
After returning to Scotland from America in 1922, MacLeod was first assistant in St Giles's, the High Kirk of Edinburgh, at the heart of a huge slum parish. He was tireless and ebullient in his ministry, particularly with boys from the slums, and quickly recognized as a notable preacher. In 1926 he was called to be the collegiate minister of St Cuthbert's, a society church in central Edinburgh. There his preaching attracted large congregations, and the handsome bachelor was commonly known as 'the Rudolph Valentino of the Edinburgh pulpit'. So far, MacLeod was following with some distinction the conventional 'cursus honorum' of 'princes' of the Church of Scotland. 
The break came in 1930, when MacLeod accepted a call to Govan old parish church, where his great-uncle John MacLeod had had a remarkable ministry in the late nineteenth century. Unlike St Cuthbert's, Govan was basically a working-class parish; even more than St Cuthbert's it maintained a high-church tradition of worship. MacLeod arrived as minister in the depths of the depression, with a huge incidence of unemployment, much poverty, and hardship for most families in the parish. He developed a ministry to the whole parish, very much in the tradition of Thomas Chalmers, and indeed of his grandfather Norman MacLeod at the Barony, and of his great-uncle in Govan. He was outraged at the poverty with which he was surrounded; it made him an outspoken Christian socialist. His Govan ministry was like a whirlwind, as he initiated a huge programme of social action, service, and open-air preaching, culminating in an immensely successful parish mission in Holy Week 1934. He really believed in the parish system, and was convinced that the future of the Church of Scotland depended on its revival. He ran his parish like a military campaign, always leading from the front, and being the first to 'go over the top'. 
But even MacLeod, with his superabundant energy and his apparently total confidence, had his breaking point. In 1932-3 he had a prolonged period of depression which, as it were, mirrored in his inner life the poverty and hopelessness by which he was surrounded in Govan. He was completely exhausted, physically and spiritually. Out of this depression, and in particular as a consequence of a profound experience in Jerusalem in Holy Week 1933, he returned to Govan with an enlarged vision and a new surge of energy. 
MacLeod's move from Govan to realize his vision and establish an Iona community in 1938 seemed to some people another abrupt change of direction. It was, however, a coming together of his war experience, his struggles to make the faith a relevant reality in conditions of great hardship during the depression of the 1930s, his romantic and inventive attachment to the tradition of 'Celtic Christianity', and his own very strong and personal spirituality, strengthened by his own period of depression. He never tired of telling the story, in numerous versions, of how the Iona Community emerged out of his ministry in Govan. He was summoned to visit in hospital a man who was dying of starvation. The man turned out to be Archie Gray, who had heckled MacLeod while he was preaching in the open air. Archie 'was bitter about the Church, not because it was preaching falsehoods, but because it was speaking the truth and did not mean what it said'. 'Archie Gray', George announced, 'was the real founder of the Iona Community' (Ferguson, 'George MacLeod', 137). 
From the beginning of the Iona Community, MacLeod saw himself as a kind of latter-day Columba, directing a campaign for the re-evangelization of Scotland from the ancient holy centre of Iona. But he behaved like a military commander, or another Ignatius of Loyola, leading a disciplined army in the service of the Lord. From the beginning, rebuilding the ruined abbey was at the heart of the community's activity. At a time of unemployment and social division, craftsmen, ministers, and divinity students together discovered in the labour of rebuilding the dignity of creative work; budding ministers learned how to communicate with ordinary folk; shared and lively worship, drawing particularly on what was imagined to be a living tradition of Celtic spirituality, renewed the worship of the Church of Scotland. MacLeod freely invented 'ancient Celtic' beliefs and practices, and often seems to have convinced even himself that they were authentic. For a time at least, he embraced Rudolph Steiner's theories about the spiritual significance of the Celts, and was also much attracted to the way in which Steiner and his associates understood community, cared for the disadvantaged, and believed that the physical world was charged with spiritual significance. In 'The Coracle' (November 1939) he solemnly reported that 'It was a practice of the Celtic Clergy to bathe in the sea EVERY DAY OF THE YEAR'. He thus justified his own frequent practice of inveigling young members of the community to join him in an early morning swim. From early on, alongside the rebuilding work, there were youth camps and varied conferences on Iona, attracting a wide constituency to the island where, as MacLeod was wont to say, the veil between time and eternity was very thin. 
In April 1944 MacLeod succeeded his nephew Captain Sir Ian Francis Norman MacLeod as fourth baronet, although he did not use the title. On 28 August 1948 he married his cousin Lorna Helen Janet Macleod (died 1984), elder daughter of the Revd Donald Macleod, of Balvonie of Inshes, Inverness. They had a daughter, Eva Mary Ellen ('b'. 1950), and two sons, (John) Maxwell Norman ('b'. 1952) and Neil David ('b'. 1959). 
The ideology behind the rebuilding of the abbey and the work of the Iona Community was outlined by MacLeod in his book 'We Shall Re-Build: the Work of the Iona Community on Mainland and Island' (1944). The purpose was to revitalize the Church of Scotland and, more broadly, the Presbyterian family of churches. This was to be achieved through recovering the centrality of mission and reinvigorating the parish and the congregation. Twelve years later MacLeod's Cunningham lectures, published as 'Only One Way Left' (1956), presented a broader and less ecclesiastical agenda, concerned with nuclear warfare, justice, and the environment -- all encompassed in a passionate commitment to the cosmic Christ. MacLeod was not a disciplined or original thinker, and his writings were not of lasting significance, but at the time he had a rare and exciting capacity to kindle the heart and elicit commitment. Apart from his Warrack lectures on preaching, published as 'Speaking the Truth in Love: the Modern Preacher's Task' (1936), he published a large number of sermons in collections such as 'Govan Calling' (1934) or individually, and a stream of manifestos and tracts for the times. But the best way to trace how his thinking developed is through the Iona Community's journal, 'The Coracle'. In the early days it was almost entirely written by MacLeod, and it continued while he was leader of the community to be his major workshop of ideas. 
At the beginning the Iona Community consisted entirely of men, most of them young ministers, or 'licentiates', straight out of the Scottish theological colleges, with MacLeod and a few older ministers to lead them, together with a handful of craftsmen. In the winter the ministers in the community went to work in 'community parishes' on the mainland, mostly in the inner cities and housing estates, while the craftsmen and a few others continued the rebuilding work on the island. The rebuilding was a romantic project, in part an attempt to recover the Celtic heritage, in part a symbol of the renewal and rebuilding of the church as a whole that was required. It continued throughout the war, with MacLeod almost miraculously charming money and materials for the reconstruction from rich donors. The project was a sign of hope in dark days, and an affirmation of the future. Its completion in 1965 was a massive achievement, duly celebrated, but it brought into the open what many people had suspected: neither MacLeod nor the community as a whole had a very clear idea of what to do with the now reconstructed abbey. MacLeod shortly afterwards demitted his post as leader with a note of bitterness, as he strongly opposed the plans supported by the majority of the community for the future use of the buildings. The community wanted the abbey to be a centre of spirituality, study, and meeting all the year round; MacLeod wanted it to be a centre for applied theology attached to the four Scottish divinity colleges. 
Especially at the beginning, the Iona Community was seen as a strictly disciplined, military-style body of men, a brotherhood. Even after his own marriage MacLeod resolutely set his face against any involvement by women or wives in the life of the community. It was to be 'an experiment in the technique of Fellowship'. Community members had a uniform -- dark blue suits, shirts, and ties, supposedly the dress of ordinary Scots working men -- which they were expected to wear while on the island. Everyone was to attend all services, and meals were taken in common. From this base the discipline of the community developed, involving a commitment to peace and justice (though not necessarily to pacifism), a daily practice of prayer and 'Bible' reading, and an economic discipline. 
The fifteen years after the Second World War were the great days of the Iona Community, and the high point of MacLeod's career. The community grew larger, and without ever ceasing to be controversial it became regarded as one of the greatest gifts of the Church of Scotland to the world church, for as it grew it became thoroughly ecumenical and well regarded all over the Christian world. Iona Abbey became, and continues to be, a major centre of spiritual renewal and lively and relevant worship. 
As the buildings neared completion and the community developed a will of its own on a number of issues, MacLeod's energies began to turn in other directions, and he became more freelance in his activities. After serving as moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1957-8, from 1958 he was convener of the church extension committee of the Church of Scotland, a position in which he gave typically vigorous leadership, wiping out a huge deficit incurred by the construction of new churches to serve the housing estates which had sprung up all over Scotland. In the same year he became convener of a special committee on central Africa, and in 1959 the general assembly responded enthusiastically to his call to support the opposition to the Central African Federation: 'Someone must speak for the Africans, and that someone will be the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland', he said. 
In 1967, two years after the great Pentecost service to celebrate the completion of the rebuilding of Iona Abbey, MacLeod was made a life peer, as Baron MacLeod of Fuinary. Now he prepared for new battles and a different campaign. He resigned as leader of the community, becoming a general without an army who none the less could still excite new generations with his passionate oratory and calls to action. For some years he had shown himself to be increasingly restless, spending long periods on overseas preaching and speaking tours, and clearly looking for new projects and new battles to fight for the kingdom of God. 
MacLeod's membership of the House of Lords was not a success. His speeches were few, and his pulpit oratory fell rather flat in the lords' chamber. His successors as leaders of the community were rather different in style, and he bombarded them with advice and warnings, feeling that without his leadership the community was adrift. He set up abortive or short-lived initiatives, such as 'The new breakthrough in Christ', which was unambiguously pacifist, and 'The new reformation'. He tried unsuccessfully to establish a new community at his family seat of Fuinary in Morven, Argyll. Even as a peer of the realm, an ex-moderator of the general assembly, a rector of Glasgow University (1968-71), and chaplain to the queen, MacLeod in his later years remained a rebel with many a cause, an aristocratic radical who was a constant irritant to the establishment of which he was so much a part. His greatest critics came to respect the old warrior, while continuing to disagree with him. He was a soldier and a romantic, whose infectious, imperious vision challenged and enriched the life of church and society in Scotland and far beyond. His great legacy was the Iona Community, which continues to flourish, to disturb, and to transform. 
MacLeod was one of the greatest preachers of his day, but no theologian. Leading theologians of the time, such as the Baillie brothers, Archie Craig, David Cairns, Garth Macgregor, and Charles Raven, supported him and the work of the community enthusiastically, but his own theological thinking was (according to his friends) mystical and Celtic, and (according to his critics) confused sloganizing. He argued that the natural order was the garment of Christ, and that the central problem of the modern world was the division between the spiritual and the material. From this polarization all the evils of the modern age flowed, but it had been already definitively overcome in the incarnation. In sacramental life the wound that kept the material and the spiritual apart was healed, but those who took the sacraments seriously must work out their reality in the life of the world. 
MacLeod was a man of intense and moving piety. His prayers, like his sermons, invited people to encounter reality at a new depth, and challenged them to go and transform the world. He was the joint recipient of the Templeton prize for progress in religion in 1989, and the recipient of a number of honorary doctorates from universities in Britain and North America. He died at his home, 23 Learmonth Terrace, Edinburgh, on 27 June 1991; he was cremated and his ashes were partly scattered on Iona and partly interred beside his wife's grave in Inverness. He was survived by his daughter and two sons, the elder of whom succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 49887


Mann, Frederick Alexander (1907-1991), jurist, was born at Frankenthal, Rhenish palatinate, Germany, on 11 August 1907, the only child of Richard Mann (1873-1953), lawyer, and his wife, Ida, 'nee' Oppenheim (1877-1936). Both parents were from Jewish families which had been settled near the Rhine in Germany for many generations. Mann was brought up by his father, a successful provincial lawyer, and by his mother's sister. His mother had disappeared from the boy's life at an early age, having suffered a breakdown, and spent the rest of her days in an institution. It was a lonely and austere childhood. But Mann derived from the companionship of his father the personal and professional ethic which sustained him through disappointment and disaster to ultimate honour and success. 
Mann's schooling and time at university took place during the turbulent years of the Weimar republic and, above all, of the German inflation, which left a permanent mark on him. He attended the universities of Geneva, Munich, and Berlin. At Berlin in 1930 he became an assistant in the law faculty, a mark of unusual distinction, and in the following year he took a doctoral degree. It was there also that he met his wife, Eleonore (Lore) Ehrlich (1907-1980), a girl from Breslau whose academic record promised as much as his own. They both looked forward to their professional careers, and Mann himself decided to combine academic work with an advocate's practice, as was not unusual in Germany. But his life and prospects were destroyed when Hitler came to power in January 1933. Both he and Eleonore were impatient with those who thought the nightmare would soon pass, and they decided immediately that they must leave. Arrangements were made for him to open an office in London where, in the first instance, he would practise German law. He returned to Berlin in October 1933 to rejoin Eleonore and take his final examinations. They were married on 12 October under the ubiquitous picture of Hitler, and left Berlin at once for London. 
Mann was forced to start again from scratch in an alien land. His wife had to defer her own career to his, and it was not until 1966 that she was able to start her pioneering legal practice for poor persons in the Portobello Road. His intention (a reluctant one, driven by the need to earn a living as quickly as possible: he would have preferred to have continued his academic work) was to practise as a solicitor, but he could not do so until he became a British subject by naturalization in 1946. In the meantime he acted as a consultant in German law to the solicitors' firm of Swann Hardman & Co., of 10 Norfolk Street, London. Between 1936 and 1938 he worked on a book on the law of money, the manuscript for which he submitted as a doctoral thesis to the University of London. The book was published by Oxford University Press under the title 'The Legal Aspect of Money' (1938) and received highly favourable notices. It was the first systematic study of the law of money in the English language, and a work of monumental erudition. It was also one of the first textbooks to break the convention that the works of living academic writers should not be quoted in court. Uniquely among writers of English legal textbooks, the author was able to draw copiously from his own knowledge of comparative material from other jurisdictions. 
In 1946 Mann returned to Berlin with the Allied Control Commission to help remove the imprint of Nazism from German law. He wore the uniform of a lieutenant-colonel. It was bitter for him that he had not been able to wear an army uniform in wartime. But he had become an enemy alien, and it was only because the police turned a blind eye to his case that he was not interned. After the war, he became a partner in the Norfolk Street firm, which changed its name to Hardman, Phillips and Mann. His practice developed rapidly, and in 1958 the firm was merged with the large City practice of Herbert Smith & Co., of which he remained a working member until the day of his death. He became well known as a forceful and tactically ingenious litigating solicitor with an enviable following. His clients included many international corporations, as well as such diverse characters as Somerset Maugham, Nubar Gulbenkian, and Baron Thyssen. At the same time his writings on international law were increasingly admired not only in England and Germany but elsewhere in Europe, the United States, and more widely. It was a rare combination of academic and practical distinction. 
Although he had been educated first in the civil law tradition, Mann came to have a great admiration for the administration of justice in England. But this did not inhibit his legendary criticisms in the learned journals of any judicial decision which fell short of his own exacting standards. Underlying all his work, both practical and academic, was the pursuit of the unifying legal principle. This is perhaps why, of all his admirers among the judges, none gave place to Lord Denning, who described him in his own book, 'The Due Process of Law' (1980), as the most learned of all his learned friends. 
Mann (who was known in England as Francis, though he published as F. A. Mann) was one of that unique generation of German Jewish refugees who pulled themselves up by their own efforts and enriched and varied the qualities of English life in the 1930s and beyond. He did not practise the Jewish religion but he felt the force and separateness of his cultural inheritance. In his attitude to Israel and Germany he showed the adamantine quality of his integrity. He refused to condone the abduction of Adolf Eichmann from Argentina so that he could stand trial in Jerusalem, because in his view the kidnapping fatally flawed the trial. 
Mann was forthright in his opinions. His confidence in his own legal judgement made him reject compromise as weakness, and seem intolerant of other views. But he was in truth a modest man with a genuine horror of the parade of his own attainments. Both inside and outside the law he possessed the life force, a man of energy and enthusiasm. There was a wide European culture in his make-up, with a special and discriminating love of music. It is ironic that his career and achievements were honoured in the country from which he was exiled long before they were fairly recognized in England. In 1977 the president of the Federal Republic of Germany conferred on him the grand cross of the order of merit. As early as 1960 he was appointed visiting professor at the University of Bonn, to give an annual series of lectures and seminars, whereas he never held an established post at an English university. In 1974 he was elected a fellow of the British Academy. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Zurich and Kiel, and, in 1989, from Oxford. In 1980 he was appointed CBE. In the last year of his life he became the first practising solicitor to be appointed an honorary queen's counsel and to be elected an honorary bencher of Gray's Inn. 
Apart from 'The Legal Aspect of Money', Mann published two volumes of 'Studies in International Law' (1973 and 1990) and a shorter book, 'Foreign Affairs in English Courts' (1986), as well as hundreds of writings on international and monetary law. He died of a heart attack on 16 September 1991 at his flat at 56 Manchester Street, London, while he was correcting the proofs of the fifth edition of his book on the law of money. His body was cremated at Hammersmith cemetery on 20 September. He left one son, David ('b'. 1935), and two daughters, Jessica ('b'. 1937) and Nicola ('b'. 1944). His wife predeceased him in 1980. 


@@@@@


doc= 49888


Mansergh, (Philip) Nicholas Seton (1910-1991), historian, was born into a middle-ranking Anglo-Irish gentry family on 27 June 1910 at Grenane House, Tipperary, Ireland. He was the second son of Philip St George Mansergh (1863-1928), railway engineer, and his cousin Ethel Marguerite Otway Louise Mansergh (1876-1963). Educated at the Abbey School, Tipperary, and St Columba's College, Dublin (1923-9), he entered Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1929, where he read modern history under R. B. McCallum. Despite a disappointing failure to get a first, he began postgraduate research under W. G. S. Adams, the Gladstone professor of political theory and institutions, who shared his particular interest in Ireland. Mansergh's work for the BLitt (1933) and DPhil (1936) was published in a pair of pioneering 'political science' books: 'The Irish Free State: its Government and Politics' (1934) and 'The Government of Northern Ireland: a Study in Devolution' (1936). In 1937 he was appointed tutor (but not fellow) in politics at Pembroke, a post which enabled him to produce a major work entitled 'Ireland in the Age of Reform and Revolution' (1940, later reissued and expanded as 'The Irish Question, 1840-1921'). At the same time he was secretary to the Oxford University politics research group under Sir Arthur Salter, which proved to be a useful experience. 
Meanwhile Mansergh was looking for a mixed-doubles partner in tennis, a game at which he excelled. The search resulted in marriage to Diana Mary Keeton (an undergraduate at Lady Margaret Hall, daughter of the headmaster of Reading School) on 12 December 1939. Their long and happy partnership produced five children (three sons and two daughters), while Diana also acted as his devoted research assistant until his death, and beyond. 
During the Second World War, Mansergh became the Irish expert and director of the empire division of the Ministry of Information (leading to his appointment as OBE), and then an assistant secretary at the Dominions Office (1946-7). Despite his natural gifts as a civil servant, he returned to academic life in 1947 as a research professor at the Royal Institute of International Affairs. In 1953 he moved to Cambridge as the first Smuts professor of the history of the British Commonwealth. 
Nicholas Mansergh was a striking figure, lean and tall, 6 feet 3 inches and inclined to stoop, until spinal osteoarthritis developed in old age. With a huge head and heavy spectacles, he was the very model of a professorial archetype. He had a prominent mole on his left cheek and outsize fingernails. He had a ready smile, which regularly punctuated even the driest of his lecture material, and which reinforced the general impression of an unfailing good humour and kindliness, a man who enjoyed life. He was slow and deliberate of utterance, curiously adding an 'a' or 'ah' sound after dental consonants in a way which was all too easily (if affectionately) imitated. His speech was not always easy to follow, either, as he tended to talk in hushed tones about anything remotely important, and to drop the ends of his sentences. And what he had to say was invariably cautious and guarded. All the more astonishing, then, that at fellows' lunch in St John's during the Suez crisis of 1956, he should cut short mystified attempts to justify government policy, with the loud, imperious observation, 'I shall never vote conservative again-ah'. 
But in general there was a diffidence in discussion, a reticence in answering questions, a reluctance to commit himself in public either to an opinion or a decision, which contrasted sharply with the fluency, confidence, sense of direction, and even stylistic adventurousness which pervaded his prolific written output. Between 1952 and 1983 (essentially to 1974), he published a two-volume 'Survey of British Commonwealth Affairs' covering the years 1931 to 1952, three volumes of supporting 'Documents and Speeches', four books on Commonwealth history (including a keenly felt study of British South African policy), three revised new editions of earlier books, two major lecture-booklets, some three dozen articles, and, as editor-in-chief, the twelve magnificent and highly acclaimed volumes of documents, 'Transfer of Power in India, 1942-7' ('TOPI'), which appeared from 1970 at the rate of one a year. In many ways the centrepiece of his 'oeuvre' was 'The Commonwealth Experience' (1969; new edn, 1982), covering the years from 1839 to the present; more than one of its chapters were masterly examples of the art of writing history. In retirement he completed 'The Unresolved Question: the Anglo-Irish Settlement and its Undoing, 1912-72' (published posthumously, 1991), an unrivalled and humane analysis of contemporary problems in his beloved Ireland, the first major synthesis of Anglo-Irish relations in the wider Commonwealth context, which he understood better than anyone. If in his writing about Commonwealth history, Mansergh retained what was often described as an Olympian detachment, in Irish history this was much harder. As a boy of eight in co. Tipperary he had heard the shots which killed two policemen at Soloheadbeg on 29 January 1919 and which heralded the opening of the War of Independence; for him, the events of Irish history were experienced as 'near realities, not as distant phenomena or as issues in high politics' ('The Unresolved Question', 3). 
As a Cambridge professor (1953-70) Mansergh was notably -- and successfully -- concerned to raise the profile of the study of both Irish and Commonwealth history; he travelled widely (frequently to Canada and New Delhi, but also to Canberra, Duke, and Cape Town); he cared deeply about his pupils and knew exactly how to help and encourage them. As master of St John's College (1969-79) -- to which office he was elected after fourteen years as a fellow -- he was well regarded as a patient and courteous 'safe pair of hands'; he was dignified but never pompous, hospitable rather than managerial. At meetings he was perhaps overscrupulous in making sure all views were fully expressed, except his own; it is not the way to guarantee the swift dispatch of business and his chairmanship had its critics. As a contemporary historian his achievements were impressive and influential. The 'TOPI' documents should ensure the name of Mansergh an enduring place in learned references. He contributed uniquely to the understanding of what an apparently nebulous Commonwealth actually was, and 'The Commonwealth Experience' is widely recognized as the finest book on the subject, exemplifying that 'detachment with sympathetic insight' which he always aimed at. His contributions to modern Irish history place him among its most accomplished and fair-minded practitioners too. 
He obtained an Oxford DLitt in 1960 and a fellowship of the British Academy in 1973. He was an honorary fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford (1954), and Trinity College, Dublin (1971). He was presented with a Festschrift in 1980 ('The First British Commonwealth: Essays in Honour of Nicholas Mansergh', ed. N. Hillmer and P. Wigley). 
As he grew older, Mansergh neatly substituted 'lawn mowing' for 'lawn tennis' as his hobby in 'Who's Who'. He died at Brookfields Hospital, Cambridge, on 16 January 1991, from pneumonia which set in at the end of a prolonged period of ill health precipitated by a fall on an escalator of the London underground. He was buried on 26 January in the new cemetery, Cashel Road, in his native Tipperary, at a Church of Ireland funeral attended by representatives of all Ireland and many walks of life. The taoiseach, Charles Haughey, read the lesson, a symbolic signal that Mansergh will be remembered as a scholar who tried to bring reconciliation to Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 49889


Margulies, Alexander (1902-1991), businessman and patron of the arts, was born in Skalat, Galicia, on 1 July 1902, the son of Marcus Mordecai Margulies (1862-1921) and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Feige (1865-1943). The Margulies were descendants of Rabbi Ephraim Zalman Margulies (1760-1828), who was celebrated for his scholarship and wealth. When the First World War broke out the family took up residence in Germany, and it was from there that Alexander moved to Britain in 1931. In his new country Margulies displayed great business acumen, creating with his brother Benzion Margulies (1890-1955) the firm Time Products, which incorporated clock movements, made overseas, into cases made in Britain. In 1939 the firm was the largest importer of horology, having factories in both China and Hong Kong. It became a public company in 1962, though Margulies continued as president after his retirement. With the coming of the Second World War he set up a factory to make aircraft components; its employees included refugee workers from twenty-five families whom he had helped to escape from Nazi Europe. 
Like his wife, Stella, Margulies took a keen interest in art, of which he was an avid collector. He favoured, in particular, contemporary French sculptures and paintings and numbered among his friends the artists Derain, Modigliani, and Soutine. For much of his life, however, he was appalled by what he considered the lack of interest and poor financial support given to the arts by the Anglo-Jewish community. Following his appointment in 1965 as chairman of the Ben Uri Art Gallery in London, founded to support and publicize the work of Jewish artists (in which his brother was also involved), he did much to expand the specializations of the gallery to include not only painting and sculpture, but also orchestral and choral music, drama, and literature. When the gallery was obliged to sell one of its most outstanding paintings, 'The Merry-Go-Round' by Mark Gertler, to ensure its survival, Margulies was widely criticized. He defended his action, however -- accusing the Jewish community for failing to provide the necessary financial support, and noting that he himself had donated thousands of pounds towards the gallery's maintenance and the purchase of contemporary works of art. He also gave a number of his paintings to the Tate Gallery in London and to the New Art Museum in Tel Aviv. 
Throughout his life Margulies was a dedicated supporter of Zionism. At the twenty-third Zionist Congress in 1931 he was elected a member of the actions committee of the World Zionist Organization. He was president of the friends of the Anti-Tuberculosis League of Israel. He served at various times as honorary treasurer, vice-chairman, and president of the Mizrachi Federation and the Bachad Fellowship, and his tireless work on behalf of these organizations was recognized when, in 1983, the Alexander Margulies Youth Centre was opened in Temple Fortune, London. In addition he played a prominent part as one of the vice-presidents in the Joint Israel Appeal and was a powerful driving force in helping establish such centres of Jewish education as Carmel College (the only Jewish public school) and, in 1965, Hillel House, the purpose of which was to provide support for Jewish university students. 
Firmly committed to Jewish Orthodoxy all his life, Margulies was a tireless supporter of Jewish culture. During the Second World War -- together with his brother Benzion, and with assistance from the distinguished Hebrew scholar Simon Rawidowicz -- he established the Ararat Publications Society, with himself as chairman; its purpose was to foster Hebrew literature and to encourage Jewish learning. An outstanding publication to be issued under the auspices of the society was the Hebrew quarterly 'Metzudah', the only European Hebrew magazine, its aim being to provide an outlet for Jewish scholarship on an international basis. Margulies also took a keen interest in the Institute for Jewish Studies, being its treasurer, and gave generous assistance to the 'Jewish Quarterly'. A bust of him was made by Jacob Epstein. 
Margulies died at his home, 4 Sidmouth Road, London, on 2 May 1991, survived by two sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 49893


Martin, Sir John Miller (1904-1991), civil servant, was born on 15 October 1904 at 5 Park Place, Dundee, the elder son of the Revd John Martin (1860-1927), United Free Church of Scotland minister, and his second wife, Edith Godwin, 'nee' Miller (1866-1945), only child of an Edinburgh solicitor. The family lived from 1906 in Callandar, Perthshire, then, following the father's early retirement, in 1910 in Cannes and from 1911 in Edinburgh. Martin attended the Edinburgh Academy (1911-23) with its 'old-fashioned classical curriculum' (1973 broadcast); he 'worked admirably', won prizes and was a sergeant in the Officer Training Corps and in 1922-3 dux and an ephor (prefect). He was a classical scholar at Corpus Christi College, Oxford (1923-7), a small, close, and largely apolitical community. He rowed, golfed, spoke at the Oxford Union, participated in Liberal politics, and was president of the junior common room, the Sundial Society, and the Pelican Essay Club. Like most Oxford undergraduates, in the general strike he supported the government, fearing 'red revolution'. He worked on trams in Hull, and never regretted it. He gained a first in moderations but a third in greats, a 'stunning shock'. However, in the August 1927 civil service examination he came first on the Indian list and second on the home list. 
Rejecting the Indian Civil Service because he saw little future for British officials in India, in 1927 Martin entered the Dominions Office. In 1928 he transferred to the Colonial Office and worked in the Far Eastern department. From 1931 to 1934 he was seconded to the Malayan civil service, which he enjoyed, and which confirmed his belief in the British colonial empire. From 1936 to 1937 he was secretary of the royal commission on Palestine (the Peel commission). It heard evidence in Palestine and later London, where it questioned Lloyd George and Churchill; this was Martin's first meeting with Churchill. Martin's performance was officially praised. 
In 1939 Martin offered to serve in the London Scottish, but was retained by the Colonial Office; 'congenial work and not too heavy' (Martin, 3). From May 1940 to late June 1945 he served in the prime minister's private office, joining the 'secret circle' of those close to Churchill. Martin suspected he owed his appointment as a private secretary to Brendan Bracken, and was initially 'astonished and aghast' (ibid.). Reportedly at Bracken's suggestion, in May 1941 he was promoted principal private secretary. He admired Churchill, 'my master', but found working for him, with the heavy workload and long hours, difficult and exhausting. Martin's role was neither to advise nor draft speeches nor, usually, minutes, but to organize and co-ordinate, run the private office, select for Churchill only what was necessary, draft letters, and accompany Churchill, including to overseas conferences. The private office enabled Churchill to function as war leader. Martin ran it efficiently and harmoniously, to the satisfaction of Churchill and of his own civil service colleagues. John Colville wrote that he was 'first class', with 'a shy and retiring disposition combined with a ready wit, a delectable sense of humour' (Jackson, 'A Scottish Life', 107). Elizabeth Nel, a secretary, recollected that he was 'very human and pleasant with all of the staff' (ibid., 109). He later wrote that working with Churchill, though not easy, was 'tremendous fun' (Martin, 196). On 1 May 1943 Martin married, at St Mary's University Church, Oxford, Rosalind Julia (Rozie) Ross (1913-2005), an Oxford graduate, personal secretary at the War Office, and third daughter of Sir (William) David Ross, philosopher, provost of Oriel College, and vice-chancellor of Oxford University; they had one son, David. 
In July 1945 Martin returned to the Colonial Office, where as an assistant under-secretary of state he was in charge of the Middle East and Mediterranean departments. He was involved in the difficult negotiations on Palestine and, though friendly with Chaim Weizmann and other Zionists, considered the final United Nations decision unfair to the Palestinians. From autumn 1949 he was colonial adviser to the British UN delegation, largely defending British trusteeship against hostile foreign criticism. He was disgusted by the hypocrisy, futility, and corruption at the UN. 
Promoted deputy secretary in 1956, Martin was involved in the planning, negotiation, visits, and conferences of post-war decolonization, of Cyprus, Malaysia, Nyasaland, Kenya, Nigeria, the West Indies, and other territories. Though not foreseeing the tragedies of post-colonial Africa, he recognized some problems. He was aware of Nigerian corruption, and the inexperience of some African leaders. While in public the ever-tactful civil servant, in private he had reservations. He believed that 'the old Colonial rule was one of the best British gifts to the world', and disliked having to participate in its dismemberment. He believed the process went too fast but, with the pressures on Britain, was 'inevitable and, given the circumstances, right' (Jackson, 'A Scottish Life', 218). Privately he disapproved of the 1956 Suez operation. He was high commissioner in Malta (1965-7), a post he enjoyed, then retired. He had been appointed CVO (1943), CB (1945), KCMG (1952), and knight of the venerable order of Saint John of Jerusalem (1966). 
In retirement, from 1967 Martin lived at Watlington, Oxfordshire. A devout Christian and kirk elder, he continued his 'New Testament' studies. He was secretary of the Corpus Association, and an honorary fellow of Corpus. He broadcast some reminiscences, speaking 'establishment' English with no trace of a Scottish accent. At Lady Churchill's 'express wish' he and others responded to Lord Moran's controversial 'Winston Churchill: the Struggle for Survival' (1966) with 'Action this Day: Working with Churchill' (1968), praising Churchill and rejecting Moran's 'disparagement'. Martin also helped Martin Gilbert and other historians working on Churchill and the war. Gilbert found him shy, diffident, and modest, and enjoyed the Martins' 'friendly, cultured and wise company' (Gilbert, 'In Search of Churchill', 182). In 1991 Martin published extracts from his wartime diaries and letters in 'Downing Street: the War Years'. He died of cancer on Easter Sunday, 31 March 1991, at the Churchill Hospital, Oxford, survived by his wife and son. His funeral was at St Leonard's, Watlington, on 8 April, and the same day he was cremated at Oxford crematorium. A memorial service was held at St Columba's, Pont Street, London, on 25 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 49894


Maxwell, (Ian) Robert (1923-1991), publisher and swindler, was born on 10 June 1923 in Synagogue Street, Slatinske Doly (Szlatina), a village in Czechoslovakia on a disputed frontier with Romania. He was one of seven children of Mehel Hoch (1887-1942?), agricultural labourer, and Chanca (died 1942?), daughter of Yankel Shlomowitz and also an agricultural labourer. His mother, father, grandfather, and three youngest siblings died at Auschwitz. Originally he was named Abraham Lajbi (in Yiddish Leiby) Hoch and later Jan Ludvik Hoch. After attending a Jewish village school he had a strict religious education in the 'yeshiva' (Jewish school) at Sighet and at the Pressburger Yeshiva, Bratislava. His mother wanted him to become a rabbi, but he had his sidelocks shorn, and set out to assert himself. 
Hoch joined the Czech army in France in 1940 before escaping to England, where in 1941 he volunteered for the Pioneer Corps. After two years he became a private in the North Staffordshire regiment, where his linguistic fluency resulted in his recruitment to the intelligence section. Using the name Leslie Ivan du Maurier (the surname derived from his favourite brand of cigarette), he participated in the Normandy landings of 1944 as a sniper sergeant and was commissioned as a second lieutenant. During 1945 he received the Military Cross and was promoted to captain. After the collapse of the Third Reich he was a member of the branch of the Allied Control Commission in Berlin responsible for licensing films, plays, books, and newspapers (1945-7). Under military instructions he changed his surname from du Maurier to Jones in 1944, and then (apparently for military reasons) Leslie Jones in 1945 was renamed Ian Robert Maxwell. This was the name under which he was naturalized as a British subject in June 1946. Some of his enemies suspected that he began a working relationship with the KGB shortly afterwards. 
On 14 March 1945 in Paris Maxwell married Elisabeth (1921-2013), daughter of Paul Louis Meynard, a silk mill owner who had lost his fortune. This tempestuous marriage produced four sons, five daughters, and two miscarriages. The eldest son was injured in a motoring accident at the age of fifteen in 1961 and remained in a coma in an Oxford hospital for seven years. After Maxwell agreed with a neurologist that there should be no active attempts to prolong the boy's life, Michael Maxwell died in 1968. This tragedy aside, Maxwell was a domineering, intensively possessive, and demanding parent who humiliated his children and made their home life almost unbearable. Requiring unconditional surrender from all his dependants, he relished shows of magnanimity after blistering rows. During a marital crisis of 1980-81 his wife described him as 'harsh, cruel, uncompromising, dictatorial, exceedingly selfish and inconsiderate, totally unaware of the feelings of others, least of all those who are loyal and devoted to you, those you take a sadistic pleasure in crushing and humiliating' (Maxwell, 450). Intermittently, for over thirty years, he had affairs, and he and his wife separated in 1990. 
Maxwell in 1947 formed the grandiosely titled European Periodicals, Publicity and Advertising Corporation. Initially this imported German newspapers for sale to prisoners of war in Britain, but he foresaw the international demand for German scientific, medical, and technical works and obtained world distribution rights from Germany's leading scientific publisher, Ferdinand Springer. He wrote in 1949 that he had entered the 'business world without money, friends or knowledge. In this jungle the law since eternity has been 'catch as catch can', no holds are barred and only the fittest can survive' (Maxwell, 201). His sharp practice resulted in a crisis with Springer in 1951. Shortly afterwards he founded Pergamon Press, to which however he gave little attention for four years because in 1951, with characteristic financial legerdemain, he acquired control of the leading British book wholesale warehouse, Simpkin Marshall. He threw his energies and overbearing character into the business. From the outset his accounting procedures were irregular, and the company made large interest-free loans to other Maxwell companies. It entered liquidation in 1955 owing $656,000. 
It has been alleged that in 1948 MI6 agreed to finance Maxwell's business as a cover for spying on Soviet bloc countries; certainly he travelled extensively in eastern Europe and later in the Far East, and mastered nine languages. His incessant travels during the 1950s often had serendipitous consequences. Indeed throughout his life he had chance meetings with interesting people, who introduced him to other valuable contacts: 'Bob built up an amazing circle of acquaintances, purely on this kind of chain reaction... he had a prodigious memory, which served him well until the latter years of his life. He would remember names, faces, the most minute details of a conversation, and he possessed [an] amazing store of data gleaned from his constant reading or talks with people. (Maxwell, 245)' After the Simpkin Marshall debacle Maxwell concentrated on Pergamon. His survival of an operation for lung cancer in 1955 increased his craving for conquest. Pergamon launched a succession of high-priced specialist scientific periodicals, to which academics were eager to contribute without remuneration, and published expensive scientific books whose authors were underpaid. He cultivated scientific contacts in the Soviet Union and in Warsaw pact countries, where his status was enhanced by Pergamon's willingness to publish sycophantic biographies of the more obnoxious dictators. Maxwell's initiatives proved a catalyst for international scientific communication and earned the grateful admiration of Sir Robert Robinson, Patrick Blackett, and other scientists. He read or scanned all Pergamon journals and books and always tried to learn from his scientific editors. The intricacies of much scientific research were beyond him, but he strove to understand the purposes and potential benefits of the work described in his publications. Although Maxwell latterly was an overbearing conversationalist, in the twenty years after 1945 his intense curiosity could seem charming. 'Bob still had everything to learn -- and he knew it', according to his wife. 'If he met someone working in a field he was unfamiliar with, he would not make ordinary conversation, but would literally interrogate that person, who was generally flattered.' She considered that the 1950s were formative: 'his thirst for knowledge and his ability to use and apply it were exciting to watch. In those days, he could be enormous fun to be with; his enthusiasm for life seemed to know no bounds. You never knew what to expect next from his inventive mind. (Maxwell, 246-7)' 

Maxwell was Labour's unsuccessful parliamentary candidate for Buckingham in 1959. He chaired the Labour Party's national fund-raising foundation (1960-69) and its working party on science, government, and industry. Richard Crossman described him in 1963: 'a very strange fellow -- a Czech Jew with a perfect knowledge of Russian, who has an infamous reputation in the publishing world as the creator of the Pergamon Press'. His scientific advice and liaison with important scientists had unexpectedly proved 'helpful, constructive and sensible' ('Backbench Diaries', 1017). In 1964 Maxwell was elected for Buckingham. He made his maiden speech in the Commons within a few hours of taking his seat and thereafter was a frequent and strenuous speaker, especially on scientific topics. Other parliamentarians felt that he tried too hard to impress; his booming voice could seem painfully brash. 'A thrusting man who regards the House of Commons as a place where he can push himself', Tony Benn noted in 1965. 'The big struggle with Maxwell is whether you allow him to use you' (Benn, 294, 332). 
Crossman in 1967 induced Maxwell to chair the Commons kitchen committee on the basis that if he succeeded, Wilson would be convinced that he could run a government department. Despite a scandal over the sale of wine, Maxwell was reckoned a success and sought his reward of ministerial office, but no cabinet minister wanted him as a junior minister. His ambition spurred him towards becoming a newspaper proprietor. He was foiled in his attempt in 1964 to buy two Labour-supporting newspapers, the 'Daily Herald' and 'Sunday Citizen', and in 1968 his offer to buy 25 per cent of the shares in the 'News of the World' was rebuffed. Both in 1968 and when he tried to buy 'The Sun' in 1969 he was outmanoeuvred by Rupert Murdoch. When in 1968 five secretaries from Surbiton vowed to work unpaid for an extra half-hour daily to help Britain, Maxwell bustled into fronting a patriotic, populist 'I'm backing Britain' campaign. 'What a miraculous man', Crossman reflected at this time. 'However much people hate him, laugh at him, boo him and call him a vulgarian, he gets things done' ('Diaries of a Cabinet Minister', 2.661). 
By 1964, when Pergamon was floated on the stock exchange for over $4 million, it was publishing 600 books annually and 70 journals. During the 1950s Maxwell began forming tax-free trusts, 'Stiftungen', and anonymous foundations, 'Anstalten', in the principality of Liechtenstein. These had such names as Allandra, Baccano, Corry, Hesto, Jungo, and Kiaro; he used them to buy Pergamon's books and periodicals, to increase its apparent profits. In 1969 he agreed to a $25 million take-over of Pergamon by an American company, Leasco, which withdrew its bid on discovering that he had inflated Pergamon's profit figures by transactions with his private companies and by exaggerating its encyclopaedia sales. Maxwell had also secretly supported Pergamon's share price. In the ensuing uproar he was ousted from Pergamon's board by institutional investors and Leasco. 
Two inspectors from the Department of Trade and Industry who investigated Maxwell's business affairs concluded in a report published in 1971 that he was 'not... a person who can be relied on to exercise proper stewardship of a publicly-quoted company' (Bower, 'Maxwell the Outsider', 222). This famous phrase was coined by the accountant Sir Ronald Leach, who privately called Maxwell 'a wall of fat always suing us' (Bower, 'Tiny Rowland', 203). Leach understood Maxwell perfectly: 'It was his capacity to regard the world as his own, which we thought extremely dangerous' (Greenslade, 325). Two further damning reports on the encyclopaedia business and Maxwell's private companies appeared in 1972-3. The trade and industry inspectors hesitated to accuse Maxwell of criminality, and the police failed to prosecute him for fraud. He was, however, defeated in the three general elections of 1970 and 1974, and abandoned his parliamentary ambitions. 
In 1974 Maxwell bought back Pergamon for about $1.5 million and kept it as a private company. It prospered, but he hankered for a return to national prominence. In 1975 he enjoyed assuming the role of saviour of the 'Scottish Daily News', a Glasgow newspaper being run by an employees' co-operative; but the experiment ended bitterly with insolvency after six months. A dawn raid in July 1980 gave Maxwell a 29 per cent stake in the British Printing Corporation at a cost of $2.9 million, and he forced his way to the post of chief executive in February 1981. Soon he was chairman too, armed with exceptional powers. Maxwell's ostracism by City institutions diminished after his brutal but successful reorganization of the company, including new union agreements and investment in new machinery. The British Printing Corporation was renamed the Maxwell Communications Corporation (MCC) in 1987. 
Pergamon in 1984 bought Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) for $90 million, and Maxwell installed himself as chairman. He thus controlled Britain's only remaining Labour-supporting newspapers, the 'Daily Mirror', 'Sunday Mirror', and 'The People'. He cut the printing staff by one-third and began breaking the unions' grip on newspaper publishing. However, Maxwell swiftly compromised the editorial integrity of the 'Daily Mirror', which was the second highest selling newspaper in Britain. One million readers were lost, partly because the newspaper was used for his self-publicity. His name, photograph, and pontificating were too prominent in its pages, and he meddled constantly in its production and contents. His newspapers had diminishing political influence, partly because his political outlook was so egocentric, haphazard, and crude. 
This longing for celebrity was also evident in Maxwell's sporting ventures. In 1981 he invested $128,000 in Oxford United Football Club and became chairman. His plan to merge Oxford with Reading Football Club, and thus form a new club -- Thames Valley Royals -- was defeated. Having failed to buy a controlling interest in Manchester United Football Club in 1984, he paid $300,000 for the debt-ridden Derby County Football Club, of which he became chairman in 1987. He had several clashes with the Football League, and he sold his interest in Derby in 1991. During 1986 Maxwell intervened to save the finances of the Commonwealth athletic games being staged in Edinburgh. His meddling brought publicity for MGN and for its publisher, but the millions he promised were never paid. Similarly his donations for AIDS research, the alleviation of Ethiopian starvation, the Gorbachov-Maxwell Institute in Minneapolis, and Balkan industrial renewal were announced with portentous publicity but were never delivered. 
Maxwell was increasingly aggressive and uncontrollable from 1986. During that year he launched a glossy illustrated magazine, 'Sportsweek' (which closed after five months with losses of $2 million), and bought the Philip Hill Investment Trust, from which he reaped $76 million by selling its components. In 1987 he launched the 'London Daily News', which was planned as the city's second evening newspaper but was abruptly relaunched by Maxwell (without consulting its editor) as Britain's first twenty-four-hour newspaper. His interventions in the printing, distribution, and strategy of the newspaper resulted in losses of about $50 million in its brief career (February-July 1987). He also tried to buy the newspaper 'Today' from Tiny Rowland in 1987, but as a result of his indiscretions Rupert Murdoch again outmanoeuvred him. Maxwell's obsession with excelling Murdoch as a media tycoon became more obtrusive than ever. Also in 1987 he bought a French news agency, Agence Centrale de Presse, borrowed 750 million francs to buy a 12.5 per cent share in France's leading television channel, and was defeated in a hostile bid worth almost $2 billion for the American educational publisher and theme-park proprietor Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. During 1988, on a handshake deal with an Italian whom he met at a funeral, he paid $60 million to buy 84 per cent of the football-stickers and football-album group Panini, which further depleted his finances. He bought a 30 per cent stake in Scitex, an Israeli electronic scanning equipment manufacturer, and invested in another Israeli company, Teva Pharmaceuticals. 
Maxwell wasted millions on failed projects, litigation, and sumptuous living expenses, but his downfall began with MCC's purchase of the American publishing house Macmillan (which controlled 56 per cent of the shares in the Berlitz language schools) for the exorbitant price of $2.6 billion in 1988. MCC also paid $750 million in 1988 for Official Airline Guides. Maxwell negotiated huge loans from forty-four banks eager for his business, but was soon hit by high interest rates. From 1986, when his private companies pledged 115 million MCC shares as collateral for loans, he was servicing or paying off his debts by mortgaging MCC shares (a financial device called 'pig on pork'). The banks required that if the MCC share price fell below a stipulated level, more shares had to be transferred as additional guarantees safeguarding the value of the loan. Maxwell's Liechtenstein 'Stiftungen' owned the majority of MCC shares. Some 400 of his private companies of varying sizes traded with one another and with MCC in publishing, communications, printing, technology, property, currencies, gilts, and shares. He used these companies to move assets, shares, cash, and debts regardless of regulations or laws so that MCC could claim huge profits in its sumptuous brochures. To maintain the MCC share price, and thus avoid transferring more MCC shares under 'pig on pork' arrangements, he paid excessive dividends to shareholders. The profits from trading were $97.3 million in 1989, but the dividend cost $112.3 million. The cost of maintaining this charade included $17.6 million in advance corporation tax. On adjusted trading profits of $71.1 million in 1990 the extraneous tax cost was $98.8 million. 
Additionally, from 1988 Maxwell set up twelve companies with London and Bishopsgate in their titles, operating from the same premises but with different activities, and thus well calculated to confuse outsiders. In 1989 London and Bishopsgate Investments began elaborate, systematic misuse of funds and fraudulent share transactions, particularly involving First Tokyo Trust. Maxwell's private company Bishopsgate Investment Trust managed nine pension funds for his 23,400 employees. These funds were siphoned to support the Maxwell businesses. He took $1.5 million from MCC's pension fund in 1986 and $9 million in 1987. 
Woodrow Wyatt recorded the mistrust felt by other newspaper proprietors of Maxwell. Murdoch in 1987 predicted, 'one day Maxwell will go bust in a spectacular manner' (Wyatt, 1.375). Conrad Black told Wyatt that Maxwell was an impossible business partner because 'he was so dishonest and devious and wriggled out of things and gave you false information' (ibid., 2.475-6). Despite such perceptions, bankers continued to lend Maxwell large amounts of money. By the summer of 1990 the scale of his debts and the impossibility of servicing them made ruin inevitable. He engaged during the last fifteen months of his life in dedicated criminality. He fraudulently supported MCC's share price through the Liechtenstein 'Stiftungen' and with money stolen from his employees' pension funds. In November 1990 he transferred Berlitz shares worth over $200 million from the legal ownership to his Bishopsgate Investment Trust. He began drinking heavily; his infallible memory for financial detail began to falter. Constant jet travel, meetings, and deceit were physically breaking him. Pergamon's sale for $440 million in 1991 did not solve the debt-crisis. Then, after some adroit financial manipulation, the flotation of MGN was prepared in six hectic weeks, and in May 1991 he sold 49 per cent of MGN. However, with only a 51 per cent stake, his earnings from MGN were reduced, and he could no longer use its assets as collateral. During 1991 he forged documents to inflate the profits of MCC by $37 million while his private companies' debts to MCC and MGN rose to over $600 million. As the impending doom of his empire became evident, he became more destructive. 
Having purloined from 'Die Zeit' of Hamburg the project of a pan-European newspaper, Maxwell had in 1990 launched 'The European' with himself as editor-in-chief. His arrangements for its printing and distribution were unnecessarily expensive and inefficient. Its launch cost perhaps $50 million, and it lost $1 million a week in its first year. Despite the strains on him, in March 1991 Maxwell, in return for payment of $65 million from its owners, took over the 'New York Daily News', which was suffering from a five-month strike, corrupt employment practices, rampant expenditure, and antiquated plant. American public adulation and proximity to President George Bush at a White House dinner aggravated his delusion that (in his own words) he was 'not just a hero, [but] a cult figure' (Greenslade, 224). 
Meanwhile Swiss Bank had compiled a dossier on an unpaid debt of $55.7 million that it warned would be given to the fraud squad on 5 November. The 'Financial Times' simultaneously prepared a story estimating the Maxwell family's debts at $2.2 billion. Maxwell died on 5 November 1991, disappearing from his yacht, 'Lady Ghislaine', while it was cruising off Gran Canaria. It is uncertain whether he accidentally fell overboard, deliberately killed himself (knowing that his crimes would imminently be discovered), or was murdered at the instigation of an associate hoping to stop the wrecking of his assets. The hypothesis that he was murdered by secret agents seems less tenable. Roy Greenslade, who had worked for him as editor of the 'Daily Mirror', judged that 'Mr Maxwell took his own life while the balance of his mind was briefly undisturbed' (Greenslade, 351). Maxwell's corpse was retrieved from the Atlantic and was buried on 10 November on the Mount of Olives, Jerusalem. 
The sycophantic tributes paid at Maxwell's death and the eulogies pronounced at the grave were soon discredited. His empire swiftly collapsed owing about $2.7 billion; $429 million had been stolen from employee pension funds. Banks that had taken security for loans in the form of shares lost over $655 million. Maxwell's sons Ian and Kevin were subsequently arrested on criminal charges but acquitted after a gruelling trial. 
Maxwell's resilience, which earned him the half-affectionate nickname the Bouncing Czech, was admirable. Yet despite his energy and bouts of ebullient charm, he aroused rancour for much of his career. This hostility partly derived from his litigious nature. Millions of pounds were spent on legal fees over the years. He threatened to issue writs and launched innumerable court actions; although these were often abandoned, they succeeded in their aim of intimidating his critics. He used the law to bludgeon his enemies into silence or stun creditors into pained compliance. During 1987-8, when he sought to suppress Tom Bower's unauthorized biography, he commissioned a hagiography from Joe Haines trumpeting his benefactions to humankind and ordered its serialization in the 'Sunday Mirror' and 'Daily Mirror'. 
Maxwell was as ruthless and keen as any self-made businessman of his stature; but there was a flamboyant excess which was already disruptive by the 1960s, and he reacted to the stresses that accumulated from the 1980s with dictatorial behaviour that accelerated his destructive effects. In this latter period his lavatory hygiene, foul language, and table manners became increasingly primitive. Throughout, his egotism was unashamed: the bowl-sized cup from which he drank at his office was marked 'I'M A VERY IMPORTANT PERSON'. As an employer, particularly in the final decade of his life, he allowed his verbal brutality and physical presence to terrorize many of his staff. He required servility from them, and became obsessed with loyalty, secrecy, and security. He reverted to sentimental and self-serving declarations of Judaism after visiting Israel in 1985. He increasingly enjoyed his trips to Israel, where everyone who mattered to him treated him uncritically and even unctuously. 
When young, Maxwell was dashingly handsome, but his features coarsened in middle age, and he became obese (ultimately weighing 22 stone). From the 1960s he was instantly recognizable, with dyed black hair, bushy eyebrows, paunch, and aggressively negligent clothes. His stentorian voice and almost pugilistic joviality attracted some and alienated others. His domestic arrangements were ostentatious and histrionic. He travelled between his homes, like a war-lord, by helicopter and assumed a monarchical pose during his incessant international journeys by private jet: his last Gulfstream cost $24 million and was codenamed VR-Bob ('Very Rich Bob'). 


@@@@@


doc= 49895


Mercury, Freddie (1946-1991), singer and song-writer, was born at the Government Hospital in Zanzibar on 5 September 1946, the eldest son of Bomi Bulsara, civil servant, and his wife, Jer. His parents were both from Bombay and were Zoroastrians. At five he was enrolled at the local missionary school, and his sister, Kashmira, was born in 1952. Two years later the family moved back to Bombay, and he was enrolled at St Peter's, a prestigious English boarding-school some 50 miles from the city. Here he took piano lessons, joined the school choir, and formed his first band, the Hectics. After O-levels, he returned briefly to Zanzibar before his family moved to England, settling at Feltham, Middlesex. Here he enrolled at Isleworth Polytechnic School, supporting himself in the holidays with a variety of jobs. Having gained an A-level in art, he took a course in graphic design at Ealing College of Art (1966-9). There he met an astrophysics student and guitarist, Brian May, and a dentistry student and drummer, Roger Taylor, both of whom were playing in a group called Smile. Mercury (he changed his name to Freddie Mercury by deed poll in 1970) briefly joined a Liverpudlian group, Ibex, and then Sour Milk Sea, before forming Queen in 1970 with May and Taylor. They were joined in 1971 by bass player John Deacon, and the line-up of the band remained unchanged for the rest of its history. Mercury also met Mary Austin, manager of the London boutique Biba, and lived with her for seven years. She was to be a lifelong friend. 
Signed to EMI as a glam rock band, Queen scored its first success with 'Seven Seas of Rhye' (1973), which peaked at number ten in the British charts. The albums 'Queen' (1973) and 'Queen II' (1974) followed with limited commercial success, due perhaps to the somewhat peculiar mix of styles and references. Both were essentially hard rock, but are notable for early examples of Mercury's wit and innuendo. Titles such as 'My Fairy King' and 'The Fairy Feller's Masterstroke' (both composed by Mercury), combined with his use of falsetto, implied an underlying sexual ambiguity; this ambiguity, a characteristic of many glam rock musicians, stood in sharp contrast to the vigorous heterosexuality of traditional rock and popular music. The band also had its first American tour, supporting Mott the Hoople, but the audience initially regarded them as a joke, responding to the musicians' glam rock Zandra Rhodes silks, nail varnish, and make-up. 
The band's first major success came in 1974 with the release of the 'Sheer Heart Attack' album, which contained the number two British chart single, 'Killer Queen'. Written by Mercury and notable for its studio mix and feel for narrative, it gave Queen its first American top twenty hit and became the gay anthem for the winter of 1974, as well as gaining an Ivor Novello award for Mercury. The album cover was particularly striking, with a photograph of the members of the band collapsed in a heap, Mercury's trousers undone and black nail varnish on his left hand, against a black background with gaudy red lettering, which reinforced the ambiguities already surrounding Mercury's image as a macho rock hero, blending showmanship with high camp. Queen, however, was never perceived as a gay band, and Mercury's campery was regarded by its growing number of fans as evidence of a flair for theatricality, treading the line between the outrageous and bad taste. Mercury's adoption of the union flag, which was often emblazoned on his jackets or draped around his shoulders, and his wearing of a crown and ermine-trimmed robes, led to mass singing of 'God Save the Queen' even before the band recorded a version of it in 1975. 
Queen's final breakthrough was made in 1975 with the release of 'A Night at the Opera', which took its title from the classic Marx Brothers film. The pre-release publicity for the album emphasized its production costs ($35,000), the three months it took to record, and the use of six different recording studios for its completion. Its most important track was 'Bohemian Rhapsody', which heralded what was to become Mercury's performance hallmark, an operatic vocal style. It lasted just short of six minutes (twice the length of an average single), had three tempo changes, and featured a pseudo-operatic passage of contrived pathos, so the record company was initially reluctant to issue it as a single; it was taken up by the disc jockey Kenny Everett, and reached number one in the British and number nine in the American charts. It won Queen its first platinum disc, gained a second Ivor Novello award for Mercury, and, at the 1977 Brit awards, was named joint best single of the preceding twenty-five years, with Procul Harum's 'A Whiter Shade of Pale'. 'Bohemian Rhapsody' was accompanied by one of the first promotional videos, with Mercury camping it up in a parody of Paderewski, hunched over a grand piano which he played with excessive gestures. 
As Queen's popularity broadened, they became prime movers in 'stadium rock', spectacularly lit and costumed performances for huge audiences in increasingly large venues, such as football stadiums, giving full scope to Mercury's commanding stage presence and idiosyncratic use of his detachable microphone stand. He was able to project both music and image to vast audiences, many of whom could see the stage only by virtue of live-relay video screens, 'prancing down multi-layered catwalks in a sequinned, skin-tight jump suit and ballet slippers, preening his way through a myriad of costume changes and singing in his majestic, slightly frayed tenor voice' ('The Times'). The appeal of the band was international: a concert in February 1981 at Sao Paulo, Brazil, was attended by a record audience for a rock concert, of 231,000 people. 
In addition to his work with Queen, Mercury had a solo career which began in 1973 when he released a version of the Beach Boys' song 'I Can Hear Music' under the name Larry Lurex. His first solo hit was in 1984 with 'Love Kills' from the Giorgio Moroder soundtrack to the film 'Metropolis'. His next single, 'I was Born to Love You', reached the British top twenty in 1985, and in 1987 a kitsch revival of the Platters' 'Great Pretender' reached the British top five. Later that year he teamed up with the opera singer Monserrat Caballe, whom he had long admired, for the top ten success 'Barcelona'. An album of the same title appeared in 1988, and Mercury and Caballe performed live at the Avinguda de Maria Cristina Stadium in Barcelona on 8 October 1988; it was to be Mercury's last performance on stage. 
Meanwhile, Queen's hits continued unabated into the 1980s, including 'We Will Rock You', 'Radio Ga-Ga', and 'I Want to Break Free', which was reputed to have been adopted by the then incarcerated Nelson Mandela as the anthem of the African National Congress. 'The Game' (1980) was Queen's first album to reach number one in the American charts, and one of its tracks, 'Another One Bites the Dust', by John Deacon, stayed at the top of the American singles charts for five weeks and sold 3 million copies. Like several other Queen songs, notably 'We are the Champions', it became a frequently sung anthem at sporting events. In November 1980 the single from Queen's 'Flash Gordon' soundtrack album also broke new ground in incorporating snatches of dialogue from the film of the same name. A month later, when the band performed at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham, Mercury was carried onto the stage on the shoulders of his minder, who was dressed as Darth Vader from 'Star Wars'. By 1982 the band members were recorded as Britain's highest-paid executives. They were famous for their extravagant end-of-tour and album launch parties, where guests were flown in from around the world. In 1984 Queen was placed on the United Nations' blacklist, for having played for eight nights at Sun City, South Africa, during the anti-apartheid cultural boycott. Its members were ostracized and heavily fined by the Musicians' Union, and were not forgiven until their appearance at the Live Aid concert organized by Bob Geldof in 1985 for famine relief in Ethiopia. Their twenty-minute set was one of the highlights of the show, and successfully re-presented the band to a younger audience. They then contributed to the soundtrack for Russell Mulcahy's fantasy film 'Highlander', and the songs were released on 'A Kind of Magic', which topped the British charts in the summer of 1986 and reached the top ten in forty other countries. 
In 1990 Queen was presented with a British Phonographic Industry award for its contribution to British music, and in 1991 released 'Innuendo', a celebration of the band's twentieth anniversary. Queen's last single, 'The Show Must Go On', and the accompanying video which showed excerpts from the previous twenty years, had a decidedly nostalgic feeling. Mercury had been ill for some time, and seldom left Garden Lodge in Logan Mews, the Kensington home which he shared with Jim Hutton and numerous cats during his last year. The day before he died, he issued a statement 'for my friends and fans around the world', confirming that he had AIDS and that he had 'felt it correct to keep this information private to date in order to protect the privacy of those around me' ('The Independent', 26 Nov 1991). He succumbed to bronchial pneumonia at his home on 24 November 1991. Hundreds of fans queued up outside Garden Lodge to pay their respects. His funeral took place three days later at the Kensal Green crematorium, attended only by close friends and family, and was conducted according to the Zoroastrian faith of his family. 'Bohemian Rhapsody' was re-released as a double A-side with 'These are the Days of our Lives' on 9 December and returned to the top of the charts; the royalties were donated to the HIV and AIDS charity the Terrence Higgins Trust. Other tributes followed, including a concert at Wembley stadium on 20 April 1992, at which many major stars, including David Bowie, Elton John, and Liza Minnelli, performed. In 1995 Mercury's last seven songs were released from the archives, and the remaining members of Queen added their music and backing vocals. 'Made in Heaven' went to the top of the charts. The sleeve for the album showed Brian May, John Deacon, and Roger Taylor in silhouette with their backs to the camera in the grounds of Mercury's Swiss home, Duck House, gazing across Lake Geneva past a statue of Mercury. 


@@@@@


doc= 49897


Meyer, Rollo John Oliver (1905-1991), educationist and cricketer, was born on 15 March 1905 at the rectory, Clophill, Bedfordshire, the son of Canon (Horace) Rollo Meyer ['see below'], Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Arabella Crosbie Ward. His education commenced at what he called a dame-school in Middlesex, followed by a preparatory school in Blackheath, where he was accepted on favourable terms -- a sign of things to come. In 1918 he moved to Haileybury College, to which he won an unexpected scholarship. He didn't enjoy himself much there, but did well at sports. From Haileybury he went on to Pembroke College, Cambridge, where as well as a good deal of very successful cricket (he was for three years a Cambridge cricket blue, as well as a rackets blue and very nearly a golf blue) he inclined towards schoolmastering. He spent a short period teaching, and then went to India, using his sporting fame and perhaps his less than glamorous academic results in search of a fortune. He worked as a cotton broker for Gill & Co., Bombay, from 1926 to 1929. He then worked as a private tutor in Limboli and Porbandar, and became headmaster of Dhrangadhra Palace School in 1930. In 1931 he married Joyce Evelyn Symons, with whom he had two daughters, one of whom died young. The marriage worked, but India did not. However, he started to find his feet as a schoolmaster there, and he began to coach sons of the Indian aristocracy for entry into Oxford and Cambridge. 
In 1935 Meyer took five of his Indian pupils to England, and Millfield School was thus established. It grew rapidly. Meyer -- universally known as the Boss -- built on three successful pillars. First, he recognized the value of what came to be called 'comprehensive' schooling; it may have been based on money rather than on more social attitudes, but it worked and Millfield prided itself on being the first public comprehensive and co-educational school. Secondly, and following from this, he recognized the issue of what was later called 'diversity'; he would, to put it crudely, educate not-so-bright children of rich parents at high fees, while taking on bright pupils -- whether academic, artistic, or sporting -- for little or nothing in payment. The third and most important strand in Meyer's approach was that as a born pedagogue, in the best sense of the word, he recognized that there was no child who had not got some good in him or her, and aimed to bring this out. Millfield thrived on this formula and became a large organization -- a senior school, preparatory school, and pre-preparatory school, with very substantial academic, artistic, and sporting achievements to the credit of its pupils. Meyer was appointed OBE in 1967. In later years Millfield's headmaster was a member of the headmaster's conference, a sign of respectability denied, many said unfairly, to Meyer in his day. 
Of course there was a downside. Meyer's autocratic, even roguish, approach went out in the more straight-laced post-war years, and a board of governors was established. His stern if whimsical discipline -- he was a great one for corporal punishment -- went out of fashion too. Some of Millfield's advantages in the immediate post-war years -- for instance keeping class sizes small by employing, on the cheap, retired teachers from other schools -- lost their effect. In 1970 Meyer resigned and exiled himself to Greece, in what appeared, in public anyway, to be slightly unseemly circumstances. His work in Greece was by no means a failure, with the true schoolmastering skills still coming through, as founder and first headmaster of St Lawrence College, Athens, from 1979 to 1986 and co-founder and first rector of Byron College, Athens, from 1986 to 1987. He retired through ill health in the latter year. 
Meyer was a great sportsman. As with his schoolmastering his success was based not on book knowledge or learning, but on instinct and natural flair. He played cricket for Somerset (and was captain in 1947) and his career included taking 412 first-class wickets, including those of some of the very best batsmen of the day, including Woolley, Edrich, and Bradman. He took these interests with him to Millfield but contrary to popular belief did not overdo the sporting side -- this mistake, if mistake it was, was left to his successors. 
Meyer died at Bristol General Hospital on 9 March 1991 and was survived by his wife and one daughter, the other daughter having predeceased him in a car accident. He was a difficult, talented man in very many fields. But in the field of teaching he was a genius. Millfield and indeed educational thinking more widely stand as monuments to his ideas, enthusiasm, and skill. The recognition that every child has a winning streak in him or her, and that it is the job of the school to bring this forward, may not have been entirely new, but Meyer certainly made it real. 
His father (Horace) Rollo Meyer (1868-1953), clergyman and gardener, was born at East Tisted, Hampshire, on 6 July 1868, the son of Horace Meyer (1828/9-1897), vicar of Christ Church, Clifton, and his wife, Louisa Clara, 'nee' Bosanquet. Educated at Cheam school, Charterhouse School, and Trinity College, Cambridge (1887-90), he underwent theological training at Ridley Hall and was ordained in 1894. After serving a curacy at Wirksworth, Derbyshire, from 1894 to 1900, he held the rectories of Clophill, Bedfordshire (1900-10), and Watton-at-Stone, Hertfordshire (1911-36), and was honorary canon of St Albans Abbey from 1934. In 1902 he married Arabella Crosbie, daughter of Hamilton Ward, with whom he had three sons and a daughter. 
Meyer was a prominent figure in gardening circles. Before the First World War, with his Cambridge friend the politician Noel Buxton, he founded the London Gardens Guild to encourage flower growing in deprived parts of inner London, for example by holding competitions for window boxes. In 1927 it became the National Gardens Guild, of which he was president. He was a leading exhibitor and hybridist of narcissi, and also won many awards as an iris specialist. In 1950 he received the Royal Horticultural Society's highest award, the Victoria medal of honour. He died at his home, Manor End, Little Gaddesden, Hertfordshire, on 6 March 1953. 


@@@@@


doc= 49899


Miles, Bernard James, Baron Miles (1907-1991), actor and theatre manager, was born on 27 September 1907 at 1 Poplar Terrace, New Road, Hillingdon, Uxbridge, Middlesex, the son of Edwin James Miles, market gardener, and his wife, Barbara Hooper, 'nee' Fletcher, a Scottish cook. Brought up in a strict Baptist household, he learned from his parents the value of thrift and hard work, as well as a wealth of ancient countryside lore which he later used in a triumphant series of music-hall monologues about life on a farm. 
Educated at Uxbridge county school, Miles won a scholarship to Pembroke College, Oxford, and worked briefly as a schoolmaster in Yorkshire. He abandoned this career in 1930 when he made his stage debut as the Second Messenger in a Baliol Holloway revival of Shakespeare's 'Richard III'. In 1931 he married the actress Josephine Wilson (died 1990), who gave him unstinting support. They had two daughters and a son. The carpentry Miles had learned from his father came in useful during several subsequent years travelling the country with repertory companies, when his responsibilities ranged from building scenery to playing small parts. Towards the end of the 1930s he began to make a name in London, in music-halls and late-night cabaret theatres, where he perfected his comic monologues in 'Late Joys' (1939) and three Herbert Farjeon revues. 
During the war Miles found film fame in Noel Coward's 'In Which We Serve' (1942) but also frequently toured with the Old Vic as Iago and directed John Mills in 'Men in Shadow' (1942), later following Mills in the leading role. As the war ended he was back with the Old Vic company at the New Theatre for the 1947-8 season, playing the Inquisitor in 'Saint Joan' and Christopher Sly in 'The Taming of the Shrew'. 
From the late 1940s Miles's energies were focused on building the first Mermaid Theatre in his own garden in St John's Wood, a wooden playhouse faithfully replicating Shakespeare's Globe long before the birth of Sam Wanamaker's similar project. In its first (1951) season he played Caliban in 'The Tempest' and, as producer and director, persuaded Kirsten Flagstad and Maggie Teyte to sing Purcell's 'Dido and Aeneas'. The Mermaid then found a temporary home at the Royal Exchange in the City, before Miles and his equally tireless wife finally settled it in Puddle Dock, the first theatre to have been opened in the City for 300 years. They spent six years building the new Mermaid and it eventually opened in May 1959 with a triumphant Lionel Bart musical, 'Lock up your Daughters', based somewhat loosely on Henry Fielding's 'Rape upon Rape'. Though he was to suffer all the architectural and financial problems only too familiar to anyone trying to build a theatre in Britain, or merely to keep one open, Miles's years at the Mermaid saw triumphant revivals of 'Treasure Island' (in which he was always a definitive Long John Silver) and long-running musical celebrations of the songs of Noel Coward and Cole Porter. The Mermaid also gave birth to 'Side by Side by Sondheim' in the late 1970s, and more classically was the venue for many notable Bernard Shaw and Shakespeare revivals, some of the latter in relatively modern dress. For his services to the theatre Miles was appointed CBE in 1953, knighted in 1969, and given a life peerage as Baron Miles of Blackfriars in 1979. 
Miles was an old-fashioned actor, and was often out of tune also with modern directing techniques, but his ability to keep the Mermaid going on knife-edge finance, and frequently to retrieve it from the jaws of bankruptcy, was always admirable. If he sometimes cast himself in wildly unsuitable roles (Oedipus, for instance, or John Gabriel Borkman) he was nevertheless a memorable Schweyk in 'Schweyk in the Second World War' (1963) and a formidable Falstaff in both parts of 'Henry IV' (1970). 
Like Joan Littlewood at the Theatre Royal a little further beyond the City in Stratford East, Miles worked with very slender resources and often scant critical acclaim; sadly, what should have been a triumphant rebuilding project when the Mermaid moved a few hundred yards inland in 1981 ended in bankruptcy, and in Miles's forced resignation as artistic director of the theatre he had built and still so loved. He and his wife had invested all their own money in the rebuilding project, and were forced to sell their London home to meet their debts. Following the death of his wife in 1990, Miles was moved into a nursing home with nothing more than his state pension, though funds were raised for him by an all-star 'Bernard Miles Celebration' at the Mermaid on 3 March 1991, at which he made his last public appearance in a wheelchair, having recently fallen and broken a leg. He died at the Thistle Hill Nursing Home, Knaresborough, Yorkshire, on 14 June 1991. He was survived by his son and one daughter, his other daughter, Sally (who had joined her parents in the management of the Mermaid Theatre), having died of motor neurone disease. 
Miles can still be seen in such major movies as Noel Coward's 'In Which We Serve' (1942), Alfred Hitchcock's 'The Man Who Knew Too Much' (1956), John Huston's 'Moby Dick' (1956), Basil Dearden's 'The Smallest Show on Earth' (1957), and Charles Crichton's 'Battle of the Sexes' (1960). He was a pioneer of the 'talking' gramophone record in the 1940s; his 'Over the Gate' monologues, of a mythical Buckinghamshire farmer, were released on several bestselling 78 r.p.m. discs (and he would also occasionally perform them live in the dying days of the music-hall). These were, for their time, if not scandalous then at least lusty, and during his management of the Mermaid Theatre in a still repressive theatrical era (when the lord chamberlain had to approve all scripts) he did his best to move the barriers of sexual tolerance slightly forward, in an always Falstaffian manner. He was also known to television audiences for a lengthy series of commercials on behalf of the Egg Marketing Board. Nevertheless his real legacy was the Mermaid Theatre. Though still standing just north of its original Puddle Dock site, the Mermaid enjoyed little success after he left it, and endured several periods of prolonged closure. 


@@@@@


doc= 49900


Mills, Cyril Bertram (1902-1991), circus proprietor, was born on 27 February 1902 at 56 Norfolk Square, London, the elder son of Bertram Wagstaff Mills (1873-1938), circus proprietor, and his wife, Ethel Kate, 'nee' Notley. Educated at Harrow School and Cambridge, where he studied engineering at master's level, Mills began his professional life by working in the oil industry between 1923 and 1925, a job that took him to Rangoon, where he worked in a mosquito- and snake-infested swamp. 
Having previously only dabbled in their father's business, Mills and his brother, Bernard, took on the management of the Bertram Mills circus in 1925. The task was daunting for Mills, who commented that 'to accept [this post] meant taking a gamble of going into something for which I had no training and to which I might be totally unsuited' (Mills, 32). His first challenge was to arrange the transport of Alfred Schneider's seventy lions to the London Olympia from Paris. He also searched for talented artists and often flew his own plane to showground sites on the continent in order to audition them. One obituarist noted that: 'his arrival [at such places] was signalled round every caravan within minutes and artists changed into their Sunday-best costumes and resolved to attempt the latest death-defying addition to their acts in the hop[e] of catching his eye and winning a contract for Olympia. ('The Times', 22 July 1991)' Although Bertram Mills's circus tented in virtually every major British town, it was the Christmas show at Olympia which gave the concern its spectacular reputation. Generations of children in Britain, including the royals, saw the Bertram Mills circus perform there. One member of the royal family told Mills during the circus's last show at Olympia that 'we 'had' to bring the children to the last performance. We wanted them to be able to say in later years that they had actually seen the Bertram Mills circus' (ibid.). 
In addition to being an engineer cum circus manager, Mills was a secret agent for MI5. Codenamed Mr Grey, he was attached to the War Office during the Second World War. The famous British double agent Juan Pujol (codenamed Garbo), whose autobiography was published in 1984, claimed that he was recruited into MI5 by Mr Grey, who served as his first case officer, directing his activities which changed the course of the war. A press photograph showed the two of them together in 1984 for the first time since 1940. Friends of Mills felt sure they recognized him standing with Garbo. Mills's wartime activities extended to his head offices in Dorset Square, London, which became the headquarters for the Free French forces of the French resistance. Even after the war he continued his work in intelligence. According to Peter Wright's 'Spycatcher', he was recruited to carry out surveillance activities on the Russians during the Suez Canal crisis, using his circus business as a cover. As a tenant in a flat sandwiched between a cluster of soviet diplomatic buildings in Kensington Palace Gardens, he intercepted signals between these buildings in London and Moscow. At the same time he operated his circus business from the house. 'Every time we needed to deliver staff or equipment to the house', said Wright, 'we used a garishly painted Mills circus van. It was a perfect cover, and the Russians never suspected a thing' (Wright, 104-5). 
Spurred by the post-war boom in the circus business, Mills became both successful and rich. In 1947 he launched the circus as a public company on the London stock exchange. This was the first circus in Britain to go public. Two years later Mills became an underwriting member of Lloyd's. The success of the Bertram Mills circus began to ebb, however, with the advent of television, as well as with Mills's unwillingness to cater to the latest trends; he was said to prefer the traditional sawdust performances to New Age costumes, floats, and showgirls. Declining profits led to the closure of Mills's tenting show in 1964, and, as a consequence, its tents, wagons, and animals were sold. The company was later taken over by Maxwell Joseph, head of the Grand Metropolitan hotel chain, although this arrangement proved unprofitable and ended. The name of the company was transferred in 1978 to the new Brighton Centre, although the heyday of the Bertram Mills circus had clearly ended. 
Even in his retirement Mills was the subject of popular interest, and in 1989 he was celebrated on 'This is your Life'. Suffering from emphysema and a heart condition, he nevertheless made a guest appearance on the same programme in 1990 in order to pay tribute to his last ringmaster, Norman Barrett. He died at his home, 51 Cumberland Terrace, Camden, London, on 20 July 1991, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Mimi, two sons, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 49907


Mortensen, Stanley Harding (1921-1991), footballer, was born at 23 Lord Nelson Street, South Shields, on 26 May 1921, the second son of Christopher Hardwick Mortensen, butcher, and his wife, Sarah Ellen, 'nee' Baker. His Scandinavian surname, the cause of many journalistic misprints, was inherited from his Norwegian grandfather, a sailor based in South Shields. Educated at St Mary's School, Tyne Dock, he was selected for the school football team when only nine years old and for South Shields schoolboys at the age of thirteen. After leaving school at fourteen he worked in a timber yard for three years before joining Blackpool United Football Club as an inside-right in 1938, after impressing club scouts in a junior match. The club considered releasing him because of his lack of pace, but diligent training eventually made him one of the fastest forwards in the English game. In 1941 he joined the RAF as a wireless operator-gunner; he subsequently survived an aircrash near Lossiemouth which killed two members of the crew and saw a third lose a leg. Although he received serious head injuries, he soon resumed his football career, and played for at least eleven clubs in various wartime competitions. He regarded this period as an important part of his football education and made sufficient progress to be selected first for the RAF and then for the England squad against Wales in 1943. In the somewhat relaxed atmosphere of wartime football he played for the Welsh side when cover could not be found for an injured player. He made his first appearance for the 'correct' team against Wales the following year. On 2 November 1943 he married Jean Galloway ('b'. 1920/21), clerk, and daughter of William Galloway, plasterer. They had met on Mortensen's first day as a Blackpool footballer. 
When the Football League programme resumed in 1946, Mortensen was an automatic choice in the Blackpool side, either at inside-right or centre-forward. His acceleration, ability to shoot fiercely from awkward angles, and general quick-wittedness, soon made him one of the most effective goal-scorers in the English game. Between 1946 and 1955 he scored 197 goals for his club in 325 league games and a further 25 in 29 FA cup games: he scored in every round (including the final) in 1947-8. He finished on the losing side in 1948 and again in 1951, but in 1953, against Bolton Wanderers, he became the first player to score a hat-trick in a Wembley FA cup final. The game was error-strewn and turned on injuries to Bolton players, but it provided a dramatic climax as Blackpool came from 3-1 down with only ten minutes remaining to win 4-3. The game is invariably termed the 'Matthews final' in honour of Stanley Matthews, who played a major role in wearing down a tired Bolton side but, as Matthews always acknowledged, Mortensen's goals were the crucial ingredient. Although the football world was delighted with his achievement, until his final goal was scored the television commentator continued to describe his first as an 'own goal', since his shot had taken a decisive deflection off a Bolton player. Mortensen also enjoyed a prolific goal-scoring record at international level, particularly in his early games: he scored four times on his full international debut in a 10-0 defeat of Portugal in 1947, and completed a hat-trick against Sweden later in the year. Overall, he scored twenty-three times in twenty-five England appearances between 1947 and 1953. 
Mortensen left Blackpool in October 1955 for Hull City, then joined Southport for the 1956-7 season. Between 1957 and 1962 he played non-league football with Bath and then Lancaster City, before finally retiring in 1962 to run a betting shop and a sports outfitter's in Blackpool, where he also served as a Conservative councillor. He returned to football in February 1967 as manager of Blackpool, but despite only narrowly failing to secure the team promotion to the first division in the following year, and proving himself popular with supporters, he was sacked in April 1969. He returned to his business interests but, by the early 1980s, increasingly poor health forced him into a less than financially secure retirement. Morty remained a respected local figure, however, not least because of his considerable work for local charities, and he was rewarded with the freedom of Blackpool in March 1990. 
Mortensen died at the Victoria Hospital, Blackpool, following a heart attack, on 22 May 1991. His well-attended funeral was held at St John's parish church, Blackpool, and he was cremated at Carleton crematorium, on 29 May. He was survived by his wife. Although not a significant figure in the sense of having made a distinctive contribution to the game's evolution or to the nature of the football profession, Mortensen was undoubtedly one of the best players of his generation, much liked and respected by his fellow players, and a major attraction at grounds throughout the country in the ten years after the Second World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 49914


Panufnik, Sir Andrzej (1914-1991), composer and conductor, was born on 24 September 1914 in Warsaw, the younger son of Tomasz Aleksander Panufnik (1865-1953), who had trained as an engineer but who became Poland's finest stringed instrument maker, and his wife, Matylda Maria Thonnes (1883-1945), daughter of Jan Thonnes and his wife, Henryka Szuster. Both parents were Polish; however, Jan Thonnes's father was of part English and half Polish descent. Andrzej's elder brother, MirosLaw 
(Mirek; 1910-1944)
, was reading mathematics at the University of Warsaw when his studies were interrupted by the Second World War; he served valiantly in the underground and was killed during the Warsaw uprising. 
A frail child, Panufnik experienced the generally benevolent neglect of his parents and formed a close attachment to his maternal grandmother, Henryka, who became his first piano teacher. Following kindergarten he attended a succession of secondary schools in Warsaw: the Lorentz Gimnazjum (1924-5), the SzkoLa Mazowiecka (1925-7, interrupted by typhoid), and the Municipal Gimnazjum (1927-9). He was enrolled as a junior student at the Warsaw conservatory in 1925 but, through a bout of nerves, failed his public performance examination at the end of the academic year and was advised to abandon any hope of a career in music. He reluctantly chose engineering as a profession and attended the State Engineering School, Warsaw, from 1929 to 1930; but after increasing disillusionment and depression he finally acknowledged that music was his true vocation. His parents agreed to support his decision provided that he first return to the Municipal Gimnazjum to complete his 'matura' (1930-32). Dividing his time between academic studies and preparation for the entrance examinations at the conservatory, he also began to compose jazz pieces influenced by Gershwin and Ellington. One of these, 'Ach pardon', a foxtrot with lyrics by Marian Hemar, became a hit for Adolf Dymsza; his next song with Hemar, 'I want no more', was also a success, but Panufnik's love of serious music soon ended the collaboration. 
Owing to his lack of formal musical training and technique, Panufnik managed to secure a place at the Warsaw conservatory only as a part-time percussion student in February 1932. Nevertheless he had advanced enough to enter the conservatory as a part-time student in the autumn, studying in the faculty of theory and composition. By 1936 he graduated in half the usual time as both composer and conductor, and he was awarded by unanimous decision the highest honour of a diploma with distinction. As a laureate of the conservatory, he conducted the Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra in the premiere of his 'Symphonic Variations'. He then obtained a grant from the state-run Foundation for National Culture to study conducting with Felix von Weingartner in Vienna. Called up for national service, he was forced to postpone his plans until 1937. Weingartner proved to be an inspirational teacher, but the Anschluss brought his studies to an end. 
After returning to Warsaw, Panufnik secured a commission to compose and direct the music for a film by StanisLaw Wohl and Eugeniusz Cekalski, 'Ghosts'; the fee enabled him to travel to Paris to study conducting with Philippe Gaubert. After six months he travelled to London in March 1939; unimpressed by the 'dull and conservative' programmes of music (Panufnik, 'Composing Myself', 91), he turned to studying the works of eighteenth-century English composers at the British Library -- an experience that later proved of great value during his career as a conductor. 
Although urged to remain in England with war impending, Panufnik returned to Poland. Following the surrender to Germany on 1 October, the dreadful economic conditions forced him to abandon all thoughts of serious composition. He entered into a three-year partnership with Witold LutosLawski as a piano duo in artistic cafes, and was active in the underground, composing (under a pseudonym) patriotic songs, notably 'Warszawskie dzieci' ('Warsaw children'). His 'Tragic Overture', the first of his compositions to explore the small-cell method that later became characteristic of his music, was composed during the destruction of the Warsaw ghetto in 1943. By moving his mother to a safe place outside Warsaw, he inadvertently escaped the worst effects of the 1944 uprising. In May 1945 he returned to Warsaw to arrange a proper interment for his brother. During his stay he discovered that all his manuscripts had been mistaken for rubbish and had been burnt by the new occupants of his apartment. 
Having secured accommodation for his family in Cracow in 1945, Panufnik took up the position of musical director of the Polish army film unit based at Lodz. At the request of the ministry of culture he also became musical director and conductor of the Cracow Philharmonic Orchestra. He helped to found Polskie Wydawnictwo Myzyczne (PWM), the state music publishing house, and his method of substituting blank spaces for staves with rests in music printing was adopted in the interest of musical clarity; this innovation found favour with many modern composers and became a standard feature of musical notation. He returned to composition and reconstructed from memory the 'Tragic Overture', 'Five Polish Peasant Songs', and the piano trio. 
In the spring of 1946 Panufnik was appointed director of the newly reconstituted Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra; he also represented Poland at the International Festival of Contemporary Music, and conducted concerts in Paris and Zurich. He resigned his post with the Warsaw Philharmonic and returned to Cracow in 1947 in protest at reneged promises of accommodation for musicians from outside the capital and the failure to provide a permanent venue. His first major post-war composition, 'Nocturne', won the Karol Szymanowski competition in 1947. In 1948 he was appointed to the governing body of the Composers' Union and elected vice-president; his vocalise 'Hommage a Chopin' of the same year was commissioned by UNESCO in Paris for the centenary of Chopin's birth. 
Tragically, the blossoming of Polish art was to be short-lived, as Stalinist doctrine was imposed across eastern Europe. Panufnik was forced to accept an appointment to the bogus Polish committee of the defence of peace, and soon afterwards the general assembly of Polish composers was forced to embrace Stalinist cultural doctrine by which all artistic endeavours were expected to serve an ideological purpose; modernism was condemned and socialist realism became the only official means of expression. Initially, confusion over the definition of socialist realism allowed composers a certain latitude, and Panufnik's first major post-war symphonic work, the 'Sinfonia rustica', gained the first prize at the Chopin competition in Warsaw in 1949. Nevertheless, in a complete reversal of official policy, it was judged 'formalistic' and was expunged from the state-approved repertory. After moving back to Warsaw in 1950, Panufnik met Marie Elizabeth (Scarlett) Rudnicka ('nee' O'Mahoney), and he married her the following year. They had one daughter, Oonagh. 
With the banning of the 'Sinfonia rustica', Panufnik's musical focus shifted largely to the reconstruction and adaptation of early Polish music, although he was still seen by the authorities as Poland's foremost composer and conductor; he was awarded state laureates in 1951 and 1952 even though he steadfastly refused to join the Communist Party. With the combination of conducting and administrative duties, and the increasingly repressive regime, he found little time or inclination to compose works other than those for his continuing job with the film unit. In 1953 he was coerced into being named leader of the cultural delegation to China and conducted a series of concerts of approved music, including two in the presence of Mao Zedong. However, the death of his daughter forced him to return prematurely to Warsaw. 
With personal despair added to his concern at the plight of Polish artists, Panufnik concluded that he could best serve the cause of Polish artistic freedom by defecting. With help from colleagues in the West he was invited to Zurich; after successfully slipping his minders, he arrived in London on 14 July 1954 and sought asylum. This was granted, and he was naturalized in 1961. 
Panufnik's publishing contract (1955) with Boosey and Hawkes Ltd marked the beginning of a lifelong association with the firm. In 1956 he received a BBC commission for the tenth anniversary of the Third Programme: 'Rhapsody' (performed in January 1957) included an invented hybrid rhythm based on Polish dances -- the 'Krakowiak' (binary) superimposed on the 'Mazurek' (ternary). Financial considerations led to his accepting the post of musical director and conductor of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra for the seasons 1957-8 and 1958-9; during his fruitful tenure he raised the orchestra to international standards. Living in Birmingham, however, led to irreparable strains on his marriage, which ended in divorce in 1958. 
In 1959 Panufnik received the Feeney Trust commission for his piano concerto and conducted the premiere of the BBC commission 'Polonia' at the Promenade Concerts. However, with the almost exclusive emphasis on serialism instituted by the new BBC controller, William Glock, Panufnik's music disappeared from programming for almost a decade; the irony of this happening in the country in which he had sought asylum was not lost to him. The next three years proved an unsettled time, during which he composed only 'Autumn Music'. He gave up his flat in London and undertook conducting engagements abroad in 1960; on his return to England he lived in a series of small villages as well as spending time in France and Spain. 
Early in 1961 Panufnik received a fellowship of the (Polish-American) Kosciuszko Foundation to compose a symphony for Poland's millennium in 1966 and began work on 'Sinfonia sacra', destined to be one of his most popular and enduring works. In 1963 the symphony, inspired by the earliest known Polish hymn, 'Bogurodzica', was awarded the prix de composition Prince Rainier de Monaco, and was placed first of 133 entries from thirty-eight countries. On 27 November that year Panufnik married the author and photographer Camilla Ruth Jessel ('b'. 1937), daughter of Commander Richard Frederick Jessel, a much decorated Royal Navy officer. They had a son and a daughter. 
With his second marriage, and a settled life near the Thames in Twickenham, Panufnik felt that he could no longer draw on his Polish roots and withdrew from composition for almost four years in the search for a new, original means of expression. It was only in 1968 that he fully devised the small-cell method of composition, out of which all his later works were derived; a limited number of intervals with their permutations and transpositions were employed as the basic building blocks from which large-scale compositions could be created. Pope's 'Universal Prayer' provided the inspiration for his first full-scale use of small-cell composition; the violin concerto, commissioned by Yehudi Menuhin, followed in 1972. The chance encounter with tantric philosophy not only provided the inspiration of a BBC television commission ('Triangles') but also led to a fully integrated system of composition combining the small-cell method with the perfection of geometric form. From this point each work would draw on a pre-prepared structure -- an 'unseen skeleton' from which the music, 'unfrozen architecture', would grow. 
The first half of the 1970s saw the composition of the 'Sinfonia concertante' (1973) and the 'Sinfonia di sfere' (1975). Through recordings, leading choreographers too began to discover and make use of Panufnik's music. His growing confidence with his almost structuralist method of composition was almost certainly spurred on by the fortuitous relaxations of restrictions on broadcasting his works by the BBC and of censorship in Poland where, at the insistence of the Polish Composers' Union, the 'Universal Prayer' was performed at the Warsaw Autumn Festival in 1976. From that year, major works appeared annually, including the 'Sinfonia mistica' (1976), 'Metasinfonia' (1978), and 'Concerto festivo' (1979). The growing recognition of his works in Poland encouraged him once again to draw inspiration from his native land, albeit transformed through his personal musical language. In 1980 the 'Sinfonia votiva', dedicated to the Black Madonna of Czestochowa, was commissioned for the Boston Symphony Orchestra's centennial in 1982. During the period of composition Panufnik also produced chamber works including the string quartet no. 2 ('Messages') of 1980, based on childhood memories of the sounds of wooden telegraph poles vibrating in the wind. 
In 1983 Panufnik was selected as the first laureate of the prix Prince Pierre de Monaco in recognition of his entire oeuvre. He continued to conduct, primarily premieres of his own works and the works of Mozart. For his seventieth birthday celebrations in 1984 he conducted the London Symphony Orchestra; in that same year he was made an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music, London. The crowning achievement of the year was the New York premiere of 'Arbor cosmica'; commissioned in 1982 by the Koussevitsky Foundation, this piece -- with its underlying structure reflecting both Panufnik's lifelong love of trees and the metaphoric 'cosmic tree' -- remains one of his most popular works. 
The second half of the 1980s marked the final flowering of Panufnik's genius, beginning with the bassoon concerto (1986), the ninth symphony ('Sinfonia della speranza', 1987), and 'Harmony' (1989). The symphony no. 10 marked Panufnik's decision no longer to title his works; a joint centennial commission by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Sir Georg Solti, the work was premiered in 1990, with the composer conducting. Later that year, following the collapse of communism, Panufnik made a triumphal return to Warsaw after thirty-six years of exile, conducting the Warsaw Philharmonic in an all-Panufnik programme which opened the Warsaw Autumn Festival. 
In 1991 Panufnik was knighted in the new year honours, and later in that year he received an honorary PhD from the Fryderik Chopin Academy of Music, Warsaw. Struggling with cancer, he continued to draw inspiration and comfort from both his music and his family. He made his final conducting appearance recording the symphony no. 9 and the piano concerto with the London Symphony Orchestra, and completed the cello concerto, commissioned by the same orchestra for Mstislav Rostropovich, a month before his death. He died at his home, Riverside House, Riverside, Twickenham, on 27 October, and was buried at Richmond cemetery on 5 November. He was survived by his second wife, Camilla, and their two children. He was posthumously awarded the knight's cross of the order of Polonia restituta by President Lech WaLesa. 
Panufnik's compositions include a number of fine chamber works as well as short orchestral pieces. He published a short pamphlet, 'Impulse and Design in my Music', in 1974, documenting the underlying theoretical structures of several major works. His autobiography, 'Composing Myself' (1987), presented a vivid account of his eventful life; written from memory because Polish documents were inaccessible, it is remarkably accurate. 
Many younger American composers came to regard Panufnik as one of the originators of minimalism; however, this arose from an erroneous perception of the small cell as a compositional tool. Unlike the minimalists, Panufnik constructed large and complex structures from small phrases; moreover, the small cell represented an inspirational point of departure rather than rigidly dominating his compositional method. He was firm in his refusal to attach himself to any school of composition, developing a unique musical language. His works helped to revitalize the symphony and advanced it at a time when its very validity was being called into question. Much of his sensitivity to orchestral forms stemmed from his broad experience as conductor; by all accounts he could have enjoyed an international career at the highest level in the latter profession, but he was firm in his conviction that composition was his calling. He remained true to this conviction throughout his life, declining several important commissions for operas, ballets, and films because he did not feel comfortable with that genre. 
Despite enjoying a wide social life, Panufnik was a very private person when it came to his music and never took on any students of composition. He eschewed all forms of self-promotion, preferring his works to stand or fall on their own merits. Despite his feeling uncomfortable posing for photographs, many fine examples, primarily taken by Lady Panufnik, exist. These show a handsome, classically Slavonic face, and great sensitivity tempered by a hearty sense of humour. Despite the vicissitudes of his life before settling in England, the child of early surviving photographs is easily recognizable in those of his maturity. 


@@@@@


doc= 49919


Pedler, Sir Frederick Johnson (1908-1991), colonial official and businessman, was born on 10 July 1908 at 27 Park Avenue South, Hornsey, London, the only child of Charles Henry Pedler (1865-1935), wholesale tea merchant, and his wife, Lucy Marian 
(May; 1878-1952)
, daughter of the Revd Simpson Johnson of Bishop Auckland. Both parents were Methodists. Pedler's earliest years were spent in Finsbury Park and Finchley, north of London, before the family moved to Watford in 1918, where Pedler attended Watford grammar school, becoming both head boy and captain of rugby. He won a scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1927, becoming Goldsmith's exhibitioner in 1929, and graduating in 1930 with a starred first in history. He was awarded the Schuldham plate. In later years Pedler remained a staunch supporter of both institutions, twice serving as chair of the grammar school's Old Fullerians' Association, campaigning successfully to maintain the school's academic standards during a ten-year stint as chairman of the school governors in the 1960s and 1970s, and joining the Gonville and Caius investment committee. 
On graduating, Pedler entered the administrative grade of the civil service, drawn by the opportunity for travel in the department of his choice, the Colonial Office. It was nevertheless only after some agitation on his part that he finally secured his dispatch to Tanganyika in 1934. As assistant secretary in Dar es Salaam he produced a paper (subsequently published by the Tanganyikan government) outlining the advantages of membership of the customs union with Kenya and Uganda, and (himself an enthusiastic boy scout) helped establish the scouting movement in the colony, before serving as an assistant district officer, first in Kwimba district and then in Moshi. On 11 June 1935 he married Esther Ruth Carling ('b'. 1908), teacher, and daughter of Henry Frank Carling (1873-1949) and Esther Lillie, 'nee' Colebrook (1870-1957), of Peppard Common, Oxfordshire. They had met in 1927 when both worked for an international holiday school. The couple had three children: Robin Henry ('b'. 1937), Esther Marian ('b'. 1940), and Martin Colebrook ('b'. 1943). 
In September 1935 the Colonial Office cut short Pedler's Tanganyikan tour. In the following years he played a supporting role in some of the most significant episodes in the development of British African policy. In 1937 he was appointed secretary to the commission of higher education in east Africa and the Sudan, chaired by Lord De La Warr, to whom he was seconded as private secretary. The same year he was employed to edit the highly influential 'African Survey' (1938) following Lord Hailey's breakdown, preparing some 'material that was scarcely in first draft' (MSS Afr. s. 1814, FP 9/79, survey chairman to De La Warr, 22 March 1938). At the Colonial Office's insistence, Pedler's substantial contribution went unacknowledged in the published version. His association with Hailey continued when the latter requested his appointment as secretary when asked to undertake a confidential survey of native administration in British Africa. The draft of the report (the basis for the Colonial Office's 1943 sketch for west African constitutional development, and a milestone in the evolution of official thinking towards native administration policy) was prepared by Pedler as the pair toured tropical Africa. Pedler also travelled to the Belgian Congo with Hailey when the latter was appointed head of the British economic mission to the colony in 1940-41, and on Hailey's departure he assumed control of the mission. The extent of Pedler's contribution to the final report is unknown (Pedler himself remained vague on this point), but the superior quality of this confidential report in comparison to a revised version Hailey published later led Hailey's biographer to speculate that it may have been considerable (Cell, 'Hailey', 296-7). 
Pedler's experiences shaped his own relatively far-sighted views on African political development. In 1942 (in contrast to Hailey) he supported the Gold Coast governor's proposals to admit Africans to the colony's executive council. While working on the 'Survey', he had privately recorded his own disagreement with Hailey's assessment of the native authorities (Pedler placing greater weight on the problems of investing traditional rather than educated African elites with powers of local government), and in 1946, when the Colonial Office debated their future, he wrote an influential memorandum stressing the extent of African politicization and recommending the democratization of African local government as essential to the maintenance of British African interests. 
Pedler's next important assignment came in December 1942, when he served as chief British economic representative to French West Africa and Togoland, successfully handling the delicate negotiations between the free French, Americans, and British, to direct exports essential to the allied war effort and to handle the region's supply problems. Back in London he was promoted to head the department of finance and development, in 1944, before -- to his dissatisfaction -- he was assigned in January 1945 to assist Sir Ralph Furse in handling post-war colonial service recruitment. In January 1947, frustrated in this position, convinced (ironically in view of later developments) that, as he later recalled, Africa was 'a political backwater' in the Colonial Office, and keen to secure 'a position to influence policy in Africa' (MS Afr. s. 1718), he quit the Colonial Office and, drawing on contacts established particularly during his Dakar mission, opted for a more lucrative second career with the United Africa Company (UAC). 
In various early managerial postings in Nigeria and the Gold Coast and as an area manager in London, Pedler became a leading player in framing UAC's response to the 1947-8 Gold Coast political developments. Thereafter, as UAC director (1951-68), managing director (1956-68), and deputy chairman (1965-68), as well as director of Unilever (1956-68), Pedler was a key figure in UAC's attempts via redeployment to adapt to the economic and political difficulties of operating in independent African states. During this period his friendships with various African nationalists led him into some unorthodox relationships (the future Ghanaian leader Kofi Busia corresponded with Pedler under a pseudonym during his exile), but could open doors for UAC: Pedler enjoyed famously easy access to Kwame Nkrumah. In Nigeria he was offered the vice-chancellorship of Ahmadu Bello University in October 1965, although the proposal lapsed with Sir Ahmadu Bello's murder. He retired from the United Africa Company in 1968. 
Other activities testified to Pedler's continuing engagement with African affairs: he was chairman of the council for technical education and training for overseas countries, 1962-73, chairman of the East African and Mauritius Association, 1966-8, a member of the Inter-University Council, 1967-73, and treasurer of the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), 1969-81. He was made an honorary fellow of SOAS in 1976. In 1969 he was knighted for 'services to technical education overseas'. Fluent in Swahili and Hausa, he also published many articles on Africa, and three west African historical and geographical surveys, 'West Africa' (1951), 'Economic Geography of West Africa' (1955), and 'Main Currents of West African History, 1940-1978' (1979), which revealed disappointingly little of Pedler's own role in the region's affairs. More revealing was Pedler's personal memoir 'Business and decolonization in West Africa, c.1940-1960' (1989). Pedler also published a business history, 'The lion and the unicorn in Africa: a history of the origins of the United Africa Company, 1787-1931' (1974), as well as 'A Pedler Family History' (1984) and 'A Wider Pedler Family History' (1989). 
As his career and active retirement demonstrated, Pedler was 'intelligent, hard-working and tough' (H. Macmillan, 'War Diaries: Politics and War in the Mediterranean, January 1943-May 1945', 1984, 422). He had also 'a capacity for making and keeping friends' and, although 'tough in pursuit of his objectives', possessed a 'strong sense of social justice and a concern for the individual' ('The Times', 16 April 1991). After a long and happy marriage, Pedler died at Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, London, on 6 April 1991. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49920


Penney, William George, Baron Penney (1909-1991), mathematical physicist and public servant, was born at 4E Block, Naval Hospital Road, Gibraltar, on 24 June 1909, the only son and eldest of the three children of William Alfred Penney ('b'. 1881), sergeant-major in the Royal Army Ordnance Corps, and his wife, Blanche Evelyn, daughter of Henry Alfred Johnson. Penney's mother had been chief cashier in a Co-operative store before her marriage. 
Penney's father served in a succession of postings in England and overseas, so his son attended a variety of schools in his early years. Young Penney was bright -- he may have inherited his gift for numbers from his mother -- but he often played truant because, he would say later, he found classes insufficiently demanding. Despite this, in due course he proved a good enough student to qualify for grammar school. It was not to be. His father, an authoritarian at home as at work, had little sympathy with his son's scholarly interests, besides which he knew he could not afford to maintain the boy as a boarder. So young Penney went to technical school, first in Colchester and then in his father's home town, Sheerness, Kent, where he lodged with an aunt. By good fortune, however, at Sheerness Junior Technical School he came under the influence of the principal, Albert Bell, a gifted teacher with a first-class degree in physics. Bell saw the boy's abilities, directed his interests, and helped him become a star student. Penney also flourished as a sportsman, distinguishing himself at boxing, athletics, cricket, and above all on the football field, where he played centre-forward in a school team that included several future professional players. 
Under Bell's guidance Penney won a Kent county scholarship and a royal scholarship to the Royal College of Science, part of Imperial College, London. This was the beginning of a whirlwind academic career. After just two years (he was granted exemption from the first year of the course) he graduated with a brilliant first in mathematics, in 1929, and after two more years, including a spell in the Netherlands at the University of Groningen, he was awarded his PhD. Thereafter he departed on a Commonwealth Fund fellowship to the University of Wisconsin, where he worked with, among others, the future Nobel prizewinner John Van Vleck, publishing a stream of papers and securing an MA. While in the United States he also toured the American west in a model A Ford he had bought, taking in such scientific landmarks as Carl Anderson's laboratory at the California Institute of Technology, Ernest Lawrence's new cyclotron at Berkeley, and the Oppenheimer brothers' ranch in the New Mexico mountains. It was not purely a scientific journey: he saw Babe Ruth play baseball and, the year being 1932, was able to watch track events at the Los Angeles Olympic games. 
Penney returned to Britain in 1933 to take up an 1851 Exhibition senior studentship at Trinity College, Cambridge. Among his referees for this position was Van Vleck, who wrote: 'I regard him as an exceedingly promising research man. He has an unusual gift for absorbing new developments in theoretical physics very rapidly. Also he is a hard and persistent worker. This is evidenced by the fact that he has written several papers during the time that he has been at Wisconsin. His personality is good. In view of his diligence and especially his native ability in mathematical physics, it is my belief that he could very properly be awarded an 1851 studentship. (1851 Commission records, 2 Feb 1933)' Owen Richardson, another Nobel prizewinner, took a similar view, praising Penney as 'a mathematical physicist of great power and versatility' who had achieved 'a remarkable output for his years' (1851 Commission records, 7 April 1933). 
By his mid-twenties, then, William Penney (known generally as Bill) had established an international reputation in a field that was one of the most exciting in science at the time. A mathematical physicist, he was engaged in applying and interpreting the new quantum mechanics with a view to improving the understanding of the structure and behaviour of particular metals and crystals. Of all his papers, mostly written with collaborators, it was the first, 'Quantum mechanics of electrons in crystal lattices' published in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of London' in 1931 with the Dutchman R. de L. Kronig, that acquired the most lasting renown. Variants of the mathematical model it set out are still in use. Other papers in the early 1930s were pathfinding, such as those relating to the photoelectric effect in thin metallic films and to the polarization of light emitted from atoms excited by electron collision. At Wisconsin and Cambridge his interest turned further towards chemistry and he published a series of papers contributing to the development of the theory of bonds. While still at Cambridge he was invited to give a course of lectures on quantum mechanics to chemists at Imperial and this grew into a monograph, 'The Quantum Theory of Valency' (1935), which proved to be his only book. (In chemistry valency relates to the power of atoms to combine.) He was awarded a PhD by the University of Cambridge in 1935 and a DSc by the University of London in 1936. 
In 1936 Penney became for a short time Stokes student at Pembroke College, Cambridge, but later the same year he returned to Imperial College full time as assistant professor of mathematics, a post he held until 1945. He was twenty-seven years old and on 27 July the previous year had married Adele Minnie Elms (1913-1945), daughter of Percy Orrin Elms, of Queenborough, Kent. Penney and his wife had known each other since Sheerness days. They had two sons, Martin ('b'. 1938) and Christopher ('b'. 1941). 
Many of the characteristics that were to determine Penney's future career were by this time already evident. He was a first-class mathematician, happiest when he had a problem and a pencil and paper to solve it, but he was also a natural interpreter and teacher with a gift for explaining his very complex subject to undergraduates and lay people. In this he was helped by a remarkably easy manner. Though his background was humble he had no chip on his shoulder; on the contrary, he enjoyed throughout his life a rare ability to deal as an equal with anybody he encountered, from prime ministers to private soldiers. Nor did he have what is known as 'side'. If he had a fault in his professional relationships it was a low boredom threshold; confronted with a problem that challenged nothing but his patience, he would allow his mind to wander. Subordinates found, later in his career, that the best way to engage his attention at such moments was to find some mathematical complication to the matter in hand. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Penney registered as available for scientific war work, but heard nothing for several months. Then one day, he recalled later, 'I met Sir Geoffrey Taylor, a world authority on fluid mechanics, and he told me he was being asked by government departments lots of questions about explosions and that sort of thing. He could not deal with all the questions and therefore asked me to have a go at the pressure wave caused by an explosion under water. (Cathcart, 30)' It was a fateful meeting, for by joining Taylor's physics of explosives committee, known as Physex, Penney entered on a career of public service that was to dominate his life for twenty-seven years. For Physex he studied and interpreted the results of both laboratory experiments and real explosions, including bomb attacks in the field, and before long he was an authority on blast waves. This led to other war work. When in 1943 the D-day planners began to contemplate the possibility of improvising a harbour on the French coast -- this became the Mulberry harbour -- they turned to Penney for an analysis of the physics of sea waves. The result was the Bombardon breakwaters, long steel cylinders that floated on the surface and were weighted in such a way as to absorb wave energy. These proved successful, but by then Penney was on his way to join the Manhattan Project. 
In great secrecy work was under way in 1944 at a number of places in the United States to develop the nuclear fission bomb, with Britain involved as junior partner. Sir Geoffrey Taylor, acting as a consultant, had visited the laboratory at Los Alamos where the weapon was being designed and had seen a role for Penney. Once again this was to do with waves: the bomb would generate blast waves on an unprecedented scale and Penney had experience and knowledge in this field that no one in the United States could match. Though Imperial College, where he was still teaching, was reluctant to release him, Taylor was adamant and in June 1944 Penney travelled out to New Mexico. 
At the Los Alamos laboratory, under the direction of J. Robert Oppenheimer, many of the world's leading physicists had been assembled to tackle the fundamental problems entailed in the design of a fission weapon. Among them were Enrico Fermi, Hans Bethe, Edward Teller, John von Neumann, and Emilio Segre, while the small British team included Otto Frisch, Rudolf Peierls, Klaus Fuchs, and for a short time Sir James Chadwick. One of Penney's first tasks there was to lecture on the science of bomb damage. Peierls described the occasion: 'His presentation was in a scientific, matter-of-fact style, with his usual brightly smiling face; many of the Americans had not been exposed to such a detailed and realistic discussion of casualties, and he was nicknamed, by Viktor Weisskopf, 'the smiling killer'. (C. R. Peierls, 'Bird of Passage: Recollections of a Physicist', 1985, 201)' The label did not stick, and Penney's new colleagues soon came to respect and like him. 
By late 1944 the team was pursuing in parallel two designs for the fission weapon. The first, with the uranium isotope 235 as its fissionable material, would employ the gun method of detonation. The weapon dropped on Hiroshima, known as Little Boy, was of this kind. The second design used plutonium and would be detonated in a different way: by implosion. A quantity of plutonium alloy would be placed at the centre of a ball of conventional high explosive, which would then be detonated. The inward blast would crush the plutonium until it reached a supercritical state, unleashing the chain reaction. Fat Man (or Fat Boy), used at Nagasaki, was a plutonium bomb. Successful implosion required a uniform convergent wave, in itself a considerable scientific challenge, and Penney, as an expert in the mathematics of waves, was inevitably drawn into this work. Looking back later on his Los Alamos period, he wrote: 'I spent about half of my time working on some of the scientific phenomena going into the bomb and the other half on scientific phenomena going outwards' (Cathcart, 35). 
As the actual use of the weapons drew closer, however, it was the outward matters that came to dominate for Penney and he became an important figure. General Leslie Groves, overall director of the Manhattan Project, wrote later of the final preparations for the atomic attacks on Japan: 'Throughout the life of the project, vital decisions were reached only after the most careful consideration and discussion with the men I thought were able to offer the soundest advice. Generally, for this operation, they were Oppenheimer, Von Neumann, Penney, Parsons and Ramsey. (Cathcart, 37)' For a few weeks, then, Penney found himself in the innermost councils of the project, and indeed he was a member of the committee which chose the Japanese cities to be attacked. His calculations about the effects of the weapon were greatly assisted by the Trinity test of 16 July 1945, when an implosion-type weapon was detonated in the New Mexico desert. Though he designed some of the measuring equipment that was used (notable for its simplicity) he did not witness this first atomic explosion. He had been supposed to watch from an aeroplane but unfavourable weather left him stranded at the airbase. 
On the eve of the attacks on Japan he was sent to the Pacific island of Tinian, from where the atomic raids were mounted, to be on hand for last-minute adjustments. The British government, meanwhile, had named him alongside Group Captain Leonard Cheshire VC as one of its official observers for the operation. In controversial circumstances they were excluded from the first flight but on 9 August they boarded a plane shadowing the mission to Nagasaki. Penney later described watching the city disappear in dust and smoke. 'All of us were in a state of emotional shock. We realized that a new age had begun and that possibly we had all made some contribution to raising a monster that would consume us all' (Cathcart, 38). Soon he was on the ground in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, conducting field studies with a view to calculating the yield of the two weapons. His method was characteristically simple: he made a large collection of bent poles, crushed cans, and dished metal panels and took them back with him to London (where customs officials were astonished at the contents of his luggage). From these he was able to deduce the force of the explosions, although the calculations were still approximate and he would return to the problem several times in later life to refine them. 
With the war over, Penney's career stood for a time in flux. His wife, Adele, had died on 18 April 1945, having suffered from postnatal depression since the birth of their second son, and he had arranged for the two boys to be cared for in Wales. Now that he was back in London they rejoined him, but Penney had decisions to make. The United States government, it seems, wanted to recruit him permanently for Los Alamos, so valuable was his expertise to them. Imperial College wanted him, as did Oxford University, which offered him a chair in mathematics. So too did the British government. It was C. P. Snow, the novelist and civil service commissioner, who suggested to Penney that he should become chief superintendent of armament research, running a large guns-and-bombs empire based at Fort Halstead in Kent and embracing stations at Woolwich and a dozen other places around the country. Normally such a post would have no interest for an academic scientist, but Snow had an ulterior motive. Britain, he said, was likely to make an atomic bomb of its own and the government wanted Penney in this job, ready to play his part. Penney recalled later: 'Snow said, 'Look, you must come into the Armament Research Department, just in case. Will you do it?'' (Cathcart, 40). 
This invitation was a reflection of the stature Penney had acquired both as an atomic weapons scientist and as a guide to policy makers. In both capacities he was known for combining imagination with pragmatism, for seeking simple solutions to problems, and for plain talk. Of the dozen or so senior Britons who worked at Los Alamos he stood out as the best candidate for the post Snow envisaged, just as he was the one the Americans most wanted to keep. Penney, however, had qualms. He was aware of the moral implications of the weapon and like most of his Manhattan Project colleagues was uncomfortable with them. He had seen Nagasaki bombed and had walked the devastated streets afterwards. He knew what happened to people, houses, hospitals, and schools, and on what scale, and he viewed the possibility of future nuclear war with horror. But he was also loyal and patriotic. If the British government believed that this weapon was needed for the defence of the country and the empire, and that his help was necessary to make it, then he felt he had no choice. His appointment as chief superintendent of armament research was announced on 1 January 1946. He was appointed OBE and elected FRS later the same year. 
The Attlee government's stance on the atom bomb was no less ambivalent. While it supported the efforts under way to establish UN control of all aspects of atomic energy, it felt at the same time that since such efforts had only a small chance of success it must proceed in secrecy with plans for a British weapon. As a first step, therefore, in December 1945 it commissioned the building of a large pile, or reactor, at Windscale; this would be at the heart of a complex of factories producing fissionable materials for bombs. The next step, authorizing the creation of the team and the facilities to design and build a working weapon, was deferred, which meant that Penney was left in limbo. 
Penney was none the less extremely busy. For one thing he had married, on 3 November 1945, the nurse who had cared for his sons; she was (Eleanor) Joan Quennell ('b'. 1905), daughter of George Quennell, of Brentwood, Essex. It was to be a long and happy union. For another he was recruited by the American government as a consultant to advise on the first peacetime nuclear tests, at Bikini atoll in the Pacific Ocean in July 1946. The first of these tests gave Penney an opportunity to demonstrate his particular blend of intuition and inventiveness. Many elaborate arrangements had been made to measure the yield of the bomb, but he noticed that most of them required it to explode perfectly on target. As a precaution, therefore, he had 1000 jerrycans scattered over the test site. The bomb fell off target and many of the more sophisticated devices failed to function, but Penney, by measuring the effects on his cans, was able to provide adequate readings. 
Until the spring of 1947 Penney worked mostly on the analysis of the Bikini tests for the Americans. This was seen as important by the British government, not least because almost all other aspects of atomic co-operation with the USA had ended when the 'McMahon Act' was passed by congress in 1946. Thus Penney personally kept contact alive. In June 1947, however, having finally received the official go-ahead to begin work on a British atomic bomb, he set up a secret programme within his department under the cover name Basic High Explosive Research. While he employed a few other veterans of Los Alamos as consultants (notably Klaus Fuchs), the team he built was almost entirely drawn from the staff of the department or recruited through the civil service from industry and the university graduate stream. He proved a very shrewd judge of men. The work was initially shared between Fort Halstead and Woolwich, where it took place in buildings that were fenced off for additional security, while field tests of conventional explosives were carried out at Foulness on the Essex marshes. The chosen model for the bomb was the Nagasaki design, perceived to be more powerful and to have the greater potential for development. 
For the first couple of years the team's priority was to develop the electronics and ordnance necessary for successful implosion. The bomb, a sphere 5 feet in diameter, would be simultaneously detonated at thirty-two points around its surface by a powerful electrical current. This would initiate inward blast waves in the sphere, which would be altered and shaped into a single, spherical convergent wave by the use of lenses of slow explosive, so that the plutonium core would be compressed in an even, symmetrical fashion. These tasks, undertaken without American assistance, took British weapons science into new territory. 
Penney's role was primarily administrative, and he found the Whitehall battles about resources and recruitment wearisome, particularly as he was hamstrung by excessive secrecy (for a time not even the whole cabinet was allowed to know of the project's existence). His burdens grew when, in 1949, it was decided that his team should also be responsible for making the inner, radioactive components of the weapon. A complete new factory capable of handling these materials was required, and the result was the atomic weapons establishment at Aldermaston. While Penney disliked the bureaucratic side of management he had no problem with his other responsibilities of strategy and leadership. His command of the science enabled him to keep a clear-sighted view of the progress of the project, while his personal gifts of motivation were formidable. Even junior scientists on his staff found him popping up at their sides, wearing his genial smile, asking shrewd, helpful questions, and offering encouragement rather than criticism. A square-built man, 5 feet 10 inches tall, he had something about him -- perhaps the boyish quiff of hair, perhaps the leather elbow patches and knitted sweaters -- that suggested an eternal undergraduate, with all the enthusiasm and open-mindedness which that implied. His staff were in no doubt about his scientific ability and they knew he was on their side. His popularity was enhanced by a readiness to swap jokes and talk about the latest sporting events, and he joined in the odd staff cricket game. These qualities did not dim, and became all the more vital, as time passed and timetables grew ever tighter. 
The project had its set-backs. In 1950 the heart of the weapon had to be redesigned because of unforeseen problems in the arming process. Penney oversaw the changes, which substantially raised the stakes for his team: no longer a faithful copy of the Nagasaki weapon, their bomb had become an experimental design. In the same year Fuchs confessed to spying for the Soviet Union both at Los Alamos and in Britain. This was a blow to Penney, who had made considerable use of the German-born physicist, but more important was the damage the affair did to Anglo-American relations. It came at a moment when it seemed that atomic co-operation was about to resume, which would have lightened Penney's load considerably. The Fuchs affair put paid to that. 
After a hectic final phase of preparation, the British bomb was tested in the Monte Bello Islands off north-west Australia on 2 October 1952. The trial, codenamed operation Hurricane, was a fittingly torrid climax to five difficult years: the site was extremely remote and problematic; relations there between the scientists and the Royal Navy (which provided the necessary task force) were often poor, and the weather, which was all important, proved mercurial. Penney supervised the final phase and his good humour and confidence contributed significantly to a success that was somewhat against the odds. Within hours of the explosion he received a personal message of congratulation from Winston Churchill, the prime minister, and within days he was informed that he would be made KBE. 
After operation Hurricane the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) was created, drawing nuclear energy, weapons, and research together in a single body, and Penney became member for weapons development. He and his wife settled in an official house close to the Aldermaston site and through the rest of the 1950s he oversaw an ambitious programme of work. Besides turning the prototype into a production bomb for the RAF his department also refined the design and developed alternative models, and from 1954 onwards turned its hand to creating a British hydrogen bomb. For this last task Penney had the assistance of William Cook, who ran the programme on a day-to-day basis. Up to 1956 Penney was heavily involved in further nuclear tests in Australia, which took place against a background of growing international anxiety about fall-out. Both behind the scenes and in presenting the issues to the Australian public his gift for straight talking proved invaluable, so much so that before one series in 1956 the high commissioner in Canberra begged for him to be allowed to come out early and give press interviews: 'Sir William Penney has established in Australia a reputation which is quite unique... His appearance, his obvious sincerity and honesty, and the general impression he gives that he would rather be digging his garden -- and would be, but for the essential nature of his work -- have made him a public figure of some magnitude in Australian eyes. (Arnold, 'A Very Special Relationship', 182-3)' If the British atom bomb had been a success against the odds for Penney and his team, the H-bomb was their triumph. Tests over the Pacific in 1957 and 1958, near Malden and Christmas islands, confirmed that Britain had developed a fusion weapon with a megaton-range explosive yield. Though the United States and the Soviet Union had got there first, Britain had achieved this at remarkable speed, at a fraction of the cost, and with far fewer test explosions. Soon afterwards the United States authorities finally agreed to resume co-operation in the nuclear weapons field, prompting Macmillan, the prime minister, to acknowledge the 'tremendous achievement' of the Aldermaston scientists and engineers, whose successes were a 'major factor' in persuading the Americans to heal the breach (Arnold, 'A Very Special Relationship', 230). Penney played an important part in the subsequent negotiations, which laid the foundations for a unique and enduring nuclear defence partnership. 
For Macmillan, Penney became a trusted adviser, briefing the cabinet on nuclear matters and also attending summit meetings with presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy. He led a British delegation to the conference in Geneva in 1958 that first explored the possibility of a nuclear test ban and in the early 1960s he threw himself into the negotiations for a comprehensive test ban treaty. He believed passionately that such a treaty would be verifiable and that it would slow dramatically, if not halt completely, the East-West nuclear arms race. When, through lack of trust, the talks ended with only the partial test ban treaty of 1963, Penney was bitterly disappointed. Though it was a substantial achievement to have ended atmospheric testing by the big powers, the option of underground tests remained open, and was taken up. 
In 1957 Penney was embroiled in the aftermath of the Windscale fire, the world's first serious reactor accident, which led to a release of radioactivity into the atmosphere. Three days after it took place he was appointed to lead an inquiry into what had gone wrong. The timing was awkward for him, since an important H-bomb test in the Pacific was imminent, but he was the only senior UKAEA member available. The case was urgent, so the panel conducted an intensive investigation at Windscale and produced a report in less than a fortnight. Though it placed no blame on individuals it was no whitewash; serious procedural and organizational faults were identified, and important reforms recommended. Macmillan wrote of the report's 'scrupulous honesty and even ruthlessness' (Arnold, 'Windscale', 83). Despite great public anxiety, however, and contrary to the wishes of the UKAEA, the report was not published. This decision, taken by Macmillan mainly for reasons of international diplomacy, rendered the report and Penney's role in it suspect; some thought he had been involved in a cover-up. Thirty years passed before the papers were made public and the doubts erased. Though he was no specialist in reactors, Penney had applied his customary scientific rigour to the task and, given the limited time available, produced a verdict that was both clear-eyed and fair. 
In 1959 Penney succeeded Sir John Cockcroft as UKAEA member for research; two years later he became deputy chairman of the authority and in 1964 he was made chairman, serving until 1967. This was a period of many difficult decisions, in which the shape and scale of Britain's nuclear energy programme were laid down. 'His was a voice of moderation', wrote Lord Sherfield, his predecessor as chairman, of their days together. 'Then, as later, he tried to avoid confrontation and controversy and to work for consensus' (Sherfield, 294-5). 
On his retirement from the UKAEA in 1967 Penney was created a life peer as Baron Penney of East Hendred, the village near Wantage, then in Berkshire but later in Oxfordshire, where he and Lady Penney had settled in 1963. No politician, he rarely attended the House of Lords and even more rarely cast a vote. In the same year, 1967, he accepted the position of rector of Imperial College, London, a job which proved considerably more demanding than he or anyone else anticipated. The late 1960s were turbulent times for the universities and before long Penney found his gifts of leadership and diplomacy taxed to the limit in keeping the college on an even keel. 'The students were sometimes uncontrollable', he wrote later, 'the heads of departments were bewildered and angry, the rest of the staff, including the technicians, wanted a say in how everything was run' (Sherfield, 296). He introduced significant reforms to make the administration more open and flexible, while at the same time directing an expansion of the college and keeping the finances in order. Despite the many trials he remained rector for six years instead of the planned five, bowing out in September 1973. The college's Penney Laboratory was named in his honour. 
Penney received many academic honours and prizes, including honorary doctorates from the universities of Melbourne, Durham, Oxford, Bath, and Reading, and the City and Guilds of London Institute; honorary fellowships of St Catherine's College, Oxford, the Manchester College of Science and Technology, Trinity College, Cambridge, and Pembroke College, Cambridge; the Rumford medal of the Royal Society; the Glazebrook medal and prize; the James Alfred Ewing medal; and the Kelvin gold medal. He was made a member of the Order of Merit in 1969, and a freeman of the City of London in 1970. In retirement he played golf, fished, grew vegetables in his garden at East Hendred, and enjoyed the company of his grandchildren. He kept an office at Aldermaston for a time, returning occasionally to work on old problems that still fascinated him, notably the yields at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
In 1985 Penney emerged from retirement to appear before an Australian royal commission into the nuclear weapons tests in Australia. The climate of opinion at the time was extremely hostile to all things nuclear. In Australia there were suspicions that the tests had been negligently conducted and had placed civilians, notably Aboriginal people, in danger, possibly causing deaths. In Britain there was concern that servicemen involved in the tests had been needlessly exposed to radiation and that some might have contracted illnesses and died as a result. Despite his advanced years Penney testified at hearings in London and because of his past seniority he in some respects bore the brunt of these public anxieties. The questioning was aggressive and the press coverage, both in Britain and Australia, was highly unsympathetic to his case, which was that due care was taken and that the tests conformed to the internationally accepted safety standards of the time. Alarming anecdotal evidence suggesting recklessness and incompetence was given much wider currency. 
In its final report the commission broadly accepted Penney's view and reserved its principal criticisms for the Australian governments of the 1950s, but this brought little comfort to a man left crushed by what he felt had been an assault on his reputation and his integrity. Lady Penney believed that the experience prompted depression and possibly a nervous breakdown, and others close to him agreed that the affair took a toll on his health, possibly shortening his life. It was in this late and unhappy period that he burnt what personal papers he had. In January 1991 he was diagnosed as suffering from cancer and a few weeks later, on 3 March, he died at his home, Orchard House, Cat Street, East Hendred, Oxfordshire. He was cremated on 8 March and his ashes were taken to his home. A memorial service was held at St Augustine's, East Hendred, on 15 March. 
Although Penney was an affable, often amusing man, held in great affection by those who knew him, he did not make close friends easily. His choice of a quiet retirement reflected a self-sufficiency and a preference for privacy which were present throughout his life. After the first British nuclear test in 1952 he had been lionized as a national hero and a genius, but he told a colleague at the time that he did not want to be remembered for making an atomic bomb. He knew better than most, after all, what this weapon could do. His instinct was sound, for the popularity soon evaporated and when he eventually returned to the limelight in 1985 it was in cruelly adverse circumstances. Under pressure before the royal commission he defended not just his record but the fundamental choice of his life: 'I thought we were going to have a nuclear war. The only hope I saw was that there should be a balance between East and West. That is why I did this job, not to make money. I did not make any money. What I really wanted to do was to be a professor. (Cathcart, 276)' At that time little was publicly known about his career, but more emerged in the 1990s and it showed what his close colleagues had always known. Penney was a public servant of consistent and high integrity -- not perhaps a smooth man, but thoughtful, calm, and direct. Though he has been rightly described as a reluctant weaponeer, his gifts as a scientist and leader of men were indispensable to the success of the first British atomic bomb project, and he contributed enormously to subsequent weapons development (both in their time very high priorities in British government policy), while in later life at the UKAEA and at Imperial College he proved to have a wise head and a safe pair of hands. 


@@@@@


doc= 49926


Pickering, Ronald James (1930-1991), athletics coach and sports commentator, was born on 4 May 1930 at 230 High Street in the London borough of Hackney, the son of James Thomas Pickering, a sign fixer, and his wife, Ivy Christina Wing. He was educated at Stratford grammar school, where he was head boy alongside the head girl Jean Catherine Desforges (1929-2013), who became European long-jump champion and Pickering's wife. After national service in the King's Own regiment he took a diploma in physical education at Carnegie College, Leeds, and then a master's degree in education at Leicester University before teaching, first at his old school and then at Wanstead grammar school. While still a games master he married his childhood sweetheart on 23 October 1954 at Emmanuel Church, Forest Gate, West Ham. 
In 1961 Pickering was appointed national coach for Wales and the south-west. On a visit to the Glamorgan schools championships he spotted the long-jump potential of Lynn Davies, whom he guided to Olympic, Commonwealth, and European gold medals. He was one of the first coaches to appreciate the value of weight training for all athletes, not just for the throwers. As a coach he could be tough and uncompromising, but he believed that these were the very qualities required of athletes at the highest levels. He was one of the British team coaches at the Tokyo Olympics in 1964 and the coach of the Welsh team at the Commonwealth games in Jamaica two years later. 
Pickering then became recreational manager at the Lee Valley Regional Park in London but two years later set up as a consultant in recreational planning management, work he continued as he moved into television commentating. His broadcasting career began at the 1968 Olympics, and he remained a fixture in the commentary box for two decades. Although he was best recognized for explaining the complexities of track and field to the viewing public, he brought his informed enthusiasm and strong, authoritative tones to skiing, gymnastics, and weightlifting as well as participating in popular television broadcasts such as 'Superstars' and 'We are the Champions'. 
Convinced that sport had much to offer young people in their formative teenage years, Pickering fought hard to protect sport from adverse influences. He continually spoke out against drugs, racism, and the evils of market forces in sport. As a broadcaster he recognized the influence of the media and was always willing to provide the sound bite or headline-grabbing quotation. He extolled everything that was good about sport because, as he said, 'what else can we hand to the next generation that can match its value, always provided that we teach them what those values are' ('Sunday Times', 17 Feb 1991). In the early 1980s he conceived the idea of turning a disused banana warehouse on the Isle of Dogs into an indoor training centre for the youngsters of east London. However, to his profound disappointment, the building became viable only in the form of the London Arena, primarily a venue for large sporting and theatrical events. 
Pickering detested racism and did much to bring young black people into athletics. He was proud that the Haringey club of which he was president had some 70 per cent of its athletes from ethnic minorities. He championed the cause of black African athletes, using two highly commended documentaries on South Africa and Kenya to good effect, and was at the forefront of the anti-apartheid boycott of South African sport. The black runner Linford Christie gave worthy recognition to Pickering's achievements when he dedicated his 100 metre gold-medal performance to his memory. 
Pickering listed his hobbies as 'lost causes and tilting at windmills' ('The Independent', 15 Feb 1991). Clearly he lost the battle against professionalism and drug taking in athletics, but he remained the public conscience of the sport, a staunch defender of traditional principles and philosophies. He was appointed OBE for services to sport in 1986. He died of heart failure on 13 February 1991 at his home, Woodcote, 1B Harmer Dell, Digswell, Welwyn, Hertfordshire, six weeks after undergoing a seventeen-hour heart bypass operation. His friends and colleagues established the Ron Pickering memorial fund to support promising athletes by the provision of equipment and bursaries. His widow, son, and daughter were joined by a galaxy of sporting and journalistic figures at his memorial service, held at All Souls, Langham Place, London, on 24 May 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49928


Pirie, (Douglas Alastair) Gordon (1931-1991), athlete, was born at 123 Beckett Street, Leeds, on 10 February 1931, the son of Alexander Sutherland (Alick) Pirie, a cable telegraphist and athlete, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Stead. He was registered at birth as Alistair Pirie, but his name was changed shortly afterwards. His father was a Scottish cross-country international and his brother Peter became a leading runner for the South London Harriers, the club that Pirie also represented. After leaving school Pirie worked first as a bank clerk, then as a paint salesman, while also training and competing as an athlete. 
A tall, lanky, almost emaciated figure, Pirie developed a distinctive running style, with a rolling head and an exaggerated breathing technique that earned him the sobriquet Puff Puff. He developed this technique after swallowing flies in training. Although he headed the resurgence of British middle-distance running in the 1950s, he was a dedicated and disciplined athlete rather than an innately talented runner. Essentially he trained harder than his British contemporaries, putting in an average of three hours a day, often training twice a day, and sometimes running at night with his brother, aided by lime blobs to mark their path. His first major victory came in the 6 miles at the 1951 Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) championships. Then in 1952, after the Helsinki Olympics, he came under the influence of the German coach Waldermar Gerschler, who introduced him to a more psychological and systematic approach to training. 
Two seasons stand out in Pirie's career. In 1953 he set a world record for the 6 miles, won the inaugural Emsley Carr mile at the White City, was a member of the British team which set a world mark for the 4 x 1500 metres relay, and took the first of three successive English cross-country titles. In 1956 he equalled and then broke the world record for the 3000 metres and also broke it for the 5000 metres. Yet he never won a world or Olympic title. The closest he came was a silver medal in the 5000 metres in the Melbourne Olympics of 1956. This came a week after he had been broken in a heroic attempt to match the pace of the Russian Vladimir Kucs in the 10,000 metres. In the 5000 metres he opted to run for second place, an uncharacteristic manoeuvre. On 24 September 1956 he married a fellow athlete, Shirley Hampton ('b'. 1934/5), the daughter of Harold William Hampton, a photoengraver. They had two daughters. 
Some saw Pirie as arrogant when he prophesied his successes. Certainly he was brash, colourful, and controversial, with a personality as spiky as his haircut. His autobiography was aptly titled 'Running Wild' (1961). He clashed with officialdom on many occasions. In 1961 he was dropped from the team against West Germany for not reporting on time and subsequently against Poland for declining to explain his lateness. He refused to agree that it was acceptable for athletics officials to write and broadcast about sport but not for him, a major draw card for spectators, to be reimbursed for actually running. It irked him that many of his applications to run abroad -- where promoters often took a laxer view of amateur regulations -- were turned down by the AAA. It was not only British athletics officials who felt his criticism. On receiving the BBC sports personality of the year award in 1955, he used the occasion to accuse the press of damaging British sport. Later, when travelling to Perth, Australia, as a commentator for the empire games, he agreed to provide fitness training for the English cricket team, who were on board the same vessel. He later described the group as 'an unfit, paunchy bunch of barflies' ('The Times', 9 Dec 1991). 
Although he finished only tenth in the 10,000 metres at the Rome Olympics in 1960, Pirie set a personal best time, demonstrating that he had not burned out as a result of his hard training. Before taking his leave of international athletics, at the White City in 1961, he ran a four-minute mile. He dabbled in professional athletics, including a race around a bullring in Spain, and took up orienteering successfully, but generally lost direction once he was away from world athletics. Arguing that taxation was too high in Britain, he emigrated to New Zealand, where he coached and worked in the logging industry. While he was there his marriage ended. In 1980 he was reinstated as an amateur, which allowed him to compete in athletics as a veteran and also to make his debut in a marathon. He returned to Europe several times on coaching assignments, and in 1987 he spent a season as director of a running school at Davos in Switzerland. He then moved back to Britain and spent the rest of his life in Hordle, near Lymington, Hampshire. He died at a nursing home, Oakhaven, Lower Pennington Lane, Lymington, on 7 December 1991, after a long fight against cancer, and his ashes were scattered on the Farthing Downs, where he had put in hours of training. He was survived by his two daughters. A memorial service was held at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 25 February 1992. Although he was never a world champion, in his career Pirie held five world records and twenty-two British ones, and his punishing training methods revolutionized British middle-distance running. 


@@@@@


doc= 49929


Poett, Sir (Joseph Howard) Nigel (1907-1991), army officer, was born on 20 August 1907 at Kew House, Winterbourne St Martin, near Dorchester, the only son among the five children (the youngest girl was his twin) of Major-General Joseph Howard Poett (1858-1929), army officer, and his wife, Julia Baldwin Caswell of Rhode Island, USA. On Joseph Poett's retirement from the army the family moved to farming in British Columbia, where they remained until the early part of 1914. They arrived in London shortly before the outbreak of the First World War and Nigel began formal education at preparatory school and then, as a member of a Roman Catholic family, entered Downside School. 
Tall and strong, keen to learn in the classroom, Poett gained in confidence through considerable success at games. Modest, open, and good-humoured, he got on well with his peers and schoolmasters alike. Indeed if he had a fault it was aimlessness; he had no interest in any profession. If pressed he spoke vaguely of entering a university. His headmaster judged otherwise and urged Nigel to enter the army. In January 1926 he reported as a gentleman cadet to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. 
Cadet life seemed to Poett like life at Downside. Even his posting as a subaltern in 1927 with the 1st battalion of his regiment, the Durham light infantry, in Alexandria, did not break wholly that association. Playing games and shooting wildfowl occupied many hours of an officer's day. Early in 1930, however, he was sent to the 2nd battalion, then at Razmak on the notoriously rebellious north-west frontier of India. The task of 'showing the flag', involving picketing heights to outmanoeuvre local skirmishers, took precedence over everything else, even sports. Garrison duties in Calcutta followed, in which social activities intruded. Poett passed through this as an auxiliary aide-de-camp and member of the army staff, intermittently as battalion machine-gun officer, and finally as adjutant, principal assistant to and confidant of his commanding officer. The maturing of his talents over ten years augured well for the future. While on local leave he became engaged to Julia, daughter of E. J. Herrick of Hawkes Bay, New Zealand; after a year of regimental duties they were married on 26 May 1937. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Poett passed the entrance examination for the Staff College, Camberley, in 1936 and began the course in 1938. War cut this short. Now a major, Poett was sent to the policy co-ordination branch of the general staff but, in the expectation of invasion in 1940, succeeded in joining a beach defence division. When the German offensive strategy broke instead upon Russia the War Office demanded his return. Soon he was promoted and drawn into Cabinet Office work. Restless for active service, he secured command of the 11th battalion of his regiment in 1942. Within a year he was selected a brigade commander. General Gale, raising the new 6th airborne division, chose Poett to command the 5th Parachute brigade as much for his physical as for his military talent. 
The brigade consisted principally of the 7th, 12th, and 13th battalions forming up from volunteers, to whom parachuting was a novelty. Brigadier Poett inspired his command to throw themselves into making ready for a crucial role in the forthcoming assault into France. Aimlessness had long passed from him. His open nature and enthusiasm fired his soldiers. He pondered ways and means of enhancing airborne warfare. Anticipating that his troops might be scattered on landing he decided to drop himself with the reconnaissance and 'coup de main' parties, in case it became necessary to rebalance his plans. It was a risky decision. From the moment of landing he maintained the practice of being in the midst of events from the battles in Normandy, through the Ardennes offensive at the end of 1944, and across the Rhine in May 1945. Some thought he toured his foremost lines too often; shellfire seemed to follow him. But his forces knew that he shared their perils and he led them in this way to the war's end on the Baltic. 
Poett emerged from the war in Europe with a high reputation as a field commander and a staff officer. He had been awarded a DSO and bar, and the United States Silver Star. He was of the right age among his peers to be retained in his rank when others were retired or reduced to lower ranks. He was thus marked for further promotion. In the meantime, the 5th Parachute brigade was dispatched to join the war in the Far East, expecting to fight the Japanese. The armistice overtook them. Anxious not to be disposed in garrison duties, Poett persuaded the army commander to employ the brigade in an active role. It was sent to maintain internal security between the Dutch colonial authorities and Sukarno's nationalist forces in Semarang, a task which required as much political as military judgement. While this continued Poett was posted home in February 1946 to be director of plans in the War Office. 
Politics were never far from his remaining posts in the army. He passed from the War Office in 1948 to be deputy commander to the British military mission in Greece during 1949 and chief of staff in the Far East from 1950 to 1952, and to command of the 3rd division in the Suez Canal. After returning to the War Office as director of military operations in 1954 he became commandant of the Staff College in 1957, general officer commanding southern command in 1958, and commander-in-chief of Far East land forces (1961-3). He was made knight commander of the Bath in 1959. He was persistent, as the army passed through successive reorganizations, in pressing his peers to take account of their own errors of judgement as they reshaped their policies. In this he had very much in mind what he reckoned to be his own failure to press for a quick military response to the blocking of the Suez Canal -- a Parachute brigade and Royal Marine commandos should have been used at once instead of waiting months for the arrival of a British corps, 'all due to being overawed by the opposition', as he remarked. When the Azahari uprising was attempted in Brunei during his command in the Far East he was advised that it would be necessary to gather a major force to suppress the rebels. But the force would take two or three months to assemble. Poett declined to lose the potential advantages of surprise and speed. Though he lacked a close reserve, a commander and staff were taken from his own headquarters to back a fighting core of Ghurkas. Made ready in a few days, they were flown in quickly to Brunei and routed Azahari's followers. 
After retirement Poett became a member (and later director) of the British Productivity Council, but his main interest lay in working for and congregating with the soldiers with whom he had served -- in the Durham light infantry, whose colonel he became, and with the Parachute regiment and airborne forces. His wife, ever ready to 'follow the drum', accompanied him often on these visits. They fostered the relationships between the veterans of the 6th airborne division and the French armed forces, and continued to do so even after Nigel Poett was stricken by illness. He died at his home, Swaynes Mead, Great Durnford, Salisbury, Wiltshire, on 29 October 1991, survived by his wife and children. His memoirs, 'Pure Poett', were published later that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 49932


Prain, Sir Ronald Lindsay (1907-1991), businessman, was born on 3 September 1907 in Iquiqui, Chile, the elder child of Arthur Lindsay Prain (1879-1965), nitrates manager, and his wife, Amy Gertrude, 'nee' Watson (1878-1958). His maternal grandfather was Charles Watson, business partner of 'honest' Henry Meiggs, who made and lost a fabulous fortune building railways in Peru, and his paternal grandfather was John Prain, of Valparaiso, Chile. At the age of seven Prain moved to London with his parents. Educated in Bournemouth and at Cheltenham College, to which he remained strongly attached, eventually serving as president of its council, his first job in the City was as a cashier with the metal trading firm of Marshall Brothers, subsequently Anglo Metal and then Ametalco, a subsidiary of the American Metal Company in New York. His progress was rapid. Having caught the eye first of Robert Mayer and then of Chester Beatty, Prain was appointed to the board of Anglo Metal in 1936, and in 1937 to the boards of the Rhodesian Selection Trust (RST) and Roan Antelope, in both of which American Metal had recently acquired substantial shareholdings. Together with the Anglo-American Corporation of Sir Ernest Oppenheimer these two companies were largely instrumental in the development of the Northern Rhodesian copper mining industry. On 23 April the following year, he married, at St Peter's Church, Cranley Gardens, London, Esther Pansy Brownrigg (died 1987), the 28-year-old daughter of Norman Graham Brownrigg, schoolmaster. They had two sons, Graham ('b'. 1940) and Angus ('b'. 1952). 
Turned down by the army on medical grounds for active service during the Second World War, Prain (while continuing as a director of Anglo Metal, RST, and Roan Antelope) was invited by Oliver Lyttelton to join the Ministry of Supply as controller of diamond dies and quartz crystals, used respectively in fine-wire drawing tools and for radio telegraphy and submarine detection (asdic) purposes. The excellent job he did in meeting these vital wartime needs of British industry was recognized in 1946 by his appointment as OBE. In 1943 Prain had become managing director of Mufulira and Roan Antelope, RST's two large central African copper mines, and in 1950 he succeeded Chester Beatty as chairman of the Rhodesian companies, a position he occupied until his retirement in 1972. From this point, his career was intimately associated with central Africa's copper mining industry, and the wider economic and political vicissitudes of the region. With the shift of RST's headquarters first to Northern Rhodesia in 1953, and then to Salisbury, capital of the recently established Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, in 1955, Prain moved with his family to Africa. A friend of Sir Roy Welensky, the leader of Northern Rhodesia's white settlers who became prime minister of the federation in 1956, Prain believed federation would be good for business. He pushed hard and successfully for African advancement in the copper mines under RST control, breaking the colour bar enforced by white workers. His motives were as much practical as they were moral. The problem, as Prain saw it, was not that Africans were underpaid, but that Europeans were overpaid, an opinion not precisely calculated to secure the support of either black or white miners. 
Increasingly disillusioned by the failure of successive federal governments to practise multiracial 'partnership', Prain and Harold Hochschild, the chairman of American Metal, RST's parent company, by 1959 had distanced themselves from Welensky's United Federal Party. Sensitive to African nationalist aspirations, RST put out feelers to leading black politicians, notably Kenneth Kaunda, 'a remarkable man' in Prain's estimation ('Reflections on an Era', 143). Such unofficial contacts were a useful source of information for the government of Harold Macmillan, as it grappled with the problem of constitutional advance in central Africa. Later described as 'the acceptable face of British capitalism' ('The Guardian', 27 May 1991), Prain, who was knighted in 1956, was credited with placing business in a stronger position than it might otherwise have been to weather the storms of decolonization. Such political foresight, it was thought, contrasted favourably with the apparently conservative attitude displayed by the other major mining house on the copperbelt, the Johannesburg-based Anglo-American Corporation. On Northern Rhodesia's independence as the republic of Zambia in 1964, RST changed its name from the Rhodesian Selection Trust to the Roan Selection Trust. In 1969, however, both RST and Anglo-American's Zambian interests were part-nationalized by Kaunda's self-consciously African socialist government. No distinction was drawn between the two groups, and one year later RST, whose corporate eggs had all been in one Zambian copper basket, was folded into American Metal's successor company, Amax, and ceased to exist. 
Often referred to in the popular press as Mr Copper, Ronnie Prain retired secure in the esteem of by far the larger part of the mining community. A frequent speaker on the problems and prospects of the industry, he had published 'Selected Papers' in four volumes between 1958 and 1968; in retirement he wrote 'Copper: the Anatomy of an Industry' (1975), and an autobiography, 'Reflections on an Era' (1981). In 1954 he had been instrumental in persuading RST to endow the Rhodes chair of race relations at St Antony's College, Oxford, and he later lent his name to a research fellowship in race relations at the same college. While there existed some doubt about the depth of his scientific knowledge, he was none the less a past president of the Institute of Metals, chairman of the Council of Commonwealth Mining and Metallurgical Institutions, and the recipient of numerous medals and awards, including from the New York Copper Club. In the British metal world his attempt to address fluctuations in the cost of copper by offering an 'RST producer price' at lower levels than those prevailing on the London metal exchange was criticized in market circles even as it won support from his shareholders and others concerned for the industry's long-term prospects. An indefatigable traveller, he claimed that over his career he had clocked up almost two million air miles. At one time a keen cricketer, his sporting prowess made him some unusual contacts. A pre-war match against a Hollywood eleven, among whose members was Boris Karloff, resulted in an acquaintanceship that later benefited Prain when Karloff sold him a coveted London flat ahead of other would-be purchasers. Prain died of heart failure at his home, Waverley, Granville Road, St George's Hill, Weybridge, Surrey, on 10 May 1991. He was survived by his two sons, his wife having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 49934


Priestland, Gerald Francis (1927-1991), radio and television broadcaster and writer, was born on 26 February 1927 at Meadow Cottage, Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, the son of Francis Edwin Priestland (1884- 'c'.1962), sales manager for Cooper, McDougall, and Robertson, agricultural chemists, of Berkhamsted, and his wife, Ellen Julianna (Nelly), 'nee' Renny (1900-1964). He was educated at Charterhouse School, from where he won an open history scholarship to New College, Oxford. There he read politics, philosophy, and economics, graduated with a second-class degree in 1948, and met his future wife, (Helen) Sylvia Rhodes ('b'. 1924/5), daughter of Edward Hugh Rhodes and a student at the Ruskin School of Drawing. They married on 14 May 1949, and had two sons and two daughters. 
In 1948 Priestland became one of the first six graduates recruited for training by the BBC news division. His career in the news division began with six months as an obituarist and then five years as a sub-editor. He then had a few months' experience working under Thomas Cadett in Paris before being posted in south-east Asia from 1954 to 1958. Then followed postings in the United States (1958-61 and 1965-9) and in the Middle East (1961-5). During his second period in Washington, Priestland interviewed Martin Luther King shortly before the civil rights leader's assassination. From Washington he also covered the Vietnam War. Priestland and his wife, Sylvia, tried hard, and succeeded, in combining his postings with family life for their four children, but in the autumn of 1969 they decided that the children should finish their schooling at home. Priestland persuaded Desmond Taylor, who was then editing BBC television news, to let him provide for the main evening bulletin a short commentary on the lines of the text provided at that time by Eric Sevareid for the CBS evening news in the United States. In the autumn of 1969 Priestland experimented with this format. Charles Curran, the director-general of the BBC, complimented him on the result, but pressure from the television news managers was too strong, and the experiment was discontinued at the end of that year. At the beginning of 1970 he became the anchorman of 'Newsdesk' on BBC Radio 4, part of the attempt made between 1970 and 1974 to revive that station's fortunes. He also presented radio series such as 'Analysis'. 
In the mid-1970s Priestland suffered a nervous breakdown, which he attributed to the violence he had seen while covering the Vietnam War as well as to the race riots he had witnessed during the civil rights campaigns in the American south. He recovered with the help of his wife, Sylvia, by now a psychiatrist, but also through discovering within himself a belief in the love of God and the reality of forgiveness. He had already developed an engagement with religion at school, where he was known as the school atheist and had thought it important 'to emphasize the meaninglessness and boredom of divine worship, which I did by refusing to bow my head during the Creed and by annotating any hymnbook with scornful comments during the sermon' (Priestland, 52). Having been a nominal Anglican for most of his life, he became a Quaker, partly because of his friendship with Gerard Hoffnung, in 1976. In 1977 he was appointed the BBC's religious affairs correspondent in succession to Douglas Brown. Here he was in his element in bringing religious ideas to a mass audience. 'Priestland's Progress', which he described as a plain man's guide to religious faith, was heard by millions and it attracted a postbag of 20,000 letters, an unprecedented response for a religious programme. At the end of 1981 listeners to Radio 4's early morning 'Today' programme voted him ahead of the pope and second only to the prince of Wales as their man of the year. His Saturday morning talks, 'Yours Faithfully', on the same programme brought him more letters in a week, he said, than he used to receive in Washington in a year. After retiring from the BBC in 1982 Priestland continued to present television series on TV South -- 'Priestland Right and Wrong' -- and a weekly spot on Terry Wogan's Radio 2 show, as well as continuing to write books mainly concerned with the exposition of a religious view of life. He died at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, on 20 June 1991, after suffering a stroke while returning from a shopping trip. His wife, two daughters, and two sons survived him. 


