@@@@@


doc= 752


Ashe, Thomas (c.1556-1618), lawyer, who first appears as a student of Barnard's Inn, was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1574; nothing is known of his parents or early life. He was called to the bar in January 1583 and was raised to the status of ancient of the inn in 1589. There is no record of his having practised the law. In 1588 there appeared his first work, a table to the 'Reports' of Sir James Dyer, which was successful enough to be reprinted in 1600 and 1622; this was followed by an 'Abridgement' of Edmund Plowden's 'Commentaries' (1597?; repr., 1607). In 1605 he published a table to the first five volumes of Edward Coke's 'Reports', dedicated to Coke, in the preface to which he made explicit the reasons why these reports were of such paramount importance. This volume was subsequently expanded to cover the full eleven volumes of Coke's 'Reports' published in his lifetime (1618; repr., 1652). At the same time he culled from the reports a collection of useful maxims, publishing these in 1617 as 'Fasciculus florum, or, A handfull of flowers gathered out of the severall bookes of the Rt. Hon. Sir Edward Coke' (1617). This appears to have attracted a degree of criticism, or ridicule, from a member of the North family, against which Ashe defended himself in a preface to an expanded second edition of the work in 1618, addressed 'to the captious and malicious detractors'. More originally he had compiled from the year-books and other reports a collection of cases in which statutes had been extended by equitable interpretation, organizing these analytically and publishing them in 1609 under the title 'Epieikeia'. The introduction to this work, a highly intelligent discourse on the nature of equity in English law, reveals Ashe's considerable skill as a lawyer. Five years later, in 1614, he described himself as 'Professor' of the law in the title-page to his best-known work, 'Le primer (second) volume del Promptuarie'. This was an analytical index to the year-books, complementing the abridgements of Fitzherbert and Brooke without in any way superseding them; it was well received by the legal profession. Throughout his life Ashe retained his connections with Gray's Inn, which came to his rescue as he discovered that, in terms of worldly success, legal writing was no substitute for legal practice. He was given an entitlement to free commons at the inn in 1614 while overseeing the production of his 'Promptuarie', and in 1617 he was granted an annual pension of $5 on account of his indigence. He died at Gray's Inn in 1618, seemingly without any family; his administration, dated 20 October, valued his estate at $5 10's'., but noted him as a 'pauper'. 


@@@@@


doc= 753


Ashe, Thomas (1770-1835), army officer and writer, was born at Glasnevin, near Dublin, on 15 July 1770, the third son of Margaret, 'nee' Hickman, of co. Clare and her husband, a half-pay officer who traced his descent from the younger branch of a family whose ancestors accompanied William the Conqueror to England. A cadet of this younger branch served with William of Orange in Ireland, and obtained one of the forfeited Irish estates. Ashe spent his early years at Glasnevin and a county seat of his father's called Asheville, near Limerick, before being sent to a public school in 1783. 
Ashe received a commission in the 83rd regiment of foot. The regiment was disbanded shortly afterwards, however, and he was sent to a counting-house at Bordeaux. While there he was briefly imprisoned for wounding in a duel a gentleman, whose sister he had seduced; the wound did not prove fatal, however, and the charges were dropped. Returning to Dublin, he was appointed secretary to the diocesan and endowed schools commission, but, getting into debt, and faced with allegations of embezzlement, he resigned his office and retired to Switzerland. 
Ashe then spent several years in foreign travel, living, according to his own account, in a free and unconstrained fashion, and enjoying a somewhat chequered fortune. In America his adventures included editing the 'National Intelligencer' for a time, arguing with Thomas Jefferson, and sending the first mammoth bones back to Britain. He was also arrested for attempting to steal treasures from churches in Latin America. Back in London, he disputed with Pitt and Cobbett in the newspapers, extracted confidences from Caroline of Brunswick, and had to be bought off to prevent their publication. Besides recording in his 'Memoirs' his impressions of the countries he visited, Ashe published separately 'Travels in America in 1806' (1808), 'Memoirs of Mammoth and other Bones Found in the Vicinity of the Ohio' (1806), and 'A Commercial and Geographical Sketch of Brazil and Madeira' (1812). He was also the author of several novels, including 'The Spirit of the Book' (1811; 4th edn, 1812), 'The Liberal Critic, or, Henry Percy' (1812), and 'The Soldier of Fortune' (1816). In his later years Ashe was in rather indigent circumstances. He died at Bath on 17 December 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 754


Ashe, Thomas (1836-1889), poet, was born at Stockport, Cheshire, in June 1836. His father, John Ashe (died 1879), originally a cotton spinner and a Manchester manufacturer, resolved late in life to take holy orders, was prepared for ordination by his own son, and became vicar of St Paul's at Crewe, Cheshire, in 1869. Ashe was educated at Stockport grammar school and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he entered as a sizar in 1855 and graduated BA with honours in mathematics as senior optime in 1859. At Cambridge he founded 'The Eagle', the St John's College magazine, and published his first collection of poetry in 1859. He was ordained deacon in that year and priest in 1860; at Easter 1860 he became curate of Silverstone, Northamptonshire. While at Silverstone he wrote a second collection of poetry, 'Dryope and other Poems' (1861). In 1865 he resigned his curacy to teach mathematics at Leamington College, Warwickshire. Two years later he moved to a similar post at Queen Elizabeth's School, Ipswich, where he remained until 1879. During the 1860s he contributed articles on English poets to 'Chambers's Book of Days' (1862-4), but he chiefly devoted himself to his poetry, publishing 'Pictures, and other Poems' (1865), the work for which he was best known. It sold well, running to three editions in five years, and 'The Sorrows of Hypsipyle' (1867) furthered his growing reputation for 'his skill in laying hold of the rare beauties of classic fable and reclothing them in a refined and simple English dress' ('Saturday Review', 18 May 1867). 'Songs now and then' appeared in 1876, when his work was most appreciated. 
After two years in Paris Ashe finally, in 1881, settled in London, where he was engaged in editing Coleridge's works for the 'Aldine Edition of the British Poets' series. He also edited three volumes of Coleridge's prose for Henry George Bohn's 'Standard Library': 'Lectures and Notes on Shakespeare' (1883), 'Table Talk and Omniana' (1884), and 'Miscellanies, Aesthetic and Literary' (1885). In 1886 a complete edition of Ashe's poetry was published, but by this time his popularity had waned, to the extent that two years later his 'Songs of a Year' (1888) had to be privately published. Reviewers of his poetry of the 1860s had paid tribute to his 'deep knowledge and sympathy with children' demonstrated in his many 'fanciful love poems addressed to a child of thirteen or so' ('ILN', 47). However, by the late 1880s attitudes had altered. As the sexual psychologist Havelock Ellis remarked in his introduction to a selection of Ashe's poetry, 'there is something not quite virile and wholesome, a certain touch of perversity in this absorbed brooding on child life' (Miles, 223). Ashe died at his home, 10 Worcester Street, St George's Square, Pimlico, London, on 18 December 1889 and was buried in St James's churchyard, Sutton, Macclesfield, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 755


Ashfield, Edmund (fl. 1669-c.1680), pastellist, is known principally on the basis of a marginal note in the manuscript treatise 'Miniatura, or, The art of limning', by Edward Norgate (1581-1650): 'On Crayons', 'Mr Ashfield at red ball in Lincoln Inn field in Holben row, the first house: master of this art' (Collins Baker, 83; the transcription is slightly different in Norgate, 229). Vertue, 'c'.1713-21, saw 'a Crayon head of Sr John Bennet Ld Ossulton done by Edmnd Asfield. fecit 1673. very neat & curious but not in a v. grand Manner' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.135). And the antiquary Thomas Hearne noted in his diary for 30 July 1709: 'The old Duke of Ormond's Picture in the School Gallery was done by one 'Ashfield' from the original drawn by Sir 'Peter Lilly'. The said 'Ashfield' also drew the picture of 'Duns Scotus' in the same Gallery, from his own Invention. Mr 'Ashfield' had a great Genius for Painting, especially for Craons. He liv'd in Holborn Rowe in Lincoln's Inn Field. He was a sober Person & suspected to be a Roman Catholick. ('Hearne', 2.227-8)' Buckeridge also mentioned him: 'Mr Ashfield was a gentleman well descended, who drew both in oil and crayons. He was disciple to Mr Wright, and painted some heads as big as the life. He first found out the way to multiply the number and variety of tints in crayons, and therewith to draw various complections, in imitation of oil-painting. This he performed on paper, and practised several years with deserved applause. He brought whole heads to ten pounds price. From him the present Mr Luttrel had his instruction, who has improved that invention, and multiplied the variety of colours to effect anything; as also found out a method, unknown before, to draw with those chalks or crayons on copper-plates, either by the life, or historically. (Piles, 'Art of Painting', 355)' From an unspecified source, Ozias Humphry copied the following interesting remark into his memorandum book for 1772-9: 'Mr Ashfield's man Garetmurfy [Garret Morphey] painted faster than his Master & did work for himself & his Master too, his Master not knowing' (BL, Add. MS 22950, fol. 25). 
Signed and dated pastels by Ashfield from the period 1673-5 are listed and reproduced by Collins Baker: they include 'Lady Oxenden' (1673) and 'Sir James Oxenden' (1674) (both then in the family collection); 'The Duke of Lauderdale' (1674/5; Ham House, Richmond, Surrey); and 'Viscountess Down' (1675; priv. coll.). C. F. Bell extends the date range with a further group of pastels, including 'Rebecca, Countess of Yarmouth', signed and dated 1669 (priv. coll.), and 'A Man, Supposed to be Edmund Plowden (1640-77)', signed and dated 1676 (priv. coll.); both groups were exhibited at the Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1938. At this stage in his life, therefore, Ashfield seems to have been fairly active in pastel, probably attracted, as were other contemporary English artists, by the subtle tonal effects that can be achieved in the medium. This interest in tone is reflected also in the contemporary development of the mezzotint -- the first truly sensitive means available to printmakers of representing the effect of light on surfaces -- and in the fascination with which the material plumbago (a soft and lustrous graphite, rich lodes of which had been discovered in Borrowdale in the 1660s) was greeted, especially by portrait draughtsmen in the third quarter of the seventeenth century. The flowering of the pastel in England at this time is also related to the general fascination with technique, common to almost all arts and sciences in the period following the foundation of the Royal Society. 
Ashfield seems to have worked little in the more conventional medium of oil. The paintings at Burleigh House, Northamptonshire, described by Collins Baker, do not provide any evidence towards a chronology of Ashfield's activity, nor for that matter does their style corroborate Walpole's statement that he was taught by J. M. Wright. Hearne's record of him copying Lely accounts more fully for what we can see in general of his style in all media. Furthermore, as Ashfield may have worked for the Norths (see below), a connection with Lely, and an admiration for the greatest living portrait painter, draughtsman, and connoisseur of art in England, are circumstantially likely. 
Until recently there was no hard evidence that Ashfield was anything other than a pastellist and perhaps an occasional oil painter. G. C. Williamson, H. A. Kennedy, and J. J. Foster had all attributed miniatures to him, creating a state of affairs summed up by C. F. Bell: 'It is upon the same mistaken train of reasoning [attributing pastels to Cooper and miniatures to Luttrell] that attempts have been made to attribute miniatures to yet another artist who has lately been held to have been the principal exponent of pastel at this period -- the recently re-discovered and already largely mythological Edmund Ashfield -- and this although his only ascertained works outside a very small group of crayon portraits are oil-pictures. (Bell, 5-6)' In 1987, however, a group of miniatures of members of the North family, Charles, fifth Baron North, his son William, the sixth baron, with Charles the younger son and his sisters Catherine and Dudleya, were offered for sale by descendants of the family. They are all by the same hand and one of them bears the initials E. A.. It is possible, perhaps probable, that E. A. is Edmund Ashfield; if so, they extend the period of his known activity into the mid-1680s. The handling is assured, but the technique not completely conventional for a mainstream miniaturist of the last quarter of the seventeenth century, tending in some respects to transparency in the use of wash. Neither Nicholas Dixon ('b'. 'c'.1645, died after 1708) nor Peter Cross ('c'.1645-1724), the arch-professionals, would have used bare vellum in a miniature as a light source, a practice perhaps natural to a draughtsman used to working in loose colours on paper, but some amateur or occasional miniature painters such as the monogrammist DM ('fl'. 'c'.1659-1676) used this technique. The placing of the figure in the oval, well back in the picture space, also seems very different, more tentative than the approach in the 1680s of Peter Cross, whose notion of portraiture, influenced by Samuel Cooper, brought his sitter's face right up to the picture plane. 
From such snippets of evidence, therefore, it is possible to see Ashfield as one of those ambiguous figures, like Thomas Flatman (1635-1688), Charles Beale ('bap'. 1660, died 1726?), or Matthew Snelling ('bap'. 1621, died 1678), who practised portraiture in various media, sometimes perhaps for money and usually as a gentle or even intellectual accomplishment. That Ashfield was 'suspected to be a Roman Catholick' gives him something in common with Samuel Cooper, and that he lived in Lincoln's Inn Fields places him socially and geographically close to where other professional men with an interest in the arts, especially lawyers, lived and worked. What is odd is that his name occurs so little in the annals of a period in which interest in the existence of an English school of painting was beginning to be a badge of patriotism, that Vertue, who collected information from people who should have known Ashfield well, has only one reference to him, and that he is not mentioned in the writings of the Beales or the Norths. More recently, his birth and death dates have eluded even the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century scholar Mary Edmond. The statement by Long that he died in 1700 derives from Foster, where it is probably an over-literal rendering of a general dating of Ashfield's activity to the 'last quarter of the 17th century' (Foster, 1.71). 


@@@@@


doc= 756


Ashford, William (1746-1824), landscape painter, was born in Birmingham and baptized at St Martin's parish church on 20 May 1746, the son of Richard Ashford, but made his career in Ireland. Ashford's family must have been of reasonable social standing as when he was eighteen in 1764 he went, according to Thomas Mulvany and James Gandon the younger, to Dublin as the 'favoured protege of Mr [Ralph] Ward, then at the head of the Ordnance Department in Dublin' (Gandon and Mulvany, 141). Ward himself had been appointed in 1763 through the patronage of the earl of Kildare, later duke of Leinster who was master of the ordnance. Ashford was paid $40 per annum as clerk to the controller of the laboratory section of the ordnance, where his task was to check on the armaments stored at the various forts and barracks in Ireland. The House of Commons 'Journals for Ireland' record payments for his expenses in 1765: he was paid $38 in early 1765 'for his travelling Expences, and to Viewers to assist him to examine the Arms of the Army at the different Parts of the Kingdom' (House of Commons 'Journals for Ireland', 8, 1796, appx, li: 'Sums expended... for March, June and Sept. quarters'); in June 1765 he was given $3 'for his disbursements for a Horse, hired for a labourer to assist when sent to survey arms' (ibid.) and in September 1765 $2 12's'. 6died 'for twentyone Days travelling Expences going to the Laboratory at Chapel-Izod [in suburban Dublin]' (ibid.). The travelling was of use to his later career as it gave him the opportunity to look at the landscape. He did not officially leave the ordnance until 1788, shortly after the death of Ralph Ward, but he may have employed a substitute from the 1770s when he started exhibiting regularly. Sketchy, undated, drawings exist of Timoleague and a mill near Bantry, both in co. Cork, and of Askeyton and Limerick city in co. Limerick. They are probably fairly early, as stylistically they are quite different from the only other known drawings, mostly of Mount Merrion, dated about 1806 (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). 
Ashford's first oil paintings are charming, naive, flowerpieces, one of which is dated 1766 (National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). With some other still lifes, they were exhibited at the Society of Artists in Ireland between 1767 and 1771. His first landscapes were shown in 1772 in Dublin and in 1775 he sent a landscape to the Royal Academy, when an unidentified critic wrote: 'We don't remember this artist's name before in any exhibition; notwithstanding this, he is so far from being a novice in his profession, that if he is young and attentive, he may well expect to reach the first form in this department of painting. (unidentified newspaper cutting, Courtauld Inst.)' He is likely to have attended James Mannin's classes in the Dublin Society Schools, though his name is not recorded there. He was given two premiums by the society for exhibited landscapes. There were other masters in Dublin, however, and nothing is actually known of his training. The exhibitions give many changes of address before he settled about 1792 in a house designed for him in Sandymount by a friend, the great architect James Gandon. In his will he left this house to his daughter Anne. He had two sons, William, who became a doctor, and Daniel, who was described in the 1821 census as a 'Limner and a Gentleman'. Nothing is known of his wife. 
After he left the ordnance Ashford visited London more frequently than earlier in his career and exhibited at both the Royal Academy (1775-1811) and the Society of Artists (1777-91), of which he became a fellow in 1778. He sometimes sent Dublin addresses but his frequently changing London addresses indicate that he took lodgings when there. After 1806 he sent a number of works to the British Institution exhibitions. 
In 1790 Ashford included five pictures in a sale held in London of the work of a friend, the marine painter, J. T. Serres. In 1792 he decided to sell his collection of statues and models to the Dublin Society which paid 80 guineas for them on 15 March. Unfortunately no catalogue survives of the exhibition and neither is there any list of his collection. In 1819 he held a one-man show in the board room of the Dublin Society's house in Hawkins Street, Dublin. After his death, according to the advertisement in 'Freeman's Journal' for 15 May 1824, Ashford's paintings, drawings, field studies, and sketches were auctioned by Gernon's of 38 Dawson Street, Dublin, taking four days to clear (18-21 May 1824). 
A great number of Ashford's landscapes were commissioned, usually in sets for gentlemen and aristocrats such as the duke of Leinster, the earls of Drogheda, Charleville, Bessborough, and Kilmorey, and Viscount Fitzwilliam (founder of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). Of these, the masterpieces were for Leinster (1779) and Charleville (1801), largely because they concentrated on the patrons' parks and not their buildings. The Leinster set did include two rather poor works of the ruins of Maynooth but the two of the park at Carton are, like the park at Charleville, superb. When the latter were exhibited in 1801 an unknown diarist wrote 'There is here abundant scope for an exertion of the artist's genius in the delineation of foliage... the colouring so beautifully rich, and various, that I could with pleasure have spent hours in viewing them' (MS, Royal Irish Academy). If Ashford was weakest at buildings, he was excellent at the figures and animals which enliven his landscapes. He preferred summer, though his seascapes were sometimes storm scenes. One winter scene, an illustration to a poem, survives (Birmingham City Art Gallery), and one autumnal scene, 'Jacques and the Wounded Deer' (1790), a scene from 'As You Like It'. Ashford painted one or two Shakespearian subjects but pure landscapes and seascapes were his favourites. One totally different picture exists, 'The Opening of the Docks at Ringsend' (1796, National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin). This lively scene, full of ships and people, is a mixture of genre and modern history. His later works show weakening ability and are closer to genre painting than landscape. 
Ashford was involved in setting up the Royal Hibernian Academy and became its first president in 1823, an unusual distinction for a landscape painter. He died at his home at Sandymount Park, Dublin, on 17 April 1824 and so did not see the first exhibitions in which his work was included. 


@@@@@


doc= 757


Ashley, Sir Anthony, baronet (1551/2-1628), politician and translator of The Mariners Mirrour, was the eldest son of Sir Anthony Ashley of Damerham in Hampshire, a cadet of the long-established Ashleys of Wimborne St Giles (Dorset), and Dorothy, daughter of John Lyte of Lytes Cary (Somerset). Sir Francis Ashley and Robert Ashley were his younger brothers. A typically aristocratic education involving military exercises and, probably, travel abroad, where he learned several foreign languages, was followed by legal studies at the New Inn and in 1574 the Middle Temple. Since his father was in the service of the vice-chamberlain Sir Christopher Hatton, it was Hatton also who patronized the son, sending him in the early 1580s to France as tutor and companion to his heir and nephew William, who returned in 1586 in time to be elected to parliament. Presumably it was also Hatton, now lord chancellor, who secured Ashley's appointment on 15 March 1587 as clerk to the privy council; a second office followed in 1589, the clerkship of the castle and county court of York, which he must have exercised by deputy. In 1588 Ashley was elected MP for Tavistock and in 1592 for Old Sarum, presumably by the means of the earls of Bedford and Pembroke respectively. He accompanied the queen to Oxford in 1592, when he was one of eighteen royal servants who were created MA. A career of high promise beckoned. The death of Hatton in 1591 was a grievous blow that may explain his failure to secure further advancement. In the short term Ashley failed to secure a wardship he sought from Lord Burghley as master of the court of wards and had to beg him to implement some other grant secured for him by Hatton; whatever the 'favours and comfortable speeches' for which Ashley thanked him in December 1593, Burghley was evidently not the patron that Hatton had been. Frank accusations of frauds, embezzlement, oppressions, and perversion of justice were made against Ashley to Burghley, some of which he evidently believed and for which Ashley was suspended late in Elizabeth's reign. If no more official rewards came Ashley's way, he nevertheless profited, perhaps from successful malpractices. Reappointed clerk of the privy council on 25 April 1603, he was suspended in 1609 when charged by the Scot Sir James Crichton of poisoning William Ryce in 1591. A three-day Star Chamber hearing in 1611 found Ryce had died naturally and that Ashley was the victim of a fraudulent conspiracy by Crichton with disreputable associates either aggrieved or suborned. The aim was to secure Ashley's forfeiture and, apparently, Crichton's grant of his possessions. Unfortunately Ashley's vindication came too late to save his career: in 1610, aged nearly sixty, he was pensioned off. 
Ashley's grand tour or tours indicate an unusual interest in travel. At the prompting of the Lord Admiral Howard of Effingham, the privy council agreed to an English edition of Lucas Waghenaer's pioneering collection of charts, first published at Leiden in 1584, and deputed Ashley to carry it out. The resultant volume, which was of enduring importance and has given its name to the principal maritime history journal, was allegedly delayed by his duties with the privy council and was published in folio in 1588 under a lengthy title commencing 'The Mariners Mirrour'; it was colloquially known, from its author's name, as 'The Waggoner'. Dedicated to Lord Chancellor Hatton, it was decorated with his arms and crest. More than a mere translation, it was adapted for English usage and supplemented by accounts of Drake's raid on Cadiz in 1587 and the defeat of the Armada in 1588. On 12 November 1588 Ashley was at Ilton in Somerset itemizing the Spaniards on board an Armada vessel wrecked at Hope Bay. Since there were several privy council clerks organized on a rota system, continual attendance was not obligatory, and it was therefore possible for Ashley to combine his duties with further maritime exploits. On 7 April 1589, immediately following the dissolution of parliament on 29 March, he accompanied the expedition of Drake and Norris to Portugal, in which the queen had a financial interest and whose outcome he reported on 7 July; the privy council had him oversee the disposal of the booty. He was the secretary of war for the attack on Cadiz in 1596 commanded by Howard and Essex, who knighted him. In the same year the godly preacher George Phillips dedicated 'The Aprill of the Church' to Ashley, suggesting that he was seen as having puritan sympathies in religion. 
Ashley made a good marriage, about 1590, to Jane, the daughter of Philip Okeover of Okeover and widow of Thomas Cockayne (died 1587) of Ravenston, both in Staffordshire. Unfortunately her father disapproved of the match and, despite the queen's intervention, disinherited her, although Ashley secured some property after Philip's death. The Ashleys had only one child, their daughter, Anne. Ashley served on the quorum of the Middlesex commission of the peace from 1594. After 1580 he succeeded to his father's estates, which he greatly augmented by purchase, buying the family seat at Wimborne St Giles from his cousin Henry of the senior line in 1600 for $1600. He moved there and tried to ensure his heirs also resided there, as they still do. It was family pride that prompted him to extend or rebuild his house there, to found an almshouse, and add a burial chapel to the parish church 'for my self and my successors there to be entombed with my ancestors and descendants' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/153, fol. 123'v'). His daughter's marriage contract in 1616 decreed that her eldest son should take the name of Ashley and that any barony to which he was raised should bear that name: both promises were fulfilled, her son being baptized Anthony Ashley-Cooper at Wimborne St Giles on 22 July 1621 and created Lord Ashley before becoming earl of Shaftesbury. Contingent remainders in Ashley's will conveyed his wife's dower to his brothers' male lines should his daughter's male line fail. Already JP of the quorum for Dorset in 1599, he was sheriff of Somerset and Dorset in 1619-20. His prosperous estate not only attracted Sir John Cooper, bt, of Rockbourne, Hampshire, as husband for his heir, Anne, in 1616, but made Ashley himself an eligible husband in the highest circles on the death of his first wife, Jane. On 3 January 1622 he married again; his second wife was Philippa Sheldon, a sister-in-law of the all-powerful favourite George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, whom he entertained at Wimborne St Giles. He evidently hoped thereby, in his seventies, to relaunch his career. 'On Thursday last Sir Anthony Ashley in his dotage married mistress Shelton, a young gentlewoman of the [Villiers] kindred, by whom he hath promise or expectation to become some great man' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 1.355). Allegedly it was the more remarkable because he 'never loved any but boys' (Weldon, 136). He was an unsuccessful candidate for the secretaryship of state in 1621 and the household controllership in 1622. In June 1622 he paid $1095 each for baronetcies for himself and his son-in-law: his own was little use to a septuagenarian knight, but a valuable distinction for any son to be born of the match. None was. Ashley died aged seventy-six at his Holborn house on 13 January 1628 and was buried at Wimborne St Giles. His widow married again; her second husband was Carew Raleigh (1605-1666). She died in 1674. 


@@@@@


doc= 758


Ashley, Charles Jane (1772-1843), cellist, was born on 30 December 1772 in London, probably at 4 Pimlico Terrace, Chelsea, the third son of John Ashley (c.1734-1805) and his wife Mary, 'nee' Jane (died 1809). He played at Ranelagh and at Covent Garden, carrying on the Lenten oratorios with his brothers General Christopher Ashley ['see under 'Ashley, John] and John James Ashley, and at his father's festivals, where his playing was greatly admired. He was one of the founders of the Glee Club in 1793. On 2 May 1811 he was elected secretary of the Royal Society of Musicians, of which he had been a member since 4 May 1794, and he was one of the original members of the Philharmonic Society on its foundation in 1813. He was sole manager of the Covent Garden oratorios from 1816 to 1819, and also organized musical meetings in Edinburgh and the provinces. However, in 1820 he was imprisoned for debt and not discharged from the king's bench until August 1834. In the latter part of his life he was for some seasons manager of the Tivoli Gardens at Margate. He never married. He died in Margate on 28 August 1843, of paralysis. 


@@@@@


doc= 759


General Christopher Ashley (1769-1818), was born in London on 9 November 1769. He studied the violin with Felice Giardini and F. H. Barthelemon and was apprentice to his father from 1784 to 1791. He was a member of the Royal Society of Musicians (1791) and the Worshipful Company of Musicians (1800; livery and steward, 1803). In 1790 he began a 25-year stint as leader at the Covent Garden oratorios. He was engaged at Ranelagh and the Concerts of Ancient Music, and led the orchestra at many of his father's far-flung festivals. In 1805 he succeeded his father as manager of the Covent Garden oratorios, assisted by his younger brother John James Ashley (1771-1815). He joined his younger brothers Charles Jane Ashley (1772-1843) and Richard Godfrey Ashley ['see below'] in their provincial enterprises between 1806 and 1815. General Christopher Ashley married Sarah Chandler on 22 March 1804. He resided in London at James Street, Westminster, and at 12 King's Row, Pimlico, where he died on 21 August 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 760


Ashley, John (c.1734-1805), conductor and bassoonist, was probably born in London, although it is impossible to place or date this with certainty. Little is known of Ashley's musical training and his earlier professional years. He was a bassoon player of considerable ability and may have held an appointment in a wind band of the militia, for Charles Burney described him as 'of the Guards' (Burney, 12). He was a member of the Royal Society of Musicians (1765) and made free of the Worshipful Company of Musicians (1771; livery, 1792; elected warden, 1802; and master, October 1803 to October 1804). 
Ashley rose to prominence as assistant conductor at the 1784 commemoration of Handel in Westminster Abbey and was involved in the festivals of 1785, 1786, and 1787. Together with Samuel Harrison he revived the Lenten oratorios at Covent Garden Theatre in 1789, offering programmes (on Wednesday and Friday evenings) modelled on the successful repertory of the Handel festivals. Ashley assumed sole direction in 1793, and retained this position until his death. 
With a successful season likely to gross several thousand pounds, the oratorios provided a generous income, and Ashley took care to please his socially diverse audiences. Contemporary reviews praised the 'magnitude and merit of his arrangements'; he, in turn, well read the temper of the times. While Handel, represented by complete oratorios as well as 'selections', remained the mainstay of his programmes, so satisfying established taste, Ashley also allowed for novelty. Concertos and chamber works met the growing demand for instrumental music and each season vocal and instrumental soloists new to London audiences appeared alongside such favourites as Gertrude Elizabeth Mara, Angelica Catalani, and Elizabeth Billington, and John Braham and James Bartleman. He played on the nationalistic fervour aroused by the French Revolution and the wars with France by including new songs with patriotic or bellicose sentiments and, season after season, invariably ended each programme with a stirring doxology comprising Arne's 'Rule Britannia' and an elaborate arrangement of 'God Save the King'. Hindsight, however, shows the major landmarks to have been the first performances in England of Haydn's 'Creation' (28 March 1800) and Mozart's 'Requiem' (27 February 1801), and by regularly bringing choral music to the general public in an age which otherwise lacked such opportunities Ashley's oratorio ventures ultimately may be seen as an early stimulus to the enthusiasm for choral activities that swept the country later in the century. 
Between 1788 and 1793, and again in 1801, Ashley promoted 'grand musical festivals' in provincial centres from Portsmouth to Newcastle upon Tyne during the summer months. These two- to four-day events featured London principals augmented by local rank-and-file singers and instrumentalists, and the programmes again imitated the Handel festivals. 
Ashley married Mary Jane at St George, Hanover Square, on 14 February 1769. The family resided in London -- at 4 Pimlico Terrace, Chelsea, to about 1800, shifting to Abingdon Street, Westminster, where Ashley died on 14 March 1805 and his widow on 22 December 1809. Ashley's brother-in-law Richard Jane ('b'. 1740), who died on 5 April 1809, at Abingdon Street, has been misrepresented as Jane Ashley a brother, and erroneously described as a bassoon player. 
John Ashley's eldest son, 
John Ashley's fourth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 761


Ashley, John James (1771-1815), organist and singing teacher, was born on 6 March 1771 in London, probably at 4 Pimlico Terrace, Chelsea, the second son of John Ashley (c.1734-1805), a bassoonist and conductor, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Jane (died 1809). He was apprenticed to his father for seven years, from 15 October 1787, and became a piano pupil of J. S. Schroeter. He performed as a treble, along with his two younger brothers (Charles Jane Ashley and Richard Godfrey Ashley ['see under 'Ashley, John]), and with his father as assistant conductor, at the Handel commemoration at Westminster Abbey and the Pantheon in June 1784. In 1792 he became organist of Tavistock Chapel. From the same year, again with his brothers and under the direction of his father, he became associated as organist with the Covent Garden oratorios. He also played kettle drums in the Concerts of Ancient Music for several years. He became a member of the Royal Society of Musicians on 5 August 1792, and appears between 1793 and 1804 on the lists of those appointed to play in the society's May concerts for the benefit of the clergy of St Paul's Cathedral. He was named a governor of the society in 1795. 
Ashley was one of the most successful singing masters of his day, some of his most celebrated pupils being Mrs Vaughan (Miss Tennant), Eliza Salmon (also taught by his father), and Charles Smith. His compositions include some piano music, a few sets of songs, and three sonatas for piano and violin, op. 1 ('c'.1790). He married Charlotte Sophia Lockley at St George, Hanover Square, on 5 November 1793. He died in London on 5 January 1815. 


@@@@@


doc= 762


Richard Godfrey Ashley (1774-1836), was born in London on 8 September 1774. He was best known as a viola player, although from his first appearance at the Covent Garden oratorios in 1793 he usually performed there on the 'double drums'. He participated in his father's and brothers' undertakings until 1818 but appeared only irregularly in the oratorios after 1805. Throughout his life he was in demand at major festivals, leading the violas at the Three Choirs festival (1811), Oxford (1813), York (1823), and Chester (1829). He was a member of the Royal Society of Musicians (1796) and the Worshipful Company of Musicians (1800; livery 1802). He married Elizabeth Palmer at St George, Hanover Square, London, on 1 April 1816 and resided in London at Beaver Street, Pimlico, and at Park Place, Chelsea, where he died on 11 October 1836. 


@@@@@


doc= 763


Ashley, Robert (1565-1641), translator and book collector, was born on 2 July 1565, second son of Anthony Ashley, of Damerham, Wiltshire, and Dorothy Lyte; he was the brother of Sir Anthony Ashley and Sir Francis Ashley. At an early age he acquired fluent French under Hadrian Saravia, then a religious refugee in Southampton. At Salisbury Dr Adam Hill, sometime fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, gave Ashley leading parts in school plays performed at Wilton before the second earl of Pembroke. He matriculated from Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1580, but his tutor's discipline was too severe, and under the patronage of the Hatton family he was transferred to Magdalen College. Graduating in 1582, he was awarded a fellowship, proceeding MA in 1587. In his spare time from his duties as professor of geometry, he devoured medieval romances and became proficient in several modern languages. A popular student, he was chosen lord of misrule for the Christmas festivities of 1587. But his elder brother, Anthony, insisted on removing him to London to prepare for the legal profession. At the Middle Temple he was again chosen lord of misrule, a distinction he clearly valued. He also arranged for the publication of two translations from the French ('A Comparison of the English and Spanish Nation', 1589, and 'L'Uranie, ou, Muse celeste', 1589, which translated du Bartas's poem into Latin), dedicated respectively to his brother's travelling companion Sir William Hatton and to Hatton's bosom friend, the soldier-diplomat Sir Henry Unton. 
Nevertheless Ashley soon quarrelled with his brother, abandoned his studies, and went abroad, serving as aide-de-camp to Sir Thomas Baskerville in the war in France against the Catholic league. At the end of 1591 he returned to take service with the new lord keeper, Sir Thomas Puckering, to whom he dedicated another translation from the French, 'Of the interchangeable course, or variety of things... and the concurrence of armes and learning' (1594), from the original of Louis le Roy that dealt with a subject of abiding interest to him. As amanuensis to Puckering prospects were good but rewards so inadequate that in 1593 he again yielded to his brother's pressure, and resumed residence in the Middle Temple. He was called to the bar with suspicious speed in 1595 and, after Puckering's death in the following year, sought to recommend himself to his successor Sir Thomas Egerton with his only original work, a well-arranged and comprehensive essay on honour, a subject then deemed important to a cultivated English gentleman. Philosophically, it was based on Aristotle's doctrine of the golden mean, supported by anecdotes drawn exclusively from classical antiquity. Beautifully produced by a professional scribe, it remained in manuscript among Egerton's papers. In what may have been a further fruitless attempt to attract patronage, Ashley was elected to the 1597 parliament for the borough of Dorchester, but left no trace on its records. 
Silently abandoning hopes of a public career, Ashley spent the remainder of his long life as a bachelor in the Temple. His practice was not extensive, leaving him time to build up one of the finest private libraries of the time, 'procuring the principall writers in their severall languages, especially such as had opportunitie to be acquainted with the most remote and unknowne partes' (Heltzel, 354). After a humiliating rebuff from his inn in 1614, when he was rejected for a readership on the grounds of poverty, he began to compose autobiographical notes, chiefly for astrological purposes. 
In 1618 Ashley travelled through France and Spain with a view to meeting Robert Shirley, the Persian ambassador. In the Escorial he admired the great golden library of Arabic books. Spending 'the best houres of some few Weekes' in the Bodleian Library, Oxford (Heltzel, 358), he translated from the Spanish a biography by Miguel de Luna, published in 1627 as 'Almansor the Learned and Victorious King', with a dedication to King Charles, thus returning to print after an interval of thirty-three years. To house his ever-expanding library, the benchers allowed him the exclusive use of two sets of chambers for a hefty fine. In 1633 he published 'Cochin China', translated from the Italian account of this remote and unknown country by Cristoforo Borri, and dedicated to the governor of the East India Company, Sir Maurice Abbot, in the hope that it might be 'usefull to our Countrymen that trade and traffique in those Eastern partes'. Another translation from the Italian, 'David Persecuted' (from Virgilio Malvezzi's 'Davide perseguitato'), was published in 1637. Ashley, who never married, signed his will on 27 September 1641, and was buried on 4 October in the Temple Church. He bequeathed all his books to the Middle Temple, with an endowment of $300 for a catalogue. His 5000 volumes covered nearly every branch of learning, being particularly strong in civil and canon law, geography, history, mathematics, medicine, politics, and theology. 


@@@@@


doc= 764


Ashmole, Elias (1617-1692), astrologer and antiquary, was born on 23 May 1617 at Lichfield in Staffordshire, the son of Simon Ashmole, a saddler, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Anthony Bowyer, a Coventry draper whose family was of gentry status. Ashmole's grandfather Thomas Ashmole had been a person of standing in the city, but his father punctuated his not particularly successful career as a saddler with bouts of soldiering in Ireland and on the continent. Ashmole received his initial education at Lichfield grammar school and was also a chorister at the cathedral. 
In 1633, when he was sixteen, he was given the opportunity to go to London as a companion to the sons of a distant relative of his mother, James Pagit, a baron of the exchequer. He exploited the useful stepping-stone to preferment with which her genteel connections provided him by taking up the potentially lucrative profession of the law, which he began to practise in 1638. On 27 March 1638 he married Eleanor (1603-1641), daughter of Peter Manwaring of Smallwood, Cheshire, from an impoverished gentry family. 
Though hardly, if at all, involved in the fighting, Ashmole's sympathies in the civil war were unreservedly royalist, and this loyalism was to characterize his entire subsequent career. In 1644 he was appointed royalist excise commissioner for Lichfield, taking up a similar commissionership for Worcester in 1645; in 1645 he also accepted the post of gentleman of the ordnance in the garrison at Oxford, though he mainly devoted his time there to study, being linked with Brasenose College. It was apparently at this time that he became interested in astrology, in which he was encouraged by George Wharton, the leading royalist astrologer of the time, whom he met in March 1645 and at whose suggestion he had been offered his ordnance post. In 1646 he was introduced to William Lilly, with whom he was to strike up a lifelong friendship despite the fact that Lilly was at that time writing astrological predictions strongly favourable to the parliamentarians. Indeed, Ashmole's first appearance in print comprised translations of two prophetic works which appeared in Lilly's 'The Worlds Catastrophe' (1647). 
From this time on, for the rest of his life, Ashmole was to spend hours in astrological pursuits. Among his papers are preserved thousands of notes in which he sought horoscopic elucidation about the propitiousness of the heavens at a certain time for a particular action. He also took a strong interest in magical sigils, often cast at astrologically propitious times. In addition, he noted that on 16 October 1646 he was admitted to a masonic lodge at Warrington, the earliest such reference known in England; later, he recorded his attendance at a lodge held at Masons' Hall in London in 1682. 
Ashmole's first wife died on 6 December 1641. In 1649 he married a rich widow, Mary, Lady Mainwaring (1597-1668), daughter of Sir William Forster of Aldermaston and widow of Sir Thomas Mainwaring, recorder of Reading, who had died in July 1646. Though disagreements between him and his second wife were to lead to lawsuits in the 1650s, this prudent match provided Ashmole with a steady income which allowed him (in his own words) to 'be enabled to live to my selfe & Studies, without being forced to take paines for a livelyhood in the world' ('Autobiographical and Historical Notes', 1.47). It also made it possible for him to start collecting books, scientific instruments, and the like, and to patronize others who shared his interests. 
The years around 1650 saw a climax in Ashmole's interest in alchemy, the earliest evidence of his interest in which dates from 1648. In 1650, under the pseudonym James Hasolle, he brought out 'Fasciculus chemicus', a translation of two Latin alchemical works, one of them by Arthur Dee, son of the famous Elizabethan magus John Dee. Then, in 1652, he brought out his great 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum', a collection of alchemical poems in English designed to supplement the massive European 'Theatrum chemicum' (1602 and subsequent editions) and to draw attention to English achievements in the field. Ashmole put much effort into collecting together and annotating these texts and his book remains one of the key sources for the history of alchemy, putting into print numerous works that had previously existed solely in manuscript. He also included an introduction which illustrates his wide reading of relevant writings and his understanding and acceptance of the principal tenets of alchemy. Though little evidence survives to indicate the extent to which Ashmole himself engaged in practical alchemical operations, he prided himself on his place in the oral tradition of alchemical secrets. In the early 1650s he refers to himself as a pupil of the adept William Backhouse, and in 1653 he notes that Backhouse, ill and thought to be close to death, passed on to him the secret of the philosopher's stone. Later there are indications that he in turn passed on such secrets to Robert Plot, first keeper of the Ashmolean. 
Ashmole produced a further alchemical volume, 'The Way to Bliss', in 1658, but a projected second volume of the 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' never materialized. Though he remained casually concerned with alchemy for the rest of his life, the level of his activity in this field in the early 1650s was not paralleled thereafter. The topics in which he maintained a more continuous interest were the three to which (perhaps significantly) he devoted the longest extraneous excursuses in his notes to the 'Theatrum'. One was magic and the efficacy of magical sigils; the second was astrology, there defended at length for all affairs of life; and the third, linked to this, was John Dee, a figure of unfailing interest to Ashmole, who devoted a lengthy section in the 'Theatrum' to him and later considered writing his biography. 
In the early 1650s Ashmole was cataloguing the renowned collection of rarities assembled by the Tradescant family, then housed at the residence of John and Hester Tradescant at Lambeth. He had first visited the Tradescant collection in 1650 and in 1652 undertook to catalogue it in conjunction with the physician Thomas Wharton, finishing the work later that year although it was not published until 1656. Not only did Ashmole jointly write this earliest published catalogue of an English cabinet of curiosities, he also paid the expenses of the work. It seems to have been this above all that sealed the link between him and the Tradescants and resulted in the gift to him of their collection by a deed dated 16 December 1659, though Hester Tradescant was to dispute this on the death of her husband in 1662. A chancery suit ensued, which was adjudicated in Ashmole's favour in 1664, but relations between the two continued to be strained until Hester's death in 1678. 
From the mid-1650s Ashmole became increasingly concerned with antiquarianism and especially with heraldry, interests for which before this date there is little evidence. This probably owed at least something to the fact that about 1655 Ashmole met the great antiquary William Dugdale, with whom he established a close relationship. After the death of his second wife, on 1 April 1668, he married Dugdale's daughter Elizabeth (1632-1701) on 3 November the same year. 
Ashmole shared with Dugdale an interest in heraldry, but his own special antiquarian enthusiasm was for the history of the Order of the Garter. Not only was this the oldest chivalric order in Europe, it was also a quintessentially royalist cult, and Ashmole's championship of it in the interregnum might be seen as a deliberate espousal of monarchist values in defiance of the prevailing republican regime. When writing up his notes after the Restoration he claimed that he began work on his history of the order in 1655, explaining how concerned he had been about its 'low esteem among us', and how anxious he was to provide a 'Formulary' for posterity of both the legal and the ceremonial aspects of the order. Much of Ashmole's dense archival research for the project was done in the late 1650s -- research manifesting an appreciation of the significance of documentary sources that undoubtedly owed much to Dugdale. In these same years Ashmole also spent much time (some of it with Dugdale) travelling around the country making 'church notes' on coats of arms and epitaphs; he thereby served an apprenticeship in heraldry which made him rapidly expert on the rules and technicalities of pedigrees and descents. 
In 1658 Ashmole embarked on a further antiquarian task, the cataloguing of the Bodleian Library's collection of Roman coins, which he undertook at the behest of Thomas Barlow, Bodley's librarian. This 'very laborious worke... which he did with his owne hand' ('Autobiographical and Historical Notes', 4.1394), though begun in 1658, was not completed until 1666, Ashmole's progress in the project being slowed by his official commitments after the Restoration. It was probably partly as a reward for this that the degree of MD was conferred on him by the University of Oxford in 1669. 
Ashmole celebrated the Restoration by publishing a congratulatory poem, 'Sol in ascendente', and for him, as for many royalists, the Restoration ushered in a new era of public activity. On 3 September 1660 he was granted the office of comptroller of the excise for the City of London, and in June 1668 he became accountant general of the excise, an office involving the supervision of one of Charles II's chief sources of revenue. The emoluments of these posts made him better off than ever. He was also provided with further forms of patronage through the offices of the excise to which he had the right of appointment. 
The early years of the Restoration saw Ashmole executing various tasks at the behest of Charles II. In 1660 he was given the job of preparing a catalogue of the king's coins and medals, while in 1662 he was a member of a commission for tracking down the valuables of Charles I, dispersed or sold by order of the parliamentary regime in the late 1640s. His precise part in planning Charles's coronation in 1661 -- the most lavish English coronation up to that time -- is uncertain: Sir Edward Walker was officially responsible for the ceremony, but Ashmole collected accounts of previous coronations and he may have assisted Walker in its planning. He certainly contributed retrospectively to the propaganda value of the coronation, for a narrative of it by him was appended to John Ogilby's 'The Entertainment of his Most Excellent Majestie Charles II in his Passage through the City of London to his Coronation' (1662). In 1661 Ashmole published a list of peers of the realm in order of precedence, and it is clear that he was regarded as an expert adviser on rules of protocol after the Restoration, to whom courtiers and others frequently applied for advice. In addition Ashmole made his personal contribution to the re-establishment of Anglicanism by presenting new service books to the cathedral of his native city of Lichfield in 1662. 
The Restoration also saw Ashmole taking an official role as a herald. On 18 June 1660 he was appointed Windsor herald at the College of Arms, the same day that his friend Dugdale, who was already Chester herald, was appointed Norroy king of arms. For the next decade and a half, Ashmole took part in the heralds' official activities, assisting in the revival of their traditional functions which had suffered some neglect during the interregnum. He also played a part in the system of heraldic visitations that was revitalized (not least due to Dugdale's initiative) after the Restoration. Ashmole's own copy of his 'Visitation of Berkshire', executed in 1665, illustrates the painstaking care which he took in his heraldic duties: the original manuscript of this survives, in addition to a defective edition of it published in 1719. He was also energetic in collecting subscriptions for the rebuilding of the College of Arms after it was destroyed in the fire of London in 1666. All this activity continued until 1675 when, evidently disillusioned by factional strife within the college, Ashmole resigned as Windsor herald and, despite pressure from many in high places, refused to take heraldic office of any kind thereafter. 
Ashmole's other chief concern in the years following the Restoration was with the revival of the Order of the Garter. His extensive researches during the later years of the interregnum made him an obvious candidate for consultation on the procedural details of the lavish Garter processions mounted after the Restoration. He also drafted the royal warrant for the replacement of Garter plate in the early 1660s, and, though his application in 1660 to become official historiographer of the order came to nothing, he continued to work on his definitive history of the order. This finally appeared in 1672 as 'The Institution, Laws and Ceremonies of the Most Noble Order of the Garter', a lavish folio densely packed with detail about the history and personnel of the order, and attractively illustrated with plates by Wenceslaus Hollar. On the book's appearance Ashmole was warmly commended by the duke of York, while copies which he sent to foreign members of the order -- complete with specially printed personal dedications -- brought him gratifying compliments: the king of Denmark, the elector of Brandenburg, and the Elector Palatine all presented him with gold insignia, which are preserved at the Ashmolean Museum. 
In the 1670s Ashmole continued to be as interested as ever in astrology and magic. His astrological expertise was exploited by Charles II and his courtiers, who applied to Ashmole for astrological elucidation of questions concerning the outcome of their negotiations with parliament at various points from 1669 to the 1680s, not least during such events as the exclusion crisis. He also remained interested in John Dee, a new climax in his concern with whom was stimulated by his acquisition in 1672 of hitherto unknown accounts of seances in which Dee was supposed to have indulged with angels, manuscripts which Ashmole greatly valued, studying and analysing them at length. 
It was also in the 1670s that Ashmole decided that a permanent home was needed for the curiosities that he had inherited from the Tradescants, and for his own collections. In 1675 he entered into negotiations with the authorities of the University of Oxford, possibly thereby realizing an ambition of the Tradescants themselves. He stipulated that he would bequeath the university his collections on condition that a proper building was erected to house them. The university accepted the offer and building was commenced in 1679, to be completed and opened in 1683 as the Ashmolean Museum -- said to be the first public museum in modern Europe. The Ashmolean also served as the centre for the study of science in the university. 
In fact not all of the collections that Ashmole intended for the museum ever reached it, for, although the Tradescants' rarities, together with Ashmole's books and manuscripts, were safely housed in Lambeth, others were kept at Ashmole's chambers in the Middle Temple, and on 26 January 1679 the great fire in the Middle Temple destroyed most of these. Some 9000 brass, copper, and silver coins and medals were lost or defaced, and the value that Ashmole attached to them is illustrated by the costly efforts he made to salvage their remnants from the wreckage of the building. Also destroyed were numerous printed books, many volumes of notes, and the bulk of his other collections, including his series of seals (presumably linked to his heraldic concerns) and his remarkable collection of prints. The latter included engravings of topographical subjects and of coronations, funerals, and other ceremonies in which Ashmole had a professional interest, while there was also a very extensive series of portraits of famous persons. 
Hence, when Ashmole's collections were transported to Oxford in 1683 to be placed in the new museum, a higher percentage of the items involved came from the Tradescants than would otherwise have been the case, and this helps to explain why Ashmole has sometimes been criticized for taking an undeserved share of the credit for the collection. However, partly in 1687 and partly after Ashmole's death in 1692, the museum received such rarities as he had accumulated to replace his losses in the Middle Temple fire -- over a thousand ancient and modern coins, various Roman antiquities, mineralogical and zoological specimens, and other curiosities -- together with his huge accumulation of books and manuscripts. The latter, like his coins, had been collected since the late 1640s. His holdings mainly reflected the interests that have already been mentioned and included the entire literary remains of such eminent astrologers as Simon Forman, Richard Napier, John Booker, and William Lilly. Ashmole seems also to have acquired some items of purely bibliophilic interest, including various illuminated medieval manuscripts, of which he is one of the earliest collectors known. 
Ashmole remained loyal to the city of his birth all his life, making various gifts to the city after the Restoration. In addition, in 1678 he stood unsuccessfully as candidate for Lichfield in a parliamentary election, and he would have stood again in 1685 had he not been commanded by James II to stand down. His health started to deteriorate in the early 1680s, and he became steadily less active in his later years, though he continued to be involved in governmental and courtly activity, while in 1685 he was called on by the archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft, for advice on the coronation of James II. He survived the revolution of 1688 and retained his excise post under William III and Mary, relinquishing it only on his death. In 1690 he was entertained at Oxford in the museum bearing his name. He died at his house at Lambeth on 18 or 19 May 1692, and was buried at St Mary's Church, Lambeth, on 26 May. 
Ashmole was a strong-willed, ambitious man, who knew exactly what he wanted in life, and who did not hesitate, when necessary, to have recourse to law to obtain it. His career was highly successful, not least because of the extent to which he benefited from his unswerving loyalty to the monarchy. His most lasting legacy was the museum which bears his name, which from the outset acted as a centre for the study of the natural world in Oxford and further afield. Though the core collection was that of the Tradescants, Ashmole's own contribution was significant, and would have been greater but for the regrettable losses in the Middle Temple fire. In addition, he is rightly remembered for his own writings. That which perhaps had greatest contemporary impact was his 'Institution... of the Most Noble Order of the Garter' (1672), in which he consciously used his antiquarian researches to underwrite a traditionalist, hierarchical view of society. Equally significant was his 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (1652), perhaps the most important of all English alchemical publications. This reveals a hierarchical view of the universe mirroring his political views, but it also shows a deep awareness of the mysterious powers of nature, which a magus could exploit. In Ashmole's case, he deployed the insights that he derived from such knowledge both for his own benefit and in the service of his royal master, Charles II, through the astrological advice that he purveyed. Intellectual developments of his time may have presented a challenge to his view of the world, but Ashmole's magical concerns were completely compatible with the milieu in which he lived. 


@@@@@


doc= 765


Ashmore, John (fl. 1621), translator and poet, was probably a native of the area near Ripon in Yorkshire (to which his poems repeatedly refer), but his life appears obscure. There are no records of his attending university. He was the first to publish a selection of Horace's odes in English translation, in a work entitled 'Certain Selected Odes of Horace, Englished' (1621). In twenty-eight pages he translates seventeen odes, starting with i.1, and ending with iii.30, but otherwise avoiding Horace's ordering. One ode, iii.9, is translated three times, the third time 'paulo fusius' ('a little more loosely'; 'Odes', trans. Ashmore, 16). All translations are Ashmore's own, except ii.3 which 'came into my hands under the name of Mr 'Ben Iohnson'' (ibid., 22) (an 'improbable' attribution according to Carne-Ross and Haynes although some Jonson scholars have been less sceptical (Carne-Ross and Haynes, 77)). There follow fifty pages of epigrams, epitaphs, anagrams, 'And other Poems of divers subjects; in 'Latine and English''; finally Ashmore offers a set of poems in praise of country life, translated from Martial, Virgil, and the neo-Latin author Flaminio ('Odes', trans. Ashmore, 29). Among the liminary verses praising Ashmore's achievement is a pair of elegiac couplets by John Owen, the well-known Latin poet; Ashmore reciprocates with two poems addressed to Owen, and also praises Ben Jonson. Samuel Pullein's commendatory verses claim that Ashmore would be another Horace, if he could have another Maecenas as patron; as it is, 'forma eadem est, ingeniique genus' ('you have the same appearance, and type of intellect'; ibid., sig. [A] 4'r'). Ashmore's own Latin and English dedication of the translation to Toby Matthew, archbishop of York, suggests a robust attitude to potential detractors: he does not fear '
spitefull Gibes, 

Nor crabbed Criticks, nor Grammarian Tribes. 
(ibid., sig. [A]3'v')' The rest of the book he dedicates to George Calvert, secretary of state and Yorkshire MP. 
Ashmore was probably present at James I's visit to Ripon on 15 April 1617, as the work also includes verses he composed to be recited ''In the Person of' Mercurie', and others to be presented to the king ('Odes', trans. Ashmore, 33). His poems address many other persons of national or local importance; the 'Dictionary of National Biography' found his puns vile, but they may have been more attractive to Renaissance tastes. Ashmore writes wittily to Sir Edward Mosley in 'On Nothing', a subject also found in 'Nemo' (1617) by the contemporary Latinist John Leech. Local clergymen, and members of the Fairfax and Mallory families, appear prominently in Ashmore's verses; he includes a dialogue between the two rivers at Ripon. One poem, 'De seipso' ('On himself'), may be of biographical interest: '

'Surety', what's that? I to my loss have try'd, 

Who for anothers Debt too 'Sure' am 'Ty'd': 

If this I had Etymologiz'd before, 

I never had been shut within this doore. 
('Odes', trans. Ashmore, 78)' It is uncertain whether he merely enjoyed the punning etymology, or had actually suffered imprisonment as a result of imprudent generosity.Ashmore's work may usefully be compared with the next attempt to translate Horace, in 'Odes of Horace' (1625), by Sir Thomas Hawkins. Hawkins may have taken inspiration from Ashmore's recent version, and also sought to outdo it, both in number of odes and moral standards. Hawkins's claim that he 'had rather teach Vertue to the modest, th[a]n discover Vice to the dissolute... [and not] take unhappy draughts, from the troubled and muddy waters of 'Sensuality'' ('Odes', trans. Hawkins, 38) suggests he may have been thinking of the more dangerous side of Horace that Ashmore had dared to reveal. Hawkins admits the 'lesse morall' ninth ode of book three with reluctance, and only 'for 'Iul. Scaliger's' sake, who much admireth it' (ibid.), while Ashmore approaches it with gusto: '
In Fortunes lap, who then, but I, 

By 'Venus' luld-asleep did lie? 
('Odes', trans. Ashmore, 17: from the third, looser version)' Ashmore displays a variety of metrical forms, choosing short lyric lines for some odes; he also prefaces each ode with a neat verse 'argument'. Ashmore makes a bold stab at the Pyrrha ode (i.5), his translation being certainly more passionate and arguably more successful than Milton's later attempt: in the notoriously difficult final stanza Ashmore's 'doublet wringing wet, and cod-piec't breeches' (ibid., 11) is a more vigorous expression than the 'dropping weeds' favoured by Milton and others. 


@@@@@


doc= 766


Ashpitel, Arthur (1807-1869), architect, was born on 14 December 1807 in the parish of Clapton, Hackney, Middlesex, the elder son of William Hurst Ashpitel (1776-1852), architect, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Peter. He was educated at Dr Burnett's school at Homerton, Hackney, where at the age of twelve he fell and injured his hip, an accident which left him permanently disabled. He trained under his father, and his first commission was the church of St Barnabas at Homerton in 1845. By 1847 he was practising independently at the 5 Crown Court, Old Broad Street, Hackney, and was designing many local churches, schools, and houses. He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy between 1845 and 1864, and also submitted designs jointly with John Whichcord jun. from 1852 to 1854. 
Ashpitel entered into partnership at Carlton Chambers, Regent Street, in 1850, with John Whichcord, whose Maidstone connections led to many joint commissions in Kent, including churches, schools, hospitals, baths, and wash-houses, as well as mansions and villas, in particular, additions, in 1852, to Lord Abergavenny's house, Birling, Kent. Of these joint commissions in Kent, the following were among those listed by his contemporaries: the churches of Blackheath (St John's), Platt, Postling, and Godmersham; schools at Bexley, Milton, and Rainham; the Kent Infirmary, Ophthalmic Hospital, and Chronic Lunatic Asylum, together with the Cranbrook Union Workhouse; the extension of the London Orphan Asylum at Clapton; and the Hutchison markets. Together Ashpitel and Whichcord also published several pamphlets, including 'Town dwellings: an essay on the erection of fireproof houses in flats; a modification of the Scottish and continental systems' (1855), an unsuccessful attempt to promote living in apartments, which, although they had been successfully introduced among the residents of Edinburgh, had yet to become an acceptable mode of dwelling in London. After moving to 2 Poet's Corner, Westminster, Ashpitel again worked independently on many and varied projects, including churches, schools, offices, villas, and model artisans' dwellings. The church he built among the ruins at St Dogmael's Abbey, Cardigan, and the church at Aldborough Hatch, Essex, described by a contemporary as 'a small but graceful and well-finished early First Pointed building' (Knight), were among his more notable buildings. Owing to ill health he left Britain in 1853, and travelled with the watercolour artist David Roberts via Paris and Marseilles to Rome, where they stayed for three months. After a further three months in Naples, Ashpitel returned home, having caught a fever at Airolo, Piedmont, which left permanent effects. He had already exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1850 a plate of 'Selections from Palladio', but his travels led to the exhibition of two further drawings: in 1858, the elaborate 'Restoration of Ancient Rome', and in 1859, 'Rome as it is'. 
Ashpitel became a fellow of the Institute of British Architects in 1841 and was a leading member of the institute's council; he eventually became its vice-president in 1862. He contributed to the sessional papers and architectural dictionary, was a keen supporter of the architectural exhibition, and from 1863 to 1866 served as examiner for the institute's voluntary architectural examination. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1847, and was also a fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, and took an occasional part in the proceedings of each. He also prepared for the annual congresses of the Archaeological Association, discourses on the cathedral, monastery, or church of the locality where the meeting was held. His publications include 'Hand Rails and Staircases: a New and Improved Method of Finding the Lines for Hand-Rails etc.' (1851) and 'A description and key to the view of ancient Rome, now in the Royal Academy, shewing the authorities for the various restorations' (1858). He also edited 'A treatise on architecture, including the arts of construction, building, stone-masonry, arch, carpentry, roof, joinery, and strength of materials' (1867), a collection of treatises reprinted from the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He contributed architectural articles to the 'Arts Quarterly', and to the eighth edition of 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', including the entries on Vanbrugh, Wren, and the Wyatt family. Under his initials he was a frequent contributor on literary subjects to 'Notes and Queries', and his verses and translations from the Greek anthology appeared in 'The Owl'. 'A Tory of the old school' ('DNB'), he also wrote political pamphlets, squibs, and 'vers de societe'. A bachelor, Ashpitel died at 2 Poet's Corner, Westminster, on 18 January 1869, leaving a valuable collection of vases and the contents of his library (about 4000 volumes) to the Society of Antiquaries; the latter were subsequently catalogued as 'The Ashpitel collection'. His drawings of Rome he left to the nation, and these now form part of the Victoria and Albert Museum collection. He was buried on 25 January 1869 in the family vault at St John's Church, Hackney. 


@@@@@


doc= 767


Ashpitel, William Hurst (1776-1852), architect and surveyor, of unknown parentage, was a pupil of Daniel Asher Alexander. He probably worked with Alexander on the great series of warehouses designed for the London Dock Company, submitted to them in 1800, and was involved in their construction. He is also thought to have acted as assistant to John Rennie, engineer of the London Dock Company, working with him on the construction of the Kennet and Avon Canal, built 1794-1810. 
Ashpitel went into partnership with the architect James Savage, who had also been articled to Alexander. With Savage he designed the chapel of St John-at-Jerusalem (later enlarged to become St John's Church) in Well Street, South Hackney, built 1806-10. The partnership seems not to have lasted very long and Ashpitel then practised independently as an architect and also as a surveyor. On 6 November 1807 he married at Christ Church Greyfriars Elizabeth Peter, with whom he had three children: the architect Arthur Ashpitel (1807-1869), William Hurst Ashpitel ('b'. 1811), and Elizabeth Ashpitel ('b'. 1812). Although he undertook some architectural commissions -- notably Chart Park, near Dorking, Surrey, for Sir Charles Talbot (dem. 1819 by Thomas Hope to enlarge his park at Deepdene), Shenley rectory, Hertfordshire, and The Grove, Worth, Sussex -- he gave up practice early in order to devote himself to improvement and development of Hackney, where he owned property. From 1812 he lived in a house in what became Clapton Square and may have been responsible for overseeing the building of the square. He also owned and leased land in the area, including (from 1821) brick-earth fields which he seems to have worked. In 1822 he undertook to design and build (for $2000) Shacklewell vicarage house for Archdeacon Watson, incumbent of St John's Church, south Hackney. He later became involved with Hackney Church of England school, opened 1830, which was partially built on his property in Back Lane (later Clarence Road) and which he almost certainly designed. Ashpitel was elected a member of the Surveyors' Club in 1806. He left his profession rather early in life, and died at his home in Clapton Square, Hackney, on 23 April 1852. 


@@@@@


doc= 768


Ashton, Charles (1665-1752), college head, was born and baptized on 25 May 1665, son of Robert Ashton and Dorothy Wood, at Bradway, in the parish of Norton, Derbyshire. He was admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge, on 18 May 1682 and took the degree of BA in 1686. He was elected fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, on 30 April 1687, and graduated MA in 1689, BD in 1697. After serving for a time as chaplain to Simon Patrick, bishop of Ely and rector of Quy, Cambridgeshire, from 1692 to 1699, he was presented on 10 March 1699 to the rectory of Rattenden, Essex. In June he exchanged this for a chaplainship at Chelsea Hospital. He vacated the post when, on 3 July 1701, he was collated to the fourth prebendal stall in Ely Cathedral, and was elected on the next day to the mastership of Jesus College, both offices becoming vacant on the death of William Saywell. The following year he graduated DD and was elected vice-chancellor of the university, a post he held until 1703. 
Ashton's life was spent in scholarly seclusion, and he seldom left Cambridge, except when his attendance was required at Ely. He contributed an article to Wasse's 'Bibliotheca literaria' (1724) on a passage in Justin Martyr, and another reconciling Cicero's and Hirtius's accounts of Caesar's African war. William Reading's edition of Origen's ''Peri euches'... De oratione' (1728) and 'Historiae ecclesiasticae scriptores' (1746) are said to have been largely Ashton's work. Ashton's edition of Hierocles's commentary on the golden verses of Pythagoras was published under Richard Warren's name and, according to George Dyer, an edition of Tertullian and a dictionary could also be attributed to Ashton. He was responsible for 'restoring and settling to a tittle' a corrupt inscription to Jupiter Ourios for Edmund Chishull's 'Antiquitates Asiaticae' (1728). 
Ashton died, unmarried, on 26 March 1752 and was buried in Jesus College chapel. Apart from his sermons, which he destroyed, he left his papers to Frederick Keller, fellow of Jesus College, who used them to publish an edition of Justin Martyr's 'Apologiae' in 1768. Among the Cole manuscripts in the British Library there are transcripts of some of Ashton's letters to Dean Moss, his additions to John Sherman's 'History of Jesus College', and his large 'Collections relating to the university'. 


@@@@@


doc= 769


Ashton, Edward (d. 1658), conspirator, was of unknown background and origins, though he was a citizen of London, having (on his own account) been 'a gentleman borne' ('Mercurius Politicus', no. 423, 667). He is chiefly remembered for his involvement in a plot against Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell in 1658. It was reported that, like at least two other parties to the plot, Sir William Leighton and Timothy Wright, he had been present at the siege of Colchester in 1648, having 'formerly commanded the Butchers in that town, and had now engaged them for this design' ('Publick Intelligencer', no. 129, 638). This may suggest that he was a butcher by trade. 
Ashton was by no means the controlling mind behind the conspiracy, later claiming to have been drawn into it by others who had dazzled him with the promise of a regiment. But his role was not negligible; he had, according to a resident of the King's Head in St Swithin, attended many of the plotters' meetings there and had been entrusted with money by one of the principals, Robert Manley. Ashton was to command a 'regiment' of foot, with a Major Goodwin as his second in command. It was he who suggested that the insurrectionists should wear, as a means of recognition, white tape tied around their arms. According to one press report 'Colonel Ashton was to make all sure about Cripplegate, Newgate and Aldersgate' ('Publick Intelligencer', no. 129, 584). However, at his trial it was charged only that he had agreed 'to block up the Tower, and for that end his main post was to have been at [All Hallows] Barking church at the upper end of Tower Street' (ibid., 641). On Friday 14 May 1658 the conspirators met for the last time, at the Mermaid tavern in Cheapside, setting the action for 11 p.m. the following night, 'when the chimes should go at Bow and in Cornhill' (ibid., 638). But the government had received regular bulletins about their preparations, and Thurloe's secretary was told immediately that the attempt was imminent. Strong military patrols were sent into the City, and there were many arrests. 
Once captive the conspirators' chances of escaping death were not improved by allegations that they had planned to create civic chaos by firing buildings in the city and throwing open its prisons. On 17 June 1658 it was reported that an order had been issued for the trial of seven leaders, including Ashton, 'for the traitrous design of insurrection contrived' ('Publick Intelligencer', no. 130, 618). On 1 July these men appeared before the commissioners of the high court of justice at Westminster. Ashton pleaded not guilty, but did not deny the substance of the charges against him. Six of the seven defendants were found guilty and sentenced to death; three were eventually reprieved, but Ashton was not among them. On 7 July he was accompanied to the place of his execution by Thomas Warmestry, the sequestered rector of Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire. Between nine and ten in the morning he was 'conveyed in a sled from Newgate, drawn with four horses (Dr Warmestry sitting in the sled with him) to Tower street, over against Mark Lane end' ('Mercurius Politicus', no. 423, 665). At the request of the condemned man, Warmestry prayed for his soul. On the scaffold Ashton bemoaned his 'shameful death'. God had often forgiven him his sins, but now, He 'hath visited me at this time, because I slighted, and did not follow that repentance that I promised' (p. 667). When he had finished speaking, the writer faithfully records: 'the executioner turned him off the ladder; and afterwards being cut down, he ripped up his belly, took out the bowels, and burnt them in a fire readie prepared upon the place. Then his head was cut off, and his body divided into four quarters. (p. 668)' 



@@@@@


doc= 770


Ashton, Henry (1801-1872), architect, was born in Marylebone, London, on 18 April 1801, and was baptized at Marylebone on 3 May 1801, the son of John Ashton (1776-1821) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Canburn. He was articled to Sir Robert Smirke, one of the leaders of the architectural profession, who had 'a large and well-organised office' (Colvin, 'Archs'., 877). Ashton exhibited at the Royal Academy from an early age. Giving the address of 75 Hatton Garden, he sent in 'A Design for a Monumental Building' in 1816, when he was only fifteen, and other designs for villas and a military chapel and mausoleum in the two following years. Then, from 6 Quebeck Street, he offered more designs as well as Italian views between 1820 and 1831, by which time he had entered the office of another successful architect, Sir Jeffry Wyatville. According to Ashton's obituary this took place when Wyatville was 'engaged on important work at Windsor Castle' ('The Builder', 879), which could mean any time from 1824 onwards, when Ashton would have been in his early twenties and have completed his articles with Smirke. 
Presumably Ashton worked on the drawings for Windsor, and as Wyatville evidently had confidence in him, it is quite likely that he was largely responsible for the final design in 1839 for a royal stable and riding-house outside the castle walls. It is a large building, accommodating 100 stables, space for 40 carriages and a riding-house. Although Wyatville took an interest in the design and was the nominal architect, he was ill and shortly before his death he handed over the execution of the building to Ashton. It was completed in 1842. Ashton also provided designs for new kennels for Queen Victoria to the south-east of the castle. These were built in 1840-41 and included a picturesque half-timbered brick cottage for the dog-keeper. Ashton's association with Windsor was also maintained by his taking over the editorship of the elephant folio 'Illustrations of Windsor Castle', a monumental work illustrated by thirty-seven full plates published in 1841, in which Ashton refers to his completion of Wyatville's various works after his death, including those 'for the Duke of Devonshire, the Duke of Buccleugh ['sic'] and several noblemen of the first distinction, both for taste and wealth' (Van der Wijck, 423). In 1838 he had been summoned to The Hague, probably on Wyatville's recommendation, by the prince of Orange (later William II), who was an admirer of the neo-Gothic style. Ashton drew out different versions of the prince's ideas for a country house at Zorgvliet, some of which were close to aspects of Windsor Castle; but nothing came of it. 
Ashton was said to be 'an elegant and artistic draughtsman' whose designs 'show evidence of considerable professional skill and fertility of invention' ('The Builder', 879). He submitted entries in the competitions for the Houses of Parliament, the Nelson monument, the National Gallery and the Great Exhibition, but he was among the many unsuccessful competitors. He still sent designs to the Royal Academy in the 1850s, from addresses in Westminster, where he erected buildings in Victoria Street for the Westminster improvement commission, which were 'amongst the first which offered to the inhabitants of this metropolis the advantages of extensive suites of apartments disposed ''de plain pied'', like the Continental and Scotch flats' (ibid.). These probably included those in Ashley Place, of which he sent a design to the Royal Academy in 1854. 
Ashton was said to have possessed 'the charm of a polished intellect, pungent wit, and a well-stored mind' ('The Builder', 879). On 7 July 1857 he married Julia (1821-1878), daughter of William Elliott, professor of music. He died on 18 March 1872 at 23 Palace Gardens Terrace, London, 'after a long and trying confinement to his room from partial paralysis' (ibid.), and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 771


Ashton, Hugh (d. 1522), Catholic ecclesiastic and university benefactor, apparently never himself had a formal university education, his main expertise lying in administration and estate management. He probably first encountered Lady Margaret Beaufort, countess of Richmond and Derby, in Lancashire, his native county, and rose to prominence through this association. On 7 January 1496 he was admitted to the rectory of Normanton in Derbyshire on the presentation of Thomas Legh of Adlington, and in 1502 he secured the rectory of Barnack in Northamptonshire, which he vacated in 1517. He became Lady Margaret Beaufort's receiver-general in 1502, and controller of her household six years later. In 1504 she gave him the rectory of Lythe in Yorkshire, and in this same decade he acquired the living of Grasmere in Westmorland, which he surrendered in 1509. In July 1522, only months before he died, he obtained the Northamptonshire rectory of Burton Latimer. He also accumulated much preferment without cure of souls, beginning about 1504 with a prebend in the church of Stafford, and including prebends in 1507 in Exeter and Salisbury cathedrals which he surrendered in 1516 and 1517 respectively, soon after receiving from Wolsey in 1515 the golden prebend of Strensall in York Minster, worth $105 a year. In 1509 the crown appointed him to a canonry in St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster, which he retained for the rest of his life. He was also collated in 1511 to the archdeaconry of Winchester, relinquished in 1520, in 1515 to the archdeaconry of Cornwall, kept for only two years, and in 1516 to the archdeaconry of York, which he held until his death. 
Lady Margaret involved Ashton in the complicated negotiations which ultimately resulted in the foundation of her two Cambridge colleges of Christ's and St John's, and it was probably at her instigation that he was granted the degree of bachelor of canon law by the university in 1508. On her death in 1509 he served as one of the executors of her will, and in this capacity supervised the building of St John's College. Ashton committed himself personally to St John's, in his lifetime endowing four fellowships at the college for scholars from Lancashire, Yorkshire, or Durham, and adding exhibitions for four students at his death. Before he died he had set in progress the construction of his monument in his chantry chapel within St John's chapel, where his fellows and scholars were to say mass for his soul and the souls of the Lady Margaret, his parents, and his benefactors. 
During his last years Ashton seems to have spent part of his time in London, and part in York, where he took up his duties as a canon residentiary and was placed on government commissions to investigate imparking of land and to inspect sewers in Yorkshire. The stained glass window bearing an inscription requesting prayers for his soul, which he donated to St Leonard's Hospital in York, probably dates from this period. He died in York on 9 December 1522, and was buried in the minster on 4 January 1523. In his will, made on 7 December and proved on 9 March 1523, he appointed as his executors Brian Higdon, the dean of York, Robert Shirton, a canon of York, his brother William Ashton, and Roger Ellis. He established obits in St Stephen's Chapel and York Minster, as well as at St John's College, to which he left a quarter of his plate. The remainder of his plate went to his sister's son, Thomas Mawdesley, his brother's son, James Ashton, and his brother's daughter, the wife of Anthony Crook. He bequeathed a tenement in Lathom in Lancashire to Thomas Mawdesley and a tenement and lands in Mawdesley, also in Lancashire, to James Ashton, and, in addition to making legacies to his many servants, he asked his brother to distribute his household stuff among his relatives. 


@@@@@


doc= 772


Ashton, Sir John (c.1354-c.1398), soldier and landowner, was the son and heir of Sir John Ashton (died 'c'.1360) of Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, and of Margaret, a daughter of Robert del Leigh of Adlington, Cheshire. His mother's second marriage, to William Radcliffe of Todmorden, Lancashire, took place while Ashton was still a child, and intensified an existing struggle for control of his estates. He had barely reached the age of twelve when his stepfather sought to tighten his grip on the property by arranging for him to marry into his own prolific and influential family. By 'c'.1366 Ashton had married his first wife, Joan, the daughter of William Radcliffe of Smithills, Lancashire, and they eventually had five sons and a daughter, among them Sir John Ashton (d. 1427), soldier and administrator, whose careers Ashton assiduously fostered, although during his early life he showed little interest in county society or the dynastic politics of the local gentry. Instead, following the example of his father, who had fought with distinction overseas, he assumed the profession of arms. 
As a mere youth, in 1369, Ashton served in France with John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and was still under age when, in 1373, he accompanied Sir William Windsor, the governor, to Ireland. Ashton entered his inheritance some two years later, being then old enough to sue his former guardians for revenues optimistically valued at $100 per annum, misappropriated during the fifteen years in which they had managed his affairs. Such unambiguous evidence about his adolescence, together with the fact that he was not knighted until later, renders suspect any identification with the Sir John Assueton 'a very valiant and able man', said by Froissart to have performed various feats of arms at the siege of Noyon in 1370. Yet he was already a seasoned campaigner when Gaunt retained him formally, as a belted knight, at $20 a year in 1377; and he soon returned to France under the ducal banner. 
The support of so powerful a patron must have been invaluable to Ashton in his legal battles, while he, in turn, was able to perform many services for the duke. Gaunt's pursuit of a claim to the throne of Castile required financial backing from an unenthusiastic House of Commons, and in October 1382 Ashton managed to be returned to parliament by the electors of Lancashire so that he could promote the venture. It would, however, be mistaken to regard him as a placeman without a voice or mind of his own. On the contrary, he was eminently qualified, in terms of age, property, and experience, to represent the county of his birth. Nor was he afraid to incur the duke's displeasure. Once the Commons had rejected Gaunt's unpopular proposal in favour of a 'crusade' to be led by Bishop Henry Despenser against the schismatics in Flanders, Ashton actually took the cross and joined the rival expedition himself. Neither this ill-fated exercise (supported by few other Lancastrian retainers), nor an equally unsuccessful invasion of Scotland led by Richard II in 1385 brought any glory to Sir John or the other participants. His defection to the bishop may, moreover, have soured relations between him and his patron, for, when Gaunt left for Spain in 1386, he stayed behind on his Lancashire estates. Given, however, that he continued to associate with other members of the ducal entourage and also to draw his annuity, the breach cannot have been too serious. 
Having already taken a seat on the local bench in 1384 and served occasionally as a royal commissioner, it seems that Ashton now wished to lead the life of a country gentleman, perhaps disillusioned by his recent experiences in the field. He attended two more parliaments, in September 1388 and January 1390, and died shortly before Gaunt, about 1398. His connection with the house of Lancaster was continued by four of his sons, each of whom found favour under Henry IV; and it is worth noting that this attachment was shared by the family of his second wife (whose name is unknown), a daughter of Robert Staveley of Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 773


Ashton, Sir John (d. 1427), soldier and administrator, came of a gentry family which took its name from Ashton under Lyne in Lancashire, and which had estates there, as well as at Manchester, Wardle, and Alt in that county, and at Morley in Yorkshire. The son of another Sir John Ashton (c.1354-c.1398), a servant of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, whose career as a soldier took him at various times to France, Spain, Ireland, Scotland, and the Low Countries, and of his first wife, Joan, the daughter of William Radcliffe of Smithills in Lancashire, he followed his father into Lancastrian service during the 1380s, receiving an annual fee of $20, and being dubbed a knight by Henry IV on the eve of his coronation. The new king's favour brought him such benefits as an additional annuity of $10, a profitable wardship of lands in Lancashire and Lincolnshire, and the farm of the manor of Rothwell, Northamptonshire, at a reduced rent. His evident trustworthiness made Ashton an appropriate person to be several times a commissioner of array, and also to be appointed in May 1402 to take steps against the spread of treasonable rumours. In 1404 he became a JP for Lancashire, and in 1411 and 1413 he was elected to represent the county in parliament. He may have fought against the Welsh and the Scots during Henry IV's reign; he certainly served under Henry V in 1415 on the Agincourt campaign. Elected to parliament again in 1416, in the following year Ashton returned to France, where he was appointed seneschal of Bayeux in 1417 and 'bailli' of the Cotentin in 1418, offices he held until 1421. During those years he was also sent three times on embassy to Brittany. After the death of Henry V he played less part in public life, beyond becoming a JP for Yorkshire as well as Lancashire. Ashton was married twice, first to Jane, daughter of Sir John Saville, with whom he had three sons (among them the alchemist Sir Thomas Ashton (c.1403-c.1460)) and eight daughters, and second to Margaret Gray, with whom he had a son, Sir Ralph Ashton (c.1425-1487x90). Sir John Ashton died on 3 September 1427. 


@@@@@


doc= 774


Ashton, John (c.1653-1691), official in the royal household and Jacobite conspirator, was the son of Andrew Ashton (died 1679), of Liverpool, and his wife, Alice. His father was apparently a parliamentarian army officer, though from the royalist family of Ashton of Penketh, near Warrington, Lancashire -- one brother was killed and another heavily fined on the cavalier side. John Ashton's marriage licence of 15 December 1685 described him as being about thirty-two, and in January 1691 he declared that he had served James II for sixteen years. He should not therefore, be confused with Colonel Edmund Assheton or Ashton of Chaderton, a courtier in James's service since the 1660s. John Ashton had joined the 'family' of Major-General Robert Werden, comptroller of James's household from 1675, and was for years secretary to his son Sir John Werden, James's private secretary from 1673. In 1684 Ashton was clerk to the commissioners of James's household; in 1687, following Werden (who still considered him his own servant) into the queen's household, he was clerk to her council. She respected his diligence, loyalty, and financial honesty, and his determined Anglicanism did not forfeit her or James's favour. 
On 17 December 1685 at St Mary-at-Hill, Lovat Lane, London, Ashton married Mary ('bap'. 1667, died 1693), daughter of Edward Rigby, a leading mercer (later of Covent Garden) from another Lancashire gentry family ruined by civil-war royalism. Their first son, John, baptized on 29 June 1686, and two siblings (one posthumous), died as infants, but a son, James, and a daughter named after her godmother the queen survived. Ashton traded privately and ran lotteries in Scotland. He bought a small Essex estate for $1500 but his home was in London -- possibly, after 1688, at Mr Rigby's. His friends included William Cartwright, bishop of Chester. 
Late in 1688 Ashton lent James's government $12,500, perhaps really the queen's money. He may also have been the 'John Ashton, gent.' who lent William III's government $4000 in 1689. He was sometimes known as Captain or Major Ashton, though no army commission is recorded. After the revolution of 1688, using his partial immunity as a royal servant, he acted for the Jacobite cause. He advanced money towards paying Mary of Modena's debts to tradesmen, and tried to save Lord Melfort's art collection. The queen's debts and Robert Werden's accounts were the cover for Ashton's last mission. In May 1689 he crossed unannounced to St Germain carrying letters for Mary. Back in England that winter he was trusted to disburse Jacobite money: he sent 1100 guineas by the marquess of Atholl to Scotland to finance Sir James Montgomery's plot. In May 1690 he and some Jacobite officers were captured at Dover trying to cross to France, but were soon bailed. 
Ashton that winter planned to exacerbate disillusionment with William III by republishing the king's largely unfulfilled declaration of 1688. He also supported the plan to send Richard Graham, Viscount Preston, to St Germain to resume his post as James's secretary of state, and was praised for his zeal and sincerity in the Jacobite cause by William Penn, the Quaker. The appearance of more witnesses alleging that the prince of Wales was supposititious made Ashton decide to cross to France with Preston, carrying long-assembled proofs of the prince's legitimacy, to gain James's permission to publish them and lay them before parliament. He hired a smack and late on 31 December 1690 Preston, Ashton, and Edmund Elliot, a naval captain dismissed for Jacobitism, sailed down the Thames. 
William's government, however, discovered the plan, and a naval captain who boarded the smack at Tilbury the next day found the three men hiding in the ballast. Ashton picked up and concealed the packet of treasonable letters Preston had left there, evidently hoping to throw it overboard, but was spotted, and the packet was seized. He and the others vainly urged the captain to destroy it or flee with them. 
Swiftly brought before the next Old Bailey sessions for high treason, Preston and Ashton, who insisted on separate trials, were given little time to prepare their defence. Ashton was tried on 19 January 1691 before a clearly biased jury. Lord Chief Justice Holt took care that Ashton's deafness should not hamper his defence, but Holt's colleague Pollexfen showed violent hostility throughout. Ashton's witnesses were nonjuring clerics who testified as to his protestantism. He was found guilty; but the prosecution's failure, apparently from sheer incompetence, to prove his knowledge of the treasonable documents by identifying his handwriting there enabled him to consider himself legally innocent. 
Queen Mary II accepted the verdict and ignored heavy pressure from many sides to pardon or reprieve Ashton. He himself considered that it was his papers on the prince of Wales, seized with him and permanently suppressed, which doomed him. Surviving ministers' letters stress rather that his death might frighten Preston into confessing what he knew of this dangerous conspiracy. The cruder parts of the death sentence were remitted. On 28 January 1691 Ashton was driven to Tyburn by coach. He behaved with fortitude and, after praying with two nonjuring clerics, was hanged. He was buried that night at St Faith's under St Paul's Church. At his trial and in his last paper, he emphasized Elliot's ignorance of the plot, and the latter was soon freed. Ashton's paper, besides criticizing his trial, stressed the duty he felt as an Anglican to serve James, and his certainty of the prince's legitimacy. Published in mid-March it made a great impression, was translated into Dutch and French, and prompted a pamphlet war between government and Jacobite sympathizers. Ashton became known as 'a royal martyr' or 'the loyal martyr' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 3.353; Grascome). Early disparagement by James's extremist Catholic ministers fell silent. 
Late in 1692 Mary Ashton crossed to St Germain with her son, to whom King James gave a baronetcy and pension, but died about February 1693. Macky's allegation in 'A View of the Court of St Germain' that she was refused favour for not being a Catholic and died broken-hearted is contradicted by a report to Archbishop Sancroft that she died unharried by proselytizing, with Anglican divines attending. Her daughter claimed, moreover, that James defied French law and had her buried with Anglican rites. Her son died before September 1698. Ashton's daughter married Richard Venn, a leading London cleric. 


@@@@@


doc= 775


Ashton, Peter (d. 1548), translator, may be the same person as the prebendary of Lincoln (1542-8); if so, he was the son of Peter Ashton, of Old Weston, Huntingdonshire, and studied at Cambridge (his college is not known), where he graduated BA in 1516 and MA in 1519. He was fellow of Christ's College, 1523-8; rector of Tillingham, Essex, 1540-48; and rector of Houghton, Huntingdonshire, 1537-48; 'apparently the same man' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.') was licensed to practise medicine in 1533, and became a fellow of the College of Physicians in 1542, and its censor in 1543. 
Ashton translated into English, in 1546, the popular contemporary work on Turkish history by the Italian Paulus Jovius 
(Paolo Giovio; 'c'.1486-1552)
. Giovio's 'Comentario de le cose de' Turchi' (1532) had already gone through a number of continental editions (German translation, 1538; Spanish, 1547); Ashton worked not from the Italian but from the Latin translation by Franciscus Niger. 'A Shorte Treatise upon the Turkes Chronicles' covers the origins of Turkish power, the lives of all Turkish sultans, and the 'araye and discipline of the Turkish warfare'. The subject is highly relevant, as verses on the title-page remind us: '
Wake up now, Christiens out of your slumbre. 

Of the Turkes to recover your long lost glory, 

Fear not theyr strength, theyr power, ne numbre, 

Sith ryght, and not myght, atchyveth the victory. 

' Further verses overleaf compare the Turks to Hannibal; the dedicatory letter to Sir Rafe Sadler opens with Plato, and mentions many other classical parallels. Ashton chooses 'playn and famylier' English, rather than Chaucer's old-fashioned words, or Latinate 'inkhorn termes'. His style is straightforward, sometimes flat, but generally clear and effective. Marginal notes aid the reader. So Ashton marks 'A digression' (fol. ciii) before Solyman assaults Belgrade: his opponent Leweys, son of Vladislaus, is 'a younge man not all of the wyttyest, ne yet (because he was young) of any experience'. Earlier we read of 'lightning' Bayazet, who 'used such spedines' ('Hyldrin', that is Yildirim, in Turkish; fol. xii), captured and held in a cage by Tamberlayne, as in Marlowe's play. The 'Janizars, most strong and puyssant fotemen' are described in detail, among other troops: we find they 'starche [their] cappes so hard with glewe' (fol. cxxii). Overall, Ashton's translation forms a useful introduction to the manners and ruthless history of the leading Mediterranean power of his age. He died in 1548. 


@@@@@


doc= 776


Ashton, Sir Ralph (c.1425-1487x90), soldier, was the son of Sir John Ashton (d. 1427) of Ashton under Lyne and his second wife, Margaret Gray, and hence half-brother of Sir Thomas Ashton (c.1403-c.1460), the alchemist, who in 1439 arranged Ralph's marriage with Margery, the daughter and heir of John Barton of Middleton. Middleton became his descendants' main home, but Ashton seems to have preferred Fryton, North Riding of Yorkshire, and his political connections were primarily with Yorkshire. He earned the favour of Edward IV by service to Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460), and was rewarded with office in the honour of Pickering. He was knighted in 1464 or 1465, perhaps in the course of northern campaigning. In spite of his earlier Neville links Ashton supported Edward IV in his conflict with the earl of Warwick in 1469-71 and was not named on any of the commissions issued during Henry VI's readeption. On Edward's return Ashton was appointed sheriff of Yorkshire. 
In the 1470s Ashton built links with Richard, duke of Gloucester. It was perhaps Gloucester's influence that kept him in office as receiver of Pickering after his dismissal had been ordered for failure to render account. He fought under the duke in Scotland, and was made a banneret by him in July 1482. After Richard's accession Ashton became a knight of the king's body. In October 1483 he was made vice-constable of England, which gave him a key role in the suppression of Buckingham's rebellion. He was rewarded with forfeited land in Kent, where he had recently acquired interests of his own through his second marriage (described as imminent in July 1483) to Elizabeth, daughter of John Chichele of Wimpole and the widow of John Kyriel of Stockbury, Kent. Ashton was active in Kent throughout Richard's reign, apparently making his home at the Kyriel manor of Westenhanger. Two of his younger sons, Edmund and John, were based there when they assaulted two royal servants in 1484. 
Ashton may have avoided Bosworth; he was not attainted by Henry VII. The year of his death is unknown, although it occurred on 10 April. He was still alive in 1486, but by 1490 his widow, Elizabeth, had remarried; her third husband was John Bourchier, a younger son of Henry, earl of Essex. She died on 2 April 1499. With his first wife, Margery, who was still living in 1480, Ashton had six sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Richard, succeeded him at Middleton and died in 1507. The second, Ralph, was married to the Lever heir, Margaret, whom Ralph senior claimed as his ward. Margaret's uncle Roger contested the claim and in 1467 the case was tried at Lancaster. Ashton won, but Roger and his friends stole the record of the case. In 1469 Ashton arranged that Thomas Pilkington should capture Roger, and agreed that he would bear half the damages if Roger were killed, or would use his influence to intervene with the king if the death were adjudged murder. 
The episode suggests Ralph Ashton to have been a violent and unscrupulous man, and he passed into folklore in the north-west, where stories variously have him being shot dead by a woman he had raped, or carried off by the devil. Nineteenth-century antiquaries recorded the rhyme: '
Sweet Jesu, for thy mercy sake 

And for thy bitter passion 

Save us from the axe of the Tower 

And from Sir Ralph of Ashton. 
(Axton, 27)' 



@@@@@


doc= 777


Ashton, Sir Robert (d. 1384), soldier and administrator, came from Long Ashton in Somerset, and was the son of another Robert Ashton. The younger Robert's date of birth is uncertain, but he was already a knight in 1361. He accompanied Lionel, duke of Clarence to Ireland and was appointed chancellor there on 24 October 1364 -- he had already exercised the office for some time -- and he held the post until 20 February 1367. He is noted as one of the king's bachelors at Christmas 1366, and by January 1368 had also served as captain of Guines. Just before war with France resumed, he was sent to Ponthieu to inspect the fortifications of the surrounding region, a matter on which he was later deemed an expert. Arriving on 22 March 1369 at Le Crotoy, of which he became captain, he was forced to leave in early May when the French overran the county. But by then he had been named admiral to the west, and in this capacity he took part in inconclusive operations in Normandy later in the year. In 1371 he became keeper of Southampton, but in the following summer he was sent back to Ireland as justiciar to investigate complaints about Sir William Windsor's administration, which he did so conscientiously but slowly, until Windsor himself replaced him as justiciar on 20 September. 
Ashton next participated in the earl of March's unsuccessful expedition to restore Duke John IV of Brittany in 1374-5. Complaints were later made specifically about the depredations of Ashton's men in Devon, but he remained high in the trust of the ageing king and his sons. On 26 September 1375 he was appointed treasurer and, although attacked in the Good Parliament, he managed to escape the opprobrium that fell on the other favourites with whom he was closely associated, like William, Lord Latimer, Alice Perrers, and Richard Lyons; he was treasurer until 11 January 1377, when he became king's chamberlain. His success in steering through this turbulent period unscathed may have been partly due to his abilities as an orator and skilled diplomat; these were demonstrated in a hostile speech against the papacy delivered in convocation in January 1377, by his nomination as envoy to the Anglo-French peace talks at Bruges in April, and by Walsingham's account of an alleged tirade against the Londoners on Gaunt's behalf (though the 'Anonimalle Chronicle' attributes this to Gaunt himself). 
Ashton remained active in Richard II's early years, combining his duties as admiral with various captaincies, such as those of Sangatte and Guines in the Calais pale, and defence of the Isle of Wight. Appointed keeper of Porchester Castle on 15 February 1376, he undertook major repairs, and a tower at the north-east angle of the inner ward, incorporating novel artillery features, still bears his name. He remained close to John of Gaunt, owing to the duke his appointment as under-constable of England in 1381, during the earl of Buckingham's absence abroad, as well as the keepership of Ashdown forest. On 1 February 1381 he resigned his custody of Porchester to take up the constableship of Dover and wardenship of the Cinque Ports, for which he received $300 p.a. In this key role he not only continued to play his part as admiral but also helped to suppress the peasants' revolt in Kent, while taking his share in local administration. 
Ashton died on 9 January 1384. His first wife, Elizabeth de l'Orti, previously married to Ralph Middleney (died 1361), held lands in Somerset and Dorset, and their daughter, Eleanor (also known as Alice), married John Berkeley of Over, in Gloucestershire. Ashton's second wife was Philippa Talbot, who after his death married successively Sir Matthew Gournay and Sir John Tiptoft, and died in 1417. As treasurer Ashton enjoyed several lucrative wardships and during his career he accumulated many manors, chiefly in the west country. The heirs to his Dorset and Gloucestershire lands were the descendants of his father's sister, Isabel; those in Somerset went to his second wife or to Sir William Windsor by virtue of deeds previously drawn up with Alice Perrers. Ashton was buried in the church of St Mary de Castro at Dover, where a commemorative brass once existed. 


@@@@@


doc= 778


Ashton, Thomas (supp. fl. 1346), soldier, whom the 'Dictionary of National Biography' identified as a member of the Lancashire Ashtons of Ashton under Lyne, is probably a figment. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' claimed that he captured the Scottish royal standard at the battle of Nevilles Cross (1346), but no contemporary evidence attests his existence. He can be traced no earlier than his appearance in Edward Baines's 'History, Directory and Gazeteer of the County Palatine of Lancaster' (1824). The discrepancy in date alone suggests that he cannot have been identical with the Thomas de Ashton who accompanied John of Gaunt's retinue to Spain in 1386, as W. E. A. Axon claimed in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. In the absence of any other evidence it seems very likely that he never existed. There is certainly nothing to link him to the family of Sir John Ashton (c.1354-c.1398). 


@@@@@


doc= 779


Ashton, Sir Thomas (c.1403-c.1460), alchemist, was the son of Sir John Ashton (d. 1427) of Ashton under Lyne, Lancashire, and his first wife, Jane Saville. His half-brother was Sir Ralph Ashton. Sir John's career in public office and the service of the house of Lancaster culminated in his stewardship of the duchy lands in Lancashire and Cheshire between 1425 and his death in 1428. Although Thomas had been knighted by 1434, he showed no taste for any such career in administration. In 1442 he was granted a formal exemption from appointment to crown offices. Personal preference may therefore help to explain Thomas's enthusiasm for alchemy, but financial exigencies may also have played a part. John Ashton left Thomas his Lancashire estates at Ashton, Wardle, and Manchester, but passed his Yorkshire estates to the infant son of his second marriage. Thomas clearly resented this settlement, as, within eighteen months of his father's death, he had kidnapped this half-brother, also called John, who was then at Ashton. The result was a lawsuit in chancery, the outcome of which is unknown. 
Despite these difficulties Ashton maintained contacts with figures close to the crown, which helps to explain the licence to practise alchemy (which had been prohibited since the reign of Henry IV) granted to himself and Sir Edmund Trafford on 7 April 1446. Sir Thomas married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir John Byron and Margery Booth, a relative of William Booth, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield (died 1464). Ashton's co-grantee, Trafford, who had been knighted for his service to the crown at the battle of Verneuil in 1424 and who married Ashton's daughter Dulcie, was also related to the Booths. In 1446 when the licence to practise without molestation by any of the king's subjects was issued, the Booths, supported by Sir John Byron, were involved in a violent dispute with opponents among the Lancashire clergy. The licence may therefore have been granted at the instance of the Booths. The suggestion of an initiative so close to the crown is all the more plausible since this licence can be interpreted as the first sign of the interest in alchemy on the part of Henry VI's government which in 1456-7 culminated in a systematic inquiry into its potential as a source of revenue. On the other hand, a local tradition, dating back as far as the mid-seventeenth century, claimed that one of the two knights had transmuted part of the base of an iron pot into gold and sent it to the king. 
Whether Ashton or his partner in the licence practised alchemy in person, or whether they engaged servants (who were also covered by the licence), is uncertain. However, Ashton's involvement in alchemy clearly reflects the spread, during the fifteenth century, of alchemical knowledge and manuscripts from the monasteries into secular society. Sir Thomas was almost certainly dead by 1460, when his son and heir, John, was knighted by Henry VI before the battle of Northampton. Following the deposition of Henry VI, John Ashton rapidly made his peace with Edward IV. 


@@@@@


doc= 780


Ashton, Thomas (d. 1578), headmaster, is of unknown origins. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, being elected to a fellowship about 1520, shortly after graduating BA. He proceeded MA in 1521 and BTh in 1531. Little is known of his subsequent career until his appointment as headmaster of Shrewsbury School in 1561, except that he was still a fellow of St John's in 1542, and held a benefice in Lincoln diocese. In April 1561 Bishop Bentham of Lichfield requested Archbishop Parker to license Ashton's non-residence on the grounds that the progress of the school at Shrewsbury would be damaged by his departure, and that Ashton was the only licensed preacher in the district. He was known to be a strong protestant. 
Ashton successfully raised the prestige of the school, which Camden described as the largest in England. Between 1562 and 1569, 875 boys were admitted, with a total of 266 on the roll at the end of 1562, half of whom boarded at houses in the town. Pupils were drawn from the sons of the gentry from surrounding counties, and from as far away as Buckinghamshire. Sir Philip Sidney and Sir Fulke Greville were among those who studied there during Ashton's headmastership. Ashton made notable contributions to the school in the field of drama, and in securing important endowments from the crown. St John's, the headmaster's old college, had a notable dramatic tradition, and this may have influenced the bailiffs of Shrewsbury, who had their own interest in theatrical productions, in his appointment. Under Ashton the highest form of the school was required to perform one act of a play each Thursday, and much effort was put into the annual Whitsuntide production in the open space known as the Quarry. These productions were written by Ashton and took religious themes, and included 'Julian the Apostate' (1566) and 'The Passion of Christ' (1569), the latter of which lasted all the holidays and attracted a large audience of nobles and gentry. 
Between 1568 and 1571 Ashton spent much time away from Shrewsbury, in the course of which he obtained from the crown valuable tithes from the rectory of Chirbury and the dissolved college of St Mary in Shrewsbury. He retired from the school in 1571, and entered into the service of Walter Devereux, subsequently earl of Essex. He did not completely sever his links with the school, and was responsible for drawing up a set of ordinances for its government, which were adopted in 1578 and remained in force until 1798. While the appointment of the headmaster remained with the bailiffs and preference was to be given to former pupils, St John's College, Cambridge, exercised an academic veto over candidates. Ashton's duties in the service of Devereux initially consisted of superintending his employer's affairs in his absence, and acting as tutor to his son Robert. He was also employed by the crown, possibly as one of the network of agents and spies maintained by Burghley; to him he wrote in 1571 warning of the extent of Catholic influence in Shropshire, and recommending Sir Andrew Corbet, a fellow puritan, for the magistracy. He also corresponded with Burghley concerning Thomas Browne, a Shrewsbury draper, who had played a minor role in uncovering the duke of Norfolk's treasonable dealings with Ridolfi and Mary, queen of Scots. In 1573 he was admitted to the Buckinghamshire living of Haversham. 
In 1574 Ashton was sent to Ireland to persuade Essex to make peace with Turlough Luineach O'Neill. He was successful, and was subsequently chosen as mediator in a serious quarrel between Essex and Leicester. In 1575 Ashton was again sent to Ireland by the queen, desiring Essex to give up his Ulster enterprise. When Essex died in 1576 he bequeathed Ashton an annuity of $40 for life and made him a trustee for his son. Following the settlement of the affairs of Essex, Ashton devoted his energies to securing the ordinances for governing Shrewsbury School. In August 1578 he paid a final visit to Shrewsbury for their sealing, following which he returned to Cambridge, where he died on 28 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 781


Ashton, Thomas (bap. 1715, d. 1775), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, son of the Revd Francis Ashton, usher of Lancaster grammar school, was baptized on 22 May 1715 at Bolton-le-Sands, Lancashire. Ashton was educated at Eton College from 1730. Intellectually precocious but socially withdrawn -- he was taciturn as well as physically awkward, being both tall and ungainly -- Ashton formed an intense schoolboy friendship with Horace Walpole, Thomas Gray, and the poet Richard West. The four schoolfellows, who dubbed themselves the 'Quadruple Alliance', are now widely regarded as the prototype of the exaggerated, and somewhat cloying, relationships that later became common in English public schools. 
In August 1734 Ashton entered King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar. For some months, until he was joined at King's by Horace Walpole, his only friend was Gray, then at Peterhouse. The bond between the three of them, already close, became much closer. Arguably Ashton's greatest triumph during his undergraduate years was persuading the deistically inclined Horace Walpole to accompany him to Cambridge gaol, where the two of them prayed with the prisoners. 
Ashton was elected a fellow of King's in 1737. Thereafter progress in his career was effortless -- thanks to Walpole. In the year that Ashton became a fellow of King's, Walpole secured him the tutorship to Lewis Windsor, later fourth earl of Plymouth. Ashton was ordained in 1741. In May of the next year Walpole wrote to Henry Pelham, paymaster-general, asking if there were any crown livings for which Ashton might be considered a suitable candidate. Within three months he had been instituted to the rectory of Aldingham in Lancashire, a living bringing in the substantial sum of $200 a year. Having pulled, with consummate ease, a good plum from the ecclesiastical pie, Ashton had to give up his fellowship at King's. He was, however, quite quickly financially compensated, becoming a fellow of Eton in December 1745. Walpole had, once again, successfully canvassed on his friend's behalf. 
Ashton was now able to take care of himself. In 1749 the provost and fellows of Eton preferred him to the rectory of Sturminster Marshall, Dorset, Ashton adroitly securing appointment to Aldingham for his younger brother, John. Three years later Ashton moved from Dorset to the prestigious London living of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. He took his DD in 1759, and was preacher to the House of Commons in 1761 and preacher of Lincoln's Inn from 1762 to 1764. 
It was just as well that Ashton was no longer reliant upon the patronage of Walpole. In July 1750 he published a controversial pamphlet, entitled 'A Dissertation on 2 Peter 1.19'. The pamphlet, a defence of miracle as proof of the divinity of Christ, was a direct attack upon Walpole's close friend, the deist Conyers Middleton. By way of emphasizing his intellectual independence Ashton used as his motto a quotation from Horace: 'I am not bound over to swear in the words of any master... what is right and seemly is my study and pursuit, and to that I am wholly given'. Walpole was outraged, telling Horace Mann in Florence, 'I have forbid him [Ashton] my house' (Walpole, 20.164-5). 
Ashton was a celebrated preacher. He made his reputation, in the years immediately following his ordination, as preacher of Queen's Street Chapel, near Shepherd's Market, London. A collection of Ashton's preachments, 'Sermons, on Several Occasions', was published in 1770. Conservative in both tone and theological content, this small selection of addresses does scant justice to Ashton's histrionic power. 
On 16 December 1760, aged forty-five, Ashton married Judith, sixth daughter of Claudius Amyand, principal surgeon to George II. The marriage was dogged by illness. In 1763, while preaching in Eton College chapel, Ashton had a heart attack. He never fully recovered, and after years of ill health died on 1 March 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 782


Ashurst, Henry (1616?-1680), merchant, was the third son of Henry Ashurst (died 'c'.1645), gentleman, of Dalton, Lancashire, and Cassandra, daughter of John Bradshaw of Bradshaw, Lancashire. Ashurst's family had proved a bastion of the protestant faith since the late sixteenth century, his grandfather William lauded as 'soundly affected in religion' (Powicke, 309), and his father, Henry, described as 'a gentleman of great wisdom and piety, and zealous for the true reformed religion in a country where papists much abounded' (Baxter, 36). Henry senior evidently inspired his sons to embrace both religion and public service, for his eldest, William, served as MP for Newton in the Long Parliament and for Lancashire in the first protectorate parliament; while the second son, John, was an officer in the parliamentarian army, and became governor of Liverpool. 
Although uncertainty still surrounds Ashurst's birth date, his friend Richard Baxter records that Ashurst was fifteen when he gained an apprenticeship in 1631 under draper Thomas Torbocke of Watling Street, London. The tyranny of his master was later credited as one of the principal reasons for his turn to serious religion, for he went 'to hear good preachers for his comfort', and alleviated the miseries of his dank cellar accommodation by prayer and meditation (ibid., 37). Having survived such hardship, he set himself up in partnership with a draper, helped by the Presbyterian minister Simeon Ash. However, although his partner left to help the parliamentarian war effort, Ashurst remained in the capital, being 'ever against tumults, sedition and rebellion' (ibid., 49). In or before 1643 he married Judith (died 'c'.1690), daughter of William Reresby of London, a match which brought him a dowry of $1500, and produced at least four sons and four daughters. 
Although Ashurst later settled in suburban Clapton, in Hackney, he maintained a lifelong association with the ward of Bread Street, and first entered civic life as one of its common councilmen between 1657 and 1662. However, after the passage of the 'Corporation Act', which debarred dissenters from public office, his Presbyterian beliefs effectively curtailed his rise up the corporate ladder. In response to the 'Act of Uniformity' he tried to co-ordinate provision for poor ejected ministers, and from 1662 donated an annual $100 for those of his native Lancashire. He also organized aid for victims of the great fire of 1666, and he contributed towards the building of a conventicle in Oxenden Street, thereby further establishing his credentials as one of the leading dissenters in Restoration London. He was elected an alderman in July 1668, but probably as part of a familiar design to extract money from nonconformists, since he fined to leave office two days later. Despite such reluctance to serve he was sometimes referred to thereafter as 'Alderman Ashurst' ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 620). He did continue to progress in the Merchant Taylors' Company, however, becoming an assistant in 1667, and serving as master in 1670-71. Ever keen to advance the cause of his co-religionists, he took full advantage of Charles II's declaration of indulgence in 1672, successfully petitioning for a licence to hold Presbyterian services in his Clapton home. 
Ashurst won greatest distinction for his charitable works, renowned as 'the famousest person in the City, who purposely addicted himself to works of mercy' (Sylvester, 3.17-18). Probably his most important achievement was the re-establishment of the New England Company, which he served as treasurer from 1659 to his death, thereby aiding the conversion of the Native Americans. His sons also played a major role in its affairs after his death, and his close contact with its governor Robert Boyle was reflected by his appointment as a trustee of Boyle's lecture. Among the many divines he counted as friends were Henry Newcome, Matthew Henry, and Richard Baxter, the last of whom preached his funeral sermon, in which Ashurst was praised for having set a truly Christian example, and for always displaying 'a humble meekness and sweetness of temper' (Baxter, 37). His philanthropy was also recognized, and among the many beneficiaries of his will were Christ's Hospital, and 100 poor Londoners, none of whom were to be 'begging poor, but such as have been of sober and honest conversation' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/364/159). 
Ashurst died on 16 November 1680, having suffered 'the terrible disease of the stone in the bladder' (Sylvester, 3.189). Shortly before his death he vowed 'to set upon as many Parliament men he could speak with to repeal all the laws which hinder good men from preaching Christ's gospel' (Baxter, 56-7), but, although his influence was regarded with concern by secretary of state Sir Leoline Jenkins as late as August 1680, he never was given the chance to play this more forceful role. He was buried on 1 December at St Augustine, Watling Street; his wife and at least five children outlived him. His will bears testimony to his success in trade, for he left over $6000 in bequests, and annuities totalling over $500 a year. As he would have wished, his sons emulated him as pillars of the nonconformist community in the capital. Henry, the eldest, became a baronet in 1688, and served as MP for Truro and Wilton. He also established the family at Waterstock, Oxfordshire, on lands which his father had bequeathed. William, the second son, gained a knighthood in 1687, and was later elected as lord mayor and member for London. The marriage of his daughter Mary to Thomas Lane, a future knight and lord mayor, gave further proof of his family's standing in the City. 


@@@@@


doc= 783


Ashurst, James (d. 1679), Church of England clergyman, was admitted as a sizar to Queens' College, Cambridge, on 23 August 1623; he graduated BA in 1628 and proceeded MA in 1631. In 1632 he was instituted to the vicarage of Arlesey, Bedfordshire. On 20 November 1660 he was married at Arlesey to Mary, widow of Daniel Baldocke. Ashurst must not be confused with the man of the same name who became dean of divinity at Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1658. Both men lost their positions after the Restoration; in the case of Ashurst of Arlesey, his removal was voluntary. He had been episcopally ordained, but could not comply with the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662, and so resigned his living, continuing, however, to sign the bishop's transcripts of the parish register until 1664. A successor was instituted in 1667, but in 1672 Ashurst regained the cure and held it until his death. 
Ashurst probably owed this to a powerful neighbour, Sir Samuel Browne, justice of common pleas, his 'great friend and patron': 'the whole parish was well affected towards him for his worthy behaviour amongst them, and was entirely under the influence of the judge... and so, though he was legally silenced, he continued in his church a nonconformist. He read part of the morning and evening service, viz, the confession, scripture-hymns, the creed, and some of the collects... His contempt of the world and contentedness on a very small income were very remarkable. He took for his small tithes just what his parishioners were pleased to give him. (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.93)' Ashurst died in 1679 and was 'buried in woolen' at Arlesey on 16 December ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.281). His neighbour, Richard Read, of nearby Henlow, preached the funeral sermon. 


@@@@@


doc= 784


Ashhurst, Sir William Henry (1725-1807), judge, was born on 25 January 1725 at Ashhurst, near Wigan, Lancashire, the third son of Thomas Henry Ashhurst (died 1744), vice-chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster and recorder of Liverpool and Wigan, who held the Lancashire manors of Dalton, Upholland, and Skelmersdale, and his wife Diana (died 1786); she was the daughter of Sir Richard Allin, baronet, of Somerleyton, Suffolk, and his wife, Frances Ashurst, and thereby the granddaughter of Sir Henry Ashurst, first baronet (1645-1711). Henry's father was a younger son of Henry Ashurst of Dalton; William Henry's parents were therefore distant cousins. Diana Allin was heir to Sir Henry Ashurst's estates at Waterstock and Emmington, Oxfordshire, which Ashhurst inherited in 1788; his older brother Henry sold the Lancashire estates in 1751. 
Ashhurst was educated at Charterhouse School, and entered the Inner Temple on 19 January 1750. Until he was called to the bar, on 8 February 1754, he worked as a special pleader 'under the bar' -- an invaluable preparation for a barrister, as it made him known to the attorney. (His student Francis Buller, later an eminent judge, would work for Ashhurst in the same role from 1765 to 1772.) He practised at the bar for the next sixteen years. He was appointed auditor of the duchy of Lancaster and was counsel for the commissioners of excise and many other clients. In the first half of 1770, the year in which he became a judge, he made 11 appearances on the crown side and 121 on the plea side of king's bench, probably more than any other barrister in that court. His income was commensurably great. 
Ashhurst was created serjeant-at-law, knighted, and appointed a puisne justice of king's bench on 25 June 1770. On 21 April 1772 he married Grace ('bap'. 1752, died 1807), daughter of Robert Whalley MD, of Oxford; they had four sons, one of whom -- Henry John ('bap'. 1780) -- died young, and a daughter. He was a commissioner of the great seal, from 9 April 1783 to 23 December 1783 and from 15 June 1792 to 28 January 1793, while the position of lord chancellor was vacant. He kept chambers in Serjeants' Inn, and in the 1780s had his residence in Spring Garden Road. On assize he usually took the western circuit in his early years, sometimes the home, and eventually almost always the Norfolk circuit. The proportion of capital convicts left for execution at those assizes was higher than that for most other judges of the later eighteenth century, although he did request a pardon for two children under fifteen sentenced to death in 1775. He was one of the judges (Sir William Blackstone was another) who supported the employment of convicts at Trinity House in 1776, when transportation to America was interrupted, and he helped William Eden with his prison bill, passed in 1778. His judgments include 'R v. Pasmore' (1789), on remedies against corporate bodies; 'Roe v. Quartley' (1787), on contingent remainders; 'Goodtitle v. Otway' (1797), on the need for certainty and predictability in the law of property; 'Russell v. the Men of Devon' (1788), on public convenience as a principle of law; 'Mead v. Young' (1790), on forgery; 'R v. Wells' (1786); and 'R. v. Judd' (1788), on the reach of the 'Black Act' (9 Geo I c.22). 
Ashhurst did not play a prominent role in state trials. He tried John Binns, acquitted of sedition at Warwick assizes in August 1797, but otherwise assisted at only a few trials in king's bench. He lived in the shadow of William Murray, first earl of Mansfield and lord chief justice (whom he revered), and an early biographer referred to his 'passive indolence and inertness' (Wynne, 8). An anonymous correspondent of John Reeves called him in 1792 'a time-serving pimp' (BL, Add. MS 16923, fol. 4; in Dinwiddy, 204). He typically accounted for fewer than a tenth of reported judgments, in the majority of reported cases giving no opinion whatsoever. He became slightly more active when Mansfield absented himself from the court in his last years. After 1787 he often delivered sentences in state trials and other criminal cases as senior puisne justice in king's bench, although in the opinion of Isaac Espinasse he was greatly helped by Buller, who managed the administrative work usually undertaken by the senior judge. He also shared the views of Mansfield's successor as chief justice, Lloyd Kenyon, first Baron Kenyon, on the criminality of forestalling, regrating, and engrossing (to Edmund Burke's horror); on the growing evils of combinations; and on the dangers of irreligion and immorality. 
Ashhurst's charges to Middlesex grand juries were frequently reported in the press, perhaps because they were somewhat idiosyncratic; they may also have reflected the low-church tradition in his own family. He inveighed against crimes against religion and morality, duelling, and conspiracies to raise wages, as well as the more common misdemeanours. He complained that the judges were delayed in getting to Westminster Hall by the coachmakers of Long Acre, who plied their trade in public space. He devoted all of one charge to the crime of gambling, alleging that it ruined more families than drink. His most famous charge was given on 19 November 1792, when he excoriated what he termed the absurd and pernicious critics of the British constitution: seditious reformers 'with dark and gloomy hearts' who wished to inflict on Britain the miseries of republican France ('The Times', 20 Nov 1792). The charge was reprinted and widely distributed by the Constitutional Association. This defence of 'virtual representation' in parliament -- of the common law and of monarchy -- was attacked in an undistinguished contemporary pamphlet by one Hughes ('Justice to a Judge') and in a very distinguished critique of the common law. The latter, Jeremy Bentham's 'Truth versus Ashhurst', was not published, on Samuel Romilly's advice, until many years later. In his 'Rationale of Judicial Evidence' Bentham also quoted Ashhurst (among others) in convicting the judiciary of complacent acceptance of the irrational rules of evidence in the common law. Isaac Espinasse found Ashhurst without the 'bearing to command respect... His manner was confused and embarrassed, and he seemed to shrink from the eye of every one who approached him' (Espinasse, 223). However, despite his apparent 'apathy and inattention' and the monotony of his hurried delivery, his judgments 'were always correct, and, from his apparent inattention to the arguments, surprised by their accuracy. He stated the points of the case with brevity and precision, and they displayed no want of learning or discrimination' (ibid., 224). 
Ashhurst retired from king's bench on 3 June 1799, and died on 5 November 1807 at his estate at Waterstock. He was buried on 12 November in Waterstock, where a memorial tablet was set up in the church. His eldest son, William Henry Ashhurst (1778-1846), who inherited the bulk of the estate, was high sheriff of Oxfordshire from 1810 to 1811, and member of parliament for the county from 1815 to 1830. The younger surviving sons, James Henry ('bap'. 1782) and Thomas Henry ('bap'. 1784), received bequests of $3000 each from their father's will. The daughter, Grace ('bap'. 1774), who had married George Dorrien in 1796, did not receive a bequest but was named heir to the estate should her brothers die without natural heirs. James Henry, captain of the 11th regiment of native infantry and deputy paymaster to the Nagpoor subsidiary force, died at Husingabad, India, aged thirty-six, in 1817. The Waterstock estate remained in the family into the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 785


Ashurst, William Henry (bap. 1791?, d. 1855), lawyer and radical, was born in London, and was probably the William Henry Ashurst baptized on 20 March 1791 at St Luke's, Old Street, the son of Brusel Ashurst and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Hook ('IGI'; 'DNB' gives his birth date as 11 Feb 1792, apparently in error). 'Consciously educated to the energy and self-dependence which distinguished him throughout his life by the spectacle of the aimless, thriftless existence led by his father' (Venturi, 81), who, it is implied by the 'Dictionary of National Biography', believed himself to be the son of the judge William Henry Ashurst (1725-1807), Ashurst became a committed and energetic proponent of a multitude of advanced radical causes. After a formal education 'no better... than could be obtained at a dame school' (ibid.), he was apprenticed under a solicitor. He gained his articles at a young age, supplementing his income by journalism and copy work engrossing legal documents. It is recorded that he married at the age of nineteen: this was almost certainly to Elizabeth Ann Brown (died 1854), on 30 October 1810, at St Mary Magdalene, Bermondsey ('IGI'). 
Ashurst's earliest radical legal work centred on his opposition to payment of the church rates. He published pamphlets in 1835, 1837, and 1839 during anti-church rate activism in Bungay, Southwark, and Chelmsford respectively, while his orchestration of the famous and protracted Braintree case (1837-53) eventually resulted in the abolition of mandatory church rates. 
Although in early life Ashurst had belonged to a freethinking Christian sect, he became attracted to the moral principles of Owenism and forged a close alliance with the leaders of freethought, serving Robert Owen as both patron and legal adviser. Ashurst financed a succession of freethought journals (principally 'The Reasoner', for which he wrote as Edward Search, and the 'Spirit of the Age') and organizations (the Anti-Persecution Union and the Theological Utilitarians) centred on George Jacob Holyoake: a man to whom Ashurst had offered legal assistance in his 1842 blasphemy trial, in his purchase of the Paternoster Row and Fleet Street House publishing enterprises in the 1850s, and in his campaign against the stamp tax. Indeed Ashurst is credited with suggesting the term 'secularist' to Holyoake to describe the non-religious moral and ethical system around which both men based their radicalism. Ashurst also financed the radical weekly 'Leader' newspaper (founded in 1850), edited by Thornton Leigh Hunt. 
Deeply influenced by the writings of Paine and Franklin and the example of the American constitution, Ashurst associated himself with various campaigns against tyranny, oppression, and inequality. Meeting William Lloyd Garrison at the World Anti-slavery Convention in London in 1840 Ashurst made this occasion the forum for his own parallel crusade for the emancipation of women. On these twin platforms of sexual and social emancipation Ashurst contributed frequently to Garrison's 'Liberator' under the pseudonym Edward Search. Ashurst was a vigorous proponent of reform, regarding the undemocratic Lords and ineffectual Commons alike as 'a drag on the onward progress of the Nation' (Venturi, 85), and in 1832 he displayed a poster on his house front with the slogan 'This House pays no taxes until the 'Reform Bill' becomes law'. In 1837 he published 'The Advance of Democracy', a crystallization of his democratic and republican political philosophy. 
Ashurst was an active municipal politician, serving as a common councilman, elected chair of the committee of City lands, and serving for one year as under-sheriff of London; his 'Corporation Register' (1832) was a manifesto for reform of City government in the light of these experiences. His official attendance at a public execution also engendered his lifelong opposition to capital punishment. 
Ashurst's reforming zeal animated his vigorous campaign for the penny post. In 1837, working as unpaid solicitor, Ashurst formed the Mercantile Committee of leading bankers and industrialists to press the case, presenting a mass of statistical evidence before parliament (later published as an exhaustive summary, 'Facts and Reasons in Support of Mr Rowland Hill's Plan', 1838): a crucial factor in the victory secured in 1840. Ashurst's legal help and tireless activism in the Association for the Repeal of the Taxes on Knowledge was also central in the successful conclusion of the long radical campaign against the stamp tax. 
Ashurst met Mazzini in 1844 at the height of the letter opening affair and, out of the axis of sympathy among metropolitan radicals for the cause of European democracy, the People's International League was born in 1846. Ashurst was a founder member and trustee, and the league's principal recruiter. Following the fall of Mazzini's Roman Republic, Ashurst founded the Society of the Friends of Italy in 1851, which raised $13,000 for the cause of Italian unification and republicanism in five years (Ashurst himself contributed $740). 
Ashurst's energetic and diverse radical activity ensured that his Muswell Hill home was for twenty years the epicentre of metropolitan radicalism. Known as the 'Muswell Hill brigade', the attendees at the regular Sunday evening gatherings included the leaders of the campaigns for freethought, emancipation, and European democracy. 
Ashurst once remarked that 'agitation is for the people that troubling of the water which produces health and vigour' (Venturi, 89). The multitude of his activities: feminism, anti-slavery, European (especially Italian) nationalism and republicanism, secularism, and administrative reform paint a picture of a uniquely energetic and vigorous man. It was while visiting Garrison and the other abolitionists in America in 1853 that Ashurst's health finally broke down. The death of his wife soon after his return shattered it completely, and Ashurst died at Park House, Wandsworth, Surrey, on 13 October 1855. He was survived by his son, William Henry Ashurst (1819-1879), who was also a solicitor (and later, from 1862 to 1879, solicitor to the Post Office), and his daughters Elizabeth ['see 'Ashurst, Elizabeth Ann], Caroline ['see 'Stansfeld, Caroline], Matilda ['see 'Biggs, Matilda], and Emilie ['see 'Venturi, Emilie], all of whom were active in the causes espoused by their father. 


@@@@@


doc= 786


Ashwardby, John (fl. c.1380-c.1400), theological controversialist, was admitted vicar of St Mary's, Oxford, on 26 November 1384, and had left it by July 1395; he was chancellor's commissary by 27 November 1391, by when he was doctor of theology; since the living of St Mary's was appropriated to Oriel, he may have been associated with that college, though there is no surviving evidence that he was a fellow. Details of his views, which were hostile to the mendicant friars, emerge from two surviving texts (a determination and a sermon) by his opponent, the Carmelite Richard Maidstone; although John Bale gives the incipit to one of Ashwardby's works, 'Contra fraterculum mendicitatem', neither this, nor any of the other eight works Bale attributes to Ashwardby, is known to survive. From Maidstone's evidence it would seem that the argument between them continued over some time, and through various exchanges both in the university in Latin and, on Ashwardby's side, also in English sermons at St Mary's. Though a chronology of some of the contributions emerges, the year of the debate cannot be precisely fixed: from the chronology of Maidstone's life a date after 1390 seems most likely. Ashwardby's views on the friars, in so far as they can be reconstructed from his opponent's statements, had declaredly echoed those of Richard Fitzralph (died 1360), but to an Oxford congregation at this date would inevitably have recalled John Wyclif's (whom Maidstone does not mention); his methods, in taking the argument to those outside the university world of Latin, recall those of Wyclif's academic followers in 1381-2. Nothing is known of Ashwardby's later life. Bale's list of works could have been derived (with the exception of the single incipit) from the two works of Maidstone that Bale owned. 


@@@@@


doc= 787


Ashwell, Arthur Rawson (1824-1879), Church of England clergyman and college head, was born at Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, on 9 December 1824, the son of James Ashwell, civil engineer and resident director of the Luxembourg Railway, and his wife, Susan, 'nee' Rawson. In 1843 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, and in 1846 was elected foundation scholar of Gonville and Caius College, graduating as fifteenth wrangler in 1847. In 1848 he was ordained deacon and became curate of Speldhurst, Kent. In the following year he was ordained priest and returned to Cambridge as curate of St Mary-the-Less, in order to study theology with Professor J. J. Blunt. In 1851 he was appointed vice-principal of St Mark's College, Chelsea, and in 1853, partly through the instrumentality of Canon W. J. Butler of Wantage, he was appointed by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce principal of the newly founded Oxford Diocesan Training College at Culham. Here he remained for several years, and, besides his work in the college, assisted the bishop in organizing a system of diocesan inspection. In 1854 he married Elizabeth Fixsen, of Blackheath, who survived him. In 1862 his health compelled him to retire to lighter work, and for two years he was minister of Holy Trinity Church, Conduit Street, Hanover Square, London; in 1865 he returned to his former occupation, accepting the principalship of the Diocesan Training College, Durham. His success there led to his appointment in 1870 to the principalship of the Theological College, Chichester, with a canonry of Chichester Cathedral attached, and he also held for a short time the rectory of St Martin's (1871-5) and of St Andrew's (1872-5) in that city. 
Ashwell wrote widely. From 1864 to 1876 he edited the 'Literary Churchman', and in 1876 he became first editor of the 'Church Quarterly Review' (a high-church review); shortly before his death he also resumed the editorship of the 'Literary Churchman'. To both these periodicals he was a regular contributor. He was also a contributor to the third series of 'Tracts for the Christian Seasons', and he wrote occasionally for the 'Quarterly Review' and the 'Monthly Packet'. He was also in great demand as a preacher in his own cathedral and elsewhere. He was, moreover, a frequent reader and speaker at church congresses, and an effective conductor of mission services. Overwork led to illness and Ashwell succumbed to an attack of congestion of the lungs, which led to his death at Canon Lane, Chichester on 23 October 1879. A window and a lectern in Chichester Cathedral perpetuate his memory. 
Ashwell was a high-churchman, though he was sometimes described as a Tractarian. His articles on F. W. Farrar's 'Life of Christ' in the second number of the 'Church Quarterly Review', and on the state of the church in the 'Quarterly Review' (July 1874), excited much interest. His article on Samuel Wilberforce in the April number of the 'Quarterly Review' (1874) was the main cause of his being asked to write the bishop's life, and several of his educational articles attracted unusual attention. His longest work was the first volume of the 'Life of Bishop Wilberforce' (1880), the best volume in that notable work. 
As a trainer, first of future schoolmasters and then of future clergymen, Ashwell made his influence deeply felt. His clear, epigrammatic style was ideal for capturing the attention of young men. He was a very strict disciplinarian, and the kindest of friends and counsellors to all pupils who sought his aid in confidence. He was a noted preacher, especially to congregations who enjoyed theological disquisition. Some of his sermons were printed in 'God in his Work and Nature' (1863). Among his other publications were 'The Schoolmaster's Studies' (1860), 'The Argument Against Evening Communions' (1875), 'Lectures on the Holy Catholic Church' (1876), and 'Septuagesima Lectures' (1877). 


@@@@@


doc= 788


Ashwell, George (1612-1694), Church of England clergyman, was born on 8 November 1612 in the parish of St Martin Ludgate, London, where he was baptized a week later, the son of Robert Ashwell of Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex. He was admitted a scholar of Wadham College, Oxford, on 2 July 1629, aged sixteen, matriculating on 30 October of the same year and graduating BA on 4 December 1632. He proceeded MA on 27 June 1635 and three days later was elected probationary fellow of the college; this election was confirmed the following year, and he became a full fellow of Wadham on 1 July 1636. He served as college librarian in 1636 and as sub-warden in 1644 and 1647. He earned a reputation, according to Anthony Wood, as 'a noted tutor' and 'a quiet and pious man... well read in the fathers and schoolmen' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.396). 
During the civil war Ashwell preached before the royal court assembled at Oxford. He proceeded BD just before the surrender of the city to the parliamentarian forces in the summer of 1646. Ashwell was a convinced royalist, who owned a manuscript copy of Sir Robert Filmer's 'Patriarcha', and at whose suggestion Peter Heylin wrote 'Parliament's Power in Laws for Religion'. Ashwell's fate after the fall of Oxford is uncertain. According to Anthony Wood he submitted to the parliamentary visitors in 1648. However, according to their records he had not done so by May. Whether he was formally ejected or not, by about 1650 Henry Hammond, a leading figure in the beleaguered Anglicanism of the interregnum, was trying to place Ashwell as chaplain to the royalist Lord Leigh of Stoneleigh. When Hammond was silenced in his ministry at Westwood, Worcestershire, at the end of 1655, Ashwell served as his curate and, Hammond noted, 'preacheth much better then this auditory hath for a long time heard any' by reading the sermons of Robert Sanderson ('Walker rev.', 34). In August 1657 Ashwell was living at Thame Park, the home of Thomas Wenman, second Viscount Wenman, a protector of sequestered Anglican clergymen, when he wrote a letter to Richard Baxter. In the course of the letter, a mild protest against Baxter's criticism in print of his 'Fides apostolica' (1653), Ashwell expressed his respect for Baxter's broad-based Worcestershire Voluntary Association of Ministers. This he regarded 'as a Thing well meant, & as a good tollerable expedient for the present, to recollect the scattered limbs of a broken Church, and fortify the Ministry against its common Enemies' a means of 'closing up the Breaches which Schisme had made' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.262). 
In 1658 Ashwell was admitted to the rectory of Hanwell, Oxfordshire, by the triers, a living he held beyond the Restoration and until his death. There he displayed the same self-effacing piety he had shown at Oxford, writing to Bishop Fell about his parishioners that 'I conceive that I have done more good among them by my Discourses and Admonitions in private, than by my preaching in public' (Clapinson, 19). He was notably gentle in his attempts to deal with the nonconformists in his parish, declaring in his will that he had 'an unfeigned pity towards the persons of the seduced' (ibid., 136). 
Ashwell's writings sustain the impression of a quiet, unassuming, fair-minded man. They are almost completely lacking in the sharp polemical edge found in the works of many of his contemporaries. 'Fides apostolica', based on lectures given at Wadham, was a defence of the direct apostolic authorship of the so-called apostles' creed. Ashwell was gracious to more critical writers who opposed such an archaic view. In this work Ashwell, foreshadowing future concerns, referred to Socinianism (a radical anti-trinitarian theology of continental origin) as 'a compendium of heresies'. 'Gestus eucharisticus' (1663), a discussion of the posture to be adopted in receiving holy communion, was similarly even-handed. Ashwell argued for the propriety of kneeling to receive the eucharistic species but with characteristic fairness conceded that this was by no means a universal or constant practice of the Church. 

'De Socino et Socinianismo dissertatio' (1680) was part of a much larger work, 'De judice controversiarum et catholicae veritatis regula', never published in its entirety (according to Ashwell for reasons of cost and uncertainty of popular appeal). Ashwell described Socinianism as a hydra, and noted that Socinian books were being eagerly read by scholars. While acknowledging the goodness of the eponymous Sozzini (Socinus), a concession which few if any of his more polemical comrades were prepared to make, he was clearly alarmed by the effects of Socinian teaching. Far from perfecting the Reformation, a common Socinian defence, Ashwell feared they risked dragging up the wheat along with the tares. 
His translation, 'The History of Hai Eb'n Yockdan' appeared in 1686. Among other aims, Ashwell hoped that the work of this 'self-taught philosopher' would be a corrective to the burgeoning rationalism of his contemporaries, by showing how, properly exercised, 'humane Reason, improved by diligent Observation and Experience, may arrive to the knowledge of natural things, and from thence to the discovery of Supernaturals; more especially of God, and the Concernments of the other World' (title-page). This same concern surfaced in his last work, the only section published of the larger 'De judice', published as 'De ecclesiae Romana dissertatio' (1688), which attempted to discern the rule of right reason in matters of religion. Ashwell died in his rectory at Hanwell on 8 February 1694, and was buried in the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 789


Ashwell, John (d. 1541?), prior of Newnham, was educated at Oxford University, where he received the degree of DCnL in 1515. He was incorporated at Cambridge soon afterwards. Little else is known of his early career. He became rector of Mistley, Essex, in 1504; the living was vacant by August 1516, the same month in which Ashwell was admitted as vicar of Littlebury, Essex. He was also vicar of Halstead in the same county. In 1515, during Henry VIII's first French campaign, Ashwell served as chaplain to the troops of Lord Bergavenny. In 1521 Ashwell obtained a prebendal stall in St Paul's Cathedral. 
In 1527 Ashwell became the prior of Newnham Priory, Bedfordshire, the same year that he wrote a letter to John Longland, bishop of Lincoln, which ultimately placed Ashwell at the centre of a small debate between traditionalists and reformers in the English church. The letter, written partly in English and partly in Latin, complained about the heretical opinions of George Joye. Joye, a fellow at Peterhouse, was a close associate of Ashwell and also a member of the Cambridge White Horse circle, from which many early protestant leaders emerged. A copy of this letter fell into Joye's hand and he fled into exile, living the next several years in Strasbourg. In the 1530s Joye published English translations of several 'Old Testament' tracts, but soon after his departure from England he published Ashwell's letter with a point by point refutation of all charges of heresy. The book, entitled 'The letter whyche Johan Ashwell, priour of Newnham Abbey besydes Bedforde, sente secretly to the byshope of Lyncolne in the yeare of Our Lorde MDXXVII', was published at Antwerp in 1531 and again in 1548. Joye protested against the use of force by the church, asking when would God's true church persecute anyone? Joye also encouraged 'This lytell boke be delyvered to Johan Ashwell at Newnham Abbey besyde Bedforde with spede', a point rendered more powerful in that Ashwell's original letter stated the author's desire to keep his denunciation a secret between him and the bishop. The multiple publications of Joye's refutation suggest that as English culture increasingly equated Roman Catholicism with subterfuge and deception, the main point of Joye's answer transformed from a protest of ecclesiastical coercion into proof of Roman Catholic deceit. 
Ashwell apparently conformed to all the legislation of the Henrician Reformation, submitting to the royal supremacy, but he was not the prior of Newnham upon its dissolution in 1539. The date of his death is uncertain, but his prebendal stall in St Paul's Cathedral was listed as open on 23 August 1541. 


@@@@@


doc= 790


Ashwood, Bartholomew (1622-1678), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in 1622 and baptized on 23 June of that year at Bickleigh, near Tiverton, Devon, the son of Bartholomew Ashwood (died 1650x60), originally from Warwickshire, who for forty years was rector of Bickleigh. He matriculated from St Alban Hall, Oxford, on 22 March 1639 but soon transferred to Exeter College, where, according to Anthony Wood, he was put under a puritan tutor and took his BA on 23 December 1642. Threatened with sequestration in 1650, his father resigned his living to Ashwood. In October 1656, on the presentation of the godly Sir John Drake, Ashwood moved to the vicarage of Axminster, Devon. He had married in or before the following year when his son John Ashwood (1657-1706) was born. In 1660, Ashwood, now an Independent, gathered a congregation at Axminster. With twelve brethren he signed a covenant, promising 'to keep at a distance from the corruptions of the times, both as to worship and conversation: that they would be... a people dwelling alone' (Howard, 15). Ejected from his vicarage at the Restoration, he continued to minister to his congregation. For this he was arrested in August 1662 and, on his refusal to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, imprisoned at Exeter. The authorities kept a watchful eye on Ashwood's activities. Bishop Seth Ward reported him still preaching at Axminster in 1665. In April 1672 Ashwood obtained a licence as an Independent preacher in his house at Axminster, and at Chard, Somerset. 
Thomas Reynolds's popular 'Account' of John Ashwood (1707) celebrated Bartholomew Ashwood as a godly minister and exemplary parent, whose preaching helped to effect the conversion of his despairing son. Reynolds also related how both Bartholomew and his father, while worrying about their children, were comforted 'by an audible voice', which 'strangely impressed upon [them]' (Reynolds, 54-5) those words (from 'Genesis' 17: 7), 'I will be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee'. While Reynolds denied that this smacked of enthusiasm, Samuel Palmer, the late eighteenth-century biographer of nonconformists, was less certain. 
All three of Bartholomew Ashwood's publications were posthumous. His 'Heavenly Trade' (1679, 1688), dedicated to the Bristol merchant Jeremy Holwey, sought to 'revive dying godliness' by urging that 'Religion hath its work as well as the world; every trade hath its employment, and so has godliness... faith without works... will signifie nothing towards salvation' (title-page, p. 192). Such a lively faith promised more immediate rewards: [It] 'will make you thrive in your own work, if you are faithful and diligent in God's work, he will care for yours... Twas piety made Joseph so prosperous' (pp. 207-8). 'The Best Treasure' (1681) included a preface by John Owen which applauded the author for upholding the mystery of free grace against those who exalted human wisdom. Returning to 'Genesis' 17: 7, Ashwood insisted that the best inheritance the godly could leave their children was an interest in the covenant. Yet parents must not 'daub and flatter [their children] with false promises', but convince them of their 'undone condition without Christ' (p. 435). Though he directed the treatise particularly to godly families, Ashwood did not ignore those outside the covenant, but issued a fervent call for lay evangelization: 'Do all you can to further the match between the Lord Jesus and sinners: Be advising your neighbours to forsake their evil ways... and stirring up your Christless friends... you should... commend [Christ] to all the world' (p. 433). His 'Groans for Sion' (1681), advertised by the bookseller, William Marshal, is no longer extant. Ashwood died while visiting members of his flock in Chard on 27 October 1678, and was buried on 6 November at Axminster. Robert Bartlet, the ejected rector of Over Compton, Dorset, also an Independent, preached (but did not print) his funeral sermon. Ashwood was survived by his widow, Elizabeth (died 1710), who was possibly not his first wife, and his son John, who served as his executor. At the time of his death, he possessed goods valued at $41, though little remained after his debts had been paid. 


@@@@@


doc= 791


Ashwood, John (1657-1706), Independent minister, the only son of Bartholomew Ashwood (1622-1678), was born in Axminster, Devon, where his father was vicar. His mother may have been Elizabeth (died 1710), the wife who outlived Bartholomew. After a 'remarkable' conversion at the age of fourteen, he was admitted to his father's Independent church at Axminster (Reynolds, 'Account', 60). He proceeded to Newington Green, near London, where he studied under Theophilus Gale. Before 1678 he returned to teach at a school and preach with his father at Axminster and at nearby Chard, Somerset. He preached publicly even in the 'darkest times' and though the magistrates attempted to silence him, they could never convict him (ibid., 104). The persecution intensified, however, and Ashwood and some friends determined to emigrate to Carolina in January 1684, but an attack of smallpox prevented him from leaving. Like many Axminster dissenters he joined the Monmouth rebels in 1685, for which he was arrested and sentenced to death, though ultimately pardoned. He then preached at various places in southern Somerset, including Ilminster, Weston in the parish of Combe St Nicholas, and Buckland. Not until 1689, when the Independent church at Castle Lane, Exeter, invited him to settle as pastor, was he ordained. He remained for almost a decade, during which time he attempted to co-operate with the presbyterian-dominated Exeter Assembly, though relations soon deteriorated. The insistence of Ashwood and his fellow congregationalist Stephen Towgood on ordaining men without the consent of the assembly offended their brethren and threatened to re-open fundamental denominational differences which still existed over church government. Ashwood suffered perpetual financial difficulties which grants from the London Common Fund and the Congregational Fund could not relieve. Struggling to support his wife and seven young daughters, he moved to London by 1698. Nothing more is known of his family, save that his wife died shortly after their arrival in London. He preached at Hoxton and Spitalfields before accepting a call from a congregation at Peckham, Surrey, about 1700. 
Ashwood is chiefly known for the posthumous account of his life written by Thomas Reynolds, which long remained a favourite among nonconformist readers. Reynolds, the Independent minister at the Weigh House, Little East Cheap, endeavoured to show that, despite his obscurity, Ashwood's life was marked by a quiet yet heroic piety. Ashwood diligently served his flock, worshipped God in his closet and family, and recorded God's dealings with him in a diary. Naturally melancholy, he became increasingly discouraged that his preaching made no discernible impact on his people, and concluded his ministry a failure. Appended to the 'Account' (1707) are two sermons addressed to 'fatherless children', preached to his old hearers at Axminster a few months before he died. After a final sermon delivered to his former congregation in Exeter, he returned to Peckham, died on 22 September 1706, and was buried at Camberwell, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 792


Ashworth, Caleb (d. 1775), dissenting minister and tutor, was born at Clough Fold, near Rawtenstall, Rossendale, Lancashire, one of three sons of Richard Ashworth (1667-1751), a Particular Baptist lay preacher. His date of birth is uncertain: in his funeral address in 1775 Samuel Palmer states that Ashworth was 'but fifty-three years of age' at his death, and the inscription on his tombstone in Daventry churchyard, recorded in George Baker's 'History of the County of Northampton', gives his age as fifty-four, but on the next page Baker gives the year of birth as 1709 (Baker, 1.332-3). His brothers both entered the Baptist ministry: Thomas became a Particular Baptist minister at Heckmondwike, and John, a General Baptist minister, was a colleague of Dr James Foster, who preached his funeral sermon in 1742. Caleb, however, who was probably not in sympathy with his father's religious views, first became a carpenter, but later, in 1739, entered Dr Doddridge's academy at Northampton, where he was educated for the Independent ministry under Dr Philip Doddridge, the celebrated dissenting divine. In 1746 he was appointed assistant to James Floyd, the minister at Daventry, and later that year he became co-pastor of the congregation. A few years later Floyd retired, leaving him in sole charge. 
Doddridge intended Ashworth to succeed him in Northampton, both as minister and principal of the academy, and nominated him as such in his will. When Doddridge died in 1751 Ashworth felt that he could not leave his Daventry congregation after so short a time, and so declined the transfer. He did, however, take on the academy, which he moved to new premises in Sheaf Street, Daventry, in 1752, where it remained until 1789. 
The academy at Daventry was one of a number set up in the early eighteenth century by nonconformists who were barred from taking degrees at the English universities. Under Ashworth, Daventry Academy became a leading centre of learning for liberal Independents and Presbyterians. A list of his students, who included Joseph Priestley, may be found in the 'Monthly Repository' (1822). In his autobiography Priestley says that Ashworth took 'the orthodox side of every question' in theology and philosophy; the sub-tutor, Samuel Clark, 'that of heresy' ('Life and Correspondence', 1.23). The Doddridge principle of referring to authors on all sides of every question, and of requiring the students to give an account of them, was faithfully followed by his successors, resulting in much independence of judgement. Another pupil, the Revd T. Thomas, said: 'Under Dr. Doddridge there was a more popular exterior; under Dr. Ashworth a more disciplined interior' ('Monthly Repository', 1st ser., 9, 1814, 79). A defect of the academy was the neglect of languages, biblical criticism, and ecclesiastical history; its staple was dogmatics and philosophy, including psychology (then called pneumatology), ethics, and physics. For his academy, Ashworth published a Hebrew grammar and a treatise on plane trigonometry; for his congregation, a book, 'Tunes'. He also published funeral sermons for Isaac Watts (1749), James Floyd (1759), and Samuel Clark, his colleague (1770). 
Ashworth was married to a Miss Hemings, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. Their son John entered the academy in 1760, but later became a grazier. On 13 November 1767 Ashworth was awarded the unsolicited honorary degree of DD by Marischal College, Aberdeen. After twenty-nine years of distinguished service to the ministry and academy in Daventry, Caleb Ashworth died in Sheaf Street, on 18 July 1775, of 'a dropsy in the chest' (congestive heart failure) after, apparently, a long illness, for Job Orton, another dissenting minister, friend, and associate, wrote at the time: 'The death of Dr. Ashworth, though it has been long expected, has been a very painful event to me!' He is buried in an altar tomb in Daventry churchyard with other members of his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 793


Ashworth, Sir Charles (d. 1832), army officer, was appointed ensign in the 68th foot in 1798, and promoted lieutenant in 1799. He became a captain in the 55th foot in 1801. He was promoted major in the 6th West India regiment in 1808, and transferred in the same year to the 62nd foot. He became a lieutenant-colonel in the Portuguese army in 1810, and served as brigadier-general at the battles of Vitoria, the Pyrenees, the Nivelle, the Nive, and St Pierre, where he was badly wounded. He participated in the action of Buenza and succeeding engagements, for which he was allowed, on 14 November 1814, to accept the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword. Promoted colonel in 1814, he was made a CB in 1815, a major-general in 1830, and a KCB in September 1831. He died at Hall Place, St John's Wood, London, on 13 August 1832. 


@@@@@


doc= 794


Ashworth, Henry (1785-1811), naval officer, was born in London in December 1785. In November 1799 he entered the 38-gun frigate 'Hussar', under the immediate patronage of the first lieutenant, and four years later he was serving as midshipman on the same ship when she was lost on the Saintes, near Brest, on 8 February 1804. While a prisoner of war, Ashworth made several remarkable attempts to escape; and at last, having escaped from Bitche in December 1808, he succeeded in passing through Germany to Trieste, where he got on board the British frigate 'L'Unite'. On 31 October 1809 he was promoted lieutenant, and was on the 'Centaur' (74 guns) off the coast of Spain when the French took Tarragona on 28 June 1811 and drove some of the panic-stricken inhabitants into the sea. Ashworth had command of one of the boats sent to rescue them and received a wound, of which he died a month later at Minorca on 25 July 1811. 
Ashworth's curious adventures as a midshipman, in company with master's mate Donat Henchy O'Brien, were recounted in the 'Naval Chronicle', volumes 28-31 and 33, and were apparently the original of an episode in Frederick Marryatt's novel 'Peter Simple'. 


@@@@@


doc= 795


Ashworth, Henry (1794-1880), cotton master, was born on 4 September 1794 at Birtwistle, near Bolton, the eldest of the six sons and five daughters of John Ashworth, land agent and cotton spinner, and his wife, Isabel Thomasson. Educated locally and at Ackworth School in Yorkshire, a Quaker boarding-school, he entered his father's firm in 1808. Since his father's main interests lay in agriculture, he had by 1818 taken charge, to be joined in 1824 by his brother Edmund Ashworth. By 1834 the firm had grown dramatically in size (with two factories, over 77,000 spindles, and 'c'.700 employees) and was in the forefront of technological change in this most advanced sector of the economy. Growth continued in the next twenty years, although Ashworth's wider interests increasingly diverted him from managerial concerns. Moreover, disputes with his brother, unresolved by Quaker arbitration, led in 1854 to the division of the firm, with Henry taking the New Eagley mill, with its 700 or so employees. The firm still remained prominent and lucrative to the partners, but now dropped from the front rank. 
In the 1830s and 1840s the Ashworth enterprise had become an emblem of the new industrial order itself. Its rural location, as at the Gregs' Styal mills, had favoured an exercise in community-building driven by profit rather than philanthropy. Ashworth had built cottages, chapels, schools, a library, and a reading-room. In his activities Ashworth self-consciously epitomized the northern, nonconformist mill owner, seeking through industrial progress to liberate the middle classes from the shackles of aristocratic rule. His tireless and unashamedly entrepreneurial advocacy included strong support for Edwin Chadwick's implementation of the new poor law of 1834, including what became a notorious and ill-advised scheme to resettle rural labourers in the factory districts. Equally dogmatically, Ashworth opposed trade unions, and strikes, as harmful to workers, employers, and society: he published a severe attack on the Preston strikers in 1854. Above all, he was an outspoken opponent of factory legislation, both as an infraction of the worker's (and employer's) freedom of contract, and as an unjustified slur upon the industrial class. Through his evidence to parliamentary committees, letters to the press, and pamphleteering, Ashworth and his mills became a focal point for social observers, and for discussions of the 'condition of England' question. 
Ashworth's reputation as an 'enrage', rebarbative employer was reinforced by the leading part he played in the campaign for the repeal of the corn laws. By the end of 1838 he acted with Cobden in the Manchester chamber of commerce, in moves preceding the formation of the Anti-Corn Law League. He was thereafter in the van of the league as organizer, fund-raiser, vocal member of the deputations to government, and speaker nationally (the A in the league's ABC). He identified strongly with Cobden's view of the wider benefits of free trade as part of the work of peace and progress, and saluted repeal in 1846 as the victory of 'business industry' over 'titled power' ('The League', 4 July 1846). 
Ashworth's other activities also offered an example of 'class pride', for example, his support in Bolton for radical electoral reform, for municipal incorporation, for the 'Bolton Free Press', and for the education of the operatives, where he was an early supporter of national (state) education. He acted as a county JP, one of the first Quakers to do so. In the very different mood of the 1850s some of his more recalcitrant attitudes mellowed, but Ashworth, with Cobden, lamented the decline of the crusading 'league' spirit, and it was in order to revive entrepreneurial radicalism that in 1859 he helped found the National Reform Union and stood, unsuccessfully, for Salford. He also supported Cobden's Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1860, and as president of the Manchester chamber of commerce (1862-5) he promoted the cause of maritime law reform during the American Civil War, in which his sympathies lay mostly with the South (he visited America in 1857). More atypically, he campaigned as a member of the Cotton Supply Association for the state to promote cotton-growing in India during the cotton famine. Less prominent publicly after the second 'Reform Act', Ashworth in his eighties wrote, with the help of John Watts, 'Recollections of Richard Cobden MP and the Anti-Corn Law League' (1876), a lengthy memorial which helped inculcate the powerful 'myth' of the league, of which W. E. A. Axon's entry in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' is itself a fitting expression. 
Ashworth married in 1823 Letitia Binns (1798-1868), daughter of a Liverpool leatherseller and mother of six sons and five daughters. He remained a firm Quaker, a member, like Bright of the Marsden meeting. A handsome, physically powerful man, he enjoyed conversation and good company; he also had 'a most unquakerly passion for the gun' ('DNB'), and regularly hired Scottish shooting lodges. He also travelled widely in Europe, the Near East, and North America. In his final years he wintered in Italy, and it was while returning from Rome that he died, of Roman fever, on 17 May 1880 at Florence. He is buried in the protestant cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 796


Ashworth, John (1813-1875), preacher and author, was born on 8 July 1813 at Cutgate, near Rochdale, Lancashire, the eighth child of John and Alice Ashworth, woollen weavers. His formal education was minimal, being chiefly received at Bagslate and Bamford Sunday schools. The poverty of the family was exacerbated by the intemperance of the father, who, however, reformed later in life. On 15 October 1832 Ashworth married Jane Thornber, only daughter of William and Jane Thornber of Cutlane Farm, near Cutgate. The marriage was happy, though marked by years of struggle and poverty. Ashworth unwisely ventured into shopkeeping with few resources of his own, and the couple's lives were troubled by constant indebtedness. They had five children, two sons and one daughter surviving infancy. Ashworth's position improved when he returned to the textile trade in which he had been trained. He eventually flourished as a manufacturer, but by this time his first wife was dead. He remarried; his second wife was Hannah, daughter of Joseph Wood of Rochdale. 
In 1851, when visiting the Great Exhibition, Ashworth decided to found a chapel for the destitute in Rochdale. Discouraged by his friends, he abandoned the project for a time, and did not put it into execution until 1858. As minister of this independent chapel he was brought into close contact with the town's poorest people. He was a vigorous preacher, orthodox in doctrine, and, because he knew the people's way of life and spoke a language which they understood, he gathered a large congregation. Ashworth was a liberal in politics, a staunch teetotaller, an uncompromising advocate of the Maine law, and a strict sabbatarian. He visited the United States and the Holy Land, and for many years had a busy life as preacher, manufacturer, lecturer, and author. 
Ashworth wrote 'Walks in Canaan' (1869) and 'Back from Canaan' (1873), and had begun an account of his 'Rambles in the New World' when death overtook him. His chief work, however, was the series 'Strange Tales' (5 vols., 1863-74), followed by a similar gathering, 'Simple Records' (1871-3). The combined circulation of these short works was considerable; there were translations into Welsh, French, Dutch, Russian, and Spanish. Although these narratives have little literary polish, they are of interest for their depiction of the life of the poor in nineteenth-century industrial Lancashire. Ashworth mostly related, in straightforward prose, incidents that had come to his knowledge during his work among the poor. His knowledge of the class he described gives 'Strange Tales' a value beyond that of most religious tracts. Ashworth died on 26 January 1875 at Broadfield, Rochdale, and was followed to his grave in Rochdale cemetery on 30 January by a procession of the poor among whom he had worked. 


@@@@@


doc= 797


Aske, Robert (c.1500-1537), lawyer and rebel, was the third son of Sir Robert Aske (died 1529), landowner, of Aughton, near Selby, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Clifford, ninth Baron Clifford, and his wife, Margaret. His elder brother John Aske ('b'. 1498/9, died after 1546) was heir to the family property. The family was reasonably well-connected: he was a cousin of Henry Clifford, first earl of Cumberland, whose brother-in-law was Henry Percy, sixth earl of Northumberland. Aske's brother Christopher Aske (died 1538) was Cumberland's steward. 
Aske was probably sent to Gray's Inn to study common law. He was subsequently an attorney and fellow of the inn. He was Northumberland's secretary in the late 1520s and can be seen disbursing small sums of money on his behalf in 1527. Thereafter he seems to have made his living as a lawyer. He appears on several occasions as counsel on Star Chamber bills, and it is significant that he stumbled into the Lincolnshire rebellion while travelling to Westminster for the beginning of the law term. He never achieved sufficient local standing to be appointed JP but this may reflect his youth. There is no sign that he ever married. He inherited several small estates in Hampshire and the East Riding of Yorkshire, including Bubwith, between Aughton and the Percy estate at Wressle. 
Aske left Yorkshire for Lincolnshire on 4 October 1536, ignorant, when he set out, of the rising at Louth in that county. The rebellion was triggered by the activities of an episcopal commission in Lincolnshire to inquire into the state of the local clergy, but which, it was feared, was instructed to confiscate church goods. The Louth commons were proud of their church and the arrival of the commissioner there on 2 October caused disorder to break out, which escalated rapidly throughout the northern part of the county. Aske was taken and sworn by a band of commons at Sawcliff on the morning of 5 October and assisted them in raising other areas of north Lincolnshire. He then rode deeper into the county on their behalf to make contact with the Louth rebels under another lawyer, Thomas Moigne, at Hamilton Hill near Market Rasen before riding back to his own band of rebels to report on what he had seen. They then allowed him to cross over the Humber back into Yorkshire. There he told the commons of the Marshland not to rise until they heard the bells of Howden ring and the commons of Howden not to rise until they heard the bells of Marshland, so either pacifying both districts or making a rising contingent on his instruction. Having then gone back to Aughton, Aske decided to return to Lincoln on 7 October in expectation that the king's answer to the Lincolnshire rebels would be read the following day, but was advised when he got there to leave the town for his own safety, as he was regarded in Lincolnshire as a renegade. He travelled back into Yorkshire, probably by way of Burton upon Stather, and, on his own account, went into hiding (probably at Whitgift). 
The Marshland rose in rebellion on 10 October after Sir Brian Hastings tried to muster troops to be deployed in the repression of Lincolnshire. Aske threw in his lot with the rebels and, the following day, put his name to a proclamation calling out a further area in which he called himself the 'chief captain of the Marshland, the Isle and Howdenshire' (Dodds and Dodds, 1.148). In the following days he gathered the commons about him at a series of musters and entered York without a siege on 16 October with about 10,000 men. Aske issued a proclamation that laid out the aims of the rebellion: 'For thys pylgrymage we have taken hyt for the presevacyon of Crystes churche, of thys realme of England, the kynge our soverayne lorde, the nobylytie and comyns of the same, and to the entent to macke petycion to the kinges highnes for the reformacyon of that whyche is amysse within thys hys realme. (Fletcher and MacCulloch, 26)' There are no signs that Aske wished to align himself with the commons' rising when he went into Lincolnshire, and he professed to disbelieve the rumours of the impending confiscation of church goods which prompted that rebellion. He was drawn back to Lincoln in the expectation of hearing the king's answer to the letter sent him by the Louth rebels on 3 October. His curiosity is evident: but he declared himself for the commons and emerged as one of their leaders only after he had seen the articles sent by the Lincolnshire gentry to the king from Lincoln on 9 October. Having read these and found them to his taste, he set out to create an East Riding branch of the Lincolnshire movement, adopting the Lincoln articles as his own manifesto and focusing an existing disturbance of the commons upon him. The reports of the conversation he had with some emissaries of Lincolnshire on 13 October make it clear that he regarded his actions as extending the activities and agenda of the Lincolnshire rebels. It was, for instance, a breviate of the Lincolnshire articles that Aske attached to his request to be allowed a free passage through York. It was only after the disintegration of the Lincolnshire revolt that Aske wrote his own oath, gave the movement the title of the Pilgrimage of Grace, and shifted it from the broad commonwealth concerns of the Lincoln articles to the critique of Cromwell's religious policies contained in his oath. 
From York Aske advanced to Pontefract Castle, Yorkshire, apparently against the advice of other leaders of the commons, and took the castle after a short siege on 20 October. Among those taking refuge in the castle were its captain, Thomas Darcy, Baron Darcy, Edward Lee, archbishop of York, Thomas Magnus, archdeacon of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and a number of Yorkshire gentry. While he may have envisaged sharing power with them, it is fairly plain that they cold-shouldered him, probably because he was critical of the nobility. From Pontefract Aske called the gentry leaders of the other sectors of the commons' revolt to him -- men such as Robert Bowes and Sir Thomas Percy, all of them involuntary captains of the commons -- so that by about 24 October a sizeable force of 20,000-30,000 or more men were confronting a much smaller royal army under Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, and George Talbot, fourth earl of Shrewsbury, among others camped on the south side of the River Don at Doncaster. There are signs that Aske was frozen out of the leadership of the pilgrimage: when negotiations took place with Norfolk on 26-27 October, Aske was excluded; and the conclusion of the discussions, that both armies should disband while Sir Ralph Ellerker and Robert Bowes travelled to the king, destroyed his power base among the commons. 
It is clear that Aske and Darcy came to co-operate more fully during November, if only for their own protection against Henry, and it seems that Aske took the initiative of drawing up the articles made at the Pontefract conference held on 3 December. (He also convened the parallel gathering of the clergy modelled on a convocation.) The Pontefract articles were presented to Norfolk at Doncaster on 4 December. He conceded both a pardon and a parliament to be held at York without considering the articles. After this the pilgrimage formally disbanded, with Aske leading the other captains in pulling off their badges. 
There are indications that the commons were reluctant to agree to the Doncaster settlement. Aske accepted the king's invitation to go to court over Christmas 1536 where he advised Henry on the future government of the north. Back in Yorkshire, he found that his standing was diminished by his contact with Henry, and that the settlement had been further undermined by the king's decision to restart the collection of the clerical tenth and the circulation of his inflammatory printed answer to the Yorkshire rebels (written in early November). While Aske argued by both speech and letter for the king's good faith, scepticism among the commons and the actions of a renegade gentleman, Sir Francis Bigod, led to a new rising in the East Riding in January 1537. With further violence in Cumberland during February the agreement at Doncaster progressively became a dead letter and none of the concessions made by Norfolk was ever implemented although the pardon was honoured. 
Aske travelled through the north in Norfolk's entourage in March 1537. On the 24th he set out to London with a letter of commendation from Norfolk to the king and was arrested there, together with Darcy and Sir Robert Constable, on contrived charges of renewed conspiracy after the pardon, on 7 April. He was interrogated, tried, and executed at York by being hanged from a chain on 12 July. 
Any account of Aske's activities must be based on a small number of sources, none of which is entirely satisfactory. He wrote -- apparently for Henry's scrutiny -- a self-justificatory memoir of his role in the pilgrimage. There are also some of the answers to the interrogatories put to him while he was imprisoned and a few letters written while he was grand captain. From these limited materials his attitudes and motivations have to be deduced. How he is understood must turn, in large measure, on an overall assessment of whether the pilgrimage was a gentry conspiracy or a rising of the commons. Several interpretations of Aske's role have been advanced. M. H. and R. Dodds gave him an almost saintly status but did not probe too deeply into his motives. Geoffrey Elton and others have seen him as a linkman between conspiracies in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, the first going off at half cock and collapsing before the parallel revolt in Yorkshire had gathered momentum. The most recent interpretations see the pilgrimage as a revolt of the commons and view Aske as being fundamentally an opportunist, taking advantage of a rebellion not of his making. 
Aske exploited the Lincolnshire revolt to press his own political point of view. He did not create the risings of October 1536: the very title of his memoir, 'The manner of the taking of Robert Aske', shows how he believed that he had gone through the same experience of capture and coercion as the other northern gentry in 1536. But where most gentry tried to restrain the commons and to divert them into essentially harmless timewasting activities such as mustering and petitioning, Aske adopted a forward strategy and exploited their numbers to place pressure on the king. He admitted while under interrogation that he had been willing to fight the king if Henry had not conceded the grievances expressed in the pilgrims' petition. It is less clear how tender he was to the predicament of the smaller dissolved monasteries. Aske wrote eloquently in their defence, and a number of monasteries were reoccupied during the Yorkshire pilgrimage; but while he issued an order on behalf of the disposed monasteries, it seems likely that their reoccupation was the result of spontaneous acts by the commons. There can be no doubt that in the autumn of 1536 he was able to draw upon a vein of popular revulsion at the direction of Henry's policies. He had no hesitation in offering the commons leadership and organization, referring to them on one occasion as 'my people'. He made a mistaken calculation in early December, agreeing to disband the pilgrimage in return for the promise of a parliament in which he, and other conservatives, surely intended to repeal the legislation of the Reformation Parliament. It may be argued that it was the failure of the pilgrimage to press home its advantage which allowed Henry to proceed with the incremental reformation of the last years of his reign. 


@@@@@


doc= 798


Askew, Anne (c.1521-1546), writer and protestant martyr, was probably born at her family home in Stallingborough, near Grimsby in Lincolnshire, the second daughter of Sir William Askew (1489-1541) and his first wife, Elizabeth Wrottesley. She had two brothers, Francis and Edward, and two sisters, Martha and Jane. Her father, who was a landowner in Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire, was knighted in 1513, and in 1521, at about the time of Anne's birth, he was appointed high sheriff of Lincolnshire. He also sat as MP for Grimsby in 1529, and perhaps later. After the death of his first wife he married twice more and had two more sons, Christopher and Thomas. Perhaps by 1523 the family had moved to South Kelsey, about 20 miles from Lincoln. 
Anne Askew is generally thought to have received a good education, possibly from tutors at home. Her marriage and conversion to protestantism are described by the reformist scholar John Bale, who published her writings posthumously. In spite of a tendency to editorial intervention in his treatment of her literary remains, he is a basically trustworthy source for her life. He states that Sir William negotiated a match between his eldest daughter and one 'mastre Kyme', the son and heir of a neighbouring farmer ('Examinations', 92). This Master Kyme can be identified as one of two men, both called Thomas, and both of Friskney: one was born 'c'.1517, the other died in 1590. Unfortunately Martha died before the wedding to Thomas Kyme could take place, and rather than suffer any financial loss, William Askew offered Anne as a replacement, 'so that in the ende she was compelled agaynst her wyll or fre consent to marrye with hym' (ibid.). The couple had two children, and, as Bale puts it, Askew 'demeaned her selfe lyke a Christen wyfe' (ibid.). However, 'in processe of tyme by oft readynge of the sacred 'Bible', she fell clerelye from all olde superstycyons of papystrye, to a perfyght beleve in Jhesus Christ' (ibid., 93). Askew's enthusiasm initially brought her to the attention of members of the established church in her own locality, and she herself describes the hostility which it generated: 'For my fryndes tolde me, if I ded come to Lyncolne, the prestes wolde assault me and put me to great trouble, as therof they had made their boast' (ibid., 56). In response to this challenge, Askew travelled to the city, and stayed there for six days or more. As she sat reading her 'Bible' in the cathedral, she was approached by small groups of clerics. Only one man actually confronted her, and she asserted that his words were of so little import that she could not remember them. Bale claims that this episode so infuriated her religiously orthodox husband that he 'vyolentlye drove her oute of hyse howse' (ibid., 93), and that, having been forced to leave her husband, she quite legitimately sought a divorce. Writing over half a century later, the recusant propagandist Robert Persons gives a more negative account of her activities, representing her as leaving her spouse in order 'to gad up and downe the countrey a ghospelling and ghossipinge where she might and ought not. And this for divers yeares before her imprisonment; but especially she delighted to be in London neere the court' (Nichols, 'Narratives', 309). 
Susan Brigden dates Anne Askew's arrival in the capital to late in 1544, and argues that she hoped to obtain a legal separation in chancery. Askew already had family connections with the royal household: her brother Edward was cup-bearer to the king, and her half-brother Christopher, who had died the previous year, had been a gentleman of the privy chamber. Some of her siblings may have been sympathizers with the new religion. Before he entered the royal household Edward had been in the service of Archbishop Cranmer; however, it is likely that he owed his position there simply to the archbishop's Lincolnshire connections, and of arguably greater significance is the marriage of Anne's sister Jane to George St Poll, a lawyer in the service of the duke and duchess of Suffolk. Anne Askew's own connection with the duchess was to be one which her interrogators were keen to establish when they examined and tortured her in 1546. Jane later married the protestant Richard Disney. Other important members of Askew's social network were her religious adviser John Lascels, the chronicler Edward Hall, and her cousin Christopher Brittayn. All these men were lawyers in the inns of court, but a number of her associates were of the artisan class, including the Kentish Anabaptist Joan Bocher (executed 1550), who came from a family of rural craftsmen, and who was described by Persons as Askew's 'dear sister, disciple, and handmayd' (Nichols, 'Narratives', 309). 
In 1544 or 1545, 'one great papiste of Wykam [Winchester] colledge, then called Wadloe', moved into a house near Anne Askew's lodgings in the Temple in order to spy on her activities, and noted that 'at mydnyght she begynneth to pray, and cessyth not in many howers after, when I and others applye owr sleape or do worse' (Nichols, 'Narratives', 40). Although Wadlow found nothing sinister to report back to his master in chancery, Sir Thomas Wriothesley, and was indeed impressed by her piety, Askew was soon brought before the authorities and forced to endure a two-year period of persecution. In a version of her life written by her nephew Edward Ayscu, she was even forced into hiding for a time, before being betrayed to her opponents by a close relative. The exact order of the events which lead up to her execution is unclear. Askew herself, in her autobiographical account of her trials, dates her first examination to 'the yeare of oure Lorde M.D.xlv and in the moneth of Marche' ('Examinations', 19). While it might be assumed that she is using the old style calendar (in other words, referring to events now dated to 1546), contemporary records confirm that the aldermen of London ordered her to be detained under the 'Six Articles Act' on 10 March 1545. On the testimony of an unnamed woman, Askew was brought before the quest (an official heresy hearing in front of a commission) at Sadler's Hall before being cross-examined by the lord mayor of London and the chancellor of the bishop of London, Edmund Bonner. She was then imprisoned in the Counter for twelve days, where she refused to be shriven except by reformist priests, before her cousin Brittayn was allowed to visit her and to begin negotiations concerning bail. Having been interrogated further, this time by Bonner himself and his archdeacon John Wymesley, she was questioned about a book which she was carrying, written by John Frith, who was burnt for heresy in 1533, and accused of subscribing to reformist beliefs concerning transubstantiation and the other sacraments and the dominion of the priesthood. Whether she retracted her beliefs or not is open to debate. Askew acknowledged putting her name to a confession of faith, but the one preserved in the diocesan records (GL, MS 9531/12, fol. 109) does not include her own addenda, 'I, Anne Askewe do beleve all maner thynges contayned in the faythe of the Catholyck churche', as recorded in her printed 'Examinations' ('Examinations', 62). John Foxe interpreted the discrepancy as just one more example of Bonner's corruption. Her friends -- Brittayn and Hall, together with Hugh Weston and Francis Spilman -- interceded on her behalf and negotiated her release on bail. 
It would appear that at this stage Bonner was concerned more about the heterodoxy of Askew's beliefs than with her connections and contacts, and that he principally wanted to rid himself of a woman whom he found obstinate and vexatious. Her treatment during her first examination suggests, therefore, that Askew's opponents did not yet view her as particularly influential or important. None the less, she did not remain in the clear for long. Charles Wriothesley's 'Chronicle' notes that she was arraigned in the Guildhall on 13 June 1545, along with two others named Joan Sawtrey and Robert Lukine (a servant of Sir Humphrey Browne). All three were accused of speaking against the sacrament of the altar. But when the only witness to appear against them was judged unreliable, they were released. 
By the summer of 1546 the authorities had clearly begun to take Anne Askew's activities far more seriously. The travails which subsequently came upon her began on 24 May 1546, when letters were sent to Thomas Kyme requiring him to appear before the privy council with his wife within fourteen days. On 19 June Kyme duly attended with Anne, who denied that he was her husband; he then returned home, while she was incarcerated. In 'The lattre examinacyon' Askew describes the two-day interrogation to which she was subjected by the king's council at Greenwich -- on this occasion her questioners included: the chancellor, Sir Thomas Wriothesley; Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester; John Dudley, Viscount Lisle; William Parr, earl of Essex; and Sir William Paget, the king's principal secretary. Despite threats of execution, Askew steadfastly refused to recant. Her request to speak with Hugh Latimer was refused. She was then imprisoned in Newgate in 'extremyte of syckenesse' ('Examinations', 102). 
Askew's second examination had been far more intensive, and conducted at a much higher level, than her first. The events which followed explain the differences between the two processes. Their background was the political and religious uncertainty of the last year of Henry VIII's reign, as conservatives and reformers competed for a position which would give them control of government when the king died, as it was clear he soon would, and a minor succeeded. On 28 June 1546 Askew was arraigned for heresy at the Guildhall along with Nicholas Shaxton, former bishop of Salisbury, and two other men. Shaxton abjured, but Askew and another were condemned, 'without any triall of a jurie' (Wriothesley, 167) and thus contrary to the law. The next day she was taken from Newgate to the Tower. Word had got out that she had contacts with noblewomen at court, who sympathized with her religious stance. This gave the conservative faction grounds for hoping she could be induced to incriminate her abettors, and by implication their husbands, and so ruin the reformist cause in the eyes of the doctrinally conservative king. Wriothesley and Sir Richard Rich, another councillor, tried to force Askew to name other members of her 'secte'. When she refused, they took the exceptional step of having her tortured, even going so far as to turn the rack themselves -- as a woman, gently born, and a condemned person, she should have been exempt from such treatment. 
Askew was questioned about whether she had received any support from members of the privy council, and specifically asked about 'my ladye of Sothfolke, my ladye of Sussex, my ladye of Hertforde, my lady Dennye, and my ladye Fizwyllyams' ('Examinations', 122). These were women in the queen's immediate circle who were evidently suspected of encouraging the spread of protestantism, and together constitute an aristocratic roll-call which underlines just how high the political and religious stakes had become; Lady Hertford's husband, Edward Seymour, would be protector of the realm and leader of the evangelicals less than a year hence. Indeed, her torturers were probably also motivated by the hope that she would incriminate the queen -- Katherine Parr was a committed religious radical. Persons even suggests that they were operating under the instructions of Henry VIII himself, who had been informed that Askew had access to his wife's immediate circle and sought 'to corrupt divers people but especially weomen' (Nichols, 'Narratives', 308). Askew eventually acknowledged that two men who had given her money in prison claimed to have done so on behalf of Lady Hertford and Lady Denny. But she said that for the most part she relied on her maid, who obtained money from apprentices, and could not be persuaded to extend her testimony further. The unlawfulness of these proceedings caused the privy council some anxiety, but attempts to cover them up did not succeed: on 2 July, a London merchant, Ottiwell Johnson, wrote to his brother that Askew remained 'in stedfast mynde, and yet she hath ben rakked sins her condempnacion' (ibid., 306). 
Askew was removed to a house to recover and once more offered the opportunity to recant, then taken to Newgate to await her execution. On 16 July 1546, aged about twenty-five according to Bale, she was burnt at the stake in Smithfield, alongside John Lascels, John Hadlam, who was a tailor, and John Hemley, formerly an Observant friar. Nicholas Shaxton, who had recanted, delivered the sermon. If her persecutors intended that Shaxton's performance should reinforce the message of Askew's execution, while at the same time indicating that the retraction of erroneous beliefs was possible, evangelicals interpreted his presence differently. Robert Crowley, for instance, denounces Shaxton for his inconstancy, contrasting him unfavourably with Askew, who had 'stood manfully to the truth' (Crowley, sigs. K5'r'-K5'v'). John Foxe even includes a fictionalized exchange between the condemned woman and the preacher in his account of Askew's execution in the second edition of his 'Acts and Monuments'. The lord chancellor, the lord mayor, Sir Martin Bowes, and the duke of Norfolk were among those present when Askew was burnt, watching from a scaffold. The Catholic propagandist Miles Huggarde has it that Askew was offered a pardon, but defied the officers with 'opprobrious names' and made the sign of the gallows to the preacher (Huggarde, fol. 46'v'). But Johne Louthe, an eyewitness to the events, says that she 'was so racked that she could not stand, but the dounge carte was holden up betwene ij sarjantes, perhaptes syttyng there in a cheare'. He also maintains that throughout her suffering she had an angel's countenance, and a smiling face, and claims that at the moment of her death there was 'a pleasant crackyng from heaven' (Nichols, 'Narratives', 41-4). German merchants in the audience brought reports of this strange natural phenomenon to Bale, then in exile on the continent. 
For Askew's enduring renown as a protestant saint and for her more recent reputation as a Renaissance woman writer, she is considerably indebted to Bale. The first edition of 'The first examinacyon of Anne Askewe, latelye martyred in Smythfelde' was printed at Wesel in Germany in the year of her death in a text which included his introduction, conclusion, and intertextual commentary. The following year the second part of this work, 'The lattre examinacyon of Anne Askewe', was published in the same city. For Bale, who saw his own role as that of a martyrologist, the story of Askewe's interrogations was that of a protestant saint. He was evidently an intrusive editor, and some of the material included in his texts, especially the paraphrase of 'Psalm 54' and the ballad which Askew supposedly wrote and sang while in Newgate, may be falsely attributed to her. His extensive glosses reveal the extent to which he freely interpreted the material available to him to make it fit not only his own apocalyptic historiographical scheme (according to which Askew represents one of the two witnesses of the book of 'Revelation') but also his assumptions about gender. Consequently his depiction of Askew as young, weak, and tender, if also brave and steadfast, is somewhat at odds with her own self-representation as a disputatious individual, confident of her salvation, and inspired to follow in the footsteps of Christ. 
Askew seems to have written down the events that led up to her condemnation at the request of religious sympathizers -- she addresses the second part to 'a secrete frynde' ('Examinations', 88) -- and evidently hoped that her narrative would encourage others in adversity. Bale's edition and texts based on them were reprinted several times, but it was the incorporation of Askew's autobiography (without Bale's additions) into Foxe's 'Acts and Monuments' (from its first edition onwards) which ensured its continuing popularity -- and her fame -- in the centuries which followed. Although a broadside ballad about Askew's fate, entitled 'I am a woman poore and blinde', which came out in a number of editions over a period of some seventy years during the seventeenth century, replaced the confrontational but calm and rational heroine of her own testimonial with an image of feminine passivity and suffering, this view was by no means the only or dominant one. One of the most remarkable tributes to Askew was made in 1673 by Bathsua Makin, formerly a tutor in the household of Charles I, when she called her 'a person famous for learning and piety' and claimed that Askew had 'so seasoned the Queen and ladies at Court, by her precepts and example, and after sealed her profession with her book, that the seed of reformation seemed to be sowed by her hand' (Makin, 134). 


@@@@@


doc= 799


Askew, Anthony (bap. 1722, d. 1774), physician and book collector, was born in Kendal, Westmorland, where he was baptized on 7 May 1722, the son of Adam Askew, physician, and his wife, Anne Crackenthorp. In 1725 his family moved to Newcastle, where his father established a well-respected practice. Askew was educated at Sedbergh School and then at Newcastle Free School, under the eminent classicist Richard Dawes. In 1741 he matriculated from Emmanuel College, Cambridge, whence he graduated MB in 1745. Intended for the medical profession, he studied at Leiden University from 1745 to 1746 and then spent the next three years travelling to Hungary, Athens, Constantinople, Italy, and other countries. During his time abroad he purchased a large number of books and manuscripts that formed the basis of his extensive library, the Bibliotheca Askeviana. Having returned to England he was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1749, and in 1750 he began practising medicine at Cambridge and graduated MD. He soon afterwards established himself in London and was appointed physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1754. In the previous year he had been elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and he served as its registrar from 1767 until his death. He married twice. His first wife, whom he married at Hartburn, Northumberland, on 15 November 1751, was Margaret, daughter of Cuthburt Swinburn of Longwitton, Northumberland; the marriage was childless. Askew married secondly, in 1757, Elizabeth (1734-1773), younger daughter of Robert Holford, master in chancery; they had twelve children. 
Askew was a keen and accomplished classical scholar whose love of Greek literature was probably stimulated by his teacher Richard Dawes. His favourite author was Aeschylus and he planned to publish a new and complete critical edition of his works but, apart from a brief proposal and specimen of the work published in 1746, nothing came of the project. This pamphlet was Askew's only publication. His principal contribution to scholarship lay in his outstanding collection of manuscripts and books that was crammed 'from cellar to garret' into his house in Queen Square, London ('N&Q'). The collection was chiefly classical and it was Askew's ambition to own every edition of a Greek author, which he achieved in the case of Aeschylus. His librarian was John Caravella, who in 1822 published a verbal index to Aristophanes taken from one of a series in Askew's library. 
Elizabeth Askew died on 2 August 1773 and Askew died at his home in Hampstead on 27 February 1774; he was buried in Hampstead church. His young family was left in the care of his brother, Henry Askew. His library of almost 7000 books was auctioned over twenty days in February and March the following year and fetched nearly $4000; among the principal purchasers were George III, Louis XV, and the British Museum. The manuscripts were sold separately in 1785. An appendix to Dr Charles Burney's edition of Johannes Scapula's 'Lexicon Graeco-Latinum' was taken from Askew's manuscript collection, and Samuel Butler made use of his collections in compiling his edition of Aeschylus (4 vols., 1809-16). Askew's scholarly credentials, however, were criticized by Charles James Blomfield, who discovered that a volume in Askew's handwriting, which contained a collation of five codices, was a transcript from a volume in Peter Needham's handwriting. None the less John Nichols concluded that 'the benefit the public received by the dissemination of his collection of scarce and valuable manuscripts and books give him a just title to be regarded among the promoters of literature and science' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.496). 


@@@@@


doc= 800


Askew, Egeon (1575/6-1637), Church of England clergyman, was a native of Lancashire. His family originated from Mulcaster, Cumberland, and lived subsequently at Kirby Ireleth, Lancashire, where Thomas Askew, probably Egeon's younger brother, was instituted vicar in 1606. Having matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in July 1593, Egeon Askew graduated BA in April 1597, was chaplain of Queen's in 1598, and proceeded MA in June 1600. By about 1603 this 'great admirer of Dr John Reynolds and Richard Crackanthorpe' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.756) was minister of Greenwich, Kent, and had a reputation as a preacher. His only book, 'Brotherly reconcilement; preached in Oxford for the union of some, and now published... for the unitie of all in this church and commonwealth', published in 1605 and dedicated to James I, is dated from Greenwich. Supported by wide biblical, patristic, and classical references, the book beseeches fellow clergy to preach the necessity of good works as well as faith, castigates 'deceivers of minds, Puritans or Pruritans' as guilty of 'sinful scisme' and, while acknowledging Calvin's learning and approving his use of extra-scriptural learning in sermons, criticizes both his attitude to vestments and his adherents' worship of him. 
In May 1609 Askew was instituted to the rectory of Great Hampden, Buckinghamshire, on the presentation of Robert Heynes and George Herst. Here he married Elizabeth Smith on 14 May 1610 and died after a long ministry; he was buried on 10 May 1637. 


@@@@@


doc= 801


Askham, John (1825-1894), shoemaker and poet, was born on 20 or 25 July 1825, in a cottage off Market Street, adjoining White Horse Yard, in Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, the youngest among the seven children of John Askham, a shoemaker from Raunds, and his wife, who was originally from Kimbolton. The young Askham was educated at a dame-school for a brief period, and then went to the Wellingborough free school. His formal education was limited, as he noted later in life: 'I have no recollections of learning anything, my most vivid remembrance being of having to stand up with my legs straddled out to their fullest extent in a window recess, with a tall fool's cap on my devoted head.' Before he was ten Askham was put to work at his father's trade, working long hours during which he recalled that although 'nothing but one long, unbroken perspective of toil' had presented itself, he had nevertheless 'ever cherished a deep love for poetry' ('Wellingborough News', October 1934). He was largely self-educated, and was to become a well-known working-class poet. 
Askham married Hannah Bonham (1822/3-1860) in the late 1840s, and they had five children, two of whom died in childhood. A few years after his marriage, at twenty-five, he began to write and publish poetry in earnest. He contributed poems to the 'Wellingborough Independent', and the quality of these greatly impressed the editor of the 'Northampton Mercury', G. J. de Wilde, who consequently hired Askham as a correspondent for his paper, and also became a good friend. Askham had been urged to write his first verses by a workmate who was a vehement Chartist, but Askham himself never subscribed to Chartism proper, although he fervently advocated the rights and worth of the working classes. This can be seen in the poem that he published first: 'The Dignity of Labour'. Askham's first collected volume of verse, 'Sonnets on the Months, and other Poems' (1863), was 'composed for the most part in the comparative quiet of the warehouse of a shoe upper manufactory', whereas the pace and concerns of the second volume, 'Descriptive Poems' (1866), reflect its genesis 'in the ceaseless din of twenty machines in the factory of Messers Singer' ('Wellingborough News', October 1934). One of his most effective social poems was entitled 'The Singers', and refers to his time working for the sewing machine manufacturers. 
Askham eventually left Singers & Co. and went into the shoemaking business for himself. He continued to write poetry, furthering his reputation in the region, where increasingly he became known as 'the Shoemaker Poet'. All his books were published by subscription, and it was shortly after the publication of 'Judith, and other Poems' (1868) that one of his subscribers, George Ward Hunt, arranged for Askham to receive a grant of $50 from the queen's bounty fund. 'Poems and Sonnets' followed in 1875, and his final volume, 'Sketches in Prose and Verse', appeared in 1893. Askham cited John Clare as a particular influence on his poetry, and this is reflected in his early sonnet 'To John Clare'. The fidelity of Askham's nature poetry has been much praised, particularly as he lacked Clare's opportunities for appreciating country life. 
Askham was also very much involved in the life of his village community; he co-founded the Wellingborough Literary Institute, and became librarian and hall-keeper when it was established in the newly built corn exchange. He was elected a member of the first school board of the town in 1871, and in 1874 he became school attendance officer. Between 1875 and 1887 he served as sanitary inspector of the local board of health. He was forced to retire from these occupations in 1887 because of ill health, and in his later years he was stricken with paralysis. 
Askham died on 28 October 1894 at Clare Cottage, 76 High Street, Hardingstone, near Northampton, and was buried on 1 November in the London Road cemetery, Wellingborough. He was survived by his second wife, Rebecca Eliza, 'nee' Cox (1846-1918), and by three daughters from his first marriage: Mrs Elizabeth Smith, Mrs Alice Douglas, and Mrs Spencer. 


@@@@@


doc= 802


Aspinall, James (1795?-1861), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Liverpool, probably in 1795, the son of John Bridge Aspinall of Liverpool. He matriculated from St Mary Hall, Oxford, in 1816, graduating BA in 1820 and MA in 1823. After serving as a curate in Cheshire and in Rochdale he returned to Liverpool as curate of St Luke's, where in 1831 he preached a remarkable sermon published as 'The Crisis, or, The Signs of the Times with Regard to the Church of England'; it called for wholesale reform of the Church of England, especially with respect to tithes, pluralities, inequalities of clerical salaries, and ownership of patronage. 
From 1839 until his death Aspinall was rector of the crown living of Althorpe, Lincolnshire. He was active in radical circles and on 26 January 1839 addressed the great free-trade meeting held at Hull, at which John Bright and Richard Cobden both spoke. He was also a strong supporter of the movement to establish mechanics' institutes and was an admirer of William Roscoe (1753-1831), as is shown by his 'Roscoe's Library, or, Old Books and Old Times' (1853), dedicated to the earl of Carlisle, 'the representative of the intelligence of the aristocracy and of the aristocracy of intelligence', and praising Roscoe. He published two series of 'Parish Sermons' (1854-9). He was domestic chaplain for more than thirty years to the Right Hon. Lord Clonbrock. On 17 January 1861, when JP for Lindsey, Aspinall married, at West Butterwick, Ann, widow of W. Hunter, of the Ings, East Butterwick. On 15 February of the same year he died at Althorpe rectory. 


@@@@@


doc= 803


Aspinwall, Edward (1678-1732), religious controversialist, was born on 1 January 1678 and baptized the same day at Aughton by Ormskirk, Lancashire, the son of Henry Aspinwall. Almost certainly born into a Roman Catholic family, he was educated at the English College at St Omer and was admitted to the Society of Jesus in 1696. He continued his studies at Watten, near St Omer, in 1697, and at Liege in the Southern Netherlands from 1699 to 1700 and then from 1701 to 1705; he was ordained Roman Catholic priest about 1705. He returned to England to the Worcestershire and Wales residence of St George-at-Spetchley from 1706 to 1707, but at some point within the next few years he abjured his faith and entered the Church of England. He was chaplain to the earl of Radnor by 1715 when he published his tract 'A Preservative Against Popery', which he dedicated to Charles Trimnell, bishop of Norwich, as public acknowledgement of the role played by Trimnell in his conversion. Aspinwall published the 'Preservative' principally to set out his arguments 'by which strength of Conviction only I was prevail'd upon to quit a blind, implicit, erroneous Faith, to embrace the 'Free' and Glorious 'Light' of the Gospel Truth' ('A Preservative Against Popery', appx) and thereby demonstrate that the oath of allegiance to the crown and to the Church of England was incompatible with the oath made in profession of the Roman Catholic faith. 
Aspinwall rapidly gained promotion in the Church of England: awarded an MA (1717) and DD (1729) by Clare College, Cambridge, he became subdean of the Chapel Royal in 1718 and was instituted prebendary of Westminster on 13 November 1729. In 1731 he published an 'Apology, being a Series of Arguments in Proof of the Christian Religion', prefaced with an address, 'To All Impartial Freethinkers', in which he declared that his mind was guided by reason alone, and not prejudice, in his choice of revealed religion. Here Aspinwall pleaded for free discussion in religious matters, but called for his opponents, principally the deist Anthony Collins, to refrain from using ridicule or satire in their writings. Aspinwall died on 3 August 1732 and was buried in Westminster Abbey on 8 August. After his death there was some controversy as to whether he converted to Roman Catholicism on his deathbed, but the rumours were denied by Aspinwall's friend and fellow former Jesuit Archibald Bower. 


@@@@@


doc= 804


Aspinwall, William (d. 1702), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Trumfleet, Kirk Sandall, West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Matthew Aspinwall. After attending school at York, he was admitted to Magdalene College, Cambridge, as a sizar in 1654, graduating BA in 1657. He was admitted vicar of Mattersey, Nottinghamshire, on 24 November 1658 and was ordained at the thirty-third meeting of the Nottinghamshire classis held in St Mary's Church, Nottingham, on 4 May 1660. In January 1661 he was indicted at the quarter sessions at Retford for not reading the 'Book of Common Prayer', and was ejected from the living later in the year. On 3 March 1662 he took out a licence to marry Ann Lloid, a widow of Carlton in Lindrick, Nottinghamshire. 
After his ejection Aspinwall apparently took a farm at Thurnscoe in the West Riding, and subsequently moved to the Manchester township of Newton, where he was living in 1668 when he subscribed for a copy of Matthew Poole's 'Synopsis criticorum'. In 1672 he was licensed as a presbyterian minister at Winwick, Lancashire. At some point he moved to Forton in the parish of Cockerham on the Lancashire coast. In 1693 the Common Fund, set up in 1690 to support presbyterian and congregational ministers, granted him $6 per annum to preach in Shireshead chapelry, Cockerham; this was reduced to $4 per annum in 1695. 
Thomas Brockbank, the vicar of Cartmel, recorded hearing of Aspinwall's death on 20 April 1702. He was buried at Cockerham on 22 April. His estate was valued at $137 17's'. 3died, of which, after the payment of debts and funeral expenses, there remained $54 0's'. 11died 
It is not certain whether Ann Aspinwall died before or after her husband. She may be the Mrs Asponell whose burial is recorded in the Cockerham parish register on 14 January 1698, four years before her husband's death. If so, however, William Aspinwall must have married another woman named Ann, for by his will, proved in June 1702, he left a two-thirds share of his property to his wife, Ann, should she not remarry; the residue he left to his daughter, Elizabeth, when she reached the age of twenty-one. Ann Aspinwall duly signed a bond undertaking to care for Elizabeth and pay to her her share of the estate when she came of age. 
The name Aspinwall and its variants are not uncommon in the north-west, and it is frequently not possible to tell whether references to 'Mr Aspinwall' in local sources refer to this man or to namesakes, several of whom were also nonconformists. He has been confused with the Lancashireman William Aspinwall who migrated in 1630 to New England where he established himself as a merchant, became involved in the antinomian controversy, and served in local office in Massachusetts; on returning to England, he became a Fifth Monarchist pamphleteer. He has also been confused with 


@@@@@


doc= 805


Aspland, Robert (1782-1845), Unitarian minister and journal editor, was born on 23 January 1782 at Wicken, Cambridgeshire, the only surviving child of Robert Aspland, the village shopkeeper, and his second wife, Hannah Brook of nearby Isleham; Isaac, a half-brother from the earlier marriage, lived from 1774 to 1829. The elder Aspland had turned from Anglicanism to dissent and, under his wife's influence, became a Particular Baptist, later turning to Unitarianism. The son was educated largely by Anglicans, however: for four years, indifferently and unhappily, by a relative, the Revd John Aspland, at the grammar school in Soham and then, in improving succession between 1794 and 1797, with a Mr Gillyat at Islington, the Revd Edward Porter (an Independent) at Highgate, and the Revd John Eyre at Hackney. 
Hoping to enter the Baptist college in Bristol, Aspland reluctantly underwent the stipulated baptism at Devonshire Square Chapel in the City of London in April 1797. Fearing from a long silence that Bristol had rejected him, he learned towards the end of the year that he had been awarded a scholarship under the bequest of John Ward (1679?-1758), Gresham professor of rhetoric, which provided for two years of schooling in England, four years at a Scottish university, and a year's maintenance following graduation. 
After studying with the Revd Joseph Hughes (1769-1833) in Battersea, Aspland returned briefly to Wicken, where he found some fame as a boy preacher, and entered Bristol College, then headed by Dr John Ryland (1753-1825), on 31 July 1798. In October 1799 he enrolled in Marischal College, Aberdeen, but by the end of the following year his growing heterodoxy, long suspected by others, led to expulsion from Devonshire Square and to the decision to resign his scholarship, closing off, he thought, further education and a ministerial career. 
Through a sickly schoolboy he had befriended while serving as an assistant at the school attached to Devonshire Square Chapel, Aspland had come to know the family of John Middleton, a well-to-do manufacturer of artists' colours in London; he had developed a close attachment to Sara Middleton (1770/71-1858) and now her father offered Aspland a place in the firm. Handicapped by colour-blindness and finding business an insuperable barrier to his literary interests, he was recommended by the Revd John Evans (1767-1827), pastor of the General Baptist chapel in Worship Street, London, to the small, lively General Baptist congregation at Newport, Isle of Wight, where he was invited to settle as soon as his probationary preaching was completed on 3 May 1801; he was ordained on 21 July. His marriage to Sara Middleton took place in the same year. One child died in infancy; two daughters and three sons survived, the eldest being the Revd Robert Brook Aspland (1805-1869). 
Encouraged by the openness of his congregation, Aspland moved from Arian belief in the subordinate divinity of Christ to Unitarianism, which asserted Christ's humanity. Through Thomas Belsham (1750-1829), the prominent London Unitarian minister whom he had encountered at a meeting of the Southern Unitarian Society, of which Aspland was a founding member, he was offered and accepted an invitation to Norton, Derbyshire, where the congregation was dominated for many decades by two Samuel Shores, father (1707-1785) and son (1738-1828), descended from an old nonconformist gentry family. On his way north early in 1805 Aspland was invited to preach at the Gravel Pit Chapel, Hackney, by Belsham, who was about to move to the premier London congregation in Essex Street and who recommended Aspland as his successor. Released by the Shores after a few months at Norton, Aspland took up the Hackney appointment. Despite some initial dissatisfaction, a not uncommon consequence of ministerial changes, he preached there for some forty years to an imposing congregation, in a new chapel from 1809. 
Aspland founded two major Unitarian periodicals. He took over the failing 'Universal Theological Magazine' from William Vidler (1758-1816) at the end of 1805, and on that basis established the 'Monthly Repository', which first appeared in February 1806. Over the next two decades it was distinguished by radical nonconformist politics, extensive controversy on theology and biblical criticism, and broad coverage of Unitarian affairs. Austerely uncompromising and long unprofitable -- subscribers hovered around a thousand -- the 'Repository' drew contributors from the Unitarian intelligentsia, both ministerial and lay, among them Mrs Barbauld, Thomas Belsham, John Bowring, Harriet Martineau, Henry Crabb Robinson, and Thomas Noon Talfourd. 
In 1826 Aspland transferred the magazine to the new British and Foreign Unitarian Association and a brief, unsuccessful editorship by committee. The second series, begun in June 1827, was edited from August 1828 by W. J. Fox (1786-1864), who transformed the 'Repository' into a national literary periodical. Unitarian concerns then fell to the 'Christian Reformer', which Aspland had founded in 1815, initially for a wider, less sophisticated audience than the 'Repository''s, and which he edited until 1845, when his son succeeded him. 
Aspland was an organizer and secretary of genius. In the same year that he founded the 'Repository', he established the Unitarian Fund to encourage missionary activities; the Christian Tract Society followed three years later and the Association for the Protection of the Civil Rights of Unitarians in 1819. In 1825 he took the lead in merging two of those organizations -- the Christian Tract Society held aloof -- with Belsham's earlier Unitarian Society for distributing books, thus forming the British and Foreign Unitarian Association, which for more than a century was the central organization of the denomination; Aspland was, of course, its secretary until 1841. In 1812 he established an academy at Durham House, Hackney, to train men as popular Unitarian preachers, but, owing to chronic financial problems and a temporary bout of ill health, he was forced to abandon it in 1818. 
Aspland inherited his family's radical whig politics, which, united with a fervent commitment to dissent, put him in the forefront of every agitation for the protection and extension of religious liberty. He actively supported Catholic emancipation, and opposed Lord Sidmouth's attempt in 1811 to circumscribe the registration of dissenting ministers. In 1817 he founded the Non-Con Club to advance religious freedom, and published many of its papers in the 'Repository'. He helped to prepare William Hone's defence against prosecutions for his satirical publications in 1817 and Richard Carlile's for republishing Thomas Paine's 'Age of Reason' two years later. As well as drafting a petition to parliament, presented by Joseph Hume in 1823, against the prosecution of unbelievers, Aspland launched the 'Test Act Reporter' in 1827 to trace the efforts at repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', attained in 1828, and was active in the campaign in the mid-1830s to alter the law relating to dissenters' marriages. He was a steady advocate of reform of the law and of parliament. 
Theologically, Aspland followed Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) and Thomas Belsham, insisting on the ultimate triumph of truth and on the indispensability of both reason and revelation to religion. Abandoning adult baptism, the central tenet of his old faith, he avoided the alternative of infant baptism by a service of dedication. Like other converts from the Particular Baptists, he zealously advocated the doctrine of universal restitution, the belief that all ultimately will be saved -- a dramatic rejection of Calvinist predestination. A list of his many publications appears in the memoir by his son. 
Aspland suffered intermittently from poor health, but in 1843 there was no recovery. He preached his last sermon at the Gravel Pit on 4 February 1844. He died of heart disease in Hackney on 30 December 1845, and was buried on 6 January 1846 in the Gravel Pit burial-ground. 


@@@@@


doc= 806


Aspland, Robert Brook (1805-1869), Unitarian minister, was born at Newport, Isle of Wight, on 19 January 1805, the eldest surviving son of the Revd Robert Aspland (1782-1845) and his wife, Sara Middleton (1770/71-1858). After schooling with the Revd John Potticary at Blackheath, Kent, and with the Revd William Evans, minister of the Abbey Chapel, Tavistock, he entered the University of Glasgow in 1819, graduating MA in 1822. After studying at Manchester College, York, from 1822 to 1826, he entered the ministry at Chester in August 1826. In 1833 he became co-pastor with the Revd Lant Carpenter at Lewin's Mead, Bristol. On 21 October 1833 in Mottram, Cheshire, he married Jane (1812-1872), fourth daughter of Randal Hibbert (1769-1849), farmer and cotton manufacturer of Godley, Cheshire; two sons were born in the marriage. Aspland also conducted a boarding-school in Bristol until 1836, when he moved to Old Chapel in Dukinfield, Cheshire, taking up the ministry there on 1 January 1837. In 1858 he became minister at the New Gravel Pit Chapel, Hackney, in a newly built Gothic church on the site of the chapel (of the same name) where his father had ministered for almost forty years. The congregation had been much divided by ministries in the interim, but the 'new Aspland' its leaders had been hoping for, while he was admired and influential, could not stop a long-term decline in a congregation in an area which was losing its respectable inhabitants. 
Aspland's services to his denomination were of the first importance. During his father's last illness in 1845 he took over the editorship of the 'Christian Reformer', continuing with great distinction until the magazine ceased publication in 1863. In it in 1850 he published a long memoir of his father (reprinted the same year as a book), a number of valuable brief congregational histories, and a series of sketches that drew on his deep historical knowledge of early English protestantism. 
In 1846 Aspland became one of the secretaries of Manchester College, in Manchester after 1840 and in London from 1853; he resigned in 1857 in disagreement with the direction the college was taking, dominated as it then was by John James Tayler and James Martineau, the leaders of the 'new school' of Unitarians who sought to base religion in instinct and emotion rather than natural and biblical evidences. A splendid man of business as well as a strong liberal, he had taken a major role in securing passage in 1844 of the 'Dissenters' Chapels Act', to prevent the expropriation of Unitarian chapels and endowments by orthodox groups whose claims had been upheld in the courts. He was, therefore, a logical successor in 1859 to Edward Tagart as secretary of the British and Foreign Unitarian Association. Although his sympathies lay with the conservative theological position and his letters betray a degree of contempt for its opponents, he played a calming diplomatic part in the fierce debate in 1865-6 over criteria for membership in the association, a magnanimity generously recognized at the time of his death and notably evident in the choice of Martineau to deliver the address at the funeral. 
His health deteriorating, Aspland attempted to resign the secretaryship in 1867 but was persuaded to remain, with the Revd Robert Spears as assistant secretary. His last sermon was delivered on 13 June 1869, and his last letter accepted a three-month leave pressed on him by a worried congregation. He died suddenly on 21 June 1869 at 1 Frampton Park Villas, Hackney, and was buried on 26 June in the family vault in the burial-ground of the New Gravel Pit Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 807


Aspley, William (b. in or before 1573, d. 1640), bookseller, was born the son of William Aspley (died 1574), vicar of Royston, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Jane (died after 1640), who outlived her son. On 5 February 1588 he was apprenticed to the London bookseller George Bishop, and was freed on 11 April 1597, by which date he would have been at least twenty-four. His house and shop were in St Paul's Churchyard; he set up first at the sign of the Tiger's Head in 1599 against the north-eastern wall of the cathedral, but by 1608 had moved across the churchyard to larger premises at the sign of the Parrot, where he remained until his death. 
Aspley's fame largely rests on his association with Shakespeare. On 23 August 1600 he and a fellow bookseller, Andrew Wise, entered 'Muche a Doo about nothinge' and 'the second parte of the history of kinge Henry the IIIJth' into the register of the Stationers' Company; both were printed on their behalf by Valentine Simmes that same year (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 3.170). Aspley's name appears on one of the two variant editions of Shakespeare's sonnets published in 1609. He was one of four booksellers at whose charge the first folio of Shakespeare was printed in 1623; he also co-published the second folio edition of 1632. In addition Aspley published John Marston's 'The Malcontent' (1604), 'Eastward Ho!' by Marston, George Chapman, and Ben Jonson (1605), and Chapman's 'Bussy D'Ambois' (1607-8). However, perhaps his most successful publishing ventures were popular religious works. 
Aspley was an active and evidently trusted member of the Stationers' Company; he was made a liveryman in 1611 and frequently arbitrated in disputes between members of the company. Despite a dramatic confrontation with the governing body in August 1628 in his capacity as a stock-keeper for the company, which led to his suspension for six months, he was elected to that same governing body in July 1630. Early the following year he was appointed to a committee to oversee the 'workmanshipp' of the almanacs printed on behalf of the company; it is appropriate, or perhaps ironic, that his will is wrapped in a page from Robert Butler's almanac of 1632 (Jackson, 224). He was elected master of the company on 14 July 1640 but died during his term, at some point between 7 and 19 December. His wife and child had predeceased him and he asked to be buried alongside them in the local church of St Faith's. The rights to a number of his religious publications appear as separate items in his will, bequeathed to his nephew William Page and to Robert Lunn, another kinsman. The bookseller Luke Fawne was the executor of the will and its main beneficiary. 


@@@@@


doc= 808


Asplin, William (1688/9-1758), Church of England clergyman and writer, was the son of William Asplin of Tardebig, Worcestershire. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 1 February 1704, aged fifteen, but moved to St Alban Hall, where he took his BA in 1707. He proceeded MA in 1710 and became vice-principal of the hall. He was ordained in 1709, became chaplain to a regiment on foreign service, and in 1717 was vicar of Banbury. In 1723 he became vicar of Horley and Hornton, and in 1733 vicar of Burthorpe, Gloucestershire. He married Mary, daughter of John Myster, of Horton, Oxfordshire, with whom he had at least one daughter. His wife predeceased him. 
Asplin was a man of considerable learning, and corresponded with Dr John Ward, the Gresham professor of rhetoric, on matters relating to archaeological lore and natural history. His published works aroused considerable controversy. The first, 'Alkibla: a Disquisition upon Worshiping towards the East' (1728), presented a historical explanation of how the Christian practice of praying towards the east had originated in the idolatrous practice of worshipping the sun. In 1731 he published a second part of his work, but his theories had already been attacked by John Andrews, vicar of South Newington in Oxfordshire, in 'The Kebla, or, A Defence of Eastward Adoration' (2 parts, 1728-9). This in turn was 'dissected' in 'The Anatomy of the Kebla, by a True Son of the Church of England' (1729). Asplin's publisher printed a second edition of 'Alkibla' in 1740. Asplin is generally believed to have written, under the pseudonym of Philalethus Rusticus, the anonymously published 'The Impertinence and Imposture of Modern Antiquaries Display'd, or, A Refutation of Mr. Wise's Letter to Dr. Mead, Concerning the White Horse and other Antiquities in Berkshire' (1740). The book's mocking personal attack on Francis Wise's scholarship prompted a flurry of pamphlets in defence of Wise, including one by the numismatist George North. Asplin died in 1758. 


@@@@@


doc= 809


Aspull, George (1813-1832), pianist, was born in June 1813 in Manchester, the ninth of the ten sons of Thomas Aspull, an unsuccessful merchant who had turned to earning his living by teaching music and playing the violin. George Aspull began to learn the piano from his father in February 1821, and made such rapid progress that within four months he was playing Cramer's first study in C. His first public performance was in January 1822, when he played and sang with one of his brothers. In February 1823 Frederic Kalkbrenner, after hearing him play at Liverpool, advised his father to take him to London, which he did in April. Here he performed for Clementi, who was extremely impressed by his playing and called him a genius, although at the time he was too small to sit at the piano, and performed standing up. Rossini was equally impressed when Aspull played to him during the composer's first visit to England in December 1823. On 20 February 1824 Aspull was asked to perform for George IV at Windsor, where he played for over three hours, and accompanied himself singing while Princess Augusta turned the pages. 
Aspull gave many concerts which attracted large audiences and enthusiastic reviews. 'That Master Aspull is a Musical Wonder, was the opinion of the whole room' ('Harmonicon', April 1824). He was also compared by critics to the young Mozart. At a concert at Brighton he gave the first performance in England of Weber's 'Konzertstuck'. In April 1825 he and his father went to Paris, where they met Hummel and Ignaz Moscheles, and for the next six years he toured in Great Britain and Ireland. Besides performing on the piano, Aspull used to sing at his concerts. He had a sweet if not very powerful tenor voice, but Rossini advised that he should not sing much, 'for his soul is too much for his body'. He wrote a little piano music and some songs; these were published after his premature death by his father, with a memoir, as 'George Aspull's Posthumous Works for the Pianoforte' (1837). 
Aspull died in Leamington on 19 August 1832 after catching a cold at Clementi's funeral. He was buried in Nottingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 810


Asser (d. 909), bishop of Sherborne, is a figure whose significance has often been hotly debated. All that is universally accepted about Asser is that a bishop of this name was said by King Alfred to have assisted his translation of Gregory's 'Book of Pastoral Rule', and that he held the see of Sherborne when he died. Of eleven reliably recorded witness lists to Edward the Elder's charters, between 900 and 904, Asser 'episcopus' is in ten, but is absent from transactions dated either 908 or 909. An undated but acceptable document from Wells records his exchange of lands with Edward; the estates he acquired belonged to Wells in 1066. In the name of this otherwise shadowy figure stands a short life of King Alfred. What may have been its sole medieval manuscript was numbered Otho A.xii in the Cotton Library, and was destroyed in the 1731 fire. It had mercifully been copied for Archbishop Parker, who published it in 1574, though unfortunately contaminated with interpolations from the annals of St Neots; more tampering in Camden's 1602 text 'proved' Alfred's (re-)foundation of Oxford. Francis Wise published a purified edition in 1722; he apparently did not use the manuscript but, in one of the saga's few happy chances, he did consult Humfrey Wanley about it. Wanley's view, that its script was very like that of a charter dated 1001, confirmed for what this is worth by a 'facsimile' of the opening lines supplied by Wise, commands respect. Proof that the life was at least as old as this is its quotation at length in the 'Historia regum' of Byrhtferth of Ramsey ('c'.1000) as well as by the annals of St Neots and the twelfth-century chronicler John of Worcester. 
The life of Alfred makes its author Welsh. The first of two autobiographical passages has him coming to Alfred from St David's, where he has been 'brought up, educated... and ordained' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 79). He claims to be a kinsman of 'Archbishop' Nobis (perhaps the bishop whose death in 873 is noted by 'Annales Cambriae'). Nobis and Asser have each been 'driven out' by the king of Dyfed. Asser's visit is meant to win the protection of a king whom south Welsh kings have accepted as lord in return for his help against Gwynedd, Mercia, and viking York. Asser is induced to spend at least half of each year with Alfred, who hopes that his people will profit from 'St David's learning'. His reward is the gift of two Somerset abbeys and the 'parochia' of Exeter, as well as a silk cloak and (more precious yet) 'a strong man's load of incense' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 81). In the second autobiographical section, Asser actually teaches Alfred 'to read and translate' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 87). The king's pursuit of literacy for himself and others, part of a quest for the wisdom of Solomon, is a main theme of the life. The early chapters have the famous story of how the prince wins a book of English poetry from his mother by memorizing it. The conclusion tells how Alfred obliges his judges to learn to read by threatening to dismiss them. In between is an account of a school for royal children and those of both nobles and the less nobly born. All belong to the part of the work (concentrated in its second half) which concerns not the king's life story but (in words quoted from Charlemagne's biographer Einhard) 'his behaviour and character'. The narrative proper mostly comprises a translation from the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. Even that has didactic glosses on dynastic politics English and Frankish; suggestively too, the chronicle's 'Danes' are regularly 'pagans', where English and even Franks are 'Christians'. The book's prose can be clumsy. Present and past tenses are confused. As a work set in 893, when its subject was still alive (in that respect resembling not Einhard but one life of Charlemagne's son Louis the Pious), it may have been a draft intended for completion and smoothing at Alfred's death. Alternatively, it has a literary design which has so far been missed by most scholars; or it was a forgery that 'pretended' to be contemporary, with variable success. 
The language and information of the life are, however, compatible with its being what it claims to be -- a contemporary account of Alfred's life. The Latin is in the hermeneutic idiom, rare in England since Aldhelm, but perhaps more familiar in Wales. There are also distinct Frankish elements, to go with knowledge of Einhard and nuggets of late Carolingian history. Above all, there are many Welsh symptoms, from an Avon spelled with a 'b' to Welsh equivalents offered for a run of English place names (long a staple of Welsh bardic schools). The first, and best, of many reasons to accept the life's authenticity is the fiendish ingenuity required for any such forgery. The life is the sole reason to think Asser Welsh: a forger 'need' not have made his task so difficult. The 'blunders' that alert suspicion do not run to a single palpable anachronism. The implication is that it was not from ignorance that it said so little that is plausible on the king's childhood, so much that is rebarbative on his maladies or clockmaking skills. This may be not just a biography but a quasi-hagiographical programme, based on Carolingian mirrors of princes and especially that of the Irish Sedulius Scottus. If so, its importance goes beyond the information it supplies. Asser's book is the main, if not the only, surviving fruit of ninth-century Welsh learning. It may be linked with the ninth-century Welsh manuscripts that made their way to tenth-century England. Such influences would help to explain the flowering of the English hermeneutic tradition from 'c'.930. Second, the root of disbelief in Asser is distaste for the Alfred he depicts. But Asser's Alfred is our Alfred, like it or not. His book, addressed to the king in person, is not to be marginalized as Welsh verbosity. If it is odd, its subject was odd enough to prompt it. Their combined oddity may underlie the book's very lack of circulation. The life is thus not merely authentic: it is another extraordinary outcome of the extraordinary atmosphere created by Alfred. 


@@@@@


doc= 811


Assheton, Nicholas (1590-1625), landowner, was the second son of Richard Assheton of Downham, near Clitheroe, Lancashire, and Margaret Hilton. He belonged to a branch of the Assheton family of Middleton, in the same county. He was probably educated at Clitheroe grammar school; he married Frances (died 1618), daughter of Richard Greenacres, of Worston, near Downham, with whom he had five children. He is remembered for his journal, which extends from 2 May 1617 to 13 March 1619, and records observations on his agreeable social life, his country pursuits, and his attendance at church and ale-house. It also includes some interesting notices of James I's visit to Lancashire in August 1617, when the petition which originated the 'Book of Sports' was presented to the king. The original journal was evidently not intended for publication and has been lost. It was first printed by T. D. Whitaker in his history of Whalley (1801). The nineteenth-century novelist William Harrison Ainsworth introduced Assheton into his novel 'Lancashire Witches' (bk 2, chap. 3), as 'a type of the Lancashire squire of the day', but both he and Whitaker were mistaken in considering Assheton a puritan. Although he records hearing sermons every week, his interests were primarily hunting, shooting, and fishing, with lively society and what he termed being 'merrie' and 'more than merrie'. Assheton died on 16 April 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 812


Assheton, William (bap. 1642, d. 1711), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 17 July 1642 at Middleton, Lancashire, the son of William Assheton (died 1659), the rector there, and his wife, Ellenor Brook. The rector's family connections lay among the puritan gentry of Lancashire: his brother Ralph and his wife's brother-in-law Thomas Birch were both leading local supporters of the parliamentarian cause. He himself was, however, no more than lukewarm about the county's presbyterian settlement, dragging his feet over the appointment of elders in his parish and making no attempt to restrict access to communion to the godly. The church survey of 1650 complained that he supplied 'the cure at Middleton very weakly, and gives no satisfaction to the congregation, neyther expounds any chapter or psalme nor catechise the youth of the said parish'. To Adam Martindale the rector was 'an honest humble man, considering his high birth, but accounted an exceeding mean preacher' (Shaw, 2.209-10). 
The younger William Assheton was educated at a private country school before admission to, and matriculation at, Brasenose College, Oxford, in July 1658. Although Anthony Wood claims that he had a presbyterian tutor Assheton dedicated his life to defending Anglicanism. He graduated BA in 1662, became a fellow of Brasenose in 1663, and proceeded MA in January 1665. By about 1670 he was a frequent preacher in Oxford. He proceeded BD in 1672 and the next year became first chaplain to James Butler, duke of Ormond, chancellor of the university. Soon after proceeding DD in January 1674 he became vicar of Knaresborough, Yorkshire, and a prebendary of York. But he followed Ormond to Ireland and to London, where he was appointed to the united parishes of St Antholin, Budge Row, and St John, Walbrook, in May 1674. He resigned the living in 1677 to become rector first of Fyfield, Hampshire, and then, through Ormond's influence with the St John family, of Beckenham, Kent, which living he held for the rest of his life. He was in some demand as a preacher in court and city, and several of his occasional sermons -- before the mayor and aldermen of London (1673), the queen (1696), the sons of the clergy (1700), and the natives of Kent (1700) -- have been printed. He was frequently chosen proctor for Rochester in convocation. 
Assheton's fame rests on a myriad of original writings and collections of the work of others, many of which he had published in cheap editions for charitable or evangelical distribution. Just how many he wrote is difficult to gauge because of his habit of changing works slightly and retitling them for new editions. His first works, from the 1660s through the early 1680s, were works of controversy attacking nonconformists for threatening state and church government. 'Evangelium armatum' (1663, new edition with revised title 1682) collected selections from Richard Baxter, Edmund Calamy, and others in order to prove that their pretended purity of religion led to the cutting of throats. In the 1670s 'Toleration Disapprov'd and Condemn'd by the Authority' (1670), 'The Danger of Hypocrisie' (1673), and 'The Cases of Scandal and Persecution' (1674) condemned any relaxation of penal laws for dissenters, and he expanded the first in 1705 to condemn occasional conformity. 'A Seasonable Apology for the Honours and Revenues of the Clergy' (1676) quotes 'Eikon basilike' approvingly for condemning 'the abasing of Episcopacy into Presbytery and the robbing of the Church of its Lands and Revenues' (Assheton, 'Seasonable', sig. A6'v'). After the exposure of the Rye House plot he lambasted 'the Brethren of the Association' (Assheton, 'Royal Apology', sig. A3) by publishing 'The Cry of Royal Innocent Blood, Heard and Answered' (1683), 'The Parallel: Doleman / Bradshaw / Sidney' (1684), and 'The Royal Apology, or, An Answer to the Rebels Plea' (1684) in quick succession. Under James II he turned his attention to the Catholic threat in 'The Plain-Mans Reply to the Catholick Missionaries' (1686), followed by 'A defence of 'The Plain-Man's Reply'' (1688), and 'The Country Parsons Admonition to his Parishioners. Perswading them to continue in the protestant religion' (1687), followed by 'A Defence of the Country Parson's Admonition' in the same year. 
Assheton increasingly devoted his energies to producing short pamphlets of practical divinity for the common lay person, including: a dialogue on atheism (1690, revised 1694), four discourses against blasphemy, drunkenness, swearing, and debauchery (1691-3), a defence of infant baptism (1694, revised as 'A Conference with an Anabaptist', 1695), 'A Discourse Concerning a Death-Bed Repentance' (1696), 'A Method of Daily Devotion. Fitted to the Meanest Capacities' (1697), 'The Plain Man's Devotion' (1698), methods of devotion for sick and dying persons (1698? and 1706), 'Directions for Prayer' (1702), 'A Vindication of the Immortality of the Soul' (1703), and 'A Brief Exhortation of the Holy Communion' (1705). Several of these he dedicated to his Beckenham parishioners, a couple were translated into Welsh, and many were reprinted throughout the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. He often appended a price list of 'these little Two-penny Books' (Watts, 60) to his works, adding that they were 'cheaper to those who are so Charitable to give away Numbers' ('Account'). Assheton's biographer Thomas Watts suggests that he had printed thousands of his tracts just before the king's proclamation for the reformation of manners, and Queen Mary had his tracts distributed to soldiers and seamen. Likewise he contributed a number of his tracts to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. 
Assheton also published collected writings of Edward Stillingfleet (1710), and of John Tillotson and Stillingfleet (1697), and Isaac Barrow against Socinians (1698), as well as a collection, 'Occasional Prayers', from bishops Jeremy Taylor, John Cosin, and Thomas Kenn (1708). Finally Assheton contributed to the origins of life insurance with his 'An account of Dr Assheton's proposal... for the benefit of widows of clergymen and others; by settling joyntures and annuities at the rate of thirty per cent' (1699). He first proposed this scheme for providing maintenance for clergymen's widows and others to the corporation of the clergy and then to the Bank of England, both of whom declined, before finding acceptance from the Mercers' Company. Rich dissenters, including his friend Mr Papillon, contributed to this scheme. And, although the scheme almost immediately foundered because of faulty computations, it was revised and continued until the company petitioned parliament for assistance in 1747. 
Beckenham, according to Assheton, was beset by Unitarians ('[t]hey have been scattering their pamphlets... in my parish'; DWL, 201.38, fol. 13) and Baptists ('[t]here being several Antipaedobaptists... in this Parish'; Assheton, 'Exposition', sig. A3). But even the latter he viewed as 'very kind and loving Parishioners' (Assheton, 'Conference', vi-vii). And his tracts stirred controversy more than his ministry. A Baptist preacher published 'Jerub-Baal. Being, a Three-Penny Answer to a Twelve-Penny Book. Written by William Assheton' (1697) and Baxter refuted the arguments of Assheton and others in 'The Nonconformists Plea for Peace' (1679). Baxter later noted Assheton's attack on nonconformists' motives as 'words, so false and impudent, beseeming the Devil himself were the speaker' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.206). Assheton continued single for many years and his household was managed by his sister. He built a large personal library of divinity and shipped duplicates to Wales and the Scottish highlands. On 16 May 1689 he took out a licence to marry Anne Peache, a widow of Rotherhithe, although there seems to have been no issue from the union and Assheton buried her at Rotherhithe among her family. A few years before his death he was offered the headship of Brasenose, but he declined because of age. In September 1711 he developed a fever for about ten days and died at Beckenham. He was buried on 17 September in the chancel of his church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 813


Astbury, John (1688?-1743?), potter, was probably the son of John Astbury ('b'. 1663) and Anna Hales (died 1703). Uncertainty arises because there were several John Astburys in the Staffordshire Potteries at this time. John Astbury and Anna Hales had three other children, a daughter, Mary, and two sons, Thomas ('b'. 1692) and Samuel (1699-1781). Samuel was also a potter and married Elizabeth, the sister of Thomas Wedgwood, father of Josiah Wedgwood, and in 1744 was one of the witnesses to the deed of Josiah's pottery apprenticeship. The John Astbury with whom we are concerned may have married Ann, the union yielding five children: Margaret (1722-1728), Anne (1725-1728), Hannah, Joshua (1728-1780), and Margaret ('b'. 1730). Tradition holds that Astbury, along with Thomas Twyford, feigned idiocy to spy on the workings of the Elers' pottery at Bradwell Farm. Given his age at that time this story is unlikely to be true. Little is known of his training or education. It has been suggested that he was in a short-lived partnership with Twyford in Shelton from around 1709. 
On 24 June 1728 John Fenton leased his potworks at Shelton for three years to a John Astbury whose name had appeared as a potter in Fenton's accounts since 1723. In 1736 Astbury took over the lease on the house and land. He operated the potworks until his death, after which his widow is recorded as paying the potworks rent. It was at this site that Astbury made the wares for which he is best known. Excavations by archaeologists from the City Museum, Stoke-on-Trent, on the site of the potworks have revealed fine red earthenware often with applied decoration in either local red clay or pipe clay, perhaps influenced by the demand for Chinese wares and the work of the Elers. These moulded sprigs have included lions, unicorns, flora, and fauna. The most notable were those commemorating Admiral Vernon's capture of Porto Bello from the Spanish in 1739. White clay was used to coat pots and in banded decoration. Further excavated finds include white salt-glazed stoneware and agate ware. Most of the wares were wheel-thrown but there was some evidence of slip casting with relief decoration and of lathe turning. Astbury has become a generic term for pottery figures made from brown and white clays under colourless lead glazes. It has been suggested that the production dates of the figures do not fully correspond with those of Astbury's productive period, therefore implying an incorrect attribution. 'Astbury' is also used when referring to some tea wares produced in the manner of the early eighteenth century. 
Astbury had been suggested as the discoverer of the whitening properties that flint could impart to earthenware but this is based on a story first published by Josiah Wedgwood. He is also alleged to have been the first Staffordshire potter to import white clay from Bideford, Devon. There are questions that remain unanswered but what cannot be doubted is that an Astbury was an important potter producing wares of a quality that assisted the improvement of the local industry. The master potter John Astbury may be the man of that name buried in the graveyard of St Peter ad Vincula, Stoke-on-Trent, and recorded as having died on 3 March 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 814


Astell, Mary (1666-1731), philosopher and promoter of women's education, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne on 12 November 1666, the first of two surviving children of Peter Astell (1638-1678), coal merchant, and his wife, Mary, daughter of George Errington, also a coal merchant in Newcastle. The Erringtons were a wealthy old Catholic Northumberland family. The Astells had been barristers and coal merchants; Mary Astell's grandfather, father, and uncle Isaac all were members of the coal Hostmen, a powerful guild in Newcastle that controlled the weighing, sorting, transfer, and shipping of coal at a time when the scarcity of timber in Europe created an international market for fossil fuel. Her brother, Peter ('b'. 1668), became a lawyer, married in 1700, and had two sons; he and his wife and children were all dead by 1712. 
Mary Astell grew up in a prosperous, well-connected family. Her paternal uncle Ralph Astell, curate of St Nicholas's, Newcastle upon Tyne, was an intellectual and a man of letters. Unmarried and without any children of his own, he educated his young niece in the philosophy that he had studied at Cambridge -- Platonists like Henry More and John Smith -- and in theological doctrine. She apparently inherited his library, for a number of his books, annotated in her hand, passed into the hands of her executor, Elizabeth Hutcheson, when Astell died. In addition to their large, well-furnished house Astell's father was part owner of four merchant vessels at the time of his death in 1678. The fortunes of the family declined after that, and it was more than a decade before Astell's mother could pay back the $21 that she had borrowed from the Hostmen to pay for her husband's funeral expenses. 
It is not known when exactly Astell came to London but it was probably in 1687-8, at the time of the revolution, which brought riots to her native Newcastle, where her family, who had been staunch royalists in the civil war, now sympathized with James II and opposed William and Mary. She may have aimed to support herself as a writer, but without family in London she had difficulty making a living. Archbishop William Sancroft came to her aid with financial support 'when even my Kinsfolk had failed, and my familiar Friends had forgotten me' (Perry, 'The Celebrated Mary Astell', 68), and in gratitude she presented him in 1689 with a long manuscript of poems on subjects such as virtue, affliction, ambition, solitude, death, judgement, and the afterlife. These poems, written between 1683 and 1688, with their biblical references, fervent images of the divine, and disdain for worldly concerns, also express her loneliness and physical privation: '
Long have I liv'd on hope, but will 

A Hope that's always baulk'd continue still? 

Is't not a sign the flood dos still remain, 

When my poor Dove comes empty home again? 
(ibid., 'The Complaint', ll. 33-6, 444)' 

Astell settled in Chelsea, a salubrious suburb inhabited by the wealthy and by a number of fashionable girls' boarding-schools. She never taught in any of these schools but women's education was one of her lifelong concerns. She apparently continued the line of study marked out by her uncle Ralph Astell, for on 21 September 1693 she wrote a letter to John Norris of Bemerton, the last of the Cambridge Platonists, about an inconsistency that she had found in the third volume of his 'Discourses'. 'Sir', she wrote: 'though some morose Gentleman wou'd perhaps remit me to the Distaff or the Kitchin... yet expecting better things from the more Equitable and ingenious Mr. Norris, who is not so narrow-Soul'd as to confine Learning to his own Sex, or to envy it in ours, I presume to beg his Attention a little to the Impertinencies of a Woman's Pen. (Perry, 'The Celebrated Mary Astell', 355)' Norris had argued that one ought to love God as the efficient cause of one's pleasure. Astell countered that since God was the efficient cause of 'all' sensation one was forced to the conclusion that pain, given his responsibility for it, may in fact do one good. Her opening letter has all the earmarks of her literary self: a relish for philosophical argument; self-assured, lively, conversational prose; familiarity with contemporary discourse about the love of God and the place of suffering in human life. For ten months she and Norris corresponded about the philosophical contradictions of living a spiritual life: whether one owed love to God or to his creatures, how to respond to life's pain and misfortune, and whether God or the material world was the efficient cause of all sensation. Delighted with his interlocutor, Norris asked to publish their correspondence. While it was in negotiation Astell published her first book, 'A Serious Proposal to the Ladies' (1694), which together with the correspondence with Norris, under the title 'Letters Concerning the Love of God' (1695), established her reputation as an intellectual and a writer. 
Although the volume of letters with Norris was generally considered by Astell's contemporaries to be her most sublime work, 'A Serious Proposal to the Ladies' has proved to be her most lasting contribution. An instant success, it was widely discussed in her day and went through four new editions by 1701. Signed only by 'a lover of her sex' it was a text that began to construct the attitude that later historians would call feminist. In it Astell argued that by not educating women -- by not teaching them the works of philosophers and religious thinkers who could lead them to understand the higher purposes of human life -- women were confined to trivial ornamental status and petty concerns. 'Women', she wrote, 'are from their very Infancy debar'd those Advantages, with the want of which they are afterwards reproached' (M. Astell, 'A Serious Proposal to the Ladies', 1694, 25-6). They are 'nursed up in those Vices which will hereafter be upbraided to them. So partial are Men as to expect Brick where they afford no Straw' (ibid., 26). She appealed to women to recognize their ''real' Interest' and to improve their intellectual capacities and understanding rather than just spend their time tinkering with external appearance. 'How can you be content', she asked, 'to be in the World like Tulips in a Garden, to make a fine 'shew' and be good for nothing' (ibid., 11). She urged them to be scholars and poets and to strive for excellence, arguing that the life of the mind was 'a Matter infinitely more worthy your Debates, than what Colours are most agreeable, or what's the Dress becomes you best' (ibid., 6). She encouraged women to aspire to higher things than: 'to attract the Eyes of Men. We value 'them' too much, and ourselves too little, if we place any part of our desert in their Opinion; and don't think our selves capable of Nobler Things than the pitiful Conquest of some worthless heart. (ibid., 14-15)' Astell's proposed remedy was to create an intellectual retreat -- an all-women's community, a seminary, a secular convent -- funded by pooling many moderate dowries, where women could spend their time in study and contemplation, reading 'judicious authors', enacting good works, and enjoying one another's friendship and conversation. Moreover these proposed communities of religious retirement might also solve the problem of where a woman should live (since the English Reformation had closed the convents) if she were an adult but did not choose to marry. Astell thought of these communities as an alternative to marriage -- or at least a resting place for women between their parental homes and marriage. They were to be havens for 'hunted heiresses' importuned for their fortunes by adventurers and impoverished gentlemen, as well as places where women could cultivate their minds. 
Astell's proposal was widely noted by her contemporaries and by subsequent writers. Defoe copied her idea into his 'Essay on Projects' (1697), claiming that he had thought of an academy for women 'long before the Book call'd 'advice to the Ladies', was made Publick' (Perry, 'The Celebrated Mary Astell', 129). Richard Steele mocked her in several columns of 'The Tatler' in 1709, calling her the leader of 'an order of Platonick Ladies' determined to remain unmarried virgins and 'resolv'd to join their Fortunes and erect a Nunnery' ('The Tatler', 23 June 1709). Samuel Richardson's eponymous hero Sir Charles Grandison refers approvingly to this scheme for a 'Protestant nunnery' in the second volume of that novel (1753). There is also some evidence that Clarissa's final preparations for death in Richardson's 1748 novel -- bringing her coffin into her bedroom, praying, and refusing all food -- are modelled on Mary Astell's last days. In the nineteenth century Robert Southey proposed an educational establishment for women supported by the dowries and estates of the wealthy. Tennyson's 'The Princess' (1847) is about a noblewoman who establishes a women's university, a theme adapted by Gilbert and Sullivan in 'Princess Ida'. Even in the twentieth century Astell's proposal reverberated in continuing debates about women's education. 
Vivid, direct, and engaging, Astell's quotable style made an impression on her eighteenth-century readers. 'A Serious Proposal' was particularly admired by a set of single, aristocratic, philanthropically-minded women of the day, among them Lady Catherine Jones, Lady Elizabeth Hastings and her half-sisters, and Anne, countess of Coventry. These women took up Astell and became her patrons and supporters. Astell's extraordinary rhetorical gifts and capacity for philosophical reasoning conferred on her a status in London society that she had not been born to, raising her to a kind of social equivalence with these aristocratic women. Lady Catherine Jones, a Chelsea neighbour, became an especially close friend; Astell dedicated her 'Letters Concerning the Love of God' (1695) to her and in her final years lived in her house in Jew's Row. 
It is said that the prospective queen, Princess Anne of Denmark, was so impressed by the proposal that she was prepared to donate $10,000 to establish Astell's educational retreat. That she allowed Astell to dedicate the sequel, 'A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, Part II' (1697), to her indicates some measure of her regard for the author, but Anne was talked out of her utopian enthusiasm for Astell's plan by Bishop Gilbert Burnet, who is reputed to have disapproved of the papist flavour of this 'protestant monastery'. Astell replied to his objection in this work, and her reply suggests what Burnet's objections had been. 'They must either be very Ignorant or very Malicious who pretend that we wou'd imitate Foreign Monasteries... a little attention to what they read might have convinc'd them that our Institution is rather 'Academical' than 'Monastic'' (pp. 285-6). 
Knowledge, not faith, was the subject of 'A Serious Proposal to the Ladies, Part II'. It distils a method of philosophical thought, derived from the Jansenists of the Port Royal school, as a kind of do-it-yourself handbook to help women learn to think seriously about their moral and intellectual purposes. In it Astell synthesizes the contemporary philosophical debate about the extent to which knowledge comes directly from God or is merely gathered by the senses -- an issue that she began debating in her letters with Norris. She took issue with Locke's materialism in this particular because she felt that if the only ideas available to people came through the senses then there would be no way to advance or to improve the 'status quo'. She was convinced that the highest purpose of human thought was the contemplation of pure ideas, which by virtue of their abstract nature had the power to draw the mind away from the senses, moderate the passions, and focus the distractable mortal mind on an immaterial 'good'. Because she believed that reason was necessary to lead one to a knowledge of God she intended this book to teach women to think their way through to an understanding of the true and good in human life. Some of her arguments from this work were copied verbatim by George Berkeley, later bishop of Cloyne, into his compilation called 'The Ladies Library' (1714). 
Returning to an expressly feminist subject in her next work, 'Some Reflections upon Marriage' (1700), Astell argued that since the marriage contract required a woman's absolute obedience to her husband no woman ought to marry except where her husband's moral superiority warranted that kind of obedience. As a tory she believed in the necessity of a citizen's absolute obedience to a monarch and she disagreed with those who, following Locke, argued that obedience in a state was contractual and negotiable. She was sympathetic to the nonjuring clergy like Henry Dodwell, who, having sworn allegiance to James II, refused to renege on that pledge and swear anew to William and Mary. She asserted that since one was born into a state one owed obedience to its sovereign, but in the case of marriage one had a choice about undertaking such obligations on a voluntary basis. No woman had to agree to supererogatory vows of obedience. She advised women to think long and hard before entering voluntarily into the tyrannical relationship of marriage. 
Astell wrote four more political works as well as a major exposition of her religious credo, 'The Christian Religion, as Profess'd by a Daughter of the Church of England' (1705). All her political texts in one way or another explore the dangers of allowing dissent and subversion in the state, and religious pluralism in parliament. She wrote 'Moderation Truly Stated' (1704) and 'A Fair Way with the Dissenters and their Patrons' (1704) as interventions in the current debates in parliament about occasional conformity, the practice whereby dissenters could hold public office if they occasionally took communion in the Church of England. Her arguments against the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' were very much admired by such high-churchmen as George Hickes and Francis Atterbury. Defoe, a dissenter, wrote several pamphlets on the opposite side of the question and satirized Astell's position. 
Astell's third pamphlet of 1704, 'An Impartial Enquiry into the Causes of Rebellion and Civil War in this Kingdom', began by deploring the execution of Charles I and went on to compare the seditious tactics of the whigs and dissenters of 1688 -- and by implication the whigs and dissenters who favoured occasional conformity -- to the positions of the rebels of 1641. She then composed 'The Christian Religion, as Profess'd by a Daughter of the Church of England' (1705), which she considered her 'magnum opus', a long, scholarly treatise in numbered propositions, explaining the philosophical and theological grounds for natural and revealed religion. In 1709 she wrote 'Bart'lemy Fair, or, An Enquiry after Wit', her last polemical work, which she published under the pseudonym Mr Wotton and in which she opposed Shaftesbury's claim that ridicule could separate sound religious beliefs from absurd ones. She argued that religious truth was not guaranteed by the free exercise of wit in the market place of ideas and maintained that the bedrock of faith (or ethics) had to be accepted unconditionally rather than debated according to rules of logic. 
Mainly known today as an early feminist and high tory polemicist, Astell was first and foremost a philosopher. Her feminist texts were written to defend women's right to education and to the life of the mind. She debated with her contemporaries John Norris, John Locke, Bishop George Berkeley, and Shaftesbury on all the major philosophical questions of the day: the role of God in the production of pain and pleasure; the place of faith, of reason or propositional logic, and of sensory experience in determining what we know; whether or not human beings are born with innate ideas or are 'tabulae rasae' upon which experience writes its predictable lessons; whether or not ideas are both clear and distinct; the meaning of a mind-body dualism, and whether or not matter can think. 
Astell objected to the doctrine of the human mind as a 'tabula rasa', as she did to the notion of an abstract social contract among individuals, because she felt that humans were born into pre-existing social worlds of families, villages, countries, and cultures. She thought it absurd to imagine that children came into the world abstractly: 'I had hitherto thought that... a State of Nature was a meer figment of 'Hobb's' Brain... till you [Locke] were pleas'd to inform me 'of that Equality wherin the Race of Men were plac'd in the Free State of Nature'... How I lament my stars that it was not my good fortune to Live in those Happy Days when Men sprung up like so many Mushrooms or 'Terrae Filii', without Father or Mother or any sort of dependency. (M. Astell, 'Moderation Truly Stated', 1704, xxxv)' Furthermore she recognized that such a formulation erased women's reproductive agency for the sake of a theory that proclaimed all men equal but considered women irrelevant.Astell viewed faith, knowledge, and opinion not so much as different ways of knowing as knowledge with different degrees of evidence. For example she thought that it was possible to have clear, certain, and indubitable ideas of one's own mind and of God but that it was impossible to know their nature distinctly because in the first case the mind is too complex to know itself and in the second because God is infinite. 
Locke had objected to conceiving of religion as the contemplation of abstract ideas because he thought religion in that form was beyond the grasp of 'vulgar capacities'. In 'The Reasonableness of Christianity' (1695) he had written: 'you may as soon hope to have all Day Labourers and Tradesmen, the Spinsters and Dairy Maids perfect Mathematicians, as to have them perfect in 'Ethics' this way. Hearing plain Commands, is the sure and only course to bring them to Obedience and Practice. (p. 279)' Astell was acutely aware that in this statement Locke had dismissed women along with the lower classes as incapable of following the reasoning that set up God as the fountainhead of good, the source of that absolute idea. She denied that such concepts were mysterious or inaccessible. They were only: '
'plain Propositions and short Reasonings about things familiar to our Minds, as' need not 'amaze' any part of Mankind, no not the 'Day Labourer and Tradesmen, the Spinsters and Dairy Maids', who may very easily 'apprehend' what a Woman cou'd write. (M. Astell, 'The Christian Religion, as Profess'd by a Daughter of the Church', 1705, 40-43)' As usual she disclaimed any special abilities but used herself as the example that proved the capacities of all women. 'All the difference if there be any', she wrote, between herself and any other woman, arose 'only from her Application, her Disinterested and Unprejudiced Love to Truth, and unwearied pursuit of it, notwithstanding all Discouragements, which is in every Woman's Power as well as in hers' (ibid., 402-3). 
Astell was disturbed that Locke did not argue for an immaterial soul but stipulated instead that matter thinks, that information comes through the senses and is recombined on the blank slate of the mind, and that the super-addition of thought to matter is trivial for an all-powerful God. She asserted that even making such an argument was tantamount to conceding the separation of mind and body. Locke's arguments amounted to nothing more, she wrote, than: 'that God 'can' do what we find He 'has' done, (viz.) make another Substance besides Body, whose Essential Property, if not its very Essence shall be Thought, and can Unite this Thinking Substance to Body, which is what we call the Union between Soul and Body. (M. Astell, 'The Christian Religion', 261)' The separation of mind and body was important to Astell because she thought it proved that all human beings, whatever their bodies and sensory capacities, had the same ability to reason their way to the absolute good. 
Astell, who never married, was often plagued with poor health and spent several months living in Burwash, Sussex, to recuperate from a long illness in 1718-19. In her final years she developed breast cancer and underwent a mastectomy under the knife of a surgeon named Dr Johnson. Two months later, on 9 May 1731, she died in Chelsea, where she was buried in the churchyard on 14 May. 
A true figure of the Enlightenment, Astell was interested in science and practical education as well as philosophy and politics. She studied astronomy with Flamsteed at the Royal Observatory at Greenwich between September 1697 and February 1698. Her interest in mathematical concepts is evident from the mathematical metaphors that she uses in her writing. Always serious about women's education, she started a charity school for the daughters of pensioners in the Royal Hospital in Chelsea, for which she found a suitable site, raised funds, and planned the curriculum. The doors of this school opened in 1709 and it served veterans' daughters into the next century. 
Astell was an important model and inspiration to other eighteenth-century women writers and intellectuals such as Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, Lady Mary Chudleigh, Elizabeth Elstob, Elizabeth Thomas, Sarah Chapone, and the bluestockings of the following generation. She tried, albeit unsuccessfully, to convince Lady Mary Wortley Montagu to publish her so-called 'Turkish letters', the meditations and observations that she wrote during the years when her husband was ambassador to the court of Turkey; Astell wrote a preface to them in 1724, urging Lady Mary to publish them at the time. Astell's independent spirit and unequivocal claim to an intellectual voice certainly inspired Lady Mary Chudleigh's poems and Elizabeth Elstob's determination to be an Anglo-Saxon scholar and then an educator of women. Her books were read and admired by Sarah Chapone, a link to the bluestockings of the next generation and a good friend to Samuel Richardson. As one of the earliest English authors in the modern age of printing and mass dissemination to write what would now be called feminist analysis her ultimate influence on the history of the English-speaking women's movement is incalculable. 


@@@@@


doc= 815


Astell, William (1774-1847), director of the East India Company, was born on 13 October 1774, the second son of Godfrey Thornton of Mogerhanger and Everton, a director of the Bank of England, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Stephen Peter Godin of Cullards Grove, Middlesex. He took the name Astell in lieu of Thornton in 1807 to inherit the Bedfordshire and Huntingdonshire estates of his maternal grandmother, Margaret Astell. In 1800 he married Sarah (died 1841), only daughter of John Harvey of Ickwellbury, Bedfordshire; they had four sons and four daughters. 
Astell was a partner in Godfrey Thornton & Sons and a director of the East India Company (1800-46), the Russia Company (1802), and the East India Dock Company (1805-35). He was also at one time chairman of the Great Northern Railway Company. In 1807 he was returned for Bridgwater as a conservative, which borough he represented continuously until 1832; he sat for the county of Bedford from 1841 until his death in 1847. Astell was an unimpressive politician and rarely spoke in the House of Commons except when called upon to deflect criticism of the East India Company; nevertheless, he kept a firm hold on his borough through the ample distribution of company patronage. 
A director of the East India Company for forty-six years, Astell was chairman four times and deputy three times; most importantly he was in one or other of these offices from 1828 until 1831, the early years of Lord Bentinck's governor-generalship of India. Astell pushed for the employment of more Indians at the lower levels of the executive, not out of any great spirit of racial inclusiveness but as a means of cutting the company's expenditure on European servants. He was similarly motivated by pragmatism in opposing interference with Indian religious customs. Having voted four times against Catholic emancipation, Astell was no advocate of tolerance; he simply did not want reformers arousing social discontent in India. He was averse to annexation, unless it was clearly in the financial and military interests of the company, and in 1844 was prominent in the recall of Lord Ellenborough. He was a deputy lieutenant of Bedfordshire, lieutenant-colonel of the Bedfordshire militia, and colonel of the Royal East India volunteers. He died on 7 March 1847 at his country residence, Everton House, Huntingdonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 816


Astle, Thomas (1735-1803), archivist and collector of books and manuscripts, was born on 22 December 1735 at Yoxall, on the edge of Needwood Forest, Staffordshire, the eldest son of Daniel Astle (died 1775), keeper of the forest, who was of a family long established at Fauld in Hanbury, Staffordshire, and his wife, Dorothy (died 1745x7). He was perhaps educated at Eton College. He was articled to an attorney at Yoxall, but, despite having lost one eye in an accident at school, chose instead to spend his life in the world of ancient manuscripts and records. 
In 1761 Astle was engaged by the British Museum to compile the index to the catalogue of the Harley manuscripts; he was probably also responsible for the long and very useful preface. In the same year that this was published, 1763, he was elected FSA; he was elected FRS in 1766. On 18 December 1765 he married Anna Maria, the only daughter and heir of the Revd Philip Morant (1700-1770), the historian of Essex, and his wife, Anne Stebbing (died 1767). They had four sons and at least three daughters. 
'In the paper-office there is a wight, called Thomas Astle, who lives like moths on old parchments', wrote Horace Walpole in 1775 (Walpole, 'Corr.', 42.238), and it was no doubt true that Astle spent much of his time there. On 22 July 1763 George Grenville, who was then prime minister and chancellor of the exchequer, had nominated him, with Sir Joseph Ayloffe and Dr A. C. Ducarel, to report on the records in the state paper office; following their suggestion, a standing commission was set up (by warrant of 16 July 1764), paying them each $100 p.a. to methodize, regulate, and digest the materials in that office. At almost the same time the same trio investigated the records in the augmentation office, and again, following their suggestion in a report, a standing commission was set up (by warrant of 12 June 1765), paying them each $100 p.a. to methodize and digest all the exchequer records. Astle seems to have retained his part in these responsibilities until death, though in 1789 he renounced the income from the state paper office post (by then $200 p.a., perhaps because the two commissions had been merged into one) in favour of his son, Thomas Astle junior, who joined him as commissioner. These were not sinecures: as Astle wrote to Lord (W. W.) Grenville earlier in 1789, 'Myself and Mr [John] Topham are the efficient officers in the State Paper Office, the business of Sir Stanier Porten the Keeper, and of Mr Ramsden the Transmitter of the State Papers being intirely done by us' (BL, Add. MS 59000, fol. 91'v'). 
In 1766 Astle was consulted by a committee of the House of Lords about the publication of ancient parliamentary records: this led to the Lords' decision that the rolls of parliament should be printed. Philip Morant took the leading part in this work (having been suggested for it by his son-in-law) from 1768 until his death in 1770; Astle then took his place, dealing, apparently, with the years after 2 Henry VI. He made slow progress, and only finished the work of collating the printed sheets with the originals in 1776; the six volumes of 'Rotuli parliamentorum, ut et petitiones, et placita in parliamento [1278-1503]' were published only in 1783 (still without an index), though some sets were distributed in 1777. The work was accurate and respectable by the standards of the time, but was in no sense a critical edition of the texts: Astle and his fellow editors seem, for instance, to have been unaware of the survival of the original parliamentary petitions on which so many of the parliamentary rolls' texts were based (being responses to the petitions). A supplement of omitted materials was published in 1935, and in the 1990s it was decided that a new edition of the rolls should be prepared. 
After the death in 1775 of Henry Rooke, chief clerk of the record office in the Tower, Astle was appointed to his place; on 30 December 1783, following the death of Sir John Shelley, keeper of the records, he was admitted to the higher office. Despite opposition from the prime minister, William Pitt, he retained the keeper's high salary of $500 p.a. He was elected a trustee of the British Museum in 1787. 
Astle produced a number of publications on his own account, generally drawing on manuscripts in his own collection. An article in 'Archaeologia' (10, 1792) on his charter of King Edgar (now BL, Stowe Charter 31) was a careful demonstration that it is not of its purported date. In 1775 he printed, anonymously, 'The Will of King Henry VII' from the original in the chapter house records at Westminster Abbey, with a short preface. He had a hand in the publication of Joseph Ayloffe's 'Calendars of Ancient Charters' (1772) and 'The Will of King Alfred' (1788), for each of which he wrote an anonymous preface, and in the compilation of Andrew Coltee Ducarel's 'History of the royal hospital and collegiate church of St. Katharine, near the Tower of London, from its foundation in 1273' (1782). 
Astle's most substantial work was 'The Origin and Progress of Writing' (1784); a second edition, slightly enlarged (notably by the addition of a portrait of the author), was published in 1803. It is a wide-ranging piece of scholarship, with excellent plates of facsimiles of scripts, engraved by B. T. Pouncy: universal in its scope, it includes a history of printing as well as accounts of the materials used for writing, numerals and the characters used for numerals, and secret writing and ciphers. It must have been inspired by Astle's continental books or acquaintances -- he is said to have been 'several times on the Continent on literary pursuits' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.203n.) -- though for its immediate sources he drew on his own collection of charters, manuscripts, and facsimiles (such as those in Stowe MSS 1060-1061). It was an authoritative source for the history of writing well into the nineteenth century, and was last reprinted in 1876. Today it seems remarkable more for its out-of-the-way learning than for any methodological advance upon its continental precursors. 
Astle formed an outstanding collection of charters and manuscripts, as well as a fine library of printed books. He certainly frequented the London salerooms, but it is not known how he acquired some of his greatest treasures, such as forty-two pre-conquest charters (BL, Stowe charters 1-42; most of these had belonged to the Dering family of Kent), or an eleventh-century Latin psalter with interlinear Old English glosses (Stowe MS 2, called 'King Alfred's Psalter' by Astle). In 1769 or 1770 Michael Lort presented to him the eleventh-century 'Liber vitae' of Hyde Abbey, Winchester: this volume (Stowe MS 944), which contains the text (in Old English) of the will of King Alfred, he had handsomely bound in green morocco, stamped with the arms of Astley which he had assumed. Overall, the collection was especially rich in monastic cartularies, chronicles and other medieval texts, Tudor ceremonial and heraldic works, and catalogues and other works concerning the public records, but there was hardly an area of interest that was not represented. From the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, Astle had the 'Hanover state papers' (Stowe MSS 222-232), being the correspondence of Jean Robethon, who was private secretary to both William III and George I; he also had the entire collection of manuscripts and printed books of his father-in-law, Morant. Astle's manuscripts must have totalled over 250, quite apart from many dozens, or even hundreds, of medieval charters. 
Astle died on 1 December 1803 at his home, Battersea Rise, Surrey, after suffering for some time from 'a dropsical complaint' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.203n.); his wife survived him. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Battersea. By his will he gave to his old patron's son, George Grenville, first marquess of Buckingham, an option to buy his manuscripts for the nominal sum of $500: this was exercised (to what must have been the chagrin of the British Museum, which had second option), and a special room designed by John Soane was constructed for them at Grenville's seat, Stowe House, Buckinghamshire. In 1849 the manuscripts were catalogued for sale by auction, as 996 lots, but were purchased privately, for $8000, by Bertram Ashburnham, fourth earl of Ashburnham, and were removed to Ashburnham Place, Sussex. Thirty years later, in 1879, his son, Bertram Asburnham, fifth earl of Ashburnham, sold the Stowe manuscripts to the government for $45,000; ninety-five that are of Irish interest were given to the Royal Irish Academy, but the rest -- of which the most valuable and interesting are those that had once belonged to Astle -- were placed in the British Museum, and, still called the Stowe manuscripts, remain in the British Library's department of manuscripts. Astle's 1500 or more printed books, of which many had come to him from Morant, had their interest enhanced by the notes that both scholars were in the habit of adding to them. Almost all were purchased from Astle's executors in 1804, for $1000, for the Royal Institution of Great Britain; most were dispersed by sale in the 1960s and 1970s. 
The correspondence and some further papers and manuscripts of Morant and Astle descended through the Hills family (Astle's second son, Philip, having taken the name of Hills upon being left an estate in Essex worth $50,000), and were sold by auction, by Puttick and Simpson, on 19 June 1894 (lots 103-14), and by Sothebys, on 25 February 1901 (among lots 752-986 and 998-1121); they are now widely scattered. 


@@@@@


doc= 817


Astley, Jacob, first Baron Astley of Reading (1579-1652), royalist army officer, was the eighth child, and second surviving son, of Isaac Astley ('c'.1540-1598) of Melton Constable, Norfolk, and his wife, Mary Waldegrave ('fl'. 1579-1645), daughter of Edward Waldegrave of Lawford, Essex. The Astley family were of Warwickshire origin, but had long settled in Norfolk and elsewhere, and contributed several of their number to the county magistracy. 
The young Jacob, however, small of stature, opted for a life of greater adventure, and at the age of eighteen volunteered to join the Azores expedition in 1597 under the earl of Essex and Sir Walter Ralegh. Thereafter he was almost continually involved in the wars on the continent. He was probably among the English troops under Sir Francis Vere who took part in Prince Maurice of Nassau's bloody battle with the Spanish at Nieuport (June 1600). The severe casualties among the English allowed Maurice to fill vacancies in his forces: Astley gained a commission. 
It seems likely that Astley retained command of a company in the Anglo-Dutch brigade thereafter. Like other long-serving foreign soldiers in the brigade he settled into local society, marrying a Dutch heiress, Agnes Impel of Bloumerckem, at some time before 1619. Two sons and a daughter were born of this marriage. He must have attracted the attention of the family of the exiled elector palatine, resident at The Hague after 1621, for he joined their household. The elector's queen, Elizabeth of Bohemia, referred to him familiarly as 'honest little Jacob', or even 'little monkey', and invited him 'like a little ape to skip over quickly' to her side (Baker, 73, 83). It was said that he gave military instruction to the queen's young son, Prince Rupert, at this time. He obtained further recognition, this time from Elizabeth's father, James I, when he was knighted during a royal progress of the east midlands on 17 July 1624. With the onset of a general European conflict, in which for half a decade England participated, Astley saw active service in the Palatinate and with Dutch forces in Germany, and in the campaigns fought there by Christian IV of Denmark in 1626-7 and Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden in 1629-32. 
Astley's skill and experience, especially in the management of infantry, had been acquired under several distinguished commanders in some of the best schools of warfare in Europe, and he was now in demand. His good service to the king's sister no doubt persuaded Charles I, when the Scottish wars broke out, to invite him home. He was appointed governor of Plymouth Fort (and his younger son, Bernard, captain) on 3 December 1638, sergeant-major-general of the field, in command of the foot, and given charge of the defences of the midlands and most of the north, including the border towns and main strongholds. Asked to make a military survey of the region he painted a bleak picture of the war readiness of these counties, and drew up plans for the better fortification of key towns such as Hull and Newcastle, working closely with William Legge. Astley was consulted on technical matters by the council of war that took charge of the military response to the Scots. No doubt his long-standing contacts with Dutch arms suppliers aided his successful negotiations with them in 1638-9 for the provision of weapons for the English army. By the end of 1639 he was a full member of the king's council of war. His portrait, in armour, was painted by Van Dyck. 
For the second bishops' war in the summer of 1640 Astley was reappointed sergeant-major-general and may also have been governor of Newcastle. From York he reported at length on the bad state of the recruits drawn from the southern counties' trained bands for the army in the north. The men he inspected were good-bodied but unruly. Several units had mutinied and one had murdered its officer. They contained, he wrote, 'all the arch knaves of this kingdom' ('CSP dom.', '1640', 461-2). When their pay and clothing failed he was besieged in his headquarters and could restore order only by executing the leading mutineers. Now in his sixties, and suffering 'a shrewd sickness', he found himself 'over toiled' with duties (ibid., '1640-41', 325). He escaped any blame for the fall of Newcastle to the Scots, however, and was successful in keeping the army together until its disbandment. 
Astley also avoided any implication in the army plots of 1641, so that the Long Parliament had no reason to discriminate against him when sides were chosen in the summer of 1642. Most of his Norfolk cousins and their neighbouring gentry stayed in their posts as county 'governors', carrying out the orders of parliament. Some were to serve on the ruling body of the eastern association during the civil war. Astley chose otherwise. Although no record of it survives, his commission as sergeant-major-general must have been among the first issued by Charles I in early July 1642. It fell to him, therefore, to embody the many infantry units, enthusiastic but largely untrained and unarmed, and led by military amateurs, which flocked to the royal banner in the following months. 
By the time of the first major battle of the war -- Edgehill on 23 October 1642 -- Astley led an infantry arm some 10,000 strong, disposed in five tertias or brigades, each of about three regiments. The good rapport with his men he enjoyed (and his simple piety) were well exemplified by his prayer before the battle: 'O Lord! thou knowest how busy I must be this day; if I forget thee, do not thou forget me... March on, boys!' (P. Warwick, 'Memoirs of the Reign of King Charles the First', 1813, 252). By all accounts the royalist foot behaved with great courage, though unprotected by Rupert's cavalry and assaulted by enemy horse and foot together, sticking their colours in the ground and refusing to give way, until nightfall. Two of the five brigades were heavily mauled, and Astley himself was wounded. 
When the king set up his headquarters at Oxford in November he made Astley governor. The infantry occupied the city and the surrounding towns and villages. Astley was a leading member of the king's council of war, attending thirty-three of the fifty-four meetings where membership is recorded. His advice carried weight, as Clarendon wrote, for he was 'an honest, brave, plain man... and was so generally esteemed... In council he used few but very pertinent words, and was not at all pleased with the long speeches usually made there' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.346-7). With the start of the summer's campaign he was replaced as governor (April 1643) to enable him to lead the field army foot, first to Reading, then to the siege of Gloucester in August. Candles for the miners tunnelling under the city's defences were delivered to his headquarters up to the moment when the city was relieved by the earl of Essex's forces in early September. At the indecisive battle of Newbury the royal cavalry rather than the infantry played the more prominent role. Astley assembled his troops at Reading after the battle, and was appointed governor of the town in October. He dealt with a mutiny among the garrison troops there as he had in the Scottish wars, by executing the ringleaders. 
Reading was, controversially, abandoned in May 1644, and the foot freed to pursue Essex's army into Cornwall during the summer. 'The vigilant care' of Astley played a major role in trapping the enemy forces and forcing the surrender of the parliamentarian infantry at Lostwithiel in September 1644 (R. Symonds, 'Diary of the Royal Marches', ed. Long and Roy, 1997, 55). At the concluding encounter of the campaign, second Newbury, the foot played an important part at both ends of the battlefield in stoutly resisting attacks by superior numbers. Astley was created Baron Astley of Reading on 4 November 1644. Both his sons, Isaac and Bernard, were actively engaged for the king, and both were knighted during the war. His only daughter, Elizabeth, however, was married to her cousin Sir Edward Astley, who remained a leading parliamentarian in Norfolk. 
The new commander-in-chief of the royalist army was now Astley's disciple Prince Rupert. In the course of 1645, the year of final defeat for the king and of bitter recriminations among his leading supporters, no hint of any conflict between Astley and Rupert, or any other general, has surfaced. If he doubted the decision to engage the enemy at Naseby, on 14 June 1645, he kept it to himself. At the battle the foot in the centre, 'according to their usual custom... falling in with their swords and the but-ends of their muskets... did very notable execution' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 4.44). But as at Edgehill, the first battle, so now at the decisive final one the 4000 royalist infantrymen found themselves surrounded by both horse and foot in overwhelming numbers. After a heroic resistance they were forced to surrender, almost to a man. Lord Astley survived the destruction of his forces, and in December accepted the king's command to take control of the four English counties on the Welsh border, where the remaining royalist war effort was in disarray. His still potent authority restored some order, and he was able to lead a force of about 3000 horse and foot from Worcester in an attempt to join the king at Oxford. He got no further than Stow on the Wold, where on 21 March 1646 he was defeated, and captured by a stronger parliamentarian army. Facing his captors he said, prophetically: 'You have now done your work and may go play, unless you will fall out amongst yourselves' (J. Rushworth, 'Historical Collections', 8 vols., 1721-2, 6.140). 
Astley was moved to Warwick Castle but was comprehended in the articles of surrender of Oxford in June. This meant that when in 1648 he came to compound for what he claimed was his modest estate of $200 per annum he paid a fine of a tenth. He and his family were now resident with his daughter at her house, Hindolveston, in Norfolk. His mother had escaped from Bristol just before it surrendered in September 1645, and there too his son Bernard had been mortally wounded. Astley took no part in the risings of the summer of 1648 -- he was now sixty-nine -- but was arrested and imprisoned three years later in the general panic caused by the Scottish invasion of England. He was briefly held in Leeds Castle, Kent, then the Fleet prison in London, until bailed for large sums. 
Despite these disturbances Astley spent the last years of his life quietly at the Old Palace, Maidstone, Kent, a house and estate inherited from another Astley cousin who had also been a servant of Elizabeth of Bohemia. Distant from his remaining family in Norfolk, he took pleasure in corresponding with his daughter and her young son, also named Jacob. The rough old veteran showed himself tender-hearted, gently chiding Elizabeth for proposing to send the ten-year-old to distant grammar school in Norwich: 'Full littell thincke you how his bumbe will suffer, for they ar all churlish masters thear' (Ketton-Cremer, 'Three Generations', 27-8). He died on 27 February 1652, survived by his wife, and was buried under an elaborate monument in Maidstone church, which recites his many exploits. 
Astley is one of the best-known figures of the English civil war, if only for his famous prayer before Edgehill. A career soldier of great skill and experience, he gained as much honour at home as he had previously abroad. He occupied for the royalists a role similar to that of Philip Skippon, another Norfolk man, for parliament: they were both veteran infantrymen, trained in the Dutch school, largely non-political but unswerving in devotion to their respective causes. Honest, trustworthy, and God-fearing, they inspired loyalty in their subordinates, won the respect of their enemies, recruited converts, and rose above the petty squabbles which marked the progress of their parties during the war. 


@@@@@


doc= 818


Astley, John (c.1507-1596), courtier, was the eldest son of Thomas Astley (died in or after 1514), landowner, of Hill Morton and Melton Constable, Norfolk, and his second wife, Anne (died in or after 1508), daughter and coheir of John Wood of East Barsham, Norfolk. Nothing certain is known of his early life and education, although it seems probable that he first went to court when he was twelve. He appears to have been well educated: he may have attended Jesus College, Cambridge, and Roger Ascham commended his ability to speak Italian. 
Astley's introduction at court was almost certainly engineered by his family, for his mother's sister, Lady Elizabeth Boleyn, was Anne Boleyn's aunt. His first recorded office was that of gentleman waiter in the household of Edward, prince of Wales, from 1543, and, as one of the gentlemen 'not plased' (BL, Royal MS 7 Cxvi, fol. 94'r'), by 1547 he had been given a position in the household of his cousin Princess Elizabeth (1533-1603). Ties of blood were reinforced both by his marriage about 1545 to Katherine (died 1565) ['see 'Astley, Katherine], daughter of Sir Philip Champernowne of Modbury, Devon, and his wife, Katherine, and by his protestantism. The couple had no children. Astley is probably best known for his dismissal by the privy council from Elizabeth's service in January 1549, followed by a spell in the Tower of London, for his actions concerning the efforts of the lord admiral, Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, to marry Elizabeth, although Astley had discouraged his wife's impolitic matchmaking. Both Astleys were soon reinstated. Astley may have spent 1553-4 travelling in Italy but he was back in England in 1555. His wife and he seem to have kept a low profile following Katherine Astley's second dismissal in 1556. Astley himself was MP for Chippenham, Cambridgeshire, in 1547, West Looe, Devon, in March 1553, and St Albans, Hertfordshire, in 1555. 
Elizabeth's accession saw the restoration of the Astleys and in December 1558 Astley was made a gentleman of the privy chamber, master of the jewel house, and treasurer of the queen's jewels and plate, posts for which loyalty and a knowledge of the ways of the court were greater qualifications than administrative competence. These offices, especially the latter, brought great financial rewards, including a 5 per cent poundage on all monetary gifts to the queen and a fine set of rooms in each palace. Neither post was a sinecure, however, and he was very much a working member of staff. Indeed, as master of the jewel house Astley could risk financial ruin, for his duties entailed being held personally responsible for any unaccounted losses. The keepership of St James's Palace between 1560 and 1576, held jointly with his wife, while she lived, carried much the same status but left fewer hostages to fortune. Astley was MP for Cricklade, Wiltshire, in 1559, and for Boroughbridge, West Riding of Yorkshire, in 1563, and became a quite active member of committees. 
Astley's career was fuelled first by his family and then by his wife, so his actions on the latter's death on 18 July 1565 are revealing. An ambitious man would have been wise to make an equally judicious match within the golden circle of families closest to the queen but instead his choice fell on Margaret Lenton (died in or after 1596), an illegitimate daughter of Lord Thomas Grey; Astley's court career effectively stalled. He sank back into a comfortable, busy life in the foothills of power, spending less time at court (and managing not to draw attention to himself when he was there) and more in the shires, especially Kent. He managed his estates, held various county offices, including JP for Middlesex and for Kent, and spent surprisingly little time at law, a happy situation that founded the fortunes of the three sons and three daughters of his second marriage. He was MP for Lyme Regis, Dorset, in 1571 and 1572, and for Maidstone, Kent, in 1586 and 1589. Perhaps his single most enduring achievement was his book, 'The Art of Riding', published in his old age in 1584, the first English treatise on 'horsemanship', based on classical authors and tempered by his own considerable experience. He died on 1 August 1596, probably at Maidstone, solvent and apparently untroubled by his diminished status after the death of his first wife. He had spent the last thirty years of his life among the ranks of Elizabeth's reliable old servants, favoured with office but not trusted with power. Astley was buried in All Saints', Maidstone, on 5 August 1596; he was survived by his second wife, Margaret, who was buried on 22 June 1602, also at All Saints'. 


@@@@@


doc= 819


Astley, John (1720-1787), portrait painter and beau, was born at Wem in Shropshire on 24 June 1720, and baptized there on 6 April 1724, a younger son of Richard Astley, surgeon, and his wife, Margaret. After attending school in Shropshire, in the early 1740s he went to London to study under the fashionable portrait painter Thomas Hudson, the master of Reynolds, and from 1746 practised as a portrait painter and copyist. 
About 1747 Astley went to Rome with a commission to copy old masters for Lord Chesterfield, and in 1748 was enthusiastically taken up by Horace Mann in Florence, who recommended him as a colourist with a rare application for one of his age and a deserving young man of irreproachable manners. Back in Rome to study drawing under Pompeo Batoni, Astley joined Reynolds and the circle of English artists working there. Reynolds's biographer James Northcote refers to an excursion they made to the country one hot afternoon when all save Astley threw off their coats, until, unable to withstand their joking, he revealed the back of his waistcoat -- made of one of his own canvases of a cascading waterfall. Further patronage from Mann in Florence, whose portrait he painted in 1751 (Lewis Walpole Library, Farmington, Connecticut, USA), and commissions for copies of old masters restored his finances. He returned to London in July 1752, visiting Bologna and Venice on his way, and then Paris, where he stayed to paint portraits. 
In London Astley set up as a portrait painter, 'Mary Woodyeare' (1753; ex Christies, 14 July 1994, lot 4) being an accomplished example; but in spite of some professional success -- he was among the artists who proposed a scheme for an academy -- he gained neither money nor fame and left for Dublin as an adventurer, probably early in 1756. He prospered beyond expectation by painting more ambitious family groups, such as the 'Molyneaux Family of Castle Dillon' (1758; Ulster Museum, Belfast), but although his style became freer he never rose above an ordinary competence. 
Deriving greater success from his personality than his pencil, Astley returned to England a widower with a young daughter. Travelling in his own post-chaise with an outrider and painting his way to London, he attended the Knutsford assembly, where he captivated Lady Penelope Dukinfield Daniell, a rich widow whom he married a week later, on 7 December 1759. After her death on 31 January 1762 Astley settled in St James's Street, London, where his fortune and inclinations led to a life of dissipation and gained him the reputation of the greatest beau upon the town. With the taste of a connoisseur he became skilled in fitting out interiors of villas and houses; acquiring the lease of Schomberg House in Pall Mall in 1769, he divided it into three, keeping the central part which he 'most whimsically fitted up' (Edwards, 125) for himself. Though he was strapped for cash as a result, the luck that never deserted him allowed him to seize the Dukinfield estate on the death of his stepdaughter in 1771. He built Dukinfield Lodge in 1775, embellishing it with old masters and portraits of family and friends that he continued to paint. He made many improvements on the estate, establishing an iron foundry and building housing for workers; not all these schemes prospered but fortune favoured him again when his brother died in an accident leaving him $10,000. A year after becoming high sheriff of Cheshire in 1776 he sold Schomberg House and married for a third time; his new wife was Mary, daughter of William Wagstaffe, a Manchester surgeon, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. 
Wild estimates of his wealth had ranged up to $150,000; but Astley died at Dukinfield Lodge, Cheshire, on 14 November 1787, owing -- it was said -- to the distressed state of his fortune reducing him to imbecility. He confessed to spending $30,000 on seven years' excesses, not including $25,000 that went on fitting up his houses. His obituarist referred to his eagerness for gain and pleasure, and to his good humour and good manners, but said he was more merry than wise, owing 'his fortune to his form; his follies to his fortune' ('European Magazine', 468). He was buried in Dukinfield Chapel on 21 November 1787. 


@@@@@


doc= 820


Astley, Sir John Dugdale, third baronet (1828-1894), sportsman, a descendant of Thomas de Astley, who was slain at Evesham in 1265, and of Jacob Astley, Lord Astley, was the eldest son of Sir Francis Dugdale Astley, second baronet (1805-1873), of Everleigh, near Marlborough, and his wife, Emma Dorothea ('c'.1808-1872), daughter of Sir Thomas Buckler Lethbridge. Born at Rome in a house on the Pincian Hill, on 19 February 1828, he was educated by private tutors and at Claverton Lodge, Bathwick, and Eton. He matriculated as a gentleman commoner at Christ Church, Oxford, on 4 June 1846. About a year later, by the pressing advice of the dean, Thomas Gaisford -- possibly connected with incidents such as blocking the route to chapel with a wall of snow and threatening to defenestrate the senior censor -- he went down from Oxford, heavily in debt. In September 1847 he was sent to study French at Clarens in Switzerland, where he amused himself by shooting gelinottes on the mountains. 
In March 1848 Astley was gazetted ensign of the Scots guards, and his diary for the next few years is full of his diversions in the shape of racing, cricket, boxing, punting, and running (he himself was a first-rate sprinter at 150 yards). In February 1854 he sailed for the Crimea with his battalion, and he took an active part in the battle of the Alma, but was rather severely wounded in the neck, and invalided home. In April 1855 he again volunteered for active service, reached Balaklava in May, was made a brevet major, and was relegated for the greater part of the time to hospital duty in the town. At Balaklava he became celebrated as a promoter of sport throughout the three armies -- the French, British, and 'Sardines', as he designated the Italian troops. On his return he was promoted to a captaincy without examination, and subsequently became a lieutenant-colonel on the retired list. He obtained the Crimean medal with two clasps and the Turkish order of the Mejidiye. 
On 22 May 1858 Astley married Eleanor Blanche Mary ('c'.1838-1897), only child and heir of Thomas G. Corbet (died 1868) of Elsham Hall, Brigg, a well-known Lincolnshire squire. His honeymoon was on the point of coming to a premature conclusion at Paris when he opportunely won $1500 on the Liverpool cup. He quit the army the following year, and began to devote himself to racing, the sport which 'in his heart he always loved best'. During the lifetime of his father-in-law, who had a horror of the turf, Astley raced under the borrowed name of Mr S. Thellusson and trained in Drewitt's stable at Lewes, where he learned by his own experience the difficult art of putting horses together, at which he obtained a proficiency rare among gentlemen. A real horse lover, and probably one of the finest judges of horse-flesh in Britain, he took an intense interest in everything connected with the stable, and knew his animals with 'the intimacy of a tout or a trainer'. In 1869 he was chosen as a member of the Jockey Club. He was a steward from 1875 to 1878 and chairman of a committee revising the rules of racing. About the same time Drewitt retired from his profession, and Astley thenceforth had horses with Blanton, Joe Dawson, and other well-known trainers. He owned a number of good horses and won a great many stakes. With his usual candour he admits in his autobiography that he originally took to betting, as he subsequently took to authorship, for the purpose of 'diminishing the deficit' at his bankers. In all, during twenty-six years, he won by betting $28,968, but he did not put by his winnings, and at the end of that time was, he informs us with frank composure, 'dead broke'. 
While the turf remained his business amusement, Astley had still plenty of time to devote to other forms of sport. He describes the Sayers and Heenan prize fight of 17 April 1860 with the gusto of a connoisseur, and he moralizes in an impressive way upon the degeneracy of later boxers, whose exhibitions he nevertheless continued to patronize until the end of his life. In 1875 he made the acquaintance of Captain Webb, the channel swimmer, and arranged several tournaments for his benefit. In April 1877 he matched E. P. Weston, the celebrated American pedestrian, against Dan O'Leary in a walking match of 142 hours for $500 a side. O'Leary won, as he admiringly records, by sheer pluck, covering 520 miles in the allotted time, and beating Weston by 10 miles. Astley arranged a number of similar contests, and was barely recouped by the gate money. He also speculated unsuccessfully in luxury clubs. 
Astley succeeded to the baronetcy on 23 July 1873; he became a JP for Lincolnshire and Wiltshire, and in 1874 he was elected to parliament as Conservative member for North Lincolnshire. While an MP he promoted the 'Horse-poisoning Act' (1876), but he lost his seat in the general election of 1880. He died at home at 7 Park Place, St James's Street, London, on 10 October 1894, and was buried on 16 October at Elsham. His death evoked expressions of regret from the whole sporting community in England, among whom he was known by the nickname of The Mate. He left eight children -- Sir Francis Edmund George Astley-Corbet, the fourth baronet (1859-1937), three other sons, and four daughters. 
Astley published a few months before his death 'Fifty Years of my Life in the World of Sport at Home and Abroad' (2 vols., 1894), dedicated by permission to the prince of Wales (later Edward VII). Written in a breezy style and abounding in slang, these memories disarm the critic by their frankness no less than by the complete 'sans-gene' of the narrator, whose gambling propensity appears throughout as indomitable as his pluck. The book went rapidly through three editions, and was described by the 'Saturday Review' as ''the' sporting memoir of the century'. 


@@@@@


doc= 821


Astley, Philip (1742-1814), equestrian performer and circus proprietor, was born on 8 January 1742 at Newcastle under Lyme, one of three children of Edward Astley ('fl'. 1725-1772), cabinet-maker and veneer cutter. Apprenticed to the family trade at nine, the forthright Astley had a traumatic relationship with his father and when he was seventeen left to join the 15th light dragoons, newly established in 1759 for swift action in the Seven Years' War. At over 6 feet tall he exceeded the regimental height limit by some 6 inches, but was quickly noted for his exceptional talent at riding and breaking horses as well as his good looks and powerful bearing. A series of dramatic rescues and daring captures in battle at Emsdorf, Freiburg, and elsewhere earned him promotion to the rank of sergeant-major in 1763, along with presentation to George III. Astley married Patty Jones (1740/41-1803) in London on 8 July 1765 and was discharged from the army nearly a year later with, according to circus legend, his commander's gift of a white regimental charger. By the summer of 1767 he was working as a groom and advertiser at Mr and Mrs Sampson's riding school in Islington, near London. 
On 4 April the following year Astley opened his own 'riding school' in a fenced wayside field on Lambeth Marsh named Halfpenny Hatch. Styling himself the English Hussar, he promised such feats as straddling two cantering and jumping horses, doing headstands on a pint pot on the saddle, and a parody of riding by a foppish tailor. After collecting the 6died admission or shilling for a seat, Mrs Astley would perform several of the turns, sometimes covering for her husband when his war wound was troubling him and developing her own specialism in mounted apiculture. She would also drum out an accompaniment before their exceptional profits -- a reputed 40 guineas a day -- allowed two French-horn players to be employed. The hiring of professional clowns and acrobats soon followed and the Astleys fostered a new genre in which the traditional comic interludes of the fairground and theatre relieved a core of thrilling and arduous experiments in trick-riding. 
Having purchased a timber yard at the south-east foot of Westminster Bridge, the Astleys and their infant son, John ['see below'], moved to permanent headquarters for the next summer, of 1769. Astley's Amphitheatre, as it was eventually known, underwent a series of seasonal, jerry-built metamorphoses. It gradually acquired a roof over the ring and an auditorium that aped the elegance and accommodation of the patent theatres across the river in Westminster. During the 1770s the newly vigilant Surrey magistrates made several unsuccessful attempts to prosecute Astley for this unlicensed challenge to the theatrical monopoly. In 1782 he provoked a crisis by erecting a stage next to the ring in emulation of the new Royal Circus nearby. He was summarily gaoled along with his competitor as a rogue and a vagabond, but appealed amid strong popular and press support. Both were acquitted on the ostensible grounds that equestrian displays were not covered by the law. Their case not only practically undermined the inherited patchwork of repressive theatrical legislation, but also served as a rallying-point for its reform. 
From the outset Astley had spent his winters strategically touring British towns and continental capitals. His company performed at pleasure gardens, fairs, assizes, and races, and in open fields well into the 1780s, later tending to erect temporary wooden circuses or adapt municipal theatres. Astley played the British and French courts against each other, earning command performances, gifts, and favours from both. These included, in 1782, a patent from George III for Astley's method of horse-breaking. In October of the following year he opened his Amphitheatre Astley -- the first of its kind in France -- in the rue du Faubourg-du-Temple in Paris, under the patronage of Queen Marie Antoinette. Like many she had been captivated by John -- Young Astley -- whose dancing on horseback had superseded his father's stunts. By 1788 Philip Astley also received a full dramatic patent for Dublin, where the British authorities were less concerned to protect existing culture. There, in Peter Street, he established the Equestrian Theatre Royal. 
Astley spent much of his remaining career reacting in his own way to the revolutions of Europe. Six days after the fall of the Bastille in 1789 his company became the first to dramatize the news for the London stage, a role that it would sustain thereafter. Once war with France was declared in 1793 Astley, aged fifty, left his London amphitheatre under the management of his son and re-enlisted with his regiment under the duke of York. In Flanders he served as a horse-master, reporter, and celebrity morale-booster before word that the amphitheatre had burnt down on 17 August 1794 prompted his discharge and return. Despite the fact that his property had been insured to only a tenth of its $30,000 value he ensured that the New Amphitheatre of Arts and Sciences was ready on the same site for the following Easter. Barring the insurrections of 1798 in Dublin, where his loyal pageants attracted serious rioting and personal assault, Astley assumed retirement. In 1799 he sold a half-share of the amphitheatre to his son and two years later published his successful 'Astley's System of Equestrian Education'. This concise treatise surpassed his earlier handful of pamphlets on military affairs and riding. 
Upon peace with France in 1802, however, the sixty-year-old Astley embarked with royal endorsement for Paris. There he successfully sought from Napoleon the return of approximately $10,000 of property and fourteen years of back rent. When war recommenced within a year he was interned as an enemy subject, but escaped, reportedly shamming illness in order to obtain a passport to the spa at Montpellier, hijacking a postilion to the German border and descending the Rhine. There he learned that not only had his amphitheatre in London burnt down once again, but his wife had died a week beforehand on 25 August 1803. Having sold his theatre in Dublin for $6000 (plus a rumoured $4000 of government compensation), he supervised the rebuilding of the third amphitheatre with equal speed to the last. 
Astley promised now to 'keep the whip hand', but in his weakened financial state sought to diversify, leasing his half of the amphitheatre to a syndicate of four younger associates ('Memoris of J. Decastro', 80). Assisted by royal favour and the more liberal jurisdictions of a new lord chamberlain, he obtained a year-round licence for what had been the forbidden territory of Westminster and in 1806 opened the Olympic Pavilion in Wych Street, off the Strand. This smaller theatre-cum-circus, built from the timbers of an old naval prize, failed in its attempt to win a more socially exclusive audience. Seven years later, in declining health and increasing anxiety, Astley sold the Olympic Pavilion to the new licensee of the Royal Circus, John Elliston, for a meagre $2800 and a small annuity. He estimated his loss at $10,000. 
Astley died, diagnosed with gout in the stomach, in Paris on 20 October 1814, and was buried in Pere Lachaise cemetery. The London amphitheatre and its profits were bequeathed to his son and only child, John. 
Philip Astley was no great innovator, but a pre-eminent distributor and developer of trends -- a survivor in a precarious and litigious business thanks to his shrewd sense of what would, in his words, 'catch John Bull' ('Memoirs of Charles Dibdin', 99). In several respects his fame represented the advance of the artisan classes into the mass consumer market. His robust loyalism was in tune with a wider cult of militaristic display during a period of naked imperialism and frequent war. He also catered to demands for an apparently respectable popular entertainment that was suitable for a diverse audience. Likened by one employee to a 'humane Hog', Philip the Big was a strict paternalist (ibid., 26). He led by detailed control as well as sheer energy, tenacity, bluster, and sometimes physical brutality. Some clearly despised him; most, however, were bemused by his bellowing and malapropisms. Anecdotes about Old Astley became a staple of metropolitan legend both during and after his life. 


Astley's amphitheatre went on to further triumphs and disasters under the regimes of Andrew Ducrow, Dion Boucicault, and the Sanger brothers, among others. As a national institution it was gently lampooned in the pages of Dickens, Thackeray, and 'Punch' before being demolished in 1893. The only local trace of Philip Astley's efforts remains in the name of Hercules Road in Lambeth, where he erected his mansion and a terrace of houses and called them both after the human pyramid, or the 'Force d'Hercule'. 


@@@@@


doc= 822


Aston, Anthony (c.1682-1753?), actor and playwright, was probably born in Tamworth, Staffordshire, the son of Richard Aston, an attorney and principal of Furnival's Inn and secondary to the king's bench office; his mother was the daughter of Colonel Cope of Drumully Castle, co. Armagh. Following education in Tamworth, Aston started his working life as a legal clerk, but at the age of fourteen he left to follow a career in theatre. In a pamphlet of twenty-four pages, entitled 'A Brief Supplement to Colley Cibber, Esq.: his 'Lives of the Late Famous Actors and Actresses'', apparently written about 1747, he states that he came on the stage at the latter end of the reign of William III. He joined the duke of Norfolk's players in 1696 and was at Drury Lane in 1697-8. After a brief trip to Ireland he returned to London, claiming he had acted at the Old Play House. 
Between 1700 and 1704 Aston left the theatre, became a soldier, and journeyed to Jamaica and North America, where he claims that he had many experiences involving married women, shipwrecks, poverty, and hardship. He arrived back in England penniless and went to London, where in 1704 he 'marry'd a Bartholomew-Fair Lady'. In 1706, when Aston was about twenty-four, the couple had a son, Walter. The family travelled through England, Ireland, and Scotland, and at the chief towns Aston presented a medley entertainment of humorous scenes from various plays, with songs and dialogue of his own composition. During this period he also wrote 'Love in a Hurry', performed at the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, about 1709, and 'Pastora, or, The Coy Shepherdess', an opera performed by the Duke of Richmond's Servants at Tunbridge Wells in 1712. 'The Spectator' for 1 January 1712 contained an advertisement placed by the popular comedian Richard Estcourt, saying that he was about to open the Bumper tavern in James Street, Covent Garden, and that his wines would be sold with the utmost fidelity by his old servant, Trusty Antony, 'who had so often adorned both the theatres in England and Ireland'. It has been suggested that Aston was this servant. In 1717 Aston is said to have performed three times a week at the Globe and Marlborough taverns in Fleet Street. 
Aston's life became one long tour, moving between London, the rest of England, and Edinburgh. While acting in many plays with various companies he changed and perfected his 'medley', which he continued to perform, mostly in taverns. In 1726 he returned to Edinburgh, where he planned to stay, or so he told his friend Allan Ramsay, who defended him against a disbelieving magistracy. Aston was probably seen, like most wandering players, as an untrustworthy rogue. He eventually left the city after being accused of helping to 'entice away' Mrs Jean Kerr, the wife of his son Walter ('Caledonian Mercury', 15 April 1728). Approaching the age of fifty, Aston moved back to London, and though his wanderlust never vanished he did begin to mellow. In 1730-31 he wrote 'The Fool's Opera', 'written by Matthew Medley and performed by his company in Oxford', with an autobiographical sketch attached, from which information about his life can be gleaned. His nickname was now Mat Medley, and on Friday evenings in his own rooms in St Patrick's Close he performed his hodgepodge. In 1735 he petitioned the House of Commons to be heard against the bill introduced by Sir John Barnard for restraining the number of theatres and for the better regulating of common players of interludes, when he was permitted to deliver a ludicrous speech upon the subject; this was afterwards published in folio. 
Aston's son became an actor in his company, and died before 14 March 1743, for on that date a benefit was given by Aston for the widow and three children of Walter Aston. Chetwood, whose history was published in 1749, believed that the elder Aston was then living and 'travelling still, and as well known as the post-horse that carries the mail' (Chetwood, 90). It is not known exactly when he died, though it was believed to be in 1753. Chetwood encapsulates Aston's diverse and colourful career well: 'He play'd in all the Theatres of London, but never continued long in any: His way of living was particular to himself and family, resorting to the principal Cities and Towns in England with his medley... between every Scene, a Song or Dialogue of his own Composition, fill'd up the Chinks of the slender Meal' (ibid., 88). 


@@@@@


doc= 823


Aston, Sir Arthur (1590x93-1649), royalist army officer, was the younger son of Sir Arthur Aston (died 1627), soldier, of Fulham, Middlesex, who was killed on the expedition to the Ile de Rhe, and his first wife, Christiana Ashton, daughter of John Ashton, of Penketh, Lancashire, and the grandson of Sir Thomas Aston, of Aston, Cheshire, in which county the Aston family had long flourished. 
The younger son of a younger son, Aston was drawn early to military service abroad. With letters of recommendation from James I, he went, possibly with his father, to Russia about 1614, to serve the young tsar, Michael Romanov, against the Poles, and probably remained there until the Russo-Polish truce of 1618. After returning to England, Aston changed sides and was a captain in the force raised by King Sigismund III of Poland for service against the Turks (1621), an army of mainly Scottish and Irish troops, commanded by Aston's father. He witnessed the total defeat of the Ottoman army, and served under the Lithuanian general Radziwill, duke of Birze, against the Swedes, who had invaded Livonia. Aston commanded three companies of foot, and Radziwill praised his valour in a letter of 1 January 1623, especially in retaking the castle of Mittivia from the Swedes. Sigismund granted him a pension of 700 florins per annum on 23 April 1625, and in 1630 advanced him to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. A Swedish-Polish truce led to Aston's again returning to England, with a commission from Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, dated 19 August 1631, to raise a regiment for his service. A privy council order on 14 December authorized Aston to levy up to 1200 men, the commission to begin in February 1632. He then joined the Swedish king in the Lutzen campaign (1632) and in February 1633 he was serving under the duke of Brunswick-Luneburg at Hameln, near Hanover. 
In 1639, with a number of other experienced soldiers, Aston returned to England and purchased an estate at Cattenhall, Cheshire, which, his widow was later to allege (25 June 1651), he conveyed in 1640 to his cousin, Sir Thomas Aston, bt, in trust for himself and any wife he should marry. On 8 April 1640 he was appointed by the earl of Northumberland sergeant-major-general of the regiments which, under Viscount Conway, were routed by the Scots at Newburn (28 August) in the second bishops' war. The earl of Strafford appointed him on 7 September colonel-general of one of the brigades serving against the Scots occupying Newcastle, and ten days later gave him command of the newly raised trained bands of Yorkshire. After the latter disbanded, he was discharged because of his being a Roman Catholic. 
Aston was knighted on 15 February 1641, and on the outbreak of the civil war offered his services to the king, only to be rebuffed because of his Catholicism. When Fairfax allegedly accepted his tentative offer to fight for parliament, Prince Rupert appointed him, on 20 October 1642, sergeant-major-general of dragoons. At Edgehill, three days later, Aston, on the royalist left wing, beat off the parliamentary musketeers lining the hedges and ditches, clearing the way for Wilmot's advance. He was to succeed Wilmot in December as commissary (major)-general of horse. 
On 29 October 1642 Aston was appointed governor of Reading. He complained bitterly about the lack of military qualities in the soldiers under his command. 'I do wish', he wrote to Rupert, his close confidant, 'that either I had some German soldiers to command or that I could find some German courage in them... I could never have a greater affliction light on me than to be put in command of them' (W. A. Day, ed., 'The Pythouse Papers', 1879, 12-13). Reading was strategically situated on the main road from London to the west, and commanded passage of the River Thames; but it was poorly fortified and the garrison was short of ammunition. Over the winter of 1642-3 Aston, bullying his soldiers and the citizenry alike, surrounded the town with ditches and embankments of earth, topped by blocks of stone from the nave of the abbey church, blown up for that very purpose. He hanged several of his unruly, dispirited garrison, and also one Boys, a citizen of London, for spying. So severe was his discipline over his 3300 troops during the siege of the town by the earl of Essex (15-28 April 1643) that it was said to be more suited to 'ordering a loose Army in the Field, than in awing a regular Garrison in a Town' (Lloyd, 644). Three times Aston repelled Essex's assaults, but on 21 April he was struck on the head by a falling roof tile, dislodged by a stray parliamentary cannon shot; rendered speechless, he handed over command to his deputy, Colonel Fielding, who surrendered the town to Essex. Both Clarendon and modern historians have suggested that Aston's injury was more diplomatic than physical, and that it allowed him to avoid risking his reputation on the defence of such a vulnerable town. The Reading garrison was allowed safe passage, and Aston, in a horse litter, led the march out to Oxford, where he soon recovered his speech. 
In July 1643 Aston was Rupert's major-general of horse at the siege of Bristol, commanding the right wing and aiding Belasyse in his attack on Frome Gate. Clarendon says that Rupert initially intended Aston to be governor of Bristol, before deciding instead to appoint Hopton to the post. At the first battle of Newbury (20 September 1643) Aston had his horse killed beneath him. Meanwhile, on 23 August he had succeeded Sir William Pennyman as governor of Oxford. His appointment was allegedly influenced by the queen, who felt safer with a Catholic in command. Anthony Wood described him as 'a testy, froward, imperious and tirannical person, hated in Oxon and elsewhere by God and man' (Clark, 1.110). On 22 December Aston was wounded in the side in a nocturnal street scuffle; in February 1644 he was reportedly confined to his chamber for beating the mayor. The garrison certainly resented the severity of his discipline, and a parliamentary scout reported on 11 April that his relations with the citizens over completion of the fortifications were so bad that he begged the king to evacuate the whole civilian population. Yet, on 1 May the university, rather incongruously, awarded him a doctorate in medicine. Then on 19 September he had the misfortune to break his leg in a riding accident, which his enemies ascribed to 'kervetting on horseback on Bullington Green before certaine ladies' (Clark, 1.110). Gangrene set in, the leg was amputated (on 7 December), and Aston was replaced as governor on 25 December by his deputy, Sir Henry Gage, a fellow Catholic. He was given a pension by the king of $1000 per annum. Aston disliked Gage, especially after his successful relief of Basing House, a task Aston had earlier declined. While protesting that his own low-key practice of Catholicism gave no scandal to protestants, he launched a bizarre verbal assault on Gage, accusing him of being a Jesuit stooge who attended Catholic sermons (a more serious offence than merely attending mass). Gage's telling riposte alleged that he had merely been entrapped into presence at a single such sermon, at the house of Aston's own daughter, Elizabeth (who had been born in Russia). When Gage was killed in January 1645 in an attempt to capture Abingdon, Aston, strutting around on his wooden leg, hoped to be reappointed as governor, and he was furious when Rupert instead nominated his loyal supporter William Legge. 
By November 1646 Aston was with Ormond in Ireland. He may have arrived there earlier, since a letter from Rupert to Ormond of 30 June 1645 extolled his meritorious service. It was possibly at this time that he married Ellinor White, daughter of Charles White of Leixlip, Ireland. They had a son, Samuel, who in 1650 successfully applied for the diversion of part of Aston's sequestered estate at Cattenhall, purchased by Colonel Gilbert Gerard, for the use of himself and his sisters. The 'Lords' Journals' report that Aston was given a pass to go overseas on 4 January 1647 (he had requested either leave to return to England or such a pass), and he may have accompanied Ormond to France in 1648. On 24 August 1649 Ormond, now returned, appointed him governor of Drogheda, a strategic town dominating the mouth of the River Boyne, and well protected by a wall some 20 feet high, punctuated by twenty-nine guard towers. Aston boasted that anyone who could take Drogheda could capture hell itself, but he had few cannon and was faced by a superior besieging army of 12,000 men under Cromwell himself. On 8 September he told Ormond that his ammunition and provisions were running short. The harbour was blockaded, most of his 3000 troops were demoralized Irish Catholics, who deserted daily, and there was a plot to betray the town to Cromwell, led by Aston's own grandmother Lady Wilmot, whom he threatened to turn into powder. On 10 September Aston rejected Cromwell's summons to surrender, and overnight threw up a triple line of interior earthworks. On the 11th a steady English cannonade breached the walls, and Aston and 300 of the garrison climbed the Mill Mount, where, after Cromwell personally forbade any quarter, Aston was hacked to pieces and had his brains beaten out with his own wooden leg, thought by the besiegers to contain gold pieces; 200 were later found in his belt. 
Aston was clearly a stern, peppery, and vindictive professional soldier with pronounced conceit. Clarendon, who opposed the grant of commissions to Catholics as politically injurious to the royalist cause yet was strangely sceptical about Aston's own Catholicism, was more intemperate, describing him as a rough, untrustworthy, money-grabbing lecher. Yet even Clarendon admitted that in 1643 'there was not in [the royal] army an officer of greater reputation, and of whom the enemy had a greater dread' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.17), even if the ruthlessness he learned abroad made him 'very much esteemed where he was not known, and very much disliked where he was' (ibid., 3.406). And it is clear that his indomitable spirit, shown especially at Drogheda, could inspire his troops. Like Montrose, the royalist memorialist David Lloyd reported, he 'had one excellent faculty, that in extremity he had some operative Phrases, wherewith he could bespeak his Souldiers to do wonders' (Lloyd, 645). 


@@@@@


doc= 824


Aston, John (d. in or before 1407), Lollard preacher, was an early disciple of John Wyclif. A native of Worcester diocese, from 1365 to 1372 he was paid as a fellow of Merton College (which produced a large number of Wycliffites), and in 1372 was appointed a royal commissioner to settle a dispute at the university over the election of proctors. He gained the degrees of master of arts and scholar of theology. His career as a Wycliffite preacher had begun by 1382, if not earlier. The Leicester chronicler Henry Knighton describes Aston as a tireless preacher, trudging on foot from place to place, staff in hand, making converts of simple men by talking to them at table. Knighton reports under 1382 a sermon delivered by Aston in Leicester on an unspecified Palm Sunday, advocating the confiscation of clerical temporalities, condemning the begging of the friars and the excommunication of true preachers, and maintaining that the material substance of the bread remains in the sacrament of the altar after its consecration. However, another chronicler, Thomas Walsingham, attributes the same sermon to the Lollard William Swinderby. 
In May 1382 Aston preached in Odiham church and elsewhere in Hampshire with two other disciples of Wyclif from Oxford -- Nicholas Hereford and Laurence Stephen (Laurence Bedeman). These three are named as Wyclif's most important supporters in the dubiously authentic 'confession' of John Ball of 1381. Then on 12 June 1382, during the Council of Blackfriars which condemned Wyclif's teachings as erroneous, Aston's suspension from the university, together with that of Wyclif, Hereford, Stephen, and Philip Repyndon, was ordered by Archbishop Courtenay of Canterbury. Aston appeared before the council on 18 June, with Hereford and Repyndon, when all three were required to sign a condemnation of twenty-four errors of Wyclif. 
Unlike Hereford and Repyndon, Aston refused to prepare a written defence of his views, and said that he would answer verbally forthwith. His answers were deemed unacceptable, however, as were those of his colleagues, and all three men were summoned to return on 20 June to give more appropriate replies. In the meantime they took the extraordinary step of publishing their views in English. Aston's views on the eucharist were considered particularly offensive, and his 'Confessio', addressing this question, written in both Latin and English, was distributed on handbills around London -- a tactic that the authorities countered with leaflets of their own. Back before the council on 20 June, Aston was defiant and, buoyed by a sympathetic crowd that had broken into the hall, gave impudent and evasive answers in English to the questions put to him, refusing to speak in Latin. Archbishop Courtenay declared him a heretic and handed him over to the secular arm, and on 13 July he was expelled from the university by royal mandate. In November, however, Aston abjured his heretical views during a convocation in Oxford, received absolution from the archbishop, and was reinstated at the university. He attributed his change of heart to the influence of his colleagues, most of whom had already submitted, and to that of Nicholas Radcliffe, abbot of St Albans. 
Aston's recantation was brief, however, and by the following year he had resumed his heretical preaching, delivering a sermon at Gloucester, probably in February 1383, that criticized the impending Flemish crusade of Bishop Despenser of Norwich. In late 1386 he preached in London, again enjoying the support of its citizens, and in the summer of 1387 was one of five Wycliffites whose preaching at Bristol and elsewhere within the diocese of Worcester was forbidden by its bishop. In May 1388 royal commissions authorized the bishops of Worcester, Salisbury, and Hereford to search for, seize, and destroy all the heretical writings of Wyclif, Hereford, Aston, and John Purvey. Aston may have returned to his fellowship at Merton in 1391, for a fellow named Aston was paid in the bursar's account for the period from November 1391 to March 1392, but nothing else is known of him. He was dead by 7 August 1407, when the Lollard William Thorpe declared to Archbishop Arundel that Aston had taught and written his heretical views 'right perfectly unto his life's end' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 1.67). 


@@@@@


doc= 825


Aston, Joseph (1762-1844), journalist and playwright, the son of William Aston (1733/4-1826), gunsmith, was born in Deansgate, Manchester. In his youth he contributed to the 'Manchester Herald', a liberal newspaper, until governmental pressure and popular loyalism forced the paper's closure in 1793. In 1803 he opened a stationer's shop at 84 Deansgate, where, on 1 January 1805, he issued the prospectus of the 'Manchester Mail', published at 6died and professing 'no political creed'. From 1809 until 1825 he was publisher and editor of the 'Manchester Exchange Herald', a conservative journal. Afterwards he moved to Rochdale, where he started the 'Rochdale Recorder' in January 1827. This ran to sixty-five issues, until March 1828. 
Aston married Elizabeth Preston (died 1852) of Manchester in October 1790, and they had at least two daughters. He was the friend and executor of Thomas Barritt, the antiquary, and Charles Mayne Young, the actor. For about thirty-four years he also enjoyed a friendship with James Montgomery, poet and editor of the 'Sheffield Iris', who submitted to him many of his manuscripts for revision and criticism. 
Aston himself was a poet of little accomplishment, and often published his verses in his own paper. His 'Metrical Records of Manchester' (1822) is a humorous portrayal of Manchester history in verse. Of his three dramatic pieces, 'Conscience', a tragedy, was performed at the Theatre Royal, Manchester, in 1815, with moderate success. He also wrote 'Retributive Justice', another tragedy, and 'A Family Story', a comedy. Of his five other published works all but one, 'Lancashire Gazetteer' (1808), relate to Manchester. In 1826 he published a collection, 'Plays, Poetry and Prose'. Aston died at Chadderton Hall, near Oldham, Lancashire, on 19 October 1844, and was buried at Tonge, near Middleton. 


@@@@@


doc= 826


Aston, Sir Richard (1717-1778), judge, was a younger son of Richard Aston, of Wadley, Berkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Warren, of Oxfordshire. The Astons derived their name from Aston in Cheshire, where the family had been settled since the time of Henry II. Brother of Sir Willoughby Aston of Aston, the fifth baronet, Richard Aston was born in Berkshire, and educated at Winchester College from 1728. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1736, and was called to the bar there in 1740. Little is known about his early years at the bar, but his success is testified to by his being named king's counsel in 1759. He was one of three defence counsel for Mary Blandy, tried for murder in 1752, and he assisted Serjeant Davy as appointed counsel in 1755 to defend the notorious Stephen Macdaniel and other members of his gang. 
In 1761 Aston was made chief justice of the court of common pleas in Ireland on the resignation of Sir William Yorke. In this office he displayed considerable energy. He attempted to reform the disreputable practice of grand juries finding true bills of indictment upon the mere perusal of depositions without examining any witnesses, but only two of nine fellow judges supported him. The practice remained unaltered until parliamentary action was taken in 1816. Few English judges were popular in Ireland, and Aston was not one of the few. Accordingly he solicited a transfer, and in 1765, on the resignation of Sir Thomas Denison from the king's bench in England, Aston relocated to the English court and was knighted. In 1768 Aston was a member of the court presided over by Lord Mansfield which unanimously decided that the writ of outlawry issued against John Wilkes upon his conviction for publishing two seditious libels, in no. 45 of the 'North Briton' and in the 'Essay on Woman', was bad by reason of two formal defects. The judges disallowed all the objections urged by the counsel for Wilkes, but a careful study by the junior members of the court (Sir Joseph Yates, Aston, and Edward Willes) revealed that, according to precedent, the name of the county where the county court sat was required to be stated at two specific places in the sheriff's writ, and the writ being faulty in these respects, the court held it invalid. A decision based upon a ground so purely technical, overlooked by counsel for the petitioner, and discovered by the judges only after diligent research, excited in the minds of those hostile to Wilkes suspicions of impropriety. A report circulated to the effect that the judges, or at least Willes and Aston, had been bribed by a gift of lottery tickets, that Aston had been seen selling them on Change, and had remarked that he had as good a right to sell his tickets as his brother Willes. 
In 1770, on the sudden death of Charles Yorke immediately after his acceptance of the office of lord chancellor, Lord North's administration could not persuade Lord Mansfield to leave king's bench to take up the chancellorship and determined to place the great seal in commission. Sir Sidney Stafford Smythe of exchequer, Sir Richard Aston of king's bench, and the Hon. Henry Bathurst of common pleas were selected as commissioners. Despite Smythe's earlier service as a commissioner in 1756-7, they had little chancery experience, and perhaps little aptitude for their roles. Their execution of their commissions incurred severe criticism and lasted only a year, at the end of which Bathurst, despite his perceived deficiencies, was named lord chancellor and Aston and Smythe returned full time to their former duties. It was by Aston, sitting with Lord Mansfield at Westminster in 1777, that sentence of fine and imprisonment was passed on John Horne (afterwards Horne Tooke) for a seditious libel in advertising a subscription in relief of the widows and orphans of American revolutionists. 
According to Cradock, Aston was: 'always considered as a very sound Lawyer; friendly to those he liked, but rather rough in manners; he had a kind of dry humour about him, that in company engaged attention, and in an evening frequently enlivened his friends with many pleasant anecdotes. (Cradock, 1.85)' He was not intimidated by his superiors. Lord Eldon told of an application to Aston for a writ of 'habeas corpus', made after Lord Mansfield had perceived political sensitivity in the matter and refused the writ. Aston reportedly issued the writ directly, stating: 'what is [it] to me, one of his Majesty's Judges, that the Man, who has imprisoned this Fellow is Solicitor to the Revenue, or that his Master is Attorney General? He is the King's subject, and he must not be illegally confined for one Moment. ('Anecdote Book', 158)' Aston was characterized by John Nicholls as 'a man of sound sense', who tried causes 'with strict integrity', and 'though, perhaps, he had not that store of legal learning, which was possessed by his three colleagues... his decisions were generally right' (Nicholls, 1.340). 
Aston was married twice, first to a Miss Eldred of the Haymarket in London, and then to Susanna, daughter and coheir of Thomas Witherstone of Burghill in Herefordshire, and widow of Sir David Williams, bt, of Gwernyfed. There were no children from either marriage. He died on 1 March 1778 and was buried in the chapel of Lincoln's Inn. 


@@@@@


doc= 827


Aston, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1600-1646), apologist of the Church of England and local politician, was born on 29 September 1600 at Aston near Runcorn, Cheshire, the eldest son of John Aston (died 1615) and his wife, Maude Needham. The Aston family had a long history of service to the crown and Cheshire since the time of Henry II. Thomas's father was a Cheshire gentleman and courtier, rising to become sewer to James I's wife, Queen Anne; his mother was the daughter of Robert Needham of Sherton in Shropshire. Aston inherited the family estate upon his father's death in 1615. He was educated at Macclesfield grammar school and went to Oxford in 1617, matriculating from Brasenose College. He graduated BA in 1619 and in 1626-7 appears to have begun study for the bar at Lincoln's Inn; in any event his legal education was cut short when he was called home to tend to family business. His first wife, 
Like his father Aston was a courtier, and was created a baronet in July 1628; by 1635 he had risen to become one of the gentlemen-extraordinary of the king's privy chamber. Yet his main role was as a Cheshire gentleman. He was the county's high sheriff in 1635-6, collecting the controversial levy of ship money from the county. He used this odious task to gain local support by fighting an ill-fated action against the corporation of Chester, which claimed exemption from the levy. This action was personally costly, Aston being taxed for his wine business in the city by the vengeful city burghers. He refused to pay the $5 owed, with the result that he lost the favour of the king when the action was taken before the privy council in 1638. His resistance nevertheless made him a hero in the county of Cheshire. For creating support in his political heartland he has been described as an 'astute navigator in the treacherous currents of the Personal Rule' (Maltby, 135). However, Aston's connection with the court was not lost, as his younger brother, John, remained close to the king, acting as his agent in Scotland during the bishops' wars. In 1637 Sir Thomas had married again, his second wife being Anne Willoughby, the only child of Sir Henry Willoughby of Risley in Derbyshire. They had three children together: a son, Willoughby, and two daughters, Magdalene and Mary. 
When the war with the Scots forced Charles I to call a parliament in 1640 Aston stood for election with his later enemy Sir William Brereton against Sir George Booth and Sir Richard Wilbraham. Aston and Brereton had the support of Lord Cholmondeley and Lord Kilmorey and were thus chosen to represent Cheshire in the Short Parliament. Aston was not, however, reselected for the Long Parliament in October 1640, as Lord Cholmondeley's brother-in-law, Peter Venebles, was selected in his place. The religious grumblings of the Long Parliament reveal Aston's affection for the liturgy and government of the Elizabethan and Jacobean Church of England. He is seen as a model representative of the conservative conformist gentlemen who were against the liturgical and structural changes of Archbishop Laud but feared the new wave of reformation hoped for by the pro-presbyterian clergy in London. Aston was instrumental in organizing a petition of 6000 names presented to the House of Lords in February 1641 defending the episcopalian government of the Church of England. This petition was a reaction to the root and branch petition and the puritan ministers' petitions that were organized to call for the abolition of the episcopalian order. Aston's actions provoked Sir William Brereton to present a counter-petition said to represent the views of 12,000 of the county of Cheshire against the bishops. In reality Brereton's petition was spurious, though it prompted Aston to organize a second but on this occasion equally spurious petition in response; for this he was called before the bar of the House of Lords in April 1641 to explain his actions. 
Aston's main work in the debate on the future of the Church of England was published in May 1641. This 200-page book, entitled 'A Remonstrance, Against Presbitery', was written to support the episcopate, the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', the ordained ministry, and the Elizabethan liturgy. Aston revealed himself to be an able lay theologian, quoting widely from the early church fathers, the continental Reformed theologians, and English historical sources to show that the church had always appointed presidential bishops to govern the local priesthood and to prevent schism. He sought to counteract the arguments of influential presbyterians such as the eponymous Smectymnuus, who argued that the title of bishop and presbyter were synonymous in scripture, and that episcopacy was a usurpation of the divine warranted order in the church. Aston believed that presbyterianism would 'pull down 26 Bishops and set up 9324 potential Popes' (Aston, 'Remonstrance', section 5), and that the office of lay elders would create a clerical tyranny that would destroy the very fabric of the English social and political order. He did not, however, entirely blame the reformist puritans for the problems in the Church of England. The 'Remonstrance', as well as Aston's private manuscripts, indicate that he blamed much of the church's troubles on the innovations imposed on Britain by bishops led by Laud. Sir Thomas went so far as to state that the Laudian bishops 'entrench upon our Liberties, negligently starve the flock [and] covetously engrosse the means of faithfull Labourers' (ibid., section 18). 
The 'Remonstrance, Against Presbitery' brought Aston the national reputation of a defender of the Elizabethan and Jacobean settlement. As such he appealed to many in all ranks of English society that were satisfied with the protestantism of the English church. His struggle against presbyterianism and for the primitive episcopacy of Elizabeth's time even earned him eulogies from a number of hack poets. However, the summer and autumn of 1641 saw the presbyterians winning the battle for hearts and minds in London, and Aston decided to present a genuine petition from his county supporting the prayer book. For this petition he regained the support of the king, who wrote a letter sponsoring it. Aston's petition was presented to the House of Lords on 21 December 1641 and contained 9000 genuine signatures from all ranks of men in Cheshire. Perhaps to capitalize on the success of this petition, he published 'A Collection of Sundry Petitions Presented to the Kings most Excellent Majestie' in summer 1642 reproducing the petitions sent to parliament in defence of episcopacy and the 'Book of Common Prayer'. Aston's publications were key in transforming 'parochial anxieties into national movement' (Maltby, 177). However, his introduction to the 'Collection' shows him to be a man fearful of the popular success of the presbyterian and other anti episcopalian movements, and is a tragic reminder of how England rapidly slid into civil war. 
When in autumn 1642 war did break out, Aston campaigned to raise forces in Cheshire for Charles I. He fought at Edgehill, earning commendation by rescuing the bishop of Salisbury from the parliamentarian forces. In reward Charles appointed Aston his major-general in Cheshire. He lost to his old running-mate Sir William Brereton at the battle of Middlewich on 13 March 1643 and was involved in the battle of Nantwich on 25 January 1644. The defeat at Middlewich cost Aston his command of Cheshire's forces. At the behest of Orlando Bridgeman, the king appointed Sir Nicholas Byron as colonel-general of Cheshire. It is likely that Bridgeman's obsession with the city of Chester and his refusal to supply Aston with troops were the key reasons for Aston's defeat and humiliation. After Middlewich Aston joined Sir William Vaughan's forces in the Welsh marches. The aim of this force was to hector the parliamentarian troops besieging Chester; Vaughan's army was, however, ineffectual, being defeated by Brereton at Denbigh. Aston and his troops were scattered and were involved in minor actions until the battle of Bridgnorth in November 1645. This battle proved to be Aston's nemesis, and he was wounded and captured. He died from his wounds in a parliamentarian prison in Stafford in March 1646. Aston was buried at his beloved Aston chapel, and his son and heir erected a monument to him in 1697; the epitaph remembered that he had 'distinguished himself both by his learning and his courage in the defence of the church and state'. 


@@@@@


doc= 828


Aston, Walter, Baron Aston of Forfar (1584-1639), diplomat, was born about June 1584 at Charlecote, Warwickshire, and baptized there on 9 July, the son and heir of Sir Edward Aston of Tixall, Staffordshire, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Lucy (b. in or before 1532, d. 1600) of Charlecote. He spent his early life at Tixall. After the death of his father on 1 February 1597, Lord Burghley, master of the court of wards, granted his wardship to the attorney-general, Edward Coke, who paid fees of $300 to the crown and $1000 to Burghley in secret. The properties of Aston, assessed at $256 p.a., were popularly overvalued at $10,000. In 1600 Aston married Anne Barnes, without the permission of Coke, who insisted that this match be dissolved by the court of high commission. At this time Aston became a patron of the poet Michael Drayton, who, from 1602 to 1607, dedicated five of his works to him and, at the ceremony on 25 July 1603 where Aston was created a knight of the Bath, acted as his esquire. In 1607 Coke agreed to Aston's marriage to Gertrude, only daughter of Sir Thomas Sadler of Standon, Hertfordshire, and received a final fee of $4000. In 1611 Aston paid $1095 for a baronetcy and in 1618 James appointed him steward of the honour of Tutbury. 
On 11 November 1619 Aston was nominated resident ambassador to Spain, with instructions dated 5 January 1620 that required him to sound out both Philip III's terms for the marriage of the infanta to Prince Charles and the prospects for James's son-in-law as king of Bohemia, but 'to deny that we encouraged it' (TNA: PRO, SP 94/23, fols. 279-90). He was also to discuss the ships and equipment for an Anglo-Spanish fleet to patrol against piracy, but this future naval collaboration was shelved in 1623 by the breakdown of the Spanish match. Skilled in speaking and writing Castilian, Aston's reports from Madrid were well-informed. Buckingham assured him in October 1623 that 'his Majestie was never better satisfyed with a dispatch [than] the last you sent' (TNA: PRO, SP 94/28, fol. 229). None the less, there were serious disappointments. On 5 June 1624 Aston wrote to Prince Charles: 'in the 4 yeares that I have served here, by reason of ill payment and such charges, which... I could not avoyd, that which is now owing me... I believe is a greater sum than was ever due unto any ambassador. (BL, Add. MS 36447, fol. 89)' To pay off debts he sold portions of his patrimony in England, which weakened severely his heir's holdings. Meanwhile he was disappointed by his failure to move Philip to persuade the emperor and the duke of Bavaria that the Palatinate crisis must be resolved to the satisfaction of the English court. Aston was warned by Charles in 1624 that he considered it 'a condition of the good friendship... he deserved', if he were to marry the infanta (Gardiner, 272). 
Charles's liking for 'dear Wat' continued into his reign as king, since he pardoned Aston after his return for all prosecutions for recusancy to which his conversion to Catholicism in 1623 laid him open. At a meeting at Theobalds on 20 July 1626 the king promised Aston help in two years for his debt of $14,000: this was vital, according to Aston, for he had spent 'four parts of five of his estate in that service' ('CSP dom.', '1625-49', 227). Later Charles decided to honour him with a barony in Scotland, which he accepted, but he complained to Secretary Conway that it would have been 'a great comfort' to him had 'the ancient house of Tixall' been honoured ('CSP dom.', '1627-8', 270, 348). As a basis for his title of 'Baron Forfar in county Angus' Charles gave him a bond of $1000 to buy land in Scotland, the office of keeper of the king's mulberry garden at St James's with a fee of $60 p.a., and annual pensions of $100 p.a. and $50 p.a. for himself and his wife respectively. Finally, in December 1628 a warrant was issued to prepare a bill for a privy seal to pay out of the exchequer $14,000 to cancel his debt. Early in 1631 he was made a commissioner in his county to enforce a fine upon gentry who failed to appear at Charles's coronation to receive knighthood. In June 1635 he prepared his last will, 'being careful to sett in order my estate', prior to returning as envoy to Spain. While his son, Walter ('b'. 1609), was an executor and heir, his five other children held annuities and his wife the use of his silver plate and furniture for life. After his arrival in Madrid Arthur Hopton remained for months to assist him. While the Palatinate dispute remained intractable, his papers for 1636-8 show his assistance to twenty-seven law suits of English merchants in Spanish courts and give detailed accounts of the political burdens facing Olivares. Two problems relating to Charles I were highlighted: the role of English ships in the transport of silver to pay the army of Flanders and the strained relations of the ambassador, the count of Onate, with several courtiers. His duties took their toll on his health, and in the spring of 1638 he was recalled to England. He died on 13 August 1639 and was buried in St Mary's Church, Stafford. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 829


Aston, William (1735-1800), Jesuit, was born in London on 22 April 1735, the son of Edward Aston and his wife, Ann Bayley. He made his early studies in the English College at St Omer (1747-51), and at the age of sixteen he joined the Society of Jesus at Watten (7 September 1751). In 1761 he was professor of poetry at St Omer. He was admitted to his solemn profession in his order on 2 February 1769. His commanding talents and accomplished manners recommended him for the presidency of the Little School at Bruges. Following the school's violent suppression by the Belgic-Austrian privy council of Brussels in August 1773, he was imprisoned for eight months; but he and his companions were ultimately released, owing to the efforts of Henry, the eighth Lord Arundell of Wardour, who interceded with Prince Staremberg, the Austrian prime minister, on their behalf. A few years later Aston established an academy at Liege, and he subsequently obtained a canonry in the collegiate church of St John in that city. He died there on 15 March 1800. Besides writing for reviews and journals, Aston published a number of works, including 'Lettres ultramontaines' and 'Le cosmopolite' (not dated). 


@@@@@


doc= 830


Astry, Richard (1630/31-1714), antiquary, was the son of Thomas Astry of Toseland, a Huntingdon yeoman. Astry was admitted to Queens' College, Cambridge, in March 1648, and matriculated in 1650, graduating BA in 1651 and probably MA in 1654. 
He was identified by Thompson Cooper, author of 'A New Biographical Dictionary' (1873), as responsible for a manuscript volume (now in the British Library) containing a parochial history of Huntingdonshire. It is the work of more than one hand, in which the parishes are listed in alphabetical order together with historical details of each. An eighteenth-century inscription reads: 'Some part of this book is in the handwriting of Sir Robert Cotton, the rest is the collection of Mr Astry of Huntingdonshire'. It would seem that this was added after much of the contents was transcribed by Thomas Baker (1656-1740) who made no mention of Astry but noted that the handwriting was 'said to be Sir Robert Cotton's. But if it were his, the additions are more than the original MS' ('Catalogue', ed. Luard, 437). The British Library catalogue describes the work as being 'in the handwriting of Sir Robert Cotton with some interleaved additions by Mr Astry'. The basis on which Cooper dismissed Cotton's authorship is unclear. 
Cooper also identified Astry as the author of three manuscript volumes containing 'Alphabetical Catalogues of English Surnames with the arms belonging to them, and the particular time that the persons recorded lived', said once to have been in possession of the Revd Henry Freeman of Norman Cross, Huntingdonshire. Astry died an alderman of Huntingdon and was buried at St Mary's Church in that town on 11 August 1714, aged eighty-three. 


@@@@@


doc= 831


Asty, John (1675-1730), Independent minister, the second son of Robert Asty (1642-1681), Independent minister at Norwich, and his wife, Lydia (died 1697), eldest daughter of the Revd John Sammes of Coggeshall, Essex, was born at Norwich on 12 September 1675 and baptized at the Old Meeting-House there probably on 8 December. At the age of eight he was taken into the family of the Revd John Collinges, minister to the dissenting congregation at the East Granary, Norwich, who superintended his education, the cost of which was borne by Samuel Smith, a relation of the Fleetwoods of Armingland Hall, Norfolk. After Collinges's death in 1691 Asty was trained for the ministry, funded by a Common Fund bursary, at Thomas Rowe's academy, then located in Little Britain, London, where he was a fellow student of Isaac Watts. He remained there for four years before accepting in November 1695 the position of domestic chaplain to the family of Smith Fleetwood of Armingland Hall and Stoke Newington, a position he retained for the next fifteen years, having declined in 1700 an invitation to become minister at the Independent church in Amsterdam. 
From 14 October 1710 until his death Asty was the pastor at the Independent meeting-house in Ropemakers' Alley, Moorfields, London. He resided on the premises and was ordained there on 4 April 1711. An orthodox Trinitarian, he voted with the subscribers at the Salters' Hall conference of 1719, and in 1727 was elected one of the six Independent ministers to sit on the Committee of the Ministers of the Three Denominations. During his time in London Asty was described as a 'serious useful preacher', and his sermons as 'serious and evangelical, experimental, solid and judicious' (Wilson, 2.539, 541). However, he does not appear to have been popular with either his fellow ministers or the members of his own congregation. His part in the dismissal of Martin Tomkins, dissenting minister at Stoke Newington, did nothing to enhance his popularity. In a sermon to Tomkins's congregation in June 1718 Asty warned his listeners to be aware of the dangers of errors and heresies then being preached by some London ministers. Although no names were mentioned, the inference was that Tomkins had become an Arian. Tomkins denied this, but was never able to eradicate the seeds of doubt which Asty had sown, and within a few weeks had been dismissed. He regarded Asty's conduct as 'an officious interference' but graciously exonerated him of 'any particular personal prejudice' (Tomkins, 11). 
Asty was not a prolific writer and is credited with few publications. He edited the 'Complete Collection of Sermons of Dr. John Owen' (1712), to which he added a life of Owen, his favourite author. His only other published work was a funeral sermon preached on the death of Elizabeth Fleetwood in 1728. He died in London on 20 January 1730 and was buried in Bunhill Fields. His funeral sermon was preached by John Guyse at Ropemakers' Alley on 8 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 832


Athelm (d. 926), archbishop of Canterbury, was a monk of Glastonbury, and became the first bishop of Wells, 'c'.909. He held this office until some time between 923 and September 925, when he was translated to Canterbury. According to John of Worcester, the archbishop consecrated King AEthelstan at Kingston upon Thames. Athelm's role in this ceremony is also reported by Adelard, the early biographer of St Dunstan. The consecration was held on 4 September 925. Athelm was the paternal uncle of Dunstan, later archbishop of Canterbury. Dunstan is said by John of Worcester to have been born 'in the times of' AEthelstan. Even if this phrase is interpreted to indicate a birth date within AEthelstan's lifetime, rather than in his reign, Dunstan would still have been very young during Athelm's archiepiscopate. Yet Adelard states that after his years at Glastonbury, Dunstan went to live with his uncle, Archbishop Athelm. The latter, recognizing Dunstan's merits, commended him to AEthelstan. Athelm died on 8 January 926. 


@@@@@


doc= 833


AEthelstan (893/4-939), king of England, was the eldest son of King Edward the Elder (870s?-924), with his first wife, Ecgwynn. 
Information about AEthelstan's youth is found only in the twelfth-century 'Gesta regum Anglorum' by William of Malmesbury; this long account of the king's life may at least in part be based on pre-conquest sources, although its precise evidential value is questionable. If AEthelstan was indeed aged thirty on his accession to the throne in 924, he must have been born to King Edward in 893 or 894, while his grandfather King Alfred was still ruling. Little is known about the future king's mother, whose name is not given in any pre-conquest English sources. The verse account by Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim of the marriage of Otto I of Saxony to Eadgyth, AEthelstan's half-sister, which implies that AEthelstan's mother was socially inferior to Eadgyth's, may reflect rivalry among the offspring of Edward the Elder's different liaisons, rather than being intended to represent AEthelstan as illegitimate, though William of Malmesbury would later represent him as such. 
According to William, King Alfred honoured his grandson as a child, investing him with the gift of a scarlet cloak, a belt set with gems, and a Saxon sword with a gilded scabbard; AEthelstan can have been no more than five or six years old at the time, for Alfred died in 899. The story presents problems, but does not lack corroboration. A short acrostic poem bearing the legends ADALSTAN/IOHANNES, surviving in a single manuscript in Oxford (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. C.697, fol. 78'v'), which praises the prince as 'abundantly endowed with the holy eminence of learning', and prays that he will fulfil the promise implied by the 'noble rock' of his name (Lapidge, 72-81), was apparently written to commemorate the ceremony of AEthelstan's investiture. William of Malmesbury reports further that Alfred had AEthelstan educated and trained for rulership at the court of his daughter, AEthelflaed, and her husband, AEthelred, ealdorman of the Mercians; if so, the young man would have gained his military experience in the Mercian campaigns to conquer the Danelaw, indeed AEthelstan may have represented his father's interests in Mercia after his aunt's death in 918. 
AEthelstan himself appears never to have married, for what reason one can only speculate. Having four younger brothers, he may have been trying to prevent conflict over the succession to the West Saxon throne, conceivably influenced in this by the prevalence of rumour about the legitimacy of his own birth; alternatively -- or additionally -- this could have been a decision inspired by a religious vocation to chastity. The allusion in the twelfth-century 'Liber Eliensis' to an otherwise unattested daughter of AEthelstan's -- 'AEdida filia regis AEdelstani' -- who supposedly made a gift to Ely ('Liber Eliensis', 292) must remain unexplained, unless it is assumed that the Ely author mistook one of the king's many sisters for his daughter. 
Considerable confusion surrounds the accession of AEthelstan following the death of his father, Edward the Elder, on 17 July 924. During his reign Edward had taken direct control of Mercia, creating a single 'Anglo-Saxon' kingdom, but it is not clear that his composite realm would have been inherited as a single entity by his heirs. The Mercian register (a set of early tenth-century annals incorporated in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle') reports that on Edward's death AEthelstan was chosen king by the Mercians and consecrated at Kingston upon Thames, Surrey. But his coronation did not take place until 4 September 925, a delay apparently to be accounted for by Edward's realm being divided on his death, with AEthelstan being chosen as king in Mercia, and his half-brother AElfweard, born to Edward's second wife, AElfflaed, succeeding to Wessex. However, the Mercian register notes that AElfweard died 'very soon' after his father -- only sixteen days after, according to the D version of the chronicle. AEthelstan would have succeeded to the combined kingdom only after his half-brother's premature death and possibly not without opposition; this may be the correct reading of the sequence of events reported in the Mercian register. 
Some political difficulties apparently surrounded the start of AEthelstan's reign in Wessex. In a charter of 925 (from the part of the year when AEthelstan's authority seems to have been recognized only in Mercia), AEthelstan was termed 'supervisor of the Christian household of the whole region well-nigh in the whirlpools of cataclysms' ('AS chart.', S 395). William of Malmesbury reports particular opposition to AEthelstan's rule at Winchester, the place of AElfweard's burial; a certain Alfred was said to have organized a plot to blind AEthelstan, supposedly on account of his illegitimacy, and AElfweard's younger brother Eadwine was allegedly complicit in this enterprise. It is notable that the bishop of Winchester did not apparently attend the king's coronation in 925, nor does he appear among the witnesses to royal charters during 926. It may be appropriate to see AEthelstan as something of an outsider at the West Saxon court even after his accession there; King Edward's widow, Eadgifu, seems to have been marginalized on her stepson's accession, since she did not attest any of his charters. 
That the tensions within royal circles persisted beyond 925 may be suggested by the suspicious death of the atheling Eadwine (AElfweard's brother) in 933. The E manuscript of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records laconically for 933: 'In this year the aetheling Eadwine was drowned at sea'. The twelfth-century historians Symeon of Durham and William of Malmesbury attribute this event to conspiracy and violence in which AEthelstan himself was involved. The details can be safely ignored, but that there was indeed a background of political unease to Eadwine's death is suggested by the account given by Folcwin the Deacon in his 'Gesta abbatum S Bertini' (chap. 107), written before 962 at St Bertin, where Eadwine was buried. According to Folcwin, 'King' Eadwine left England following 'some disturbance in his kingdom', but was shipwrecked and washed ashore in Flanders, where he was buried with honour; AEthelstan subsequently sent several gifts of alms to St Bertin on his brother's behalf. Perhaps the chronicler knew more than he was prepared to say. But it is more likely that Folcwin was confused over Eadwine's royal status than that the latter was co-ruler with AEthelstan. In the one diploma that Eadwine witnessed ('AS chart.', S 1417), he attested next after the king as 'cliton', atheling. 
AEthelstan's posthumous reputation rests largely on his prowess in war, notably his famous victory over the combined forces of the kings of Dublin, Scots, and Strathclyde at 'Brunanburh' in 937. But although this victory consolidated AEthelstan's position as sole king of England, it might properly be seen as the final phase of a process begun much earlier in his reign. Once he came into possession of all of his father's kingdom, AEthelstan found himself heir to a wider realm than that inherited by any previous West Saxon (or indeed Anglo-Saxon) king. Apart perhaps from the ruler of English Bernicia at Bamburgh, Ealdred, son of Eadwulf, he was the sole native English ruler in England. The kingdom of the Northumbrians was ruled by the Danish king, Sihtric Caech (formerly king in Dublin). In 926 AEthelstan and Sihtric met at Tamworth, the old Mercian capital, where they made an alliance sealed by Sihtric's marriage to a sister of AEthelstan. That the treaty involved at the very least a commitment on both sides not to invade the territory of the other, nor to support the other's enemies, seems plausible; where the boundary between their respective territories lay is not entirely clear, since it may be that Sihtric was minting coins in Lincoln as well as in York. 
When Sihtric died, the year after this marriage treaty was agreed, AEthelstan took control of his kingdom. The report in the northern version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' in using the standard phraseology of royal succession -- 'AEpelstan cyning feng to Nordhymbra rice' -- seems to imply that this was in some sense a legitimate accession to a territory to which AEthelstan had some claim. Similarly, William of Malmesbury asserts that on Sihtric's death Northumbria became AEthelstan's lawfully, belonging to him both by ancient right and by reason of the recent marriage alliance. AEthelstan may at the same time have driven out the one remaining claimant to Northumbrian power, representative of the house of Bamburgh. Two other texts presented AEthelstan's acquisition of Northumbria rather as the conquest it more plausibly was. The northern annals incorporated into the 'Historia regum' attributed to Symeon of Durham state that AEthelstan added Sihtric's dominion ('imperium') to his own, driving out the latter's son ('recte' brother) Guthfrith. AEthelstan's acquisition of Northumbria in 927 is also described in military terms in a poem, 'Carta dirige gressus', written in that year by Petrus, probably a clerk in the king's retinue: 'He [AEthelstan], with Sihtric having died, in such circumstances arms for battle ['armat tum in prelio'] the army of the English throughout all Britain' (Lapidge, 89). 
The acquisition of Northumbria made AEthelstan the first West Saxon ruler to have a border with the Scots. Seeking recognition of his new position over the English kingdoms, and wary of the potential support his new neighbours might offer to the exiled Scandinavians, AEthelstan gathered the other kings in the island to Eamont, near Penrith. There on 12 July 927 Hywel of the West Welsh, Constantine, king of the Scots, Owain, king of the people of Gwent, and Ealdred, son of Eadwulf, from Bamburgh, all 'established peace with pledge and oaths in the place which is called Eamont and renounced all idolatry and afterwards departed in peace' ('ASC', s.a. 927, text D). Constantine's submission is also reported in the poem 'Carta dirige gressus', which celebrated 'this England now made whole' ('ista perfecta' 'Saxonia'; Lapidge, 89-90). The Owain present at Eamont was in fact probably Owain of Strathclyde, on the border of whose territory the meeting took place; the submission of Owain of Gwent is more plausibly placed by William of Malmesbury later in the same year at Hereford. William also reports (uniquely, and so unverifiably) that the Scottish king was baptized as AEthelstan's godson at Eamont, and that although an attempt to secure Guthfrith's person failed, AEthelstan nevertheless took the opportunity to raze to the ground a fortress that the Danes had built at York, 'in order to leave disloyalty no place of refuge' (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 214-15). 
Other matters occupied AEthelstan south of the Humber in the next few years, but the Scottish peace did not prove permanent and in 934 the king found himself (perhaps driven by some offensive move from the north) obliged to plan a new campaign. According to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', in that year 'King AEthelstan went into Scotland with both a land force and a naval force, and ravaged much of it' ('ASC', s.a. 934, text C). Something of the preparation for this enterprise can be seen from the witness lists to AEthelstan's charters in this period; on 28 May the king was at Winchester, where he made a grant witnessed by a number of his English thegns, three of the Welsh kings, and five earls of Scandinavian origin ('AS chart.', S 425), while a broadly similar group witnessed a charter granted at Nottingham on 7 June ('AS chart.', S 407). The fullest account of the expedition is that given among the northern annals incorporated into Symeon of Durham's 'Historia regum': on his way north the king stopped at the then resting-place of the community of St Cuthbert, Chester-le-Street, and having commended himself and his expedition to the saint's protection, 'he then subdued his enemies, laid waste Scotland as far as Dunnottar and 'Wertermorum' with a land force, and ravaged with a naval force as far as Caithness' (Symeon of Durham, 'Opera', 2.124). That the attack was made as far north as Caithness (part of the Norse kingdom of Orkney) hints at the beginning of the alliance between Scots and Norsemen that was to find full expression in their attempted joint invasion of England in 937; it also demonstrates the strategic advantages to a West Saxon king of the acquisition of the kingdom of York. The success of AEthelstan's 934 expedition is noted also by John of Worcester, who blames Constantine for provoking the war by violating the peace between him and AEthelstan, and reports that the Scots king was forced to give up his son as a hostage after his defeat. 
Individually AEthelstan's northern neighbours lacked the strength to counter the wealth and military capability of the enlarged English kingdom; together, however, they might have hoped to check Wessex's northward expansion, if not reverse some of its more recent gains. The most celebrated of the military engagements of AEthelstan's reign was the occasion on which he inflicted a crushing defeat on a combined army led by Constantine, king of the Scots, Olaf Guthfrithson, king in Dublin, and Owain, king of Strathclyde, at a place called 'Brunanburh'. To the annalist of Ulster, this was a 'great victory' for AEthelstan, a 'great, lamentable and horrible battle' in which several thousand Norsemen died as well as a large number of Saxons ('Ann. Ulster', 384-7). According to the contemporaneous Old English poem recorded in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' under the year 937, 'AEthelstan, lord of nobles, dispenser of treasure to men, and his brother also, Edmund aetheling, won by the sword's edge undying glory in battle round 'Brunanburh''. On the field died five kings and seven earls from Ireland, as well as the son of the king of the Scots; the combined West Saxon and Mercian force suffered heavy losses but achieved a decisive victory. Well might the chronicle exult that: 'Never yet in this island before this by what books tell us and our ancient sages, was a greater slaughter of a host made by the edge of the sword, since the Angles and Saxons came hither from the east, invading Britain over the broad seas, and the proud assailants, warriors eager for glory, overcame the Britons and won a country. ('ASC', s.a. 937, text C)' The site of this battle remains a subject of controversy among historians. It has been customary to suppose that it occurred somewhere on the Scottish border, but it has also been argued that it was more plausibly on the frontier established by Edward between English and viking Mercia, that is on Watling Street, possibly even as far south as Northampton. The Old English poem implies that wherever the battle occurred it was near enough to the coast (or to an estuary or a river deep enough for ships to get far inland) for the defeated Norsemen to return swiftly to Dublin by sea. It is also known from the poem that the battle occurred outside Wessex and beyond Constantine's own territory. 
For the remaining two years of his life AEthelstan retained his control over the north, although the fragility of that hold is suggested by the speed with which his brother Edmund lost it on his succession in 939. AEthelstan's claim to a kingship of Britain was based on more, however, than his conquest of Northumbria and effective subjugation of the Scots. He had expansionist interests also in western Britain, as William of Malmesbury suggests, in his account of the submission by Welsh princes to the king at Hereford in 927. Supposedly the River Wye was agreed on this occasion as the boundary between the English and the Welsh, and an implausibly vast annual tribute imposed. The chronicler had named Hywel, king of the West Welsh, and Owain, king of Gwent, among those who submitted at Eamont; the charter evidence suggests that Idwal, king of Gwynedd, should be included with these in the Hereford submission. Hywel, Idwal, and Guriat (son of Rhodri) attested a charter issued at a meeting in Exeter in April 928, in which they are all described as 'subreguli' ('AS chart.', S 400). This meeting of the king's council probably coincided with AEthelstan's driving the Cornish out of Exeter and the fixing of the boundary of their province at the Tamar; the king supposedly reinforced that city's defences on this occasion, memory of his building-works there surviving into the twelfth century. The legal tract known as the ordinance of the Dunsaete, a short agreement for the settlement of disputes between the Welsh and English on both sides of the River Wye, may date from the period after the agreement between AEthelstan and the Welsh in 927. 
The reluctance with which the Welsh kings accepted AEthelstan's overlordship is hinted at by William of Malmesbury; the fear that they would conspire against him may have prompted the West Saxon king to demand their regular attendance at his court. Several Welsh 'subreguli' attest the king's charters in the 930s, and three of them appear to have accompanied AEthelstan on his Scottish expedition of 934. The subject Welsh clearly resented their subordinate status, reinforced as it may have been by the payment of frequent gifts, if not of regular tribute. An apparently contemporary poem, 'Armes Prydein vawr' ('The great prophecy of Britain'), looks forward to the day when the British will rise up against their oppressors and drive them back to the sea. 
As the early eleventh-century author of the Old English list of the relics which the king had given to the church of Exeter reminded his audience, by grace of God AEthelstan 'ruled England singly, which prior to him many kings had shared between them' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Auct. D.2.16, fol. 8'r'). Furthermore, he achieved by force of arms (and surely also of personality) the submission of other rulers within the British Isles, the Welsh, the Scots, and the Norse claimants to the kingdom of York. In these circumstances one might expect to find some sophistication in the articulation of AEthelstan's dignity and status, both through the royal styles adopted in his charters, and also in the language and imagery of his charters and coins alike. At the beginning of his reign AEthelstan had himself described in his charters as 'king of the Anglo-Saxons' ('AS chart.', S 396-7, 394), continuing the style first adopted by his grandfather Alfred and used by his father, Edward the Elder. This title reflected his rule over a combined West Saxon and Mercian polity, but was arguably inadequate to represent his military and political achievement of creating an English monarchy. After 927 AEthelstan's diplomas affect more grandiose regnal styles, making the king 'rex Anglorum' ('king of the English'; 'AS chart.', S 399-400, 403, 412, 416), 'rex totius' 'Britanniae' ('king of the whole of Britain'; 'AS chart.', S 431, 437, 445-6), or 'nodante dei gratia basileos Anglorum et eque totius Brittannie orbis curagulus' ('by grace of God king of the English and equally guardian of the whole country of Britain'; 'AS chart.', S 429-31, 438, 446). On his coins AEthelstan chose also to be represented as 'rex totius' 'Britanniae'. 
Whether AEthelstan, or the members of his immediate circle, indeed desired to portray the king's rule in quasi-imperial terms, in emulation of his Saxon contemporaries or Carolingian predecessors, is uncertain. AEthelstan's expression of his hegemony, including his use of 'imperator' ('AS chart.', S 392), and his claim to rule not just the English but all the peoples round about ('AS chart.', S 441-2), can be paralleled in earlier English contexts which may offer more plausible models. Beyond the rhetoric, however, the sheer practical difficulties of administering so large a realm demanded innovative solutions. After the documentary silence of the later years of his father's reign, AEthelstan's resumption of the issuing of royal diplomas in 925 testifies to a reinvigorated monarchy, and the years of his rule represent a formative period in the creation of the late Anglo-Saxon state. The charters issued in the king's name between 928 and 935 are all the work of a single, apparently royal, scribe, known to modern historians as AEthelstan A. The texts of this scribe's charters are remarkable as much for their literary qualities (testimony to the intellectual environment of the royal court) as for their diplomatic structure and formulation. The witness lists with which they are supplied are of particular interest, recording the presence of the Welsh and occasionally Scottish sub-kings, large numbers of ecclesiastics (abbots as well as bishops), and ealdormen from the Danelaw areas of England. Furthermore, it is possible from these charters to establish the king's itinerary around his expanded realm, since they record the day and place of issue more precisely than earlier diplomas. In centralizing charter production in a royal chancery, the king was taking an unprecedented degree of control over this important area of royal activity; beyond 935 the king's diplomas were still apparently centrally produced in a royal writing office, but by more than one scribe, none with the flamboyance of AEthelstan A. 
The scale of AEthelstan's councils -- the number of participants, the breadth of the geographical area from which they were drawn, and the frequency with which they were held -- marked for Stenton an important change in the character of royal councils; for him these were 'national assemblies, in which every local interest was represented, and they did much to break down the provincial separatism which was the chief obstacle to the political unification of England' (Stenton, 352). These changes may have been the result of pragmatism rather than deliberate innovation, no previous king having needed to devise systems for governing both sides of the Humber, and for uniting all the separate Anglo-Saxon kingdoms into a single polity. The regularity of the gatherings may have assisted with the process of cultural assimilation, as surely will have the gradual conversion of the Danelaw population to Christianity; yet the speed with which the kingdom of York recovered its autonomy after AEthelstan's death should be a reminder of the fragility of Wessex's hold, and its abhorrence to many of the king's reluctant subjects. Problems with the preservation of the peace are evident in AEthelstan's legislation, the vitality of which is one of the most impressive features of his government. In total six law codes survive from this reign, together with a short ordinance on almsgiving: four of the codes are official royal productions, including two general proclamations of laws from the king, one issued at Grately, the second at Exeter following continued violations of the earlier code ('II AEthelstan' and 'V AEthelstan'); two other codes represent reports to the king about the keeping of his peace by the men of Kent and by the bishops and reeves of the London district ('III AEthelstan' and 'VI AEthelstan'). The law codes reveal AEthelstan's concern to fulfil his obligation to govern his people effectively, while at the same time illustrating the difficulties of controlling so diverse a population. 
AEthelstan's coins shed further light on his perceptions of his kingship. His willingness to exploit the new political circumstances he had created is evident not just from the adoption of the legend proclaiming him king of Britain, but by the imposition of his coinage over his whole realm, enforced in law: 'there is to be one coinage over all the king's dominion and no one is to mint money except in a town' ('II AEthelstan', chap. 14). Rather than meaning that there was to be only one type of coin in circulation, this provision may have been intended to ensure that only the coins of the West Saxon king were to be accepted currency within his realm; the hoard evidence certainly indicates that non-English types were kept out quite successfully, as well as demonstrating that old types were not removed from circulation as soon as new ones were introduced. The sites of mints, and the numbers of moneyers at each of them, were similarly tightly controlled by law; yet it is clear that coinage was still, in fact, organized on a local basis. Another innovation lay in the pictorial representation on AEthelstan's coins; in the 'crowned bust' type, issued from 'c'.933, the king was depicted wearing a crown, a simple band with three stalks, each surmounted by a globule. The significance of this imagery is hard to determine, but it is difficult to resist the conclusion that this was a further symbolic promotion of AEthelstan's status and a reflection of his own conception of his kingship. It is unlikely to be coincidental that the inclusion of a crown (as opposed to a helmet) among the kingly regalia conferred at inauguration is first attested in the second Anglo-Saxon coronation ordo, which dates from the first half of the tenth century and may plausibly be dated to AEthelstan's reign. The rite was intended for one who would be king over the Saxons, Mercians, and Northumbrians, a king elected 'in regnum' 'Albionis', who was to be honoured before all the kings of Britain. Similarly, in both the known manuscript depictions of the king AEthelstan is pictured wearing a crown, and in one he is also holding a sceptre. In these spheres AEthelstan and his circle appear to have been searching for outward signs and symbols to mark the unprecedented nature of his rule. 
AEthelstan is the first Anglo-Saxon king who might genuinely be thought to have pursued a 'foreign policy', in the shape of the marriage alliances and fostering arrangements he negotiated strategically with his continental neighbours, and the refuge he offered at his court to exiles from abroad, as well as the more conventional overtures of friendship he made to foreign, especially German and Breton, religious houses. William of Malmesbury makes much of this aspect of AEthelstan's rule, reporting that 'the whole of Europe sang his praises and extolled his merits to the sky; kings of other nations, not without reason, thought themselves fortunate if they could buy his friendship either by family alliances or by gifts' (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 216-17). 
One of AEthelstan's sisters, Eadgifu, had already been given in marriage to Charles the Simple, king of the Franks, during her father's lifetime. When Charles was deprived of power and Robert, count of Paris, made king in 922, Eadgifu returned to England with Charles's son and heir, Louis, taking shelter at her father's court and remaining there after AEthelstan's accession. AEthelstan's defence of his nephew's interests is clear from his receipt of the Frankish embassy that sought the return of Louis d'Outremer (so named from his sojourn in England) as king in 936; the king demanded oaths of goodwill from the legates and arranged for an English escort to accompany the young king back to Francia. But it was expediency rather than sentiment that governed AEthelstan's diplomatic policy. Despite his obvious support for the Carolingian line in West Francia, the king married another of his sisters into the rival Robertian family; the marriage of Eadhild in 926 to Hugh, duke of the Franks and son of Count Robert, is reported in both English and Frankish sources from the tenth century. William of Malmesbury provides an elaborate account of the embassy that came to the English court at Abingdon to promote Hugh's suit; the magnificent gifts supposedly brought to the West Saxon king included the sword of Constantine the Great, its scabbard decorated with a nail from the crucifixion, Charlemagne's famous lance (allegedly that with which the centurion Longinus had pierced Christ's side on the cross), and the standard of St Maurice, as well as pieces of the true cross and the crown of thorns enclosed in crystal (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 218-21). It is difficult to determine how much credence should be given to this story, but the Malmesbury community claimed that AEthelstan had bequeathed them the relics of Christ's passion, and it may be that there were other traditions of the house by which the king's acquisition of such valuable relics was recollected. 
The most celebrated, and arguably most prestigious, of the marriages negotiated by AEthelstan was that contracted with the Liudolfing house, recently elevated to the kingship in Saxony, even though it was the historic and saintly lineage of the West Saxon house that made its daughters eligible brides for the young Otto, rather than the particular achievements of the girls' half-brother. English and German sources agree that AEthelstan sent two of his sisters to Saxony for the young prince to choose whom he preferred. The girls were escorted to Germany in the autumn of 929 by Cenwald, bishop of Worcester, bearing lavish gifts for their Saxon hosts. Otto's choice fell to the elder of the two girls, Eadgyth; the fate of her younger sister, AElfgifu, has puzzled historians since the late tenth century. Contemporary sources disagree on her name, as well as on the identity of her husband, but it seems likely that she married Louis, brother of Rudolf II, king of Burgundy, with whom she had the son named 'Henricus filius Ludowici' who appears in Burgundian sources between 943 and 961. Although this marriage obviously enhanced AEthelstan's European connections, it was surely contracted on AElfgifu's behalf by her new in-laws, the arrangement serving the immediate purpose of sealing Ottonian influence in the Rhone valley and the area between the Jura and the Alps. 
Beyond the liaisons contracted through these marriages, AEthelstan further promoted English interests in foreign affairs by other means. Having helped Louis d'Outremer to return to West Francia in 936, AEthelstan appears to have continued to support his nephew after his accession to the throne, sending a fleet to help him by attacking the Flemish coast at Therouanne in 939. AEthelstan's dealings with the count of Flanders were more complicated. Earlier in 939, when Count Arnulf captured Montreuil-sur-Mer he had sent the wife and sons of the captured Count Herlouin of Ponthieu to AEthelstan's court for safe keeping; yet the English raid on the Flemish coast in 939 seems to have led to an abrupt change in Flemish tactics and to have ended friendly relations between the courts of England and Flanders. 
Other foreign exiles found refuge with the English king in this period. According to the chronicle of Nantes (written in the mid-eleventh century on the basis of earlier annals) a number of Bretons fled their land for fear of the Danes and sought refuge at the court of King AEthelstan; among these was a certain Mathuedoi, count of Poher, who took with him his son Alain, afterwards known as Crooked Beard. The English king is said to have stood as Alain's godfather at his baptism and to have fostered him at his own court; when in 936 Alain returned to his native Brittany he did so with AEthelstan's support. Hakon, son of the Norwegian king Harald Fairhair, was reputedly fostered at AEthelstan's court; his nickname in Scandinavian sources is Adalsteinsfostri ('AEthelstan's fosterling'), and he is reported (admittedly only in texts dating from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries) to have reclaimed his kingdom with military help from his foster father. The story is not implausible, although Hakon's presence in England is not recorded in any contemporary English sources. William of Malmesbury does, however, report AEthelstan's reception at York of an embassy from King Harald of Norway, who sent him a magnificently furnished viking long ship. The extent and breadth of AEthelstan's connections within the British Isles and beyond is remarkable and unprecedented. 
AEthelstan was a king noted for his piety, even in an age when pious devotion was a recognized attribute of the good monarch. He founded two new religious houses, at Milton Abbas in Dorset and at Muchelney in Somerset, and reputedly made substantial grants of land to existing houses, notably Malmesbury. The king's fervour is evident both from his efforts to attract ecclesiastics to his court, and from his interest in religious manuscripts and particularly in the collection of relics. He may have inherited some relics from his grandfather, King Alfred ('AS chart.', S 1043); he certainly already had a substantial collection of saints' relics by his accession; the text of a manumission granted by the king on the day of his coronation referred to oaths sworn on the king's 'haligdom' (BL, Royal MS 1 B. vii, fol. 15'v'). In his 'Gesta pontificum' William of Malmesbury reports that he had found in a shrine at Milton Abbas in Dorset a letter from Radbod, prior of St Samson's at Dol in Brittany, addressed to AEthelstan and sent with a gift of relics 'which we know to be dearer to you than all earthly substance' (Malmesbury, 'De gestis pontificum', 399-400). In the prelude to a list of relics supposedly given to Exeter by King AEthelstan it was said that the king had sent men overseas to buy relics for him. The churches of Westminster and Glastonbury, and the New Minster at Winchester, also laid claim to relics given by AEthelstan. The church of Abingdon even claimed to have received some of the relics that AEthelstan had been given by Hugh, duke of the Franks. 
'There was scarcely any ancient house in all England that he did not adorn with buildings or ornaments, books or estates', recalled William of Malmesbury (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 206-7). AEthelstan's generosity as a donor of manuscripts is apparent from surviving manuscript inscriptions that record the king's gift of books to Christ Church and St Augustine's at Canterbury (BL, Cotton MS Tiberius A.ii, and LPL, MS 1370; BL, Royal MS 1 A.xviii), to the minster at Bath (BL, Cotton MS Claudius B.v), and to the community of St Cuthbert, then at Chester-le-Street (BL, Cotton MS Otho B.ix, and Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 183). A number of these manuscripts are gospel books, of which one is worth singling out for special mention: Tiberius A.ii. Written perhaps at Lobbes in Belgium in the late ninth or early tenth century, this manuscript has inscriptions associating it with Otto, the German king who married AEthelstan's sister Eadgyth, and with AEthelstan himself. Two inscriptions on folio 15 record AEthelstan's gift of this manuscript to Christ Church, Canterbury; the first, in prose, describes the king as 'Anglorum basyleos et curagulus totius Bryttaniae' -- terms reminiscent of the royal styles used in his charters between 935 and 939, implying that the inscription dates from the last years of the king's reign. The second is a poem, beginning 'Rex pius AEdelstan', that celebrates AEthelstan's achievements; written in the present tense, it would also seem to date from the end of his reign. 
Of these manuscripts, only Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 183 (whose contents include a collection of texts celebrating the life of St Cuthbert) was wholly written in England during AEthelstan's reign, and this appears to have been specially commissioned for presentation to the community of the saint at Chester-le-Street. The reverse side of the first folio of the first quire of the manuscript carries a splendid picture of a king presenting a book to a saint; the king, wearing a crown, stands holding a book in both hands; the saint, standing in front of his church, has a halo above his head and gives a blessing with his right hand while holding a book in his left. Although the figures are not labelled, there can be no doubt that the two are AEthelstan and St Cuthbert. Similar in style was a portrait in the other manuscript given by the king to Chester-le-Street (burnt in the Cotton Library fire of 1731 but known from various antiquarian descriptions of the undamaged manuscript); this was a gospel book written probably in Brittany in the late ninth or early tenth century. In the Otho B.ix picture the king, again crowned, and holding a sceptre in his left hand, knelt to offer a book to St Cuthbert with his right hand; this picture bore an inscription: 'AEthelstan, the pious king of the English, gives this gospel book to St Cuthbert, the bishop' (Keynes, 'Athelstan's books', 173-4). One further manuscript may have been intended for the king to give to Chester-le-Street: a de luxe copy of Aldhelm's prose 'De virginitate' (BL, Royal MS 7 D.xxiv) made by the scribe of Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 183. The text and illustrations are, however, incomplete and the gift, if planned, was seemingly abandoned (Gretsch, 359-67). According to the 'Historia de sancto Cuthberto' AEthelstan visited the shrine of St Cuthbert on his way north to Scotland in 934, and while there drew up a 'testamentum', which he placed beside Cuthbert's head, recording his gifts to the saint; these included vestments and other sacred texts, together with a substantial estate at Wearmouth, as well as 'this gospel book'. The vestments may have been the embroideries found in the coffin of St Cuthbert in 1827; from the inscriptions on the maniple and stole it is clear that these had originally been made for Frithestan (bishop of Winchester 909-31), on the orders of Edward's queen, AElfflaed. 
Beyond his generosity as a patron of religious houses, AEthelstan should be remembered for his promotion of learning at his court. In this he was certainly assisted by his reception of scholars from abroad, as well as of continental princes and nobles, thereby helping to foster an intellectually vibrant environment. The learned men who attended his court included Bretons (notably Israel the Grammarian), Franks, Germans, Irish, Italians, and possibly even the Icelander Egill Skallagrimson, fragments of whose verses in praise of the king survive. Bishop Cenwald, travelling round German monasteries in 929, may have hoped to collect books and possibly relics, to gain some insights into German monasticism, and conceivably to recruit German ecclesiastics for the English church. During and beyond AEthelstan's reign there were men with German names among the clerical communities at the New Minster, Winchester (it is not clear, however, whether they were members of that community, or of the royal household), and at London, and there may have been a German priest at Abingdon. Some of the king's moneyers, too, had German names. 
AEthelstan's reign also represented a crucial period in the background to the monastic revolution that reached its climax in the reign of King Edgar. Many of the leading ecclesiastics of that later movement had spent time in their youth at the court of King AEthelstan, and thereby had the opportunity of contact with the ideas and new manuscript books circulating around the king. Some of the bishops in AEthelstan's circle identified themselves in charters as 'monachi', including Cenwald of Worcester, AElfheah of Winchester, Oda of Ramsbury, and Theodred of London; although it is possible that these men had taken individual professions of monastic vows, it may be that they styled themselves monks to mark their confraternity with continental religious houses. Cenwald visited a number of German monasteries and Oda had spent time at Fleury. The reign of AEthelstan saw the continuation of the revival of ecclesiastical Latin learning for which Alfred had laid the foundations, together with a developing interest in Old English prose and in the production of scholarly glosses, notably to explain the Latin writings of Aldhelm (Gretsch, 332-83). The same period witnessed the gradual restructuring of religious provision for the laity and an expansion in aristocratic lay devotion. AEthelstan's personal piety thus helped to sponsor a religious revival that extended far beyond the collection and commissioning of luxury manuscripts or the esoteric pursuit of relics. 
AEthelstan died at Gloucester on 27 October 939 and was buried, not with his father and elder brother at the New Minster in Winchester, but rather in Malmesbury Abbey, perhaps a further indication of his distance from the West Saxon establishment. William of Malmesbury provides an account of AEthelstan's funeral, reporting that many gifts in gold and silver were carried before the body, as well as 'many relics of saints, bought in Brittany, for such were the objects on which he expended the treasure accumulated and left untouched by his father' (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 228-9). The chronicler's particular interest in this king is clearly at least in part explained by the presence of AEthelstan's tomb at his own abbey; it was on the basis of his own observation that he describes the king as not above the average height, slim in build with fair hair 'as I have seen for myself in his remains, beautifully intertwined with golden threads' (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 214-15). 
AEthelstan's importance as the first king of all England cannot be doubted. Yet there are few contemporary or near-contemporary narrative accounts of his reign, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' being particularly sparse in this period; historians have had perforce to turn to the account of William of Malmesbury in their attempt to build a fuller picture of the king and his achievements. William may well have had access to sources no longer extant, but that these included an extended verse narrative dating from the tenth century, as was once suggested, now seems unlikely. In spite of these difficulties, it is clear that AEthelstan's historical significance was already recognized in his own time, and remarked beyond his death. The poem 'Rex pius Adelstan', entered in a continental hand in manuscript Tiberius A.ii, the gospel book presented by Otto the Great, gives an idea of the lavish praise heaped upon AEthelstan by panegyrists during his lifetime; it opens with the lines: '
Holy King AEthelstan, renowned through the wide world, 

whose esteem flourishes and whose honour endures everywhere. 
(Lapidge, 95-6)' In noting that AEthelstan died 'an untroubled death', the annalist of Ulster describes the West Saxon king as 'pillar of the dignity of the western world' ('Ann. Ulster', 386-7). Ealdorman AEthelweard's 'Chronicon' illustrates the king's reputation at the end of the tenth century, calling AEthelstan 'rex robustissimus' and 'rex venerandus', and dwelling on the consequences of his victory at 'Brunanburh' and the submission of the Scots and the Picts. In a discussion of the nature of kingship which forms the epilogue to his translation of the 'Old Testament' book of 'Judges', AEthelweard's contemporary AElfric, monk of Cerne and later abbot of Eynsham, draws attention to English kings 'victorious because of God', including AEthelstan 'who fought against Anlaf and slaughtered his army and put him to flight, and afterwards with his people dwelt in peace' ('Heptateuch', ed. Crawford, 416-17). 
Modern accounts of the reign attempting to integrate the full range of available sources for AEthelstan begin with Armitage Robinson's account in his 1922 Ford Lectures, 'The Times of St Dunstan' (1923); however, although Robinson did much to demonstrate AEthelstan's significance as a collector of books and relics, and to sketch his foreign contacts, he presented the reign essentially as a prelude to the later tenth-century monastic revolution. Stenton's discussion in his 'Anglo-Saxon England' (1943, third edition 1971) focused especially on the role of AEthelstan in promoting the formation of the English state, while Kirby (1976) and Loyn (1980-81, repr. 1992) demonstrated the significance of his relations with the Welsh kings. Michael Lapidge's critical analysis of the poems about AEthelstan (1981), questioning the reliability of William of Malmesbury, has had a considerable impact on perceptions of the king. An attempt to restore the credibility of William's account has recently been made by Michael Wood (Wood, 149-68). Other recent studies have dealt with cultural aspects of the reign, for instance the king's manuscript collection and his foreign connections, and attention has also been given to the Celtic dimension at AEthelstan's court (Sharp). 
Beyond his undoubted military achievements, and the administrative and governmental advances made notably in the centralization of charter production and the tighter royal control of the coinage, AEthelstan stands out most remarkably for the extent of European diplomatic activity promoted through his court, to which the marriage alliances and the intellectual energy of his circle both bear witness. Although the sources of his information cannot all be verified, William of Malmesbury's account offers the most comprehensive view of AEthelstan; in the words of the twelfth-century poet whom he quoted (and with whose opinion he patently concurred) this was indeed a great king, glory of his native land: 'magnus Adelstanus, patriae decus' (Malmesbury, 'Gesta regum', 210). 


@@@@@


doc= 834


Atherstone, Edwin (1788-1872), poet and writer, was born on 17 April 1788 at Brewhouse Yard, Nottingham, the thirteenth of the fifteen children of Hugh Atherstone (1743-1816), dyer, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Green (1747-1819). He was educated at Fulneck Moravian School in Yorkshire, and on his return to Nottingham in 1804 claimed to have married Mary Wainwright Pearson (died 'c'.1832), niece of his organ teacher, although they never went through a legal marriage ceremony. This was a secret well kept from friends and family alike until the couple's separation in 1830, after her attempted suicide. They had one son (who died young) and three daughters. 
From 1807 Atherstone worked as a music teacher at the Franciscan convent school in Taunton, and wrote occasional compositions. It was perhaps through Thomas Poole, well known in Somerset, that he met Southey and Coleridge, whose friendship he tried to cultivate with little success. Coleridge said of him, 'Nature wove him well but with coarse threads' ('Collected Letters', ed. Griggs, 6.662). Atherstone was acquainted with various other eminent contemporaries, such as John Hunt, Thomas Moore, Scott, and Wheatstone, and was a close friend of the painter John Martin. He and Martin worked together on similar subjects, mostly biblical or classical history, each in his own art. 
Atherstone's first publication in 1821 was a volume containing two poems, 'The last days of Herculaneum', and 'Abradates and Panthea'; this was followed in 1824 by 'A Midsummer Day's Dream', illustrated by Martin. Next appeared the first part of his chief work, 'The Fall of Nineveh' (1828-30), an epic poem, and 'The Sea-Kings in England' (1830), a novel about the times of King Alfred. Despite, or perhaps because of, these publications, Atherstone was often in debt. His works did not sell well, and he gained a reputation for verbosity. 'The Fall of Nineveh' was published complete in 1847. 
In 1831 Atherstone moved from Taunton to London, from where he regularly toured Britain lecturing in elocution and philosophy, and as a dealer and collector of paintings. He ran two art galleries in London, in Pall Mall and Great Marlborough Street. Late in life Atherstone published 'The Handwriting on the Wall' (1858), a romance; 'Israel in Egypt' (1861), an epic poem; and a revised edition of 'The Fall of Nineveh' (1868). He was awarded a civil-list pension, and in 1861 moved from London to Bath, to benefit from cleaner country air. He died at 19 Macaulay Buildings, Bath, on 29 January 1872, and was buried at Bath Abbey cemetery. 
In 1888 Atherstone's eldest daughter and lifelong companion, Mary Elizabeth Atherstone, published three of his plays which had failed to reach the stage in the 1820s. A fourth play about the rulers of Europe, considered too libellous even by John Hunt, remains in manuscript form. Of Atherstone's other daughters, Catherine married her cousin Dr William Guybon Atherstone, who became well known in Cape Colony, and Mary Ann married Dr George Bird, son of the poet James Bird. 


@@@@@


doc= 835


Atherton, John (1598-1640), Church of Ireland bishop of Waterford and Lismore, was the son of John Atherton ('c'.1560-1609?), rector of Bawdrip in Somerset, where Atherton was probably born. He both matriculated and graduated BA at Gloucester Hall, Oxford, in 1617 and took an MA from Lincoln College in 1621. Though he had acquired some reputation as a canon lawyer, an Oxford career was precluded by his 1622 marriage to Joan Leakey of Barnstaple, with whom he was to have five daughters and who was to survive him, and he was presented to the living of Huish Champflower in Somerset by Philip Atherton in 1622. In 1629 he was elected to fellowship and conferred with an MA 'ad eundum' at Trinity College, Dublin. His reasons for going to Ireland are unknown, but may be suggested by the currency of local rumours that he was the father of a child born to his sister-in-law Susan in 1623. 
On 22 April 1630 Atherton was installed as rector of St John's, a prebend of Christ Church, Dublin, which he held jointly, without licence, with his English benefice. Accelerated advancement followed the arrival of Lord Deputy Viscount Wentworth: in 1634, he was appointed chancellor of the Killaloe diocese, rector of Killaban and Ballintubride in Queen's county, and chaplain to the lord chancellor. In 1635 he received an honorary DD from Trinity College, Dublin, and was installed as chancellor of Christ Church, and in 1636 he was appointed a commissioner for ecclesiastical causes and consecrated bishop of Waterford and Lismore (28 May). Archbishop Laud, who had insisted that Atherton resign his Somerset living and suspected him of having proposed a simoniacal transaction to his designated successor in the previous summer, at first opposed the nomination, but yielded to Wentworth's plea that Atherton was ideally qualified to recover the alienated property of the diocese from the earl of Cork: 'I will undertake that there is no such terrier in England for the unkennelling of an old fox', Wentworth urged (Wentworth to Laud, 9 March 1636, Strafford MSS, vol. 6). This confidence proved justified: within two years, Atherton forced the earl to arbitration and procured a settlement which raised the potential income of the see from $50 to $1000 per annum. 
In 1638 Wentworth proposed that Atherton should be translated to the bishopric of Cork, where he calculated that there was property worth $800 a year to be recovered from the same hands. On this occasion Laud was unco-operative, perhaps influenced by an episode involving Atherton's recently deceased mother-in-law, Susannah Leakey, who was reputed to have appeared to her daughter-in-law in Minehead and entrusted her with a message to be delivered to Atherton in Ireland. A commission of inquiry concluded that this was 'a fiction and a practice, but to what end could not be discovered' (SP 161/383, no. 5). Laud thought that it was 'some money business', to which Wentworth responded that 'if money be that they aim at, it must be a strong and crafty devil that gets anything out of the bishop's purse' ('Works of... William Laud', 7.327; Wentworth to Laud, 10 July 1637, Strafford MSS, vol. 6). Local rumour, after the event, had it that the message was a warning to Atherton that 'unless he doth repent of the sin whereof he knows himself guilty, he shall be hanged', and that the sin was incest with his niece and complicity in the strangulation by Susannah of the daughter she bore (D. L., 'Bishop Atherton's Case'). On 17 June 1640 a petition against him was presented to the Irish House of Lords by his proctor, John Child, who both claimed to have had homosexual relations with him and accused him of acts of fornication and adultery. He was tried before a jury in the court of king's bench, where he admitted to 'some adulteries and fornications' but strenuously denied the capital charge. He was found guilty of buggery on 27 November. The death of the acting lord deputy, Sir Christopher Wandesford, prevented his intended deconsecration, and he was hanged on Oxmantown Green in Dublin on 5 December. After a service in St John's in the late evening he was buried, at his own request, in a rubbish dump in the corner of the churchyard of St John the Evangelist in Fishamble Street. 
An account of Atherton's last days, 'The Penitant Death of a Woeful Sinner', published in May 1641 by Nicholas Barnard, dean of Ardagh, who had attended him and preached at his funeral, strongly affirmed his innocence: the contrary view had been expressed in a rhyming pamphlet published some months previously which reviewed Atherton's career under the title 'The life and death of John Atherton, who for incest, buggery and many other enormous crimes, after having lived a vicious life died a shameful death'. Its version of his conduct was restated in 'Bishop Atherton's Case Discuss'd', published in 1711 after the publication of John Dunton's 'Athenianism' had drawn attention to a detailed account of the Minehead apparition written by the nonconformist minister John Quick in 1680, which provided full details of Mrs Leakey's disclosures. Posterity has been inclined to accept Bernard's vindication and to assume that Atherton was the victim of revenge for his successful recovery of church lands. No convincing culprit has been disclosed, however, and the assumption that it was inconceivable that a man 'of his years, education and function should be guilty of so unnatural and brutal a piece of lust as he was charged with' no longer seems safe (King). 


@@@@@


doc= 836


Atherton, William (1775-1850), Wesleyan Methodist minister, was born at Lamberhead Green, near Wigan, in Lancashire. In 1797 he entered the Wesleyan ministry and was assigned to the Grimsby circuit. His fresh and original style of preaching marked him as one of the more famous preachers of England of the early nineteenth century. He served as a minister for fifty-three years, for the first ten in Scottish circuits. Here he married Margaret, daughter of the Revd Walter Morison, a Church of Scotland minister. Their son, Sir William Atherton, became the first Methodist attorney-general. Atherton was acquainted for the eleven years before her death with Darcy, Lady Maxwell, whose life he published in 1838. 
After spending some years in Yorkshire, Lancashire, and London, Atherton became president of the Wesleyan Methodist conference in 1846. In 1849 he moved to be superintendent of the Wakefield circuit and chairman of the Leeds district, a position which he held until his death in Wakefield on 26 September 1850. Atherton was associated with the opposition to Jabez Bunting, and was a great advocate for missions, chapels, and schools within the Methodist Connexion. 


@@@@@


doc= 837


Atherton, Sir William (1806-1864), lawyer and politician, was born at Glasgow in October 1806, the son of the Revd William Atherton (1775-1850), a Wesleyan minister, and Margaret, daughter of Walter Morison, a minister of the established Church of Scotland. He was educated in England, and was admitted to the Inner Temple on 11 November 1829. He practised from 1832 to 1839 as a special pleader below the bar. In 1833 he published 'An elementary and practical treatise on the commencement of personal actions, and the proceedings therein to declaration, in the superior courts at Westminster', which was commended at the time as 'very useful' and 'well executed' (Allibone, 'Dict.'), and on 22 November 1839 he was called to the bar. He practised on the northern circuit, where he secured a high reputation. On 15 April 1843 he married Agnes Mary (died 1866), the daughter of Mr Thomas James Hall, chief magistrate at Bow Street. 
Atherton was returned to parliament as one of the members for the city of Durham in 1852, and was re-elected by the same constituency in 1857 and 1859. In politics he was an advanced Liberal, being in favour of vote by ballot and an extension of the suffrage, and he opposed the repeal of the grant to the Catholic college of Maynooth, and supported the removal of all religious disabilities. Unsurprisingly, most of his reported speeches were on legal matters. 
Atherton was appointed a queen's counsel in July 1851, and became a bencher of his inn the same year. He was judge-advocate of the fleet and standing counsel to the Admiralty from 1855 until 16 December 1859, when he succeeded Sir H. S. Keatinge as solicitor-general, and received the honour of knighthood (23 February 1860). In June 1861, on the elevation of Sir Richard Bethell to the lord chancellorship as Lord Westbury, Sir William Atherton succeeded to the vacant post of attorney-general. He was the first Methodist to hold the position, which he resigned in September 1863 on account of ill health; he was reported to have rallied in late November, but died at his residence, 13 Westbourne Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 22 January 1864. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 838


Aitken, James (1612/13-1687), bishop of Galloway, was born in Kirkwall, Orkney, the third son of Henry Aitken, commissary and sheriff of Orkney and Shetland, and Elizabeth Buchanan. He attended Kirkwall grammar school before moving on to the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MA on 23 July 1636. During the next two turbulent years of the covenanting revolution he completed his formal education at Oxford, where he studied divinity under John Prideaux of Exeter College. He returned to Scotland as chaplain to James, marquess of Hamilton, who was high commissioner to the Glasgow assembly of 1638 that abolished episcopacy and the royal supremacy in the Church of Scotland. Aitken was presented to the charge of Harray and Birsay, Orkney, on 27 July 1641 and officially admitted on 26 June 1642. He married Alison, daughter of Thomas Rutherford of Hunthill; they had four daughters. 
Alerted to an order for his deposition and apprehension by his kinsman Sir Archibald Primrose, the clerk of council and later lord register, for his pledge of loyalty to the crown and support for the ill-fated royalist military campaign led by the marquess of Montrose in 1650, Aitken sought refuge in the Netherlands between 1650 and 1653. He returned to Scotland during the relative calm of the Cromwellian interregnum and lived in Edinburgh between 1653 and 1660. After the Restoration his fidelity to the royalist cause was rewarded, on 15 May 1661, by a grant of $100. After accompanying Thomas Sydserf, the bishop of Orkney, to the court of Charles II in 1661 he was presented to the rectory of Winfrith, Dorset, by the bishop of Winchester. According to Anthony Wood he remained there for the next sixteen years. 
On 1 November 1676 Aitken was appointed bishop of Moray. A letter patent to that effect was issued on 5 June 1677; episcopal consecration, however, was delayed until 28 October 1679. This did not prevent him from playing a conspicuous role in the convention of estates that met in Edinburgh in June 1678. He was translated to the see of Galloway on 6 February 1680 but received a dispensation permitting him to live in Edinburgh 'because it was thought unreasonable to oblige a reverend prelate of his years to live among such a rebellious and turbulent people' (Keith, 282). He took a prominent part in the parliaments that met in the capital in July 1681, April 1685, and April 1686, where he vociferously opposed repeal of the penal laws against Roman Catholics. Aitken died of apoplexy in Edinburgh on 15 November 1687 aged seventy-four, and was interred in Greyfriars Church; his funeral sermon was preached by Bishop John Hamilton of Dunkeld. 


@@@@@


doc= 839


Atkins, Henry (1554/5-1635), physician, born in Hertfordshire, was the son of Richard Atkins of Great Berkhamsted. After matriculating aged nineteen at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1574, he graduated BA in 1575 and MA in 1578, and afterwards proceeded MD at Nantes. He was admitted a licentiate of the College of Physicians in 1586, in 1588 he became a fellow, and in 1606 president. He was re-elected in 1607, 1608, 1616, 1617, 1624, and 1625. In 1597 he sailed as physician to the earl of Essex in the Spanish expedition, but was so seasick that he had to be put on shore and was replaced by Thomas Moundeford. 
Atkins served as physician-in-ordinary for thirty-two years to James I and later Charles I. In 1604 Atkins was sent by the king to Scotland to bring back his son Charles. Charles had been left behind when James went south to claim the English throne, and now Atkins found him to be 'far out of order', as he wrote to Sir Robert Cecil (Carlton, 2). The young duke was soon well enough to be brought to his father. In 1612 Atkins was called into consultation during the last illness of Henry, prince of Wales, and his opinion was that the disease was a putrid fever 'without malignity, except that attending putridity' ('Theo. Turquet Mayernii', 119). He suggested bleeding. His signature, as one of the king's physicians, stands next to that of Mayerne in the original report of the post-mortem examination. In 1611 the king is said to have offered Atkins the first baronet's patent. 
Atkins was very active as president of the College of Physicians. He was closely involved with the apothecaries' separation from the Grocers' Company, winning them the support of the college for their charter in 1617. The same year he also planned the new charter of the college, which, although sealed, was never ratified by parliament. In 1618, under his presidency, the College of Physicians issued the first 'London Pharmacopoeia'. Atkins married Mary Pigot of Dodershall, Buckinghamshire ('c'.1567-1623). He lived in Warwick Court, London, enjoyed a large practice, and died rich on 21 September 1635. He left an only child, afterwards Sir Henry Atkins, and was buried in Cheshunt church, where a monument was erected to his memory. He was a benefactor of the College of Physicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 840


Atkins, John (bap. 1685, d. 1757), naval surgeon, the son of John and Grace Atkins, was baptized on 26 November 1685 at Plaistow, Essex. He served a professional apprenticeship before commencing a chequered naval career in March 1701 as surgeon's mate of the 'Charles Galley'. He progressed to first mate of the 'Somerset', where he successfully treated head injuries and splinter and gunshot wounds sustained during Sir George Rooke's action off Malaga in 1704, and his captain found him diligent, respectful, sober, and worthy of better things. 
As surgeon of the 'Tartar' (1705-10) Atkins saw action against the French in the channel and skilfully handled a severe penetrating gunshot wound of the chest. The bomb-ketch 'Lion' took him as ship's surgeon to the Mediterranean (1710-14), where he received forty casualties within an hour during the battle of Vaia Bay near Genoa in 1711; among these was his captain, Galfridus Walpole, brother of the future prime minister. Walpole sustained a severe compound fracture of the forearm; Atkins amputated the limb but felt it prudent to consult senior hospital ship colleagues on his post-operative management. The matter became a source of controversy which effectively ended his advancement. In 1715 he was awarded the diploma of the Barber-Surgeons' Company and, as a master surgeon, was qualified to serve as surgeon of a second-rate ship. Instead he was offered the position of surgeon's mate of the sloop 'Shark'; he declined the offer, for by then he was a shrewd, observant, and skilled surgeon. His readiness to challenge established ideas if his own experience dictated brought him into conflict with examiners who were slaves to tradition. On re-examination after a three-year break in service he qualified only as a second mate and was appointed to the storeship 'Success'. He again declined and finally, on 16 March 1719, was appointed surgeon of the 'Swallow', which, with her tender, 'Weymouth', was dispatched to seize pirates operating on the African coast. At Cape Lopez 270 were captured with $10,000 in gold dust and Atkins acted as registrar at their trial. 
The voyage introduced him to tropical diseases and he was first to describe African sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis). He also described craw-craw, or river blindness (onchocerciasis), and Guinea-worm disease (dracontiasis). Atkins provided probably the first detailed description of cerebral malaria complicating a falciparum infection, which, because it lacked the periodicity of common forms of malaria and was unresponsive to quinine, puzzled him. His differential diagnosis included heat exhaustion and typhus, which, he perceptively noted, was associated with dirt, infestation, overcrowding, and inadequate ventilation. Because the pursers of both ships had died and 'Weymouth' had lost more than her original complement, he was appointed purser of that ship for the homeward passage via Brazil and the West Indies; the hurricane he encountered at Port Royal, Jamaica, was one which he was to describe vividly in one of his books. 
The ship was paid off at Woolwich in May 1723 and Atkins was subsequently superannuated, retiring to Plaistow to write his books, 'The Navy Surgeon, or, Practical System of Surgery' (1732) and 'A Voyage to Guinea, Brasil and the West Indies' (1735). Both ran to several editions; the 1742 edition of 'The Navy Surgeon' was much enlarged and carried philosophical speculations based on an extensive knowledge of classical and contemporary writers and his own protestant convictions. He also provided a useful account of the examination, appointment, and equipment of naval surgeons, and irregularities practised by the companies of Barber-Surgeons and Apothecaries. His surgical practice was influenced by Richard Wiseman and James Yonge, but he was an independent thinker who established principles of casualty management not fully appreciated until the twentieth century. They included methodical planning; sorting of casualties into three categories to allow the surgeon to deal rapidly and effectively with those requiring immediate surgery, priority to be given to the arrest of haemorrhage; scrupulous cleanliness; thorough debridement; and antisepsis. Believing that naval surgeons required continuing education, he proposed a naval medical school in Portsmouth naval academy. 
Atkins also became concerned about the plight of black slaves and issued one of the earliest denunciations of the slave trade, which he had witnessed on the African coast. A passage in 'A Voyage to Guinea' seems to imply that he had served in a slave ship himself. It would account for the gap in his naval service from 1715 to 1718, during his period of disillusionment. His natural curiosity led him to study fetishes and speculate upon the wider aspects of faith healing, and he discussed the various properties of mineral springs. A concern for the poor brought him to recognize that infirmaries funded by local subscriptions would always be inadequate and only a national health service provided by taxpayers could offer the requisite standards of professional care. His excursions into philosophy were less successful and tended to obfuscate rather than develop his ideas. 
Atkins died, unmarried, at Plaistow, probably on 6 December 1757, aged seventy-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 841


Atkins, Richard (1559?-1581), protestant martyr, was the son of William Atkins and a native of Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. In early summer 1581 he arrived in Rome. The anonymous 'Copie of a Double Letter' (1582?), probably by the Jesuit Robert Persons from an eyewitness account, describes him as 'of no great yeres', a 'nailesmithe' by trade, short, with auburn hair, a reddish beard, and hardened hands, unlettered except that he could rudely write his name and read 'a litle new testament tourned out of Beza his latin' into English. The 'Copie' reports Atkins's claim that he was a Catholic until the age of nineteen, after that a protestant, and now three years of a 'forther faithe' for which he prophesied he would be hanged, in token of which he wore a 'figurative' garment with gallows sewn in red cloth on front and back. In England he had already delivered 'lewde speaches against the Quene', but had escaped the death penalty as a 'mad man' ('Copie', 7-8). 
Now in Rome, feverish and raving against the pope, Atkins was brought to the English College and nursed back to health -- and a renewed intention 'to charge the Pope publikely with his sinnes' ('Copie', 10). The 'Copie' reports that doctors at the hospital for madmen declared Atkins sane, and refused his care; the Inquisition found him mad, and equally refused his case. A second contemporary account, Anthony Munday's 'English Romayne Lyfe' (1582; repr. 1590), states that Atkins reproached the members of the English College themselves for their homage to 'that filthy Sacrament, which is nothing else but a foolish Idoll'. Munday also credits Atkins with an earlier unsuccessful attack on the host as it was carried in the street, for which he was excused as merely 'catch[ing] at the holinesse' coming from the sacrament (pp. 72-5). 
On 23 July, Atkins knocked the chalice from the priest's hand in St Peter's (though before it was fully consecrated), and according to Munday also tried to seize the cake. He was immediately delivered to the Inquisition, where he refused to give up either his heretical beliefs or his intention to rebuke 'the Turke, the Pope, & the Quene', continually quoting scripture in his defence ('Copie', 15). After a final refusal to recant on 29 July, he was clad in a black cassock painted with flames and conveyed to a prison near the English College. 
On 2 August, stripped to the waist, Atkins was set upon an ass and taken to 'S. Peters streate, where he was to be bourned', tormented as he rode by four men who thrust burning torches at his back and breast; there his right hand was cut off and his legs burnt first to prolong the torture. Here the accounts differ sharply, the Catholic writer of the 'Copie' describing Atkins's 'impacience and pucillanimitie' under torture, his attempt to strangle himself with the chain that bound him to hasten his own death, and a final gesture of recantation in which he raised both hand and stump ('Copie', 18-19). The protestant account of Munday, by contrast, presents a serene Atkins who 'suffered all meruailous cheerefully', leaning into the torches and sometimes seizing them to burn himself (Munday, 'Lyfe', 74). 
Munday's illustrated account, reproduced almost verbatim in 1583 by John Foxe in the revision of his 'Acts and Monuments', may have inspired a flurry of similar desecrations in Rome in November 1581 and January and November 1582, and perhaps even the later act of Walter Marsh, English clergyman and spy, in June 1595. 


@@@@@


doc= 842


Atkins, Samuel (fl. 1787-1808), marine painter, contributed annually to the Royal Academy between 1787 and 1796 (except in 1790). He was in the East Indies from 1796 to 1804, when he returned to England, and continued to exhibit until 1808. He worked in oil and watercolour, specializing in small-scale shipping scenes. The watercolour collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum each have an example of his work. Further examples of his work are in the collections of the Ulster Museum, Belfast; National Maritime Museum, Greenwich; Leeds City Art Gallery; and the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. A picture entitled 'Shakespeare's Cliff, Dover', was engraved after him by R. and D. Havell. Nagler attributes to this Samuel Atkins the originals of two engravings of sea subjects after ' -- Atkins' ('Allgemeines Kunstlerlexikon'): 'Ships in Sight of Harbour', engraved in aquatint by H. Merke; and 'A Sea Piece', by F. Janinet. He also attributes a watercolour drawing, 'Seascape with Ships', to Atkins. 


@@@@@


doc= 843


Atkins, William (1601-1681), Jesuit, was born in Cambridgeshire. In August 1622 he was one of a party of twelve Catholic students sent from the Jesuit college at St Omer to the English seminary at Seville who sailed from Calais on a ship of the Dunkirk fleet. Captured after a battle with a Dutch privateer, they were transferred to a merchantman crewed by Hamburg Mennonites. This vessel, in turn, was boarded off Cape St Vincent by Morisco corsairs and conveyed to their base at Sale, on the Moroccan coast. The students' month-long imprisonment, escape, and subsequent voyage to Gibraltar by way of Mamora, Alarache, and Tangier were equally hazardous. Atkins's later narrative of their adventures was discovered in manuscript at Moseley Old Hall, near Wolverhampton, in 1855. It is the earliest account by a European of the pirate state of Sale established between 1609 and 1614 by Spanish speaking Moriscos expelled from Extremadura who, joined by English and Dutch pirates, made Sale the base for raids on Atlantic shipping. Atkins's narrative is a unique eyewitness account of Sale in its formative state, affording evidence about its everyday life and customs, government, and the treatment of captives. Written some time after 1637, it corrects the much shorter version of events in 'The English-Spanish Pilgrime' (1629) of James Wadsworth, another of the twelve students, who later turned apostate and informer. 
After six years at St Gregory's College, Seville, where he was ordained priest in 1628, Atkins entered the Society of Jesus at the noviciate of the English province in Watten, Spanish Netherlands, in 1629. He was in England by 1631 and spent the following fifty years as a missioner in and around Wolverhampton. The fact that the manuscript of his narrative was preserved at Moseley Old Hall, the home of the Whitgreave family, suggests a connection with Thomas Whitgreave (1625-1702), the squire of Moseley, famous for having sheltered the future king Charles II in September 1651. In 1653 Atkins was appointed rector of the Jesuit college, or sub-province, of St Aloysius, covering Lancashire, Derbyshire, Cheshire, and Staffordshire. He was living at Wolverhampton, an old man in his late seventies, when he fell victim to the persecution provoked by Titus Oates. In August 1679 he and Andrew Bromwich, a secular priest, appeared at Stafford assizes before Lord Chief Justice Scroggs on a charge of being Romish priests. A stroke six years earlier had left Atkins paralysed, deaf, and virtually speechless: he could answer only through a spokesman, and the sentence of death had to be shouted in his ear. Reprieved on account of his age, he died in Stafford gaol on 17 March 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 844


Atkinson, Sir Harry Albert (1831-1892), farmer and premier of New Zealand, was born on 1 November 1831 at Broxton, Cheshire, the fourth son and the seventh of the thirteen children of John Atkinson (1798-1856), an architect and stonemason, and his wife, Elizabeth Smith (died 1855). The family moved from place to place as his father looked for work, and they eventually settled at Frindsbury, in Kent. Harry had brief spells at school in Gravesend, Rochester, and Blackheath, but most of his eclectic education occurred at home. All the Atkinson children were encouraged to show independence from an early age; Harry bred Cochin China fowls to earn pocket money. The children were permitted by their Unitarian parents to choose their own religious denomination; Harry became an Anglican. 
A friendship between Harry's eldest brother, John Staines Atkinson, and James Richmond, who with others of his family had already decided to go to New Zealand, introduced the Atkinsons to the idea of emigration. In time seven of the eight Atkinson siblings who lived to maturity participated in an extended kin group migration to New Zealand. Harry and his nearest brother, Arthur, who was his closest confidant throughout his life, arrived in New Plymouth, Taranaki, North Island, in 1853. Each had $150 capital from their maternal grandfather. Harry purchased 100 acres about 7 miles from New Plymouth on the Carrington Road. Other family purchases rounded out the settlement, which they called Hurworth. Harry's house was built in 1854 of timber felled on the property. 
Atkinson married (Amelia) Jane Skinner (1831-1865) of Rochester in St Mary's Church, New Plymouth, on 25 March 1856. The bustling energy and growing prosperity of the settlement at Hurworth was interrupted by the war which broke out in Taranaki in 1860 between settlers and Maori. Atkinson, like most settlers, was impatient with communal Maori ownership of 'unused' land which the settlers 'required' for agriculture. He thought that Maori should be assimilated into European society as quickly as possible and that dispossession of their land would, in the end, lead to progress. He was an enthusiastic belligerent, serving as captain of no. 2 company of the Taranaki rifle volunteers, a settler militia. 
Despite being elected to parliament in 1861, Atkinson was back in Taranaki in 1863 organizing an irregular force of bushrangers. He ended the war with the rank of major and was later often known as Major Atkinson. He became minister for colonial defence in the Weld ministry on 24 November 1864, but retired on 16 October 1865. His wife, who with their children had been evacuated to Wanganui, died (of suffocation by goitre) on 22 June 1865, leaving Atkinson with three young sons and a daughter. On 13 June 1866 he married his cousin, Annie Smith (1838-1919), at St Mary's Church, New Plymouth; two sons and two daughters were born of this second marriage. 
Atkinson always considered himself primarily a farmer. Hurworth and the concerns of the Taranaki settler community, especially bush farmers breaking in forest land for agriculture, were never far from his mind. Yet he found himself irresistibly drawn to politics, even though he was a man of modest means and the rewards of political life were slim. He said in 1857, when he was elected to the Taranaki provincial council, that he went 'to speak for the bush'; and he saw his role in central politics as being a farmers' advocate. On 3 October 1872 Atkinson was elected to parliament as member for Egmont, a constituency he held until 22 January 1891. On 7 September 1874 he joined Julius Vogel's cabinet as minister for crown lands and immigration, and he became premier when Vogel went to London as agent-general. In all he was premier four times: 1 September 1876 - 13 October 1877; 25 September 1883 - 16 August 1884; 28 August 1884 - 3 September 1884; and 8 October 1887 - 24 January 1891. He was colonial treasurer for ten years between 1876 and 1891, but it was the misfortune of one so enthusiastic about progress that these were mostly depression years. Atkinson's optimism was always tempered by prudence and economy. The voters in theory agreed, but in practice revolted when more promising policies were offered. 
As Atkinson grew older, his interests widened. He was accused by his conservative colleagues of harbouring fads, but he was indifferent to their criticisms. He supported proportional representation, women's suffrage, and perpetual leasehold land tenure to help small farmers on to land and preserve a 'land endowment' for future generations. All these reforms, he felt, were conducive to individual independence and responsibility. He also favoured temperance, Anglo-Saxon federation, and income taxes. He voted for one man, one vote in 1889. Above all, he advocated national insurance -- compulsory saving while young and employed to provide for the catastrophes of colonial life: unemployment, becoming an orphan, sickness, and old age. When he propounded his scheme in 1882 and 1883 it was denounced as 'an attempt to make every single individual a part of a great communistic society' (Sir George Grey, 10 July 1882, 'New Zealand Parliamentary Debates', 42.194). 
In January 1888 Atkinson was created KCMG and in January 1891, after electoral defeat, he became speaker of the legislative council. He died of heart failure in his room in Parliament House, Wellington, on 28 June 1892, and was buried the following month in Karori cemetery, Wellington. Throughout his long career he identified passionately with new farmers, and as 'the Major' he retained the glamour of the 'settler armed'. Yet he never spoke of the wars and was too pragmatic and too receptive to new ideas to be classified as a rural conservative. Although he became a professional politician, Atkinson was no crowd-pleaser. He was didactic on the hustings and ebulliently pugnacious in the house, always in pursuit of his own, moderate line. After 1889 he was left behind by the party alignments forming around him and became a figure of nostalgia, 'the most perfect type of an old settler' (James Allen, 29 June 1892, 'New Zealand Parliamentary Debates', 75.65). 


@@@@@


doc= 845


Atkinson, Henry (1781-1829), mathematician and astronomer, was born on 28 June 1781 at West Harle, Northumberland, the son of Cuthbert Atkinson, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated by his father, who ran a number of schools in small towns in Northumberland, and at an early age he began to help him run Bavington School. When he was thirteen his father, considering him capable of managing that school, resigned it to his charge, and opened another at West Woodburn. These two schools were superintended by father and son alternately. When he was about sixteen his father and he left the school at Bavington and opened another at West Belsay, which they continued to superintend alternately with the school at Woodburn. Atkinson afterwards moved to Stamfordham, where he kept a school, together with his sister, for more than six years. Then, with his sister, he moved to the adjoining village of Hawkwell. Finally, on 14 November 1808, he settled in Newcastle upon Tyne, where he spent the rest of his life. 
In Newcastle, Atkinson was a highly successful teacher of mathematics, and became active in pursuing his research interests in mathematics and astronomy. He read many papers to the Newcastle Literary and Philosophical Society, of which he became a member in June 1809, notably 'A new method of extracting the roots of equations of the higher orders' (1809, recounting a discovery he claimed to have made in 1801), 'An essay on proportion' (1811), and 'On the difference between the followers of Newton and Leibnitz concerning the measure of forces' (1814). His sustained interests in astronomical research produced papers, 'inter alia', on 'The eclipses of Jupiter's satellites and on the mode of determining the longitude by these means' (1810), on the comet of 1811 (1813), and on 'The possibility and... consequences of the lunar origin of meteoric stones' (1815). Two of his papers, 'On the utility and probable accuracy of the mode of determining the sun's parallax by observations on the planet Mars near his opposition' and 'An essay on astronomical and other refraction', were submitted to the Astronomical Society of London and published in their journal ('Memoirs of the Astronomical Society of London', 2, 1826, 27-36, 137-260). 
In December 1822 Atkinson married Isabella, the daughter of John Riddell and the sister of the mathematician Edward Riddle, who until 1821 had been master of the Trinity House School, Newcastle. They had one son and two daughters. In 1823 Atkinson was unsuccessful in his candidacy for the mathematical mastership of Newcastle grammar school, an event which led to much local controversy and was attributed by some to his dissenting religious and political views. In the following year he also failed in his candidacy for the mathematical mastership at the Edinburgh Academy. 
An energetic researcher, Atkinson also read papers to the Literary and Philosophical Society on issues in economics, engineering, and metaphysics. Some of his papers were published in the 'Newcastle Magazine', of which he was mathematical editor for a number of years. In 1827 he delivered a course of lectures on astronomy to both the society and the mechanics' institute. He served on the committee of the society from 1817 to 1828 and was an active contributor of solutions to the mathematical problems in the 'Gentleman's Diary' and the 'Ladies' Diary'. He was also a leading figure in the Newcastle Unitarian church and a close friend of its controversial minister, William Turner. He died of lung disease at his home in Saville Row, Newcastle, on 31 January 1829, and was buried in St Andrew's churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 846


Atkinson, James (1759-1839), surgeon and bibliographer, the son of a medical practitioner and friend of Laurence Sterne, received his medical education as a pupil of Henry Cline of St Thomas's Hospital, London, and attended the lectures of Thomas Denman, physician-accoucheur to the Middlesex Hospital. A Roman Catholic, by 1782 he had started to practise in York and later travelled to Holland and Paris. He is remembered as the author of 'Medical Bibliography: A. and B.' (1834), which is dedicated: 'To all idle medical students in Great Britain sit -- ', with a picture of that part of the human spinal column known as the sacrum. Atkinson's reason for attempting the work was: 'Wanting better amusement, and through mere accident, I stumbled upon the dry, dusty, tedious, accursed, hateful bibliography' (p. 371). The subject undoubtedly deserves all these epithets, but Atkinson managed to write a book to which none of them can be truly applied. It is full of anecdote, humour, and out-of-the-way information. The scientific value is, however, small, the bibliography consisting of a simple list of editions arranged alphabetically under names of authors. The notes are merely excuses for Atkinson's discursive and amusing remarks on things in general. The book is usually spoken of as unfinished, as it is only devoted to letters A and B, but there is nothing to show that it was the intention of Atkinson to go any further, especially as he asked 'what blockhead but myself, would have chosen such a task for relaxation?' (Rolleston, 179). 
T. F. Dibdin made Atkinson's acquaintance in York in the course of his bibliographical tour, and described him as 'a gentleman and a man of varied talent: ardent, active, and of the most overflowing goodness of heart... The heartiest of all the octogenarians I ever saw, he scorns a stretch and abhors a gape.... His library is suffocated with Koburgers, Frobens, the Ascensii, and the Stephens' (Dibdin, 213). On the title of his book Atkinson is described as 'surgeon to H.R.H. the Duke of York, senior surgeon to the York County Hospital and the York Dispensary, and late V.P. to the Yorkshire Philosophical Society'. In 1810 he became one of the founders of the York Medical Library. He was also an enthusiastic member of the musical society, who played the violin and entertained Paganini on his visit to York. He collected portraits of medical writers, and proposed compiling a catalogue with memoirs. He and his wife, Ann (died 1840), had a son, Henry, who became a Church of England clergyman in Leeds, and at least one daughter. For many years Atkinson was the foremost medical man in York, and remained in practice to within a few years of his death, which took place at the age of eighty, at Lendal, York, on 14 March 1839. He was buried near his father in the family vault at St Helen's Stonegate, where an inscribed monument was erected to his memory. The 'York Herald' observed on 16 March 1839 of Atkinson: 'Ever prominent with his aid at every benevolent institution, he possessed the blessing of the poor and afflicted whilst among them, and will live in their grateful remembrance beyond the grave'. The portraits attributed to him by the 'Dictionary of National Biography' were, in fact, the work of James Atkinson (1780-1852). 


@@@@@


doc= 847


Atkinson, James (1780-1852), orientalist, was born in the county of Durham on 9 March 1780. After studying medicine at Edinburgh and London, he accepted the post of medical officer on board an East Indiaman. In 1805 he was appointed an assistant surgeon in the Bengal service, and placed in medical charge of the station of Bakarganj, near Dacca. In his leisure time he devoted himself with considerable success to the study of Persian and other oriental languages. Having attracted the attention of Lord Minto, the governor-general, Atkinson was invited to Calcutta in 1813, and given the appointment of assistant assay master at the mint, which he retained until 1828. In 1818 he also filled the deputy chair of Persian in Fort William College. He visited England in 1826-7. In addition to his appointment at the mint, he held the post of superintendent of the 'Government Gazette' from 1817 to 1828. When the official connection of the government with that journal was discontinued in 1823, the proprietors, in view of his previous success, invited Atkinson to take sole charge of both the 'Gazette' and the 'Press'. Under his editorship the 'Gazette' published valuable statistical and topographical information on little known parts of India. After a second visit to England in 1828-33, Atkinson returned to his original profession, as surgeon to the 55th regiment of native infantry. In 1838 he was appointed chief surgeon to the army of the Indus, and accompanied it on its march to Kabul, but he was relieved in the ordinary course of routine shortly after the surrender of Dost Mohammad. He returned to Bengal in 1841, and thus escaped the fate which awaited the army of occupation. He was appointed a member of the medical board in 1845, retired in 1847 after forty-two years of service, and died of apoplexy at 18 Dorset Square, London, on 7 August 1852. 
Atkinson's Persian translations in both prose and verse are his chief title to fame, and of these his selections from the 'Shah Nameh' of Firdausi are the most notable. They were the first attempt to make the great Persian 'Epic of Kings' familiar to English readers. He first published the episode of 'Sohrab', in Persian with a free English translation, in 1814. In 1832 the 'Shahnamah: Abridgment and Selections', which included the earlier episode of 'Sohrab', was published by the Oriental Translation Fund and was awarded its gold medal. Atkinson translated several books from Persian into competent English verse. His 'Expedition into Affghanistan' provides an interesting personal narrative, supplemented by his 'Sketches in Affghanistan' (1842) containing a series of lithographed drawings which complete the picture of what was then an unexplored country. He also had a talent for portraiture -- several of his works, including a self-portrait, are in the National Portrait Gallery. Atkinson's first published poem was a romance called 'Rodolpho' (1801). He also wrote 'The Aubid: an Eastern Tale', in verse (1819), and made translations from Italian verse. In 1832 he published 'The Customs and Manners of the Women of Persia', an amusing translation of a Persian essay on harem life. His one professional treatise was 'Description of the New Process of Perforating and Destroying the Stone in the Bladder' (1831). Accomplished in literature and art, both a scholar and a popular writer, James Atkinson was a pioneer of oriental research. 


@@@@@


doc= 848


Atkinson, John Augustus (1774x6-1830), painter and engraver, is of unknown parentage. He was taken as a boy aged eight or nine to St Petersburg by the mezzotint engraver James Walker, who may have been his uncle and who had accepted a post at the court of Catherine the Great. There is no record of Atkinson's having had any formal training while in Russia, but the empress was taken by his precocious talent and mischievously asked him to include in a picture he was painting of the Shrovetide fair in St Petersburg a portrait of Naryshkin, the court chamberlain, dining on the balcony of his house with a large napkin under his chin 'pour demontrer', as she put it 'qu'il etoit bien eleve' (Cross, 105). Atkinson's interest in Russian life is further shown in 'Ice Hills on the Neva' (1792; State Russian Museum, St Petersburg), his depiction of a typical Russian amusement, that of sliding down artificial ice hills. He painted two large episodes from Russian history for St Michael's Castle, the damp and gloomy edifice which the emperor, Paul I, had built in a futile attempt to protect himself from assassination. Atkinson also made a portrait of the emperor on horseback (1797; Palace of Pavlosk, St Petersburg); and, in the same year, two portraits of Field Marshal Aleksandr Suvorov (one after the portrait by D. G. Levitsky), which were engraved by Walker. In 1801 he painted a striking full-length of Count Nikolay Petrovich Sheremetev robed as a knight of the order of Malta (Kuskovo Palace Museum, Moscow). Atkinson illustrated an edition of Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras' published in Konigsberg in 1798. 
Atkinson and Walker returned to London in 1802. According to the diarist Joseph Farington who was visited by them on 5 April of that year, Atkinson was studying painting (Farington, 'Diary', 6.2005). However, he seems to have decided to profit from the prevailing taste for books on costumes and foreign life usually illustrated with hand-tinted engravings or aquatints. First came 'A Picturesque Representation of the Manners, Customs and Amusements of the Russians' in 100 aquatinted plates with an informative commentary by James Walker, published in 1804. This work, which was the first in English to give an accurate representation in both text and illustrations of the manners and customs of the ordinary Russian people, demonstrated Atkinson's lively draughtsmanship and the width of his observations. In 1807 there appeared 'A Picturesque Representation of the Naval, Military and Miscellaneous Costumes of Great Britain' drawn and etched by Atkinson and published by Walker and William Miller and 'Sixteen Scenes taken from 'The Miseries of Human Life''. Atkinson also contributed to other 'costume' books. Earlier, in 1804, four sheets of a panorama of St Petersburg engraved by Atkinson from drawings he had made from the observatory of the academy of sciences in that city were published simultaneously by Atkinson and Walker, and John and Josiah Boydell. In 1814 he published 'Foreign Field Sports'. Using the occasion of Alexander I's triumphal visit to London in that year, Walker engraved and published Atkinson's portrait of the tsar made years earlier. After 1816 the two men ceased working together, and the premises where they had worked in Conway Street were given up. Atkinson's last attempt to attract a wider public came with his large depiction of the battle of Waterloo, for which he travelled to the battlefield in June 1815 with A. W. Devis, who collaborated by painting in the faces of the leading officers. It was exhibited at the British Institution in 1817 and engraved by John Burnet two years later. Atkinson submitted a design for the Wellington shield but without success. 
From 1803 until his death Atkinson exhibited at the Royal Academy, the British Institution, the Suffolk Street Gallery of the Society of British Artists, and the Society of Painters in Water Colours. His subjects included scenes from Shakespeare, French and classical literature, coastal and rustic landscapes, and also battles and military skirmishes for which he had a decided taste, and to which his style was well suited. His work was popular, and among his patrons were the duke of Wellington and Richard Colt Hoare. 
Atkinson's work had something of the lively and happy interest in human life of Thomas Rowlandson and the caricaturists of the period. Although he worked in oils during his years in Russia and was known there for his portraits, after his return to London he worked almost exclusively in aquatint and watercolour both of which suited his deceptively improvisatory manner. His occasional weaknesses in draughtsmanship were more than compensated for by the sharpness of his observations and the vitality and liveliness of his compositions. 
Atkinson died, unmarried, on 25 March 1830 at 48 London Street, Fitzroy Square, London. In 1833 James Walker's only child, Marianne (later Mrs Calmedy Richardson), with whom Atkinson had been brought up and to whom he was deeply attached, arranged a loan exhibition of seven works at the Suffolk Street Gallery. There are four of Atkinson's watercolours in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, and a preliminary study for 'The Battle of Waterloo' in the British Museum. His 'Battle at Vittoria, 21 June 1813' is in a private collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 849


Atkinson, John Christopher (1814-1900), author and antiquary, was born on 9 May 1814 at Goldhanger in Essex, the son of John Atkinson, curate there, and his wife, Martha, daughter of Richard Causten of Mundan Hall. He was educated at Kelvedon in Essex, and admitted as a sizar to St John's College, Cambridge, on 2 May 1834; he graduated BA in 1838. He was ordained deacon in 1841 as curate of Brockhampton in Herefordshire, and priest in 1842. He was curate in Scarborough from 1843 until, in 1847, he became domestic chaplain to William Henry Dawnay, seventh Viscount Downe, who in the same year presented him to the vicarage of Danby in the North Riding of Yorkshire, which he held until his death. 
Atkinson was an energetic antiquary of wide interests who, in addition to his historical work, published works on folklore, ornithology, and dialect studies, as well as writing books for children. His work on local dialects formed the basis for later scholarly work, and in 1872 he embarked on a 'History of Cleveland', which remained unfinished but was reconstructed from his surviving notes and published in 1982. He turned his attention to the editing of records, especially monastic ones, and published 'The Cartulary of Whitby Abbey' (2 vols., 1879), out of which grew his 'Memorials of Old Whitby' (1894). He was an indefatigable editor of the 'Quarter Sessions Records of the North Riding', producing between 1884 and 1893 nine volumes covering the years from 1605 to 1818. He also excavated between 80 and 100 barrows in Cleveland. 
Atkinson's scholarly activity was an integral part of his Christian ministry in his traditional and isolated parish, whose people, customs, and traditions he recorded in his most famous work, 'Forty Years in a Moorland Parish' (1891). This remains a mine of historical information and a classic account of a rural ministry in Victorian England, and has been reprinted several times. Atkinson entered a parish in which the established church had failed to evangelize the people and where other denominations had sought to overcome their superstitions. By a combination of harmonious relations with other Christian groups, institutional and pastoral reform in the parish, and a sympathetic understanding of the lives of his parishioners, he did much to revive the fortunes of Anglicanism in the area. In 1887 he received the honorary degree of DCL from Durham University, and in 1891 he was installed in the prebend of Holme in York Minster. In 1898 he received a grant of $100 a year from the civil list, which enabled him to employ a curate. 
Atkinson was married three times: first, at Scarborough on 11 December 1849, to Jane Hill (died 1860), eldest daughter of John Hill Coulson of Scarborough; second, on 1 February 1862, at Frome Selwood, to Georgina Mary, eldest daughter of Barlow Slade of North House, Frome; and third, on 28 April 1884 at Arncliffe church, to Helen Georgina, eldest daughter of Douglas Brown QC of Arncliffe Hall, Northallerton. He had thirteen children. Atkinson died on 31 March 1900 at the vicarage, Danby. Some of his papers are held at the North Yorkshire County Record Office, Northallerton, and at the Whitby Museum, where his portrait dominates the reading-room. 


@@@@@


doc= 850


Atkinson, Joseph (1743-1818), playwright, was born in Dublin and was educated at Trinity College, Dublin. He served in the army until he obtained a captain's commission. In Dublin in 1785 he produced a comedy, 'Mutual Deception', which was altered by George Colman the following year, the serious scenes being omitted, and presented under the title of 'Tit for Tat', at the Haymarket. Atkinson professed himself indebted to an Italian original for the comic portion of his play, which was found closely to resemble the earlier comedies of the 'Double Deceit' and 'Love's Metamorphosis', first performed in 1735 and 1776 respectively. In 1786 Atkinson produced in Dublin 'A Match for a Widow, or, The Frolics of Fancy', an opera in three acts with music by Charles Dibdin, founded on a French comedy which Elizabeth Inchbald had previously converted into English as the 'Widow's Vow'. In 1800 he produced at the Cork Street Theatre a comic opera called 'Love in a Blaze', with music composed by John Stevenson. The play's plot was borrowed from a French work, which had already been adapted as 'Gallic Gratitude' at Covent Garden in 1779. Atkinson also wrote numerous prologues for the Crow Street Theatre, including one prefacing Lady Morgan's 'First Attempt' (1807). He was ridiculed by her enemy John Wilson Croker in his 'Familiar Epistles' (1804). 
Atkinson died in October 1818, and was buried at Cheadle, Staffordshire. The epitaph on his grave featured verses by his friend the poet Thomas Moore, and a tablet to his memory was erected in Monkstown church, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 851


Atkinson, Miles (1741-1811), Church of England clergyman, the son of the Revd Christopher Atkinson ('b'. 1712/13), rector of Thorp Arch, Yorkshire, was born at Ledsham on 28 September 1741. He was the elder brother of the clergyman and poet William Atkinson (1758-1846). He went to school at Thorp Arch, before going up to Peterhouse, Cambridge (BA 1763). He was ordained deacon on 18 March 1764, priest on 25 May 1766, and became curate of the parish church of Leeds. He served as headmaster of the school of Drighlington, near Leeds (1764-70). He married Mary, daughter of Edward Kenion of Leeds, on 5 April 1768. The couple had at least two sons. 
In 1769 Atkinson served as lecturer of the parish church of Leeds, and in 1783 became vicar of Kippax, near Leeds. At a cost of nearly $10,000 he founded St Paul's Church, Leeds, of which he was appointed minister in 1793. He died on 6 February 1811, and was buried at St Paul's, Leeds. A collection of his 'Practical Sermons' was published in London in two volumes in 1812. 


