@@@@@


doc= 49936


Raistrick, Arthur (1896-1991), industrial archaeologist and pacifist, was born in Saltaire, Yorkshire, on 16 August 1896, the son of George Raistrick, engineer, and his wife, Minnie, 'nee' Bell. This model industrial village had been built by manufacturer Titus Salt, in whose mill Arthur Raistrick's mother and several aunts and uncles were employed. His father was a founder member of the Independent Labour Party (ILP), formed in nearby Bradford in 1892. His four grandparents came from four different Yorkshire dales, their families involved in farming and lead mining. School holidays were spent visiting relatives in the dales, walking as far as Swaledale, some 50 miles away, sleeping in barns on the longer trips. This was his inheritance -- socialist-pacifist, walker (he never had a car), and lover of the Pennine landscapes. 
From Drummond Road elementary school in Shipley, he won a scholarship to Bradford grammar school. He left at the age of sixteen to become an engineering apprentice, continuing his education at evening classes. Passionately devoted to music, he played the organ in the local Wesleyan chapel. In 1915 he abandoned his work and study to travel with an uncle through the north of England, speaking at pacifist meetings. Refusing to do military service, he spent nearly three years in prison, in Wormwood Scrubs and Durham. His pacifism was rooted in the anti-war stance of the ILP, but some of his fellow prisoners were Quakers, and he joined the Society of Friends in 1919. 
Released from prison in September 1919, Raistrick took up a scholarship at Leeds University which he had gained while an apprentice, and graduated in civil engineering. He stayed on to complete an MSc, followed by a PhD in geology, specializing in the composition of coal seams. His record as a conscientious objector was not helpful in the search for employment, and for a few years he survived on research grants, contract work for the Coal Mine Owners' Association and the modest rewards of teaching adult classes for the Workers' Educational Association (WEA). In 1929 he was appointed lecturer in applied geology at Armstrong (later King's) College, Newcastle, and was able on 17 April in the following year to marry fellow scholar (Sarah) Elizabeth Chapman (1891/2-1973). In addition to their home in Newcastle, the couple kept a cottage, later replaced by a house converted from a barn, in the Wharfedale village of Linton. 
In the early 1930s the Raistricks planned to go as Quaker missionaries to China, but the sudden death of Arthur's father caused the trip to be cancelled. If Arthur Raistrick rarely travelled far physically -- he would never have thought of holidaying away from the Pennines -- his intellectual journeys went far beyond the range of most scholars. Five of his first seven published papers (1925-7) were on aspects of glaciation. His expertise in coalmining broadened into a general involvement in the history of technology, especially lead mining and smelting and ironworking. Glaciation led him to an interest in field archaeology, and he combined this with the history of technology to produce industrial archaeology, which he practised long before the term came into general use in the 1950s. He had published in all the above areas by 1929. Later he moved sideways again, into social history, with studies of the south Yorkshire ironmasters and the (Quaker) London Lead Company, the latter published as 'Two Centuries of Industrial Welfare' (1938). 
By that time another war was in prospect, and Raistrick helped to found the Pacifist Advisory Bureau. In 1939 he refused to add his name to a government register of engineering specialists whose skills might be used in the war effort, with the consequence, in his own words, that King's College 'just had to suspend me' -- without pay (Joy, 13). He spent the war years at Linton, living partly off the produce of a small plot of land there, and taking WEA classes. For the benefit of WEA students he wrote 'Teach yourself Geology' (1943). He normally had such readers, rather than academic specialists in mind when he wrote. He supplied many articles to the 'Yorkshire Dalesman' on such topics as vernacular architecture, drystone walls, and green roads. He was the exact opposite of the kind of historian who researches the lives of people in the past without having the slightest interest in their counterparts in the present. During the depression of the early 1930s, for example, he toured the stricken south Wales coalfield, speaking at miners' welfare clubs and visiting camps for the unemployed. 
After holding a fellowship at Woodbrooke, a Quaker college, in 1945-6, Raistrick was invited to return to King's College. His prolific output, including 'Quakers in Science and Industry' (1950) and 'Dynasty of Iron Founders: the Darbys and Coalbrookdale' (1953), led to his promotion to reader in 1954. He retired in 1956 to devote himself to activities in the Yorkshire dales, including membership of the national parks committee and his adult education work. 
Raistrick conducted regular evening classes for the WEA and Leeds University extramural department until he was well into his seventies. In addition he taught for the local adult schools (an educational movement with a Quaker flavour) and at residential centres including the West Riding Adult College at Grantley Hall and the Malham Tarn field centre. For the WEA he conducted linked weekend courses in youth hostels, a successful attempt to attract young workers into adult education. He aimed to turn curiosity into scholarship by encouraging his students to be active in fieldwork and careful in recording, and especially to use their eyes in reading the landscape as a historical document. 
Raistrick's other activities were all of a piece with his research and teaching. He served as president of both the Holiday Fellowship and the Ramblers' Association, and was active in the campaign for wider access to moorland. He gave much attention to national parks, especially the two in Yorkshire. He edited and co-wrote the guide to the North York Moors Park. His involvement with the Society of Friends lasted for over seventy years, and he served for a time as clerk to the Settle monthly meeting. 
Raistrick continued to publish on a broad front. In 1965, for example, his works included four pieces in the 'Yorkshire Archaeological Journal' reporting on thirteen archaeological sites in Airedale and Wharfedale; 'Vikings, Angles and Danes in Yorkshire'; 'The Coalbrookdale Company, 1709-1959'; and, with B. Jennings, 'A History of Lead Mining in the Pennines'. The publications of his seventies would have represented a respectable career achievement for most academics. They included three books deriving from his lifelong interest in the landscape as a record, 'Old Yorkshire Dales' (1967), 'The Pennine Dales' (1968), and a volume in the 'Making of the English Landscape' series, 'The West Riding of Yorkshire' (1970). One of his most important books is 'Industrial Archaeology' (1972), designed to encourage 'a balanced investigation of industry from pre-Roman times to the present', instead of what he saw as an obsession with measuring textile mills. It was as well that he was so busy, as in 1973 his wife Elizabeth died, at the age of eighty-one. 
As Raistrick was a broadbrush writer, in several disciplines, publishing over a period of sixty years, it is inevitable that some of his works have been, and others will be, overtaken by, for example, progress in archaeological techniques and in the range of sources used for local history. However, a book such as 'The Pennine Dales' could survive periodic updating without the distinctive Raistrick quality being diminished. It is doubtful if anyone will ever match his combination of technical, economic, and social knowledge of the lead mining industry. 
Raistrick received many honours, including medals and awards from the Geological Society and the Yorkshire Archaeological Society, and honorary doctorates from the universities of Leeds (1972) and Bradford (1974). The chancellor of Bradford was Harold Wilson, and after the Labour leader had won the general election of October 1974, he offered an OBE to Raistrick. The latter responded: 'As a lifelong member of the Independent Labour Party I have frequently spoken against the system of the honours list. I feel that I cannot at this time break my principles and accept the prime minister's suggestion. My thanks for the thought so expressed are no less sincere and I shall value this gesture more than I could value the honour itself. (Correspondence in family possession)' A few days later Wilson wrote a friendly personal letter, regretting but respecting Raistrick's decision. 
Throughout his life, Raistrick drew spiritual strength as well as intellectual stimulus from the Pennine hills, where 'quiet and healing solitude... refreshment of body, mind and spirit... can be found after the exertion of the climb' (Joy, 154). The hills inspired some of his finest writing, as in this description of the view from Cross Fell at sunset: 'In the evening light the western edge of the long ridge, of which Cross Fell is the highest part, seems to plunge down at a fearful rate into the vale of Eden more than two thousand feet below, while far across the vale the Lake District mountains stand in glorious silhouette against the sunset sky. To the north, still more lightly sketched in, are the outlines of the Solway Firth, on rare occasions glowing like burnished gold under the last rays of the sun... To the east a wide extent of dusky moorlands steadily declines in broad ridges between shadow-filled valleys, until both are lost in the distance. (A. Raistrick, 'The Pennine Dales', 1972, 15)' Raistrick died in a nursing home at Skipton, Yorkshire, on 9 April 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49940


Richardson, Cecil Antonio (1928-1991), theatre and film director, was born on 5 June 1928 at 28 Bingley Road, Saltaire, Shipley, Yorkshire, the only son of Clarence Albert Richardson (died 'c'.1967), pharmacist, and his wife, Elsie Evans, 'nee' Ingle (died 'c'.1975), the daughter of a bankrupted West Hartlepool shipbuilder. After attending Ashville College, Harrogate (1939-45), he went up to Wadham College, Oxford, in 1948, where his audacious production of 'Dr Faustus' prompted his election as president of both the Experimental Theatre Club and the Oxford University Dramatic Society. Richardson graduated with a third in English in 1951 and he joined the BBC, where he made his professional directing debut with Giraudoux's 'The Apollo of Bellac' in 1953. However, he was fired from his West End bow, 'Mr Kettle and Mrs Moon' (1954), although, thanks to J. B. Priestley, he retained his credit. It was about this time that he befriended the actor George Devine, with whom he had worked on a BBC adaptation of Chekhov's 'The Actor's End' (1955). Later that year they co-formed the English Stage Company, which began its tenure at the Royal Court Theatre with the premiere of John Osborne's prototype 'angry young man' drama, 'Look Back in Anger' (1956). Although several early reviews were hostile, it was hailed as a watershed in British theatre after 'The Observer' critic Kenneth Tynan wrote, 'I doubt if I could love anyone who did not wish to see 'Look Back in Anger'' (Richardson, 79). The English stage was seemingly in his thrall. Yet the angular, garrulous Richardson was something of a young man in a hurry and he had already moved into films. In 1955 he co-directed, with Karel Reisz, 'Momma Don't Allow', a short documentary study of a north London jazz club that was screened at the National Film Theatre in February 1956 as part of the influential Free Cinema programme. Indeed, the movement's motto, 'Perfection is not an aim' (ibid., 69), would long remain Richardson's rallying cry. 
Shortly after directing Laurence Olivier in the Royal Court production of Osborne's 'The Entertainer' (1957), Richardson and Osborne co-founded Woodfall Films. Having brought 'Look Back in Anger' (1959) and 'The Entertainer' (1960) to the screen, he continued to embrace the social realist, or 'kitchen sink', tradition with his versions of Shelagh Delaney's 'A Taste of Honey' (1961) and Alan Sillitoe's 'The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner' (1962). However, it was his first colour feature, 'Tom Jones' (1963), that earned him international recognition and a reputation for literate film-making. However, he would never repeat the success of this reworking of Henry Fielding's picaresque novel, which became only the second British feature to win the Oscar for best picture; it also brought Richardson the Oscar for best direction. Following Osborne's 'Luther' (1961), Richardson grew increasingly disillusioned with what he described as 'totem theatre' ('The Independent', 16 Nov 1991). Nevertheless he drew praise for his staging of 'The Seagull' (1964), 'The Threepenny Opera' (1972), and 'Antony and Cleopatra' (1973), all three of which starred Vanessa Redgrave ('b'. 1937). Richardson had married Redgrave, the elder daughter of Sir Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson, on 28 April 1962; they had two children, Natasha Jane Richardson (1963-2009) and Joely ('b'. 1965), who would both become actors. The couple divorced in 1967, following Richardson's affair with Jeanne Moreau -- whom he had directed in Jean Genet's 'Mademoiselle' (1966) and in Marguerite Duras's 'The Sailor from Gibraltar' (1967) -- and Redgrave's liaison with the Italian star Franco Nero. 
Now based at Le Nid du Duc in the south of France, Richardson embarked on a sequence of literary adaptations -- Evelyn Waugh's 'The Loved One' (1965), Vladimir Nabokov's 'Laughter in the Dark' (1969), Shakespeare's 'Hamlet' (1969), Edward Albee's 'A Delicate Balance' (1973), and even a version of Dick Francis's horse-racing whodunit 'Dead Cert' (1974). Only his extravagant slice of costume realism, 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' (1968), found widespread critical favour, although both his biopic of the Australian outlaw 'Ned Kelly' (1970), with Mick Jagger in the title role, and a return to Fielding, with 'Joseph Andrews' (1977), had their adherents. Nevertheless, Richardson never broke the cinematic mould in the same way he had done with the stage. He was removed by producer Berry Gordy jun. from 'Mahogany' (1975), for failing to 'capture the black point of view' (Lyon, 446), and he had to endure his collaboration with Jack Nicholson, 'The Border' (1982), being saddled with an upbeat ending. Largely ostracized from Hollywood after his faithful adaptation of John Irving's 'The Hotel New Hampshire' (1984), he had to content himself with a succession of teleplays and miniseries. 
From the early 1970s Richardson was resident in Los Angeles, California, with Grizelda Grimond, the only daughter of the former Liberal Party leader Jo Grimond. They had one daughter, Katherine ('b'. 1973). Having been diagnosed as HIV positive, he completed a memoir, 'Long Distance Runner' (1993), and his final feature, 'Blue Sky', which was released three years after his death in Los Angeles from a neurological condition brought on by AIDS on 14 November 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49944


Rook, Arthur James (1918-1991), dermatologist and author, was born on 15 May 1918 at Cobham, Surrey, the elder child of Sir William James Rook (1885-1958) and his first wife, Millicent, 'nee' Baker (1888-1939). His father, a successful sugar broker, was knighted for his services as director of sugar at the Ministry of Food during the Second World War. Rook and his younger sister, Constance, were therefore born into a well-to-do family. At Charterhouse (which he attended from 1931 to 1936) early prowess at languages gained him entry to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he changed to medicine. From there he went to do his clinical studies at St Thomas's Hospital, London, graduating MB BChir in 1942. On 11 July 1942 he married (Frances) Jane Elizabeth Knott (1920-1990), a physiotherapist, and daughter of Frank Alexander Knott, a doctor. Together they made a perfect pair. They had three sons: a farmer, a professor of microbiology, and a queen's counsel. 
From 1942 to 1946 Rook did military service in the RAF, rising to the rank of squadron leader. He then returned to St Thomas's Hospital to join the inspiring team of G. B. Dowling and H. J. Wallace in the dermatology department. During these training years he spent a formative six months at the Hopital St Louis in Paris, and also wrote important clinical papers (on keratoacanthoma, and blistering eruptions, the subject of his MD thesis in 1950). In 1950 he was appointed as a consultant dermatologist at Cardiff Royal Infirmary, and then in 1953 he moved to Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, where he spent the rest of his working life. The family lived in Cambridge, and also for many years in a moated house in Steeple Bumpstead, Essex, where many enjoyed their hospitality. 
Rook was a prodigious worker; he quickly acquired a very wide experience and knowledge of all aspects of dermatology, and was much admired by patients and colleagues. Even with all his other interests clinical dermatology remained uppermost for him. But added to this he had a great breadth of knowledge of all aspects of medicine and of the biological sciences, coupled with a superb memory. Apart from his excellence as a clinician his major contribution was as a disseminator of this knowledge. He was in the forefront of those who appreciated the importance of the advances in science to dermatology, and also the important messages that clinical dermatology had for basic scientists. This influence was conveyed in many ways. His teaching, mainly of postgraduates, was inspiring: always some new light cast on a clinical situation and with an infectious sense of the excitement of it all. He was quiet in manner and speech, never flamboyant, and with an engaging smile and sense of humour. He was always generous with his time and resources. His correspondence was voluminous and international. From 1958 he organized courses for trained and for trainee dermatologists at a time when such courses were an exciting novelty. 
Where Rook truly excelled was as an author and editor. Early in the 1960s he started to collect material for a textbook of paediatric dermatology. He found he had so much material that it could readily be expanded into a major book covering all aspects of dermatology. With Dr D. S. Wilkinson and Professor F. J. G. Ebling, a zoologist, as co-editors, the 'Textbook of Dermatology' first appeared in 1968. Rook himself wrote about a third of the 2000 pages. This book quickly established itself as one of the most important sources for trainee and practising dermatologists, as well as for other physicians and scientists. Rook spoke or read several languages, and always insisted that coverage of the literature must be multilingual. His worldwide reputation was affirmed by the eighteen foreign societies which honoured him as an honorary member or in other ways. The 'Textbook' went through six editions before the end of the century, for four of which he remained the senior editor. By its sixth edition it had grown to 4000 pages in four volumes. 
Not content with one major work, Rook co-authored or edited several other books on clinical dermatology. These included monographs on hair and on botanical dermatology. He was a distinguished editor of the 'British Journal of Dermatology', which he transformed. Later he was president of the British Association of Dermatologists, at whose annual meetings the Arthur Rook oration became the principal guest lecture. He also had a great interest in the history of medicine and wrote, with Graham Cannon and Margaret Carlton, the definitive 'History of Addenbrooke's Hospital' (1991). His portrait, painted by Patrick Phillips in 1974, hangs in the British Association of Dermatologists House, Fitzroy Square, London. 
Rook largely retired from clinical practice in 1977 because of Parkinson's disease. This, and his wife's long terminal illness, marred his latter years, but did not stop his writing activities. He died of a heart attack in Cambridge on 30 July 1991, and was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium in London. He was survived by his three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 49945


Rook, Jean Kathleen (1931-1991), journalist, was born on 13 November 1931 at 91 Albert Avenue, Sculcoates, Hull, Yorkshire, the only child of Horace Rook, a consultant engineer from Boston, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Freda Garton, a cinema usherette. She was educated at Malet Lambert Grammar School, Hull, and read English at Bedford College, University of London, graduating in 1954 with an upper second-class degree. She went on to take an MA in 1956, writing her thesis on T. S. Eliot. While at Bedford College she was the first woman to edit the university newspaper, 'Sennet', and won a place on a graduate trainee scheme run by the 'Sheffield Telegraph'. From there she moved to Leeds to be fashion editor of the 'Yorkshire Post' and then to London as fashion editor of 'Flair'. When Hugh Cudlipp launched 'The Sun' in 1964, he asked her to be fashion editor. On 3 July 1965 she married Geoffrey Nash (1923-1988), a journalist whom she had met on the 'Sheffield Telegraph'; they had one son. 
From 'The Sun', Jean Rook moved to the 'Daily Sketch', where the circulation soared after she ran a 'Save our mini-skirt' campaign for the editor, David English, at a time when hemlines were falling, and when the 'Daily Sketch' merged with the 'Daily Mail' under the editorship of English in 1971 she became woman's editor of the 'Daily Mail'. In 1972 she was successfully wooed by the 'Daily Express', the main rival of the 'Daily Mail', and became its woman's editor; soon she was writing a weekly column with an enormous following. It was at the 'Daily Express' that she was dubbed the First Lady of Fleet Street by the deputy editor, and she always believed it was the actor Derek Nimmo who retitled her the First Bitch of Fleet Street. She was caricatured as Glenda Slagg in the satirical magazine 'Private Eye', and for years was savaged by the 'Daily Mail' gossip columnist Nigel Dempster, all of which added to her fame. She put her success down to the fact that she wrote what millions of ordinary people were already saying, and wanted to read: she was the first journalist to suggest that Princess Margaret's marriage was in difficulties. Her readers loved her down-to-earth approach. 
Rook regarded herself as a royalist, but wrote exactly what she thought about members of the royal family, treating them as fallible human beings. She adored the queen mother, admired the queen, was fascinated by Princess Margaret, liked Prince Charles, and detested Princess Anne, but she argued that the monarchy needed to be in touch with ordinary people in order to survive, and that it was necessary to make everyday remarks about them. When she made scathing comments in 'The Sun' about Princess Margaret's unfashionable black diamond-patterned stockings, or wrote that the queen needed to have her eyebrows trimmed, her mailbag was swamped and the phone lines jammed, but she also defended Sarah Ferguson, the future duchess of York, when the rest of the press was denouncing her as a frump: 'Fergie may dress like a tumbledown English cottage, covered with a lichen-coloured cardigan, but this huge handful of an energetic romping girl could make Randy Andy very happy' (Rook, 148). 
An admirer of Margaret Thatcher, Rook later claimed that in 1974 she was the first journalist to take Mrs Thatcher seriously, and to predict that she would be Britain's first woman prime minister. In February 1974 she wrote: 'If you spotted Margaret Thatcher in a tea shop, you'd try to buy her. She has a spun sugar complexion, and pale, whipped-gold hair. She looks so deliciously light and fluffy you feel that, in an argument, you could swallow her whole... But in fact, when you get your teeth in to her, the luscious Margaret is a well-baked rockbun, and an extremely tough cookie. ('Rook's Eye View', 1979, 67)' She backed Mrs Thatcher in her campaign for the leadership of the Conservative Party in 1975, going against the line taken by the 'Daily Express', and went on to interview her nine times between 1974 and 1989 -- on one occasion, in 1978, introducing her to her impersonator Janet Brown. As well as politicians, she interviewed other public figures, from Hollywood film stars to famous sportsmen, never allowing any of her victims to see her words until they were in print: a cartoon by Giles in the 'Daily Express' depicted a killer rook with a half-eaten politician in her beak, with the caption 'Anyone Jean Rook doesn't like'. 
Rook was the highest-paid woman in Fleet Street, and enjoyed living up to her tough, hard-bitten, and outrageous reputation, clanking with extravagant gold jewellery, and driving a Jaguar. She was highly professional, and addicted to work, but in her private life she was a warm-hearted Yorkshirewoman, devoted to her family. She published 'Dressing for Success' (1968), which included a chapter on 'How to dress to land a husband'; 'Rook's Eye View' (1979), a collection of some of her pieces in the 'Daily Express'; and an autobiography, 'The Cowardly Lioness' (1989). 
When breast cancer was diagnosed in 1989, Rook's readers were allowed to share her experiences as the disease progressed. She died on 5 September 1991 in the Nuffield Hospital, Kingswood Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 49946


Rose, Sir Alec Richard (1908-1991), yachtsman, was born on 13 July 1908 at 4 Kings Terrace, Lansdown Road, Canterbury, the son of Ambrose Rose, a laundry engineer, and his wife, Louisa Annie, 'nee' Holness. He was educated at Simon Langton School, Canterbury. After leaving school at the age of fifteen he wanted to become a deckhand, but he was rejected as too small, partly a result of being delicate as a child. When he was twenty he went to Canada, where he spent three years working on farms before returning to assist his father, who had become a haulage contractor. On Easter Monday (28 March) 1932 he married (Hannah) Barbara Kathleen Baldwin, a bookkeeper, and the daughter of George Arthur Baldwin. They had two sons and two daughters. 
In the Second World War, Rose fulfilled his youthful ambition to go to sea by joining the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve and, as a lieutenant engineer, saw service escorting Atlantic convoys and on landing craft during the Normandy invasion. He was invalided out in 1945. His first marriage having ended in divorce in 1959, on 21 May 1960 he married Dorothy Mabel Walker, another bookkeeper, and the daughter of Frederick William Walker, a builder. By this time he had retired from the nurseryman's business that he had established after the war, and in 1961 he and his wife, Dorothy, opened a greengrocer's shop in Southsea. 
Rose first took up recreational sailing in 1959 at the time of his marital breakdown, and bought a lifeboat, which he spent several years converting. At the time of his second marriage in 1960 he was actually living on board the vessel, 'Neptune's Daughter', in Ramsgate harbour. He and Dorothy honeymooned on the boat in a choppy Bay of Biscay. Sailing soon became more serious, and it culminated in his single-handed circumnavigation of the globe in 1967-8. Although many of the sailing fraternity believe that his greatest seafaring achievement was the thirty-six-day crossing which brought him fourth place in the 1964 'Observer' single-handed transatlantic race, the public acclaimed him for his round-the-world voyage. He was not the first, nor the fastest, but his feat, by an ordinary man in an elderly boat, captured the public imagination. 
Rose bought his Indian-built, 36 foot ketch the 'Lively Lady' in 1963 for $250. At the time of his circumnavigation the boat was thirty years old, not custom-designed by naval architects, and was 20 feet shorter than Francis Chichester's 'Gipsy Moth IV'. A shoestring sailor, he was unsponsored -- indeed he did not seek sponsorship -- and paid for everything himself. He considered the voyage a private affair, designed to satisfy his own ambition and provide a chance to see his second son's family in Melbourne. He had intended to set off before Chichester in 1966, but on the second night out his boat was hit by a freighter in the channel; then, after repairs, it fell away from the harbour wall at low tide and was severely damaged again. Thus his circumnavigation did not start until 16 July 1967. 354 days later, shortly before his sixtieth birthday, more than 250,000 spectators saw him land at Portsmouth, where he was greeted with the news of a knighthood. The 28,500 mile voyage, during which for five months he did not sight land, had been dramatic at times. He faced a succession of gales, nearly lost a mast in the Antarctic, and was rendered unconscious by fumes when repairing a leaking exhaust. 
When asked about the thrill of sailing alone, Rose said, when his boat rode over the great curling waves coming straight at him, 'My heart warms. My blood tingles and I feel a great happiness welling up in me' ('Daily Telegraph', 14 Jan 1991). Shy and quietly spoken, he was a man of courage, perseverance, endurance, and, by all accounts, modesty. He was self-effacing and laconic: his entry under the category recreations in 'Who's Who' reads 'sailing (inc. circumnavigation of the world)'. 'Lively Lady' was presented to the Maritime Trust and became a showpiece at the Liverpool Maritime Museum. Rose sold his Southsea shop in 1971 and retired to Havant where he sailed for fun around the Solent. In 1969 he launched the national membership scheme of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, for whom he remained a tireless fund-raiser, and in 1975 he was awarded a life governorship. He died of heart disease on 11 January 1991 at the Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, survived by his wife, Dorothy, and the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 49947


Roskill, Sir Ashton Wentworth (1902-1991), barrister and public servant, was born on 1 January 1902 at 33A Montagu Square, London, the eldest of four sons of John Henry Roskill (1860-1940), barrister, and his wife, Sybil Mary Wentworth, 'nee' Dilke (1879-1931), daughter of Ashton Wentworth Dilke (1850-1883), traveller and Liberal MP for Newcastle upon Tyne, who was the younger brother of Sir Charles Wentworth Dilke, second baronet (1843-1911), writer and politician. Roskill's three younger brothers were themselves to have remarkable careers. The second son, Stephen Wentworth Roskill (1903-1982), was the leading naval historian of the Second World War; the third son, Oliver Wentworth Roskill (1906-1994), was one of the first industrial consultants; and the fourth son, Eustace Wentworth Roskill, Baron Roskill of Newtown (1911-1996), was a lord of appeal in ordinary. 
Roskill was educated at Winchester College and at Exeter College, Oxford, of which he was a scholar and where he achieved a first-class honours degree in modern history. He gained a certificate of honour in the bar examinations, and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1925. He became a pupil of D. N. Pritt, a very clever and successful barrister who then had a substantial commercial practice. He became a member of Pritt's chambers, and gradually built up a respectable general practice. On 29 July 1932 he married Violet Hester Willoughby (Vidy) Waddington (1904/5-1964), daughter of Charles Willoughby Waddington (1869-1946), principal of Mayo College, Ajmer, India, from 1903 to 1916 and guardian to the maharaja of Jodhpur from 1919 to 1923. They had two children: John, who became a naval officer, and Susannah, who married John Stewart Hobhouse, Baron Hobhouse of Woodborough, a lord of appeal in ordinary. 
Roskill's career at the bar was seriously interrupted by the outbreak of war, during which he served with MI5 from 1940 to 1945. His capacity for keeping secrets was proverbial, and he never revealed anything about his wartime work. His chambers in the Temple were bombed out. After the war he returned to his practice as a barrister and struggled to set up a new set of chambers. This was no easy task, especially at that time. He was appointed king's counsel in 1949; but his practice, though a commercial practice of high quality, was never of the size he deserved. He was perhaps at his best in the House of Lords and the privy council, scoring one or two notable victories there; his best known case was 'The Wagon Mound' ([1961] A.C. 388), the leading authority on remoteness of damage in the law of torts. 
Roskill was not appointed to the High Court bench, a reflection on the limited size of his practice rather than on his personal qualities of intellect and judgement which, in the opinion of many who knew him well, merited his judicial appointment. However, in 1965 he was appointed chairman of the Monopolies Commission (of which he had since 1960 been a part-time member), an office which he held for no less than ten years; and in 1967 he was knighted. This proved to be an excellent appointment. It is probable that in this capacity he rendered greater service to the public than he could have done as a judge. During his time as chairman he presided over panels of the commission which produced as many as forty-three reports, and he took responsibility for many other reports produced by panels chaired by his deputy chairman. The best-known of his reports was that on the drugs Librium and Valium, in which the commission recommended price cuts of 40 and 60 per cent respectively. His 'Times' obituarist stated that 'Roskill presided over the commission with intelligence, shrewdness, charm, wit, tact and sympathy'. Plainly he was also a strong chairman, frightened of no one; and, as in all his work, he was conscientious to a fault, determined to ensure that the commission produced reports which were both fair and thorough. With a very diverse group of individualists on the commission he skilfully employed his considerable social skills in keeping them on good terms with each other and with the staff, by whom he was as well liked as he was respected. 
Roskill retired from his position as chairman of the commission in 1975, bequeathing a thriving organization to his successor. From 1968 to 1979 he was an effective and dedicated chairman of the Barristers' Benevolent Association. In 1980 he served as treasurer of the Inner Temple, giving his full time and energy to that post, which he regarded as a great honour. In the same year, through a remarkable coincidence, his brother Eustace was treasurer of the Middle Temple. In 1989 he was elected an honorary fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. 
Roskill presented himself as a formidable man, well-built, with a composed expression and dark eyes bright with intelligence. He was cautious and circumspect; and he spoke deliberately and clearly, choosing his words carefully and phrasing them well. Yet there was always a twinkle in his eye which betrayed his irrepressible sense of fun. He was most kind and considerate; he was remembered as an exceptionally kind elder brother and colleague. He was intensely loyal, to his family, to his friends, and to the institutions with which he became identified, and did all he could to advance their interests. In 1931 he was seriously injured in a terrible fire which destroyed his family home in Montagu Square, London, and in which his mother died. Roskill had to jump from the parapet at the top of the house to save his life, and fell onto railings 50 feet below, breaking both his ankles and suffering other injuries. He was lucky to survive. Characteristically, this was an episode which he hardly ever referred to. 
Roskill's first wife died in 1964. On 24 November the following year he married Phyllis Sydney (Phil) Borland (1909/10), daughter of Sydney Burney, an art dealer. Her previous marriage had been dissolved. She died in 1990, six months before Roskill, but not until Roskill had celebrated with her his second silver wedding. Roskill himself died at Newbury Dalecare, Stockcross, Newbury, Berkshire, on 23 June 1991, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by the son and daughter of his first marriage. A memorial service was held at the Temple Church, London, on 16 October 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49948


Rostal, Max (1905-1991), violinist and music teacher, was born on 7 August 1905 in Teschen, Silesia. Nothing is known of his Jewish parents, but he began the violin when aged five, gave a public concert the next year, and toured as a child prodigy. He studied under Arnold Rose in Vienna until he was twelve and then spent a formative four years under Carl Flesch at the Berlin Hochschule fur Musik. Flesch thought him outstanding and in 1922 had him make his debut. Another pupil of Flesch, Boris Schwarz, heard Rostal play in the master's studio in 1923 and 'found the finish and panache of his performance truly amazing' (Schwarz, 341). In 1925 Rostal won the Mendelssohn prize in Berlin. He then toured as a soloist and led his own quartet, and he was also leader of the Oslo Philharmonic Orchestra until 1928. As he was interested in teaching he became Flesch's assistant in Berlin, and in 1930 he was given his own class, which made him the youngest professor there. 
Because of the Nazi regime Rostal left Berlin in 1934 and emigrated to Britain, where he settled in London and taught privately. A brilliant violinist with a superb technique, rich vibrant tone, and fine musicianship, he made a reputation throughout the country as a soloist and chamber musician and formed excellent duos with the pianists Franz Osborn and, from 1954, Colin Horsley. The fiery temperament of his youth gave way to a more thoughtful and intellectual approach, always with complete fidelity to the composer. 
During the Second World War, Rostal remained in London giving concerts -- frequently at Dame Myra Hess's series at the National Gallery -- and recitals for the forces and factory workers. He also ran a small string orchestra to facilitate teaching the performance of chamber music. After the war he became a naturalized British subject. 
Rostal's greatest achievement was as a teacher. Much sought after, he trained many excellent musicians, including both the violinists and the viola player who formed the famous Amadeus Quartet, which made its debut in January 1948. His teaching was based on that of his own teacher Carl Flesch, who had formulated a rational and logical course of training to give students a sound technical foundation and to have a sincere and thoughtful musical approach to their interpretations. From 1944 to 1958 he was professor at the Guildhall School of Music in London. A champion of modern music, Rostal gave premieres of concertos written for him by Alan Bush, Benjamin Frankel (1951), Franz Reizenstein, and Bernard Stevens, among other works. Then in 1957, despite his success in England, he unexpectedly left to take the masterclass at the Cologne Academy of Music (where he remained until 1982) and played in a piano trio. Also, from 1958 to 1985 he was violin professor at the conservatory in Bern, where he lived, commuting to Cologne. 
In 1974, together with Yehudi Menuhin and others, Rostal founded the European String Teachers' Association to exchange information on the technique and teaching of string playing; he was its president for the next fifteen years. He was appointed CBE in 1977. His first two marriages, to the cellist Sela Trau and to Caroline Hohenblum, were dissolved, leaving a daughter from each, and in 1980 he married Maria Busato. He made some excellent recordings, published 'Thoughts on the Interpretation of Beethoven's Violin Sonatas' (1981) and some teaching compositions, and edited many violin works. He owned a 1697 Stradivarius violin, later known as the 'Max Rostal', a 1733 Guarnerius del Gesu 'Charles Reade', and a Giuseppe Guadagnini viola. In addition he collected first editions of music and French impressionist paintings. 
Rostal was a very independent-minded man with a vigorous sense of humour, who loved to drive powerful cars. According to his pupil Yfrah Neaman, he 'was a warm and generous human being, always ready to help out a young talent. Countless violinists around the world owe him a debt of deepest gratitude' ('The Independent'). Rostal died on 6 August 1991 at Bern, Switzerland, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 49951


Rucker, Sir Arthur Nevil (1895-1991), public servant, was born on 20 June 1895 at 19 Gledhow Gardens, Kensington, the only son of Sir Arthur William Rucker (1848-1915), a physicist, and his second wife, Thereza Charlotte, 'nee' Story-Maskelyne (1863-1941), a promoter of household science teaching ['see 'Rucker, Thereza Charlotte]. A scientist of high distinction, Sir Arthur Rucker senior eventually became the first principal of the University of London. He had earlier been sought by Joseph Chamberlain for a similar post at the University of Birmingham, a fact which formed a bond between his son and Chamberlain's. 
After leaving Marlborough College in the summer of 1914 Arthur Rucker joined the War Office and worked there unpaid; from 1915 to the end of the war he fought bravely in France and was twice wounded during his service with the Suffolk regiment. After a year of study at Trinity College, Cambridge, he passed the first part of the mathematical tripos, joined the Ministry of Health as an assistant principal, and informed his colleagues there that he wished to drop the umlaut from the spelling of his name. He married on 7 November 1922 Elsie Marion (1899-1991), daughter of George Broadbent, a London solicitor. They had two sons and two daughters. 
At the Ministry of Health, Rucker's zeal and aptitude for business were soon noticed. Douglas Veale, then a senior figure in the ministry and later registrar of the University of Oxford, recorded: 'I have a very high opinion of Mr. Rucker's ability and enthusiasm' (note by D. Veale, January 1924, TNA: PRO, MH 107/62). Within a few years Rucker had been appointed private secretary to the minister of health, first Neville Chamberlain and then in succession Arthur Greenwood, Chamberlain again, Sir Edward Hilton Young, and finally Sir Kingsley Wood. Promoted early to the rank of assistant secretary in 1935, and appointed CBE in 1937, he became director of establishments and public relations at the ministry in the latter year. 
Just as Chamberlain admired Rucker's efficiency, industry, and acuity, so Rucker valued Chamberlain's integrity, businesslike habits, and capacity to set a high standard to the civil service. When Rucker was called to be principal private secretary to the prime minister in the spring of 1939, the minister of health wrote: 'We have all admired and appreciated your work and it is no surprise to us to perceive that others have been watching you also' (Walter Elliot to Rucker, 6 May 1939, TNA: PRO, MH 107/62). For sixteen agonizing months Rucker served Chamberlain faithfully. Like the prime minister, he believed that Britain's fault had been to let her diplomacy outrun her strength, and to threaten what she could not fulfil; he was convinced that the government had been right not to precipitate a war with Germany in the autumn of 1938, and equally right to give a guarantee to Poland in 1939. Harbouring no illusions about Russia, he was surprised neither by the Nazi-Soviet pact nor by the invasion of Finland. His junior colleague in the private office, John Colville, noted in December 1939: 'Alone with Arthur at No. 10 in the morning. He has a most endearing personality and is extraordinarily thorough. At the same time, unlike most people who are thorough and conscientious, he is full of ideas and inspired by ideals. (Colville's diary, 9 Dec 1939, Colville papers 1/1, CAC Cam.)' Having unhesitatingly elected to remain with Chamberlain when he became lord president of the council in May 1940, Rucker returned to the Ministry of Health later that year. Thence he was 'seconded for special duties' in Cairo. Churchill had decided to establish a minister of state in the Middle East, with wide-ranging tasks which included liaison with the commanders-in-chief and the British embassy in Cairo. The new minister, Oliver Lyttelton, resembled Rucker in no outward particulars, Lyttelton being enormously tall and ebullient, Rucker small and restrained. Nevertheless, Lyttelton made Rucker head of his private office and remembered gratefully his saint-like character and high ability. 'He was calm and conscientious. I learnt later that when he put his foot down, he trod on no one's toes, and his decisions did not lead to discussion and resentment' ('Memoirs of Lord Chandos', 225). For the better part of two years Rucker threw himself wholeheartedly into complicated and delicate tasks, first under Lyttelton and then under his successor. For these exceptional services he was appointed KCMG in 1942. The only diversion of which there is a record is that he learned to fly and gained his pilot's licence after fourteen hours' instruction. 
On his return to the Ministry of Health as deputy secretary in 1943, Rucker was immediately plunged into the preparations for a national health service. Tireless and inventive in seeking the compromises which would lead to an agreed scheme, he had perhaps hoped to become the permanent head of the ministry in 1945. Contrary to what has often been stated, his relations with the new minister, Aneurin Bevan, were good; but there was some incompatibility of temperament, and it is unlikely that Rucker's close association with Chamberlain eased his relations with Bevan. Rucker pressed the case for retaining the voluntary hospitals. Equally, he did not wish to remove control of other hospitals from local authorities, which would constitute the biggest reduction yet made in their powers; and he attached high importance to the close relations between them and the ministry, which they had hitherto regarded as their protector and interpreter in Whitehall. Nevertheless, Rucker entirely recognized the right of the minister to decide differently, as Bevan did when he elected to nationalize almost all hospitals. The legislation passed through parliament during 1946, but was not implemented until the summer of 1948. 
Rucker had by then received the offer of a post with the United Nations. His time in Cairo had helped to fit him for this, though he and his family accepted the long separations with sadness. He became deputy director-general of the International Refugee Organization in 1948, grappling with enormous post-war problems in that context, and then deputy agent-general of the UN Korean Reconstruction Agency in 1951, where his services were warmly appreciated and eventually recognized by the award of the Korean order of Diplomatic Merit. Later he acted for six years (1956-62) as deputy chairman of the Stevenage new town corporation and then for four years (1962-6) as its chairman. To provide decent housing, not least for those in need, Rucker believed to be one of the first duties of a civilized society. He was a leading member of the committee which produced the Milner Holland report of 1965 on housing in the slums of London; this played a crucial part in persuading successive governments to support housing associations. A founder of the World of Property Housing Trust, which later changed its name to Sanctuary, he also rendered devoted service to Help the Aged, Hungarian refugees, the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, and the University of Wales, which awarded him an honorary doctorate in 1965. 
To the end Rucker remained kindly, understanding of others' difficulties, and insistent upon high standards of efficiency and probity. He died at the Curridge House Nursing Home, near Newbury, Berkshire, on 12 July 1991, Lady Rucker having predeceased him by a few weeks. There is a memorial to them both at the parish church in the Berkshire village of Yattendon, Rucker's home for most of his life. They were survived by their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 49953


Perry, Micaiah (bap. 1641, d. 1721), merchant, was born in New Haven, in what was to become Connecticut, where he was baptized at the First Church on 31 October 1641. His grandfather Richard Pery (1580-1650), from a family of small merchants in Exeter, settled in 1615 in London, where he invested in the Virginia Company and, after its dissolution, traded privately to the colony. He participated in many ultra-puritan activities, culminating in his being named an 'assistant' (director) in the charter of the Massachusetts Bay Company. But, when the other officers emigrated with the charter to the planned colony, he remained in London, sending his eldest son, Richard, in his place. This Richard Pery settled provisionally at Charlestown, near Boston, but, dissatisfied, soon joined the group around John Davenport and Theophilus Eaton, which left in 1639 to found the colony of New Haven on Long Island Sound. About the time of the move, Richard Pery married Mary, daughter of Richard Malbon, a ship's captain and a kinsman of Eaton and original member of the Davenport-Eaton group. The register of the First Church in New Haven records the baptisms of five children of Richard and Mary Pery between 1640 and 1649. 
The triumph of the parliamentary cause gave some of the New England settlers reason to reconsider their abandonment of England, and a considerable number of them returned, including Richard Malbon, about 1648 or 1649, and Richard Pery and family, about 1651 or 1652. Many of the returning New Englanders were rewarded by the Cromwellian regime, Richard Pery becoming collector of customs and excise in Glasgow and 'messenger itinerant for the country accompts' in Scotland. He lost these places about the time of Cromwell's death and withdrew to Ireland, where he became a merchant and cattle grazier near Clonmel in co. Tipperary. Before this last move, however, his eldest son, Micaiah, was apprenticed in 1656 in London to a merchant member of the Haberdashers' Company. Immediately following the end of his apprenticeship in 1663, Micaiah Perry (as he now spelt his name) married on 20 October Ann Owen (died 1689), daughter of Dr Richard Owen, the recently restored rector of St Swithin, London, and prebendary of St Paul's Cathedral. This Anglican-royalist marriage suggests that Perry was consciously turning his back on a major part of his own family's deep puritan commitments. 
Once out of his apprenticeship Perry began to trade on his own to Virginia, whither his grandfather Richard Pery had traded before 1640. By about 1670 he had formed a partnership in this trade with Thomas Lane, who was from a Northamptonshire minor gentry family. It is likely that in the early years of the firm both Perry and Lane would have visited Virginia. From twelfth in 1676 they were by 1686 to become the second largest London firm importing tobacco. Following the death in 1688 of their great rival John Jeffreys, they moved into first place, a rank which Perry retained, even after Lane's death in 1710, until his own demise in 1721. Given the importance of tobacco in British-American trade, his leadership in this trade made Perry the most important British merchant trading to North America in the period between 1689 and 1720. 
The success of Perry and Lane owed much to its efficiency, dependability, and adaptability. In most areas of the Chesapeake, it began by trading directly with small and middling planters through factors acting for them on commission. As the number of indigenous merchants in the Chesapeake increased, many of the greatest preferred dealing with the Perry house. A class of larger planters also emerged towards the end of the seventeenth century who found it in their interest to deal directly with merchants in England. Many of this element preferred Perry and Lane, which then had a relatively good reputation for acting in its correspondents' interest in selling tobacco, buying return goods, and avoiding long delays in shipping. (In 1719 the firm imported tobacco in space chartered on fifty different vessels.) To support its Chesapeake business, the firm also had some Madeira, West Indies, and North Carolina trade and occasionally ventured on the servant and slave trades. In the 1680s Perry contracted with the Royal African Company for slave deliveries to Virginia and in 1707 he attempted one slaving voyage on his own. 
Perry's success in attracting business from the largest planters made it inevitable that he would also be asked to perform political tasks, including solicitation for places in the gift of the crown and for desired legislation and orders. He acted as both political and financial agent for the colony of Virginia and sometimes represented Maryland as well. He and Robert Carter of Virginia managed the 'northern neck' of that colony for the proprietor, Lady Fairfax. He also handled the London business of Governor Francis Nicholson and of the College of William and Mary. His more charitable activities included raising funds for the college and for the refugees in the 1690s from the war-ravaged Palatinate; he was employed too by the archbishop of Canterbury to remit funds to America for the relief of Huguenot refugees there. He appears with striking frequency in the minutes of the Treasury and the Board of Trade. The board consulted him (more than fifty times between 1704 and 1713) about such matters as convoys and American conditions. In the City of London, however, he avoided all participation in municipal or guild affairs until 1708, when he was named to the lieutenancy (militia) commission. 
Perry and his wife appear to have had two sons only. The younger, Micaiah, died in 1693 at the age of twenty-two. The elder, Richard, in 1694 married Sarah Richards, daughter and ultimate heir of the recently deceased merchant George Richards, a major competitor in the Chesapeake trade. By this marriage the Perrys in effect took over the Richards business. Perry was a commissioner for taking the $2 million subscription that led to the creation of the new East India Company, but did not himself invest in that venture. Richard Perry, his son and partner, who had acquired some wealth with his wife, bought shares in the Bank of England and became a director, in 1699-1701. But the family, like many others, came to prefer safer investments in real property, including the manor of Little Stanbridge in Essex. In London their realty holdings included large storage warehouses and two of the three quays along the Thames between the Tower of London and the Customs House. In Ireland Perry helped his brother John acquire a substantial estate near Clonmel during the forced sales of the 1690s. Perry's son Richard predeceased him in 1720 and he himself died at Leadenhall Street, London, on 1 October 1721. His business as the leading tobacco-importing firm in Britain passed to his grandsons, Richard's sons Micajah Perry and Philip. They also inherited most of the family's other property though their mother and sisters were provided for. Perry was buried on 10 October 1721 at St Botolph without Bishopsgate. 
Perry is a striking example of the fairly numerous cohort of merchants from nonconformist backgrounds who found it possible to reach a considerable level of commercial success after 1660 -- particularly in the American trades -- without conspicuous political participation and concomitant government contracts. 


@@@@@


doc= 49955


Perry, Micajah (bap. 1694, d. 1753), merchant and politician, was baptized on 30 April 1694 at St Katharine Cree in London, the son of Richard Perry, merchant of London, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of George Richards, likewise a merchant. His grandfather, Micaiah Perry, was one of the founders of the leading English firm in the tobacco-importing and North American trades between 1690 and 1720. His father, a partner in that concern, died in 1720, so that when Micaiah Perry died in 1721 this major house, with commitments all over the Atlantic trading world, passed into the hands of his two grandsons, Micajah, aged twenty-six, and his younger brother, Philip, aged eighteen. Having previously spent some time as a clerk in a Philadelphia merchant's counting-house, Micajah Perry was thus reasonably familiar with American business conditions and practices. On 19 September 1721 he married Elizabeth (died 1738), daughter of Richard Cocke, a prosperous London linen draper. They lived in St Mary Axe in the City and at a villa at Epsom. They had no children. 
In Micaiah Perry's day, Perry and Lane used all the principal trading modes known in the Chesapeake trade. As a commission house, it conducted business for both planters and merchants in the colonies, but also traded on its own through stores and factors there. It avoided unnecessary shipping risks and delays by chartering limited space on many vessels. After taking over the firm (now known as Perry & Co.), Micajah Perry simplified operations by eliminating stores and factors, by reducing correspondence with merchants, and by sending out a limited number of ships of his own rather than chartering partial freight on a larger number of vessels. Almost immediately his firm began to lose money on shipping, because, without the assistance of dependable agents in every river, his captains were detained for longer periods in the tobacco colonies looking for cargoes, and, even so, frequently returned without full freights. Moreover, the firm antagonized many of the larger planters on whom it was now particularly dependent by suing aggressively for sums owed with compound interest. 
The time liberated by simplifying the operations of his firm came increasingly to be devoted by Perry to politics. This marked a sharp break with the practice of his father and grandfather who, though known whigs, had avoided any conspicuous involvement in national, municipal, or guild affairs -- except for membership in the lieutenancy commission (in charge of the militia trained bands). In 1719, however, Perry's sister Sarah married William Heysham the younger, MP, a London West Indies merchant. The Heyshams were a politically active whig family, three of whose members had since 1698 been members of parliament for Lancaster or London. The death of his brother-in-law in 1727 very probably encouraged Perry to attempt to lead the surviving Heysham interest in the City. Merchants like the Heyshams and Perrys gave much business to London dealers in export goods as well as to the port's numerous ship carpenters, chandlers, sailmakers, rope-works, and other maritime crafts and trades. The death of George I in June 1727 made it necessary to hold an election that year and the hitherto inactive Perry quickly became a liveryman and 'assistant' of the Haberdashers' Company and announced his candidacy for parliament. He was able to stand as part of a pro-ministerial grouping when the aged alderman Sir Gilbert Heathcote withdrew as a candidate for London. Perry came in third (out of the four elected) in the poll of November 1727. This was quickly followed by his selection as master of the Haberdashers' Company in December and as alderman for Aldgate ward in February 1728. 
In parliament Perry appears to have devoted most of his efforts to commercial and colonial questions. (He was also agent for Pennsylvania in the 1720s.) On many of these issues he could co-operate with the ministry, most noticeably in obtaining the 1732 act facilitating the collection of debts in the colonies -- a measure as strongly desired by merchants as loathed by colonists. On other issues he was impelled by feeling in the City to oppose the ministry, particularly on the question of Britain's reaction to the 'Spanish depredations' in the West Indies. His total break with the ministry came over Walpole's 1733 'Tobacco Excise Bill', intended to curb fraud in collecting customs on tobacco, the opposition to which he led both in the City and in the house. As one of the very few tobacco merchants in the house, his leading role in the debates was both necessary and effective. 
Perry's success in stopping the 'Excise Bill' was a costly victory. In the City he was a hero, triumphantly returned to parliament in the general election of 1734 and elected sheriff for 1734-5 and lord mayor for 1738-9. But his private affairs suffered, for his Virginia correspondents were offended both by the passage of the 'Colonial Debts Act' and by the failure of the 'Excise Bill'. (Consigning planters had hoped that it would mean lower commissions on their sales accounts.) Many there felt, too, that his political involvements meant that he was devoting too little time to his business, from which his brother, Philip, withdrew in 1739. The Treasury also harassed him with an exchequer suit to recover customs duties repaid to him on tobacco not properly exported. Perry found it necessary to reach some sort of political understanding with the ministry in order to effect a 'composition' on the customs claim. This compromised him in the eyes of the ever more numerous ardently anti-Walpole City voters and helped secure his defeat in the parliamentary election of 1741. By that time both his business and his health were in ruins. Suffering from 'dropsy', he withdrew to Bath in 1743 and subsequently avoided bankruptcy only by turning over all his effects to his English creditors. He resigned his aldermanship on 25 November 1746 and received a pension of $200 per annum from the court of aldermen. In his last years he was so 'utterly incapable of Transacting any Business whatsoever' that the court of chancery had to appoint a guardian for him. He died intestate on 22 or 25 January 1753, either at East Greenwich in Kent, or at Epsom in Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 49957


Salmon, Cyril Barnet, Baron Salmon (1903-1991), judge, was born Barnett Cyril Salmon on 28 December 1903 at 232 Finchley Road, Hampstead, London, the son of Montagu Salmon, tobacco merchant, and his wife, Marian Nina Trevor, 'nee' Abrahams. His father's family co-owned J. Lyons & Co. Ltd, famous for its corner houses and tea shops until well after the Second World War. He was educated at Mill Hill School and Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he read law. Called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1925, he was a pupil of Walter Monckton, who was already a prominent junior in distinguished chambers and 'a busy and prosperous man' (Lord Birkenhead, 'Walter Monckton: the Life of Viscount Monckton of Brenchley', 1969, 61). He then became a member of chambers at 5 Crown Office Row where the titular head was Robert Alderson Wright, Baron Wright, former master of the rolls and a legendary exponent of commercial law both as barrister and judge. He proceeded to build up his own practice covering a wide variety of (mostly civil) work, and by 1939 he was established as one of three leading common-law juniors in London, the others being Valentine Holmes, junior counsel to the treasury (the 'treasury devil'), and Gilbert Paul. Colin Sleeman, who was Salmon's pupil and became a member of his chambers in July 1939, later said: 'Cyril was a wonderful pupil master who really took trouble to instruct his pupils' (private information). 
The outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 had immediate consequences, for Salmon and his chambers, which were even more catastrophic than for most others in London. He enrolled in the army and was commissioned in the Royal Artillery in 1940. Other members of the chambers were likewise dispersed on military and RAF service, and soon afterwards the chambers building itself was bombed to the ground. In the later part of his military service, from 1943, Salmon was on the headquarters staff of the Eighth Army as a judge advocate. He ended the war with the rank of major. When he returned to practice in 1945 the chambers were housed at 3 Paper Buildings, the senior clerk had retired, and nothing of his pre-war junior practice remained. In these circumstances, he took the courageous decision to apply for silk, and was appointed KC in April 1945. 
Salmon had married, on 25 July 1929, Rencie Vanderfelt (died 1942), daughter of Sidney Gorton Vanderfelt; they had two children, Gai Rencie ('b'. 1933) and David Neville Cyril ('b'. 1935). Rencie Salmon was remembered as 'a very attractive and charming young woman and a very kind and generous hostess' (private information). The loss Salmon suffered from her untimely death was matched by the happiness brought to him by his second marriage, to Jean Beatrice (Jeannie) Morris, Lady Morris (1912-1989), on 6 April 1946. She was the elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel David Edward Maitland-Makgill-Crichton, and the divorced wife of Michael William Morris, second Baron Morris, with whom she had had two daughters and twin sons. She was lively, intelligent, and attractive, and they were devoted to each other. They lived at 12 Wilton Street, London, a house which Salmon bought during the war years, and subsequently at 1 Melina Place, St John's Wood, London, and at the Old Drum, Sandwich, Kent. No reference to their home life during the 1950s and 1960s would be complete without a mention of Salmon's two long-haired dachshunds, Rudi and Mimi, who were his constant companions, on circuit as in London, and on some official as well as private occasions. 
In the years after 1945 in the Temple, work was far from plentiful and the competition was intense. After a slow start, which perhaps was inevitable, Salmon acquired 'a large and varied practice' ('The Independent', 14 Nov 1991), and during the 1950s became one of the acknowledged leaders of the bar. His practice included commercial cases, but he was too good a general advocate, and too much in demand, to become a specialist in that or any other field. His appointment as a judge of the High Court in 1957, with the accompanying knighthood, was presaged by the lord chancellor's invitation to travel the Wales and Chester circuit as commissioner of assize in 1955, which he did with considerable success. As a judge he achieved an even higher reputation than he had earned at the bar, both in the Queen's Bench Division and, from 1964, when he was appointed a lord justice of appeal and a privy councillor, in the Court of Appeal. It was said of him that 'the higher he went, the better he got' (private information). 
As a judge Salmon was conspicuous both for his intellectual integrity and for his sometimes outspoken and fearless defence of liberal values and of the rights of the individual against intrusion by the state or by fellow citizens who failed to respect what became known as his, or her, human rights. At the same time, he retained the respect of more traditional common lawyers by recognizing the force of binding authority, even when it compelled a decision which was not necessarily in line with his personal sympathies for one or other of the parties in a particular case. At this time Lord Denning presided in the Court of Appeal as master of the rolls, and it was sometimes said, even by him, that the rules of precedent should give way, when justice demanded it, to the merits of the individual case as seen by the trial judge or appellate court. It is a mark of Salmon's intellectual distinction that he acquired a reputation which rivalled Denning's own for reconciling the justice of the case with the intellectual demands of the law. He received much favourable publicity, soon after his appointment, by reason of the tough prison sentences he imposed at the central criminal court in 1958 on the members of a gang of white youths who were convicted of attacking black victims during disturbances in the Notting Hill area of London, and his sentencing remarks were widely reported. They were credited with achieving their object of checking an incipient spread of racism at that time: 'Everyone, irrespective of the colour of their skin, is entitled to walk through our streets in peace, with their heads erect and free from fear. That is a right which these courts will always unfailingly uphold' ('The Times', 9 Nov 1991). In 1966 he criticized the 'trial by television' of Emil Savundra, who was accused (and later charged and convicted) of insurance frauds and malpractice on a major scale: such a person was entitled to a fair trial and the protection of the law. Aptly, in the same year, Salmon was appointed chairman of the royal commission which inquired into the workings of the 'Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act', of 1921. The commission's report included recommendations which were designed to provide safeguards for witnesses and advocates appearing before tribunals of that kind. He also chaired a royal commission on standards of conduct in public life in 1974-6, following his appointment to the House of Lords. He set out his views on the subject of individual liberty in a lecture which he delivered at a public meeting of Justice in July 1967 and in his Haldane lecture at Birkbeck College, London, entitled 'The law and individual liberty' in December 1970. 
Salmon's elevation to the House of Lords as Baron Salmon of Sandwich in 1972 was widely welcomed, and he remained an active and respected member of the appellate committee and of the judicial committee of the privy council until he retired in 1980. He began to suffer early symptoms of the ill health which increasingly marred the last decade of his life. Even during these later years, however, he spoke out against features of what became the 'Police and Criminal Evidence Act', of 1984, which he considered were unnecessarily restrictive of the legal rights of a criminal suspect in police custody. Characteristically, he supported in the House of Lords an early, unsuccessful, attempt to enact the European convention on human rights as part of British law. 
Salmon was a person of unique talents and charm, 'widely liked and admired for the breadth of his knowledge, his courtesy, humour and patience, and also for his strength of will' ('The Times', 9 Nov 1991). He was of medium height and always immaculately dressed, with a demeanour which was modest and quiet, to the point where sometimes he might appear almost languid to a casual onlooker. But no one could doubt for long either his intellectual energy or his personal distinction, and the word 'elegant' perhaps best describes both his outward appearance and his manner, whether in conversation or as a speaker -- or as an advocate. Indeed, it was because he was able to deploy these personal gifts in all aspects of his professional work that he not only achieved outstanding success but was held in high personal regard by all who came into contact with him. He was loyal to the Middle Temple, where he was elected a bencher in 1953 and treasurer in 1972; to Cambridge, where he became an honorary fellow of Pembroke College in 1965, an honorary doctor of laws (LLD) in 1982, and a commissary of the university in 1979; and to his adopted home county of Kent. He was recorder of Gravesend from 1947 until his appointment to the High Court bench ten years later, and in 1978 the University of Kent made him an honorary DCL. A keen and skilled golfer, he was captain of Royal St George's, Sandwich, in 1972-3 and a regular supporter of the Bar Golfing Society. He died on 7 November 1991 at Kenfield Hall Nursing Home, Petham, Canterbury, and was survived by the daughter and son of his first marriage, his wife Jeannie having predeceased him in 1989. He was commemorated at a memorial service in the Temple Church on 29 January 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 49958


Sandbach, Francis Henry (1903-1991), classical scholar, was born on 23 February 1903 in an Edgbaston nursing home, the elder son of Francis Edward Sandbach (1874-1946), lecturer and subsequently professor of German in the University of Birmingham, and Ethel Bywater (1874-1949), a teacher. From 1914 to 1921 he was at King Edward's School, Birmingham, where he was captain of the school, which he represented at rugby football. In 1920 he was elected to a major scholarship in classics at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he began in 1921 a residence that lasted with only short intermissions until his death. His university distinctions included first classes in both parts of the classical tripos, the Browne and Craven scholarships, the first chancellor's classical medal, and the Charles Oldham scholarship. Rejecting the civil service, he embarked on research for a Trinity research fellowship, to which he was elected in 1927 for a dissertation on Plutarch. This he took up in 1928, having from 1926 to 1928 held an assistant lectureship at Manchester. 
In 1929 Harry Sandbach (as he was always known) was appointed to college and university lectureships in classics, in 1951 to a Brereton readership, and in 1967 to a personal chair in classics, the first such appointment in his faculty. That this distinction, and election to the British Academy in 1968, came so late in his career is not wholly attributable to the distractions from scholarship arising from the Second World War and the demands of college administration, engrossing though these were. From 1939 to 1943 Sandbach remained in Cambridge, where in addition to a heavy teaching programme he served as junior proctor, air raid warden, and Home Guard. From 1943 he worked in the economics section of the topographical department of the Admiralty in Oxford. He was released in 1945 to take up a Trinity tutorship, and from 1953 to 1956 he was senior tutor. As a loyal Trinity man he never begrudged these commitments, and such external factors are not the whole story. 
The cast of Sandbach's mind was deliberative. His entry in the 'Trinity Who's Who' when he was an undergraduate read 'Well, it depends'; and many students and colleagues were disconcerted by his habit of thinking for some time before he spoke. Before the war he published many reviews and short notes which attest the range of interests, literary as well as philosophical, embraced by his wide and discursive reading. There being then no pressure on academics to 'produce', he was free to pursue what interested him. The first solid results of these explorations began to appear in the 1960s, in his substantial contributions to the edition of Plutarch in the 'Loeb Classical Library', for the last volume of which, the fragments, he was solely responsible. He was also working on Menander, having in 1959 accepted an invitation from the Clarendon Press to complete a comprehensive commentary begun by A. W. Gomme. This was published in 1973, and together with the 'Oxford Classical Text of Menander' (1972) constitutes Sandbach's 'chef d'oeuvre'. His international standing in this field was signalled by his election in 1977 to the Royal Society of Arts and Sciences of Goteborg. Two short books for the student and general reader that came out at this time, 'The Stoics' (1975) and 'The Comic Theatre of Greece and Rome' (1977), were warmly appreciated by their intended readership. The former reflected an interest in Stoicism which had originated in his Plutarchan studies, and which was the occasion of his last substantial work, 'Aristotle and the Stoics' (1985). This questioned received ideas on the subject and provoked a lively controversy, issuing in a special conference to debate its findings. A natural bent to literature had received little encouragement from the classical tripos as it was in Sandbach's day and for long afterwards, but he also made a number of distinctive contributions to the interpretation of Latin poetry; in particular, a lifelong and fruitful interest in Virgil, the subject of his first publication, had been stimulated at Manchester by R. S. Conway's notorious 'Virgil Discussions'. 
On 9 July 1932 Sandbach married Mary Warburton Mathews (1901-1990), later to become a distinguished Swedish scholar and translator of Strindberg. They had two surviving children, a daughter born in 1940 and a son in 1943. Sandbach was of medium height and build, wiry, a good walker, and to the end of his life a strong swimmer. His face, scarred by adolescent acne and with a prominent chin and large nose, was redeemed from ugliness by benevolent eyes of a deep grey-blue, the true reflection of an amiable and modest character. Though his scholarly standards were high and severe, his criticisms were always expressed with courtesy and moderation. As in his scholarship, so in his teaching and lecturing all rhetoric and display were foreign to his nature. He was generous in sharing his learning with others, as many prefaces testify. His upbringing was agnostic, and before leaving school he had come to disbelieve the central tenets of Christianity. Sandbach died of diabetes mellitus in Cambridge at 2 Hedgerley Close, his home since 1936, on 18 September 1991, and was cremated at Cambridge on 30 September. His ashes were scattered at the crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 49960


Richards, George (d. 1694), merchant, was a younger son of Captain Edward Richards ('c'.1617-1664) of Southampton. Of a very respectable gentle pedigree, in March 1653 his father chose to put him out as an apprentice, at the cost of $80, to Matthew Atkins, a member of the Weavers' Company. Thereafter he passed under the guidance of Philip Forter of the Barber-Surgeons' Company, and did not take his freedom in the Weavers' Company until May 1669. He married Anne (died 1683), with whom he had at least two sons and a daughter, and the family settled in Gravel Lane, in the East End of the City. 
Richards made his fortune by importing Virginia tobacco. In 1672, and again in 1676, he was the second largest dealer, and still ranked fifth in the much greater trade of 1686. His prominence in colonial commerce was attested by his appearance among the signatories of a petition to the privy council in June 1677 for the payment of bills of exchange by the governors of Virginia. Moreover, he also signed a petition of tobacco importers in September 1685 which implored the government to encourage a trade undergoing 'difficulties' ('CSP col.', 12.98). Under James II he gained new prominence in civic circles, being appointed in July 1685 to the court of assistants of the Weavers' Company. Two years later he was removed from both the court and the livery, only to be restored in February 1688 as the government desperately sought support in the capital. Despite these political and mercantile upheavals, his finances remained sound, and he valued himself in June 1690 at 'above $8,000 in goods and good debts and money' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/421/138). 
Richards was buried on 13 June 1694 at St Botolph's, Aldgate, London. Judging by his will, he was a most scrupulous businessman, having set aside sums to pay duties for tobacco 'which the waiters of several Virginia ships did order me to post short of what I ought and should have done' some eighteen years previously (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/421/138). He also proved a generous benefactor to several good causes, most notably Christ's Hospital, which received a legacy of $200. His wife having predeceased him, the bulk of his estate passed to his only surviving son, Philip, who died in April 1695. The Richards fortune thus passed to George's daughter, Sarah, who, through her marriage to the influential tobacco merchant Richard Perry, united the business and wealth of two of the most prominent families in that trade. 


@@@@@


doc= 49962


Scoones, Sir Reginald Lawrence (1900-1991), army officer, was born on 18 December 1900 at Hermitage, Sutton Heston, Brentford, Middlesex, the son of Major Fitzmaurice Thomas Le Fevre Scoones, of the Royal Fusiliers, and his wife, Florence ('nee' Osborne). General Sir Geoffry Allen Percival Scoones (1893-1975), commander of the 4th army corps which defeated the Japanese at Imphal, Burma, in 1944, and subsequently commander-in-chief, central command, India (1945-6), and British high commissioner in New Zealand (1953-7) was an elder brother. He was educated at Wellington College, where he was captain of the rugby football fifteen, and at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned into the Royal Fusiliers in 1920. He transferred to the Royal Tank Corps in 1923, and was posted to Sudan, where he was a machine-gun officer with the Sudan defence force from 1926 to 1934. While there he married, on 7 November 1933 in Khartoum, Isabella Bowie (Ella) Nisbet, daughter of John Nisbet, of the Isles of Cumbrae, Scotland. They had one daughter. After returning to England Scoones became adjutant of 1st Royal Tank regiment (RTR) in 1936 and was appointed to the staff of the experimental mobile division, as a GSO3, in 1938. 
In 1939 Scoones was posted, as brigade major, to the cavalry brigade in Cairo and became a GSO2 in General Richard O'Connor's western desert force. At this time the art of desert exploration was in its early stages and the expertise of the long range desert group and Special Air Service lay in the future, but Scoones, who was not unfamiliar with the desert, was able to organize desert reconnaissance which proved invaluable when the Italians, with massive numerical and armour superiority, invaded Egypt in September 1940. Fortunately the quality of the British forces and the generalship of O'Connor proved much superior to the Italians when O'Connor counter-attacked in December 1940. Two British divisions destroyed ten Italian divisions, took 130,000 prisoners, 380 tanks, and 845 guns, while themselves sustaining 500 killed, 1373 wounded, and 55 missing. The final battle was at Beda Fomm, 50 miles south of Benghazi in February 1941. Scoones was immediately appointed OBE for his part in this success. His next posting was as second-in-command of the 42nd RTR, and on 18 November 1942, when the 'crusader' offensive was launched by General Sir Claude Auchinleck, there was a series of hard-fought battles around Sidi Rezegh, and 4th Indian division, which 42nd RTR was supporting, captured Sidi 'Umar. During these battles Scoones was promoted to command 42nd RTR. By the end of this campaign he had accumulated enough experience of tank warfare to make him an expert on instructional needs and he was posted back to the War Office as deputy director of military training. 
In 1943 Scoones was appointed to take over command of 254 tank brigade in Burma, where the British and Indian troops were planning to advance across the Chindwin River. There he joined his oldest brother, Geoffry, who was commanding 4th Indian corps. However, while the British were planning to drive the Japanese out of Burma, the Japanese were preparing to launch an invasion of India; they had some success in the initial stages of their attack when they threatened Imphal by occupying a hill at Nungshigum on the northern edge of the Imphal plain. This move put them within range of the Imphal petrol and ammunition dumps and the Kangla airfield. The Japanese did not believe that tanks could climb hills but learned their mistake when the British tanks supporting the Dogras crawled upwards, though sustaining heavy casualties among their tank commanders who were obliged to control the battle by standing up in open turrets and directing their drivers through thick vegetation which obscured their view. Nungshigum was captured but with heavy casualties on both sides. Scoones was appointed DSO for his skill and courage in commanding the brigade, which he continued to do until he was wounded near Mandalay. 
After recovery Scoones returned to the War Office, once again as deputy director, military training. In 1947 he was offered the appointment of assistant kaid (commandant) of the Sudan defence force. Three years later he was appointed kaid, in the rank of major-general. Although he was extremely popular with all ranks and enjoyed his appointment very much, the post was not without its difficulties. With the approach of independence (Sudan became a sovereign independent state in 1955 and a republic in 1956) he had the task of preparing for the handover of military authority to Sudanese officers. His advice was not invariably heeded. He intimated that officers from the north should not be posted to units in the south. When this happened it contributed to triggering off the civil war, which led to several coups and a particularly bloody conflict that continued for many years, with external influences also contributing to instability. 
Scoones retired from the army in 1954 and was then appointed chairman of the brewing industry's National Trade Development Association. He was director of the Brewers' Society from 1957 to 1969. He was made OBE in 1941 and DSO in 1945, and was appointed CB in 1951 and KBE in 1955. Cully Scoones commanded widespread respect for his integrity and reliability, complemented by a splendid sense of humour which enabled him to defuse an impending awkward situation with an appropriate witty remark. A modest man, he always made light of his own achievements which ranged over command tactics, forward planning, and diplomatic skills. He died of heart failure and prostate cancer at the Westminster Hospital, London, on 6 October 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 49963


Sargent, John (1714-1791), merchant and politician, was born on 12 June 1714, in St Dunstan-in-the-East parish, London, the younger of the two children of John Sargent (1690-1762), a grocer from Plymouth who had moved to London to become the navy's accountant for stores at Deptford, and his wife, Mary Arnell ('b'. 1694), the daughter of John Arnell of Plymouth (1658-1703). With their father always on the move with the navy, Sargent and his sister spent their childhood in Lisbon, Sheerness, Chatham, and Deptford, where their father worked as a clerk of the survey. Settling in Deptford in 1729, the Sargents apprenticed their son to the firm of Mary Sargent's first cousin George Arnold (1685-1751), a London linen draper. 
In Cheapside, Sargent served an apprenticeship from 1729 to 1735, received the freedom of the City in 1735, and for the next sixteen years traded as Arnold's junior partner. In 1749 he married Rosamund (1722-1792), the daughter of John and Elizabeth Chambers. During the 1740s, Sargent brought to the cloth trade an extensive knowledge of naval supply and a desire to enter new geographical regions such as India and Africa, which were opening up to private traders. Prodded by Sargent, the firm became a large wholesaler of India goods and a large supplier to the Company of Merchants Trading to Africa. In addition the firm provisioned Bance Island, a slave trans-shipment factory in Sierra Leone, which Sargent had purchased with Richard Oswald, John Mill, Augustus and John Boyd, and Alexander Grant in 1748. 
After Arnold's death in 1751 Sargent continued the business as Sargent, Birch & Co. and, after 1754, as Sargent, Aufrere & Co. when he joined forces with the Huguenot George Aufrere. Thereafter, Sargent's firms were always marked by a large number of partners, having three or four more partners than the typical London two- or three-man firm of the day. Yet, despite these changes, the basic thrust of enterprise persisted. Secure in the inheritance he had received from Arnold and the growth in his African and Indian business, Sargent pushed into new areas in the 1750s. Company politics was one. In 1753 he was elected to the directorate of the Bank of England and, for the next fifteen years, he helped to manage its affairs. Two years later, when the government decided to reinstate the private provision of packet services between England and the Caribbean, Sargent and Richard Stratton (1704-1759) moved into contracting. Reaching an agreement with the Treasury and General Post Office, they signed formal articles on 6 November 1755. As the contract evolved they furnished five boats to carry the mail between Falmouth in Cornwall and the West Indies. From beginning to end, for eight years, the enterprise earned on average a profit of $785 per month, in addition to the money made from other freight. 
National parliamentary service was likewise a draw. In 1753, the same year as he joined the bank, Sargent was introduced to Lord Montagu, the patron of Midhurst, Sussex. After proffering Montagu a much needed loan of $1500, he secured Montagu's recommendation to the constituency. After a contest over the results of the election, Sargent took his seat in the Commons in 1754. In parliament, he cared for the Montagus' business, and he sided with Henry Legge, Thomas Pelham, Thomas Walpole, Charles Yorke, and Richard Stratton, voting with them in support of the government. In 1760, when the Montagus decided to handle their own parliamentary affairs, Sargent found himself without a patron. Unsuccessful in his approaches to the duke of Newcastle and the earl of Bute, he was forced to step down. Not until 1765 did he again take a seat, this time as the representative of West Looe, Cornwall, and with the help of George Grenville. Throughout this term in the house, he remained loyal to Grenville, even after the minister's fall from power in June 1765. He was considered an expert on financial and colonial matters, and used his access to information to apply pressure behind the scenes. He advised administrative departments needing information on the intricacies of commercial practice, like the handling of bills of credit, and served as the agent of both Pennsylvania (1760-66) and New York (1765-6). Ultimately, however, Sargent disliked the work of a party politician and, unwilling to succumb to 'the venality of the times', he voluntarily stepped down in 1768. 
The last years of his public service were dominated by a large-scale speculation in American lands, a fitting preoccupation for one of Benjamin Franklin's closest friends in Great Britain. Almost from its inception in 1766, Sargent was involved in the Illinois Company, which came to be called the Walpole Company, a concern for settling lands west of the Appalachian crest which he was lured into by Franklin. It took two years to organize the company and even more time to win a grant for 2.4 million acres. Not until August 1772 did the privy council issue the Walpole Company with an order for establishing such a colony west and south of Pennsylvania, but completion of the project was cut short by American independence. 
The American War of Independence shattered Sargent's dreams of overseas speculation, in much the same way as it made his American cloth trade less profitable and attractive. As one of the oldest and most respected merchants in the transatlantic shipping community, Sargent struggled to keep his business intact through the calamitous 1770s, but it was an uphill fight. Before the end of the war, he expected to remain 'in the track', but his plans changed as he began to realize the significance of the geographical shift in transatlantic trade. He wound up his adventures in overseas shipping and turned over the affairs of the firm to his younger partners. He died at Tunbridge Wells on 20 September 1791. His wife died the following year, and was buried alongside him in St Margaret's churchyard, in Halstead. He left his business and one-third of his personal estate to his younger son, John Sargent; the residue he bequeathed to his older son, George. 


@@@@@


doc= 49965


Smyth, John (c.1500-1556), merchant and local politician, was born around the turn of the sixteenth century to Matthew Smyth ['see under 'Smyth family (per. c.1500-1680)], a middling Bristol merchant and hooper, and his wife, Alice, the daughter of a local merchant. The common nature of his name makes it difficult to trace his early years with certainty. However, he was almost certainly apprenticed to a Bristol or Bridgwater merchant engaged in the Spanish trade. From 1525 the name John Smyth begins to appear regularly in the Bristol customs accounts in contexts associated with the continental trade. It seems likely that, when he married, it was to Joan White, 'nee' Hoper (died 1560), the widow of a wealthy Bridgwater merchant; she gave birth to their first son, Hugh, in 1530, and their second, Matthew, in 1533. 
After 1530 Smyth became increasingly prominent in Bristol politics. His first major office was that of sheriff, which he held in 1532-3. During this year he had to deal with a town inflamed and divided by the rival preaching of Hugh Latimer and William Hubbardine. As he testified against Latimer in an inquiry held that summer it would seem that he was opposed to religious change at that time. However, his later involvement in the sale of monastic lands indicates that he was prepared to be flexible on this issue. 
Smyth's ledger for the years 1538-50 provides detailed evidence of his commercial operations and is one of the best sources in this period for the business activities of an English merchant. The ledger reveals that he had extensive trade contacts with western France, the Biscay region of Spain, and south-west Spain and Portugal. He was involved in the export of cloth, lead, leather, and arable produce and the import of wine, iron, oil, and woad. Most of this trade was conducted in a fairly open and legal manner. However, it is clear that Smyth, along with other prominent members of Bristol's commercial community, was also involved in large-scale and well-organized illicit trade, principally the covert export of leather and arable produce to avoid the heavy licence charges to which these commodities were subject. The normal pattern of this, highly profitable, section of his trade was for a small part of a consignment to be legally declared in Bristol and for the rest to be transported from storage depots up the Bristol Channel to join outbound ships at the point where the Avon meets the Bristol Channel. The danger of capture was avoided by the local customs searchers being bribed before a ship's sailing. 
Smyth was also involved in the shipping industry. From at least 1536-46 he was the owner of a ship called the 'Trinity of Bristol'. The returns on this vessel were generally good, and he was able to achieve a high price for his freight by allowing Bristol-based merchants to defer freight payments. By doing this he was effectively able to act as a financier to the city's smaller merchants without contravening the usury laws. For obvious reasons, Smyth particularly favoured the use of his own ship when he was conducting illicit exports. 
From 1539 Smyth began to invest some of his profits in land and property, much of which become available in the wake of Henry VIII's religious reforms. In 1544 he acquired a grant of arms from the crown, and in 1545 he bought the estate of Ashton Court. This major property overlooked Bristol and was to be the home of his gentlemen descendants until the early twentieth century. 
Smyth served two terms as mayor of Bristol, first in 1547-8 and then again in 1554-5. From the inventory of his goods it is apparent that he remained active in commerce until his death, at Small Street, Bristol, on 1 September 1556. He was buried in St Werburgh's Church. 


@@@@@


doc= 49967


Gott, Benjamin (1762-1840), cloth merchant and manufacturer, was born on 24 June 1762 at Woodhall, Calverley, near Leeds, the fifth of the six children of John Gott (1720-1793), an engineer and surveyor of bridges for the West Riding of Yorkshire, and his second wife, Susanna Jackson of Bradford. He was educated at Bingley grammar school and then, in 1780, apprenticed with the Leeds merchant house of Wormald and Fountaine. His father paid the large premium of $400 for his four-year period of training. It was money well spent. Running one of the top half-dozen firms of cloth merchants in the town, Wormald and Fountaine (related by marriage) were prominent members of the Leeds elite, both men having served office as mayor in the late 1770s. On new year's day 1785, straight out of his apprenticeship, Gott became a junior partner in the firm; his father raised $3660, admitting his son to a one-eleventh share of its capital and profits. Barely had the ink dried on the deed than John Wormald died, leaving three teenage sons for whom a share in the management of the firm had been explicitly reserved. Half a dozen years later Joseph Fountaine was dead, with an only daughter eager to withdraw her large interest from the business. Gott, not yet thirty, had become senior partner in one of the West Riding's principal merchant houses. 
The second half of the 1780s and the early 1790s (in sharp contrast to the years 1775-83) were prosperous ones for the Yorkshire cloth industry. And in terms of technology they were momentous. Although the lead in the mechanization of its traditional processes in textile manufacture was given by the cotton industry, there were three innovations in the making of wool textiles in the West Riding during these years: spinning by the jenny; scribbling (preliminary carding) and carding by a machine adapted from Arkwright's water frame; and, not before 1792, the introduction of Boulton and Watt's rotary steam engine in Leeds. Gott, young, immensely talented, with a decade's training in a first-rate firm behind him, and, equally importantly, with its capital resources -- if he could communicate his vision to his young Wormald partners -- at his command, made the boldest of entrepreneurial leaps in 1792. He built the first large-scale factory in the West Riding woollen industry on a green-field site, Bean Ing, to the west of the smart Georgian squares and terraces of Leeds. Previously, merchants had not manufactured their own cloth, but bought it in the cloth halls or to order from some of the county's thousands of independent clothiers. Gott constructed a large factory (its buildings and machinery were insured for $10,000 to $12,000 when it was destroyed by fire in 1799), powered by a big 40 hp Boulton and Watt engine. In production eighteen months later, the factory housed the entire gamut of machinery necessary to produce and finish cloth. 
By no means all of Gott's machinery was steam driven: the jennies, looms, and finishing tools definitely were not. In many ways the factory was a half-way house between the old domestic system of production and the large scale, power-driven factories of the 1820s and 1830s. Certainly, Gott continued to buy cloth in the halls (indeed he remained principally a great export merchant, selling three times more cloth than he made himself), and at Armley, one of the two other water-driven mills he later acquired, he continued to provide scribbling and fulling services for the district's independent clothiers. Nevertheless, the scale of his enterprise was exceptional. Park Mills at Bean Ing employed 761 workers in 1813; six years later, on 31 July 1819 (a difficult year for the cloth industry), the total work force, there and at Gott's other two mills and warehouse, was 1019. In the late 1790s and 1800s his enterprise, together with that of a handful of other merchants running mills on a smaller scale, unnerved the entire cloth industry, creating the impression that the merchants would become factory owners, thereby squeezing out of existence the small, independent clothiers. The progress to a complete factory system, thoroughly examined in the famous 'Report on the State of the Woollen Manufacture of England' (1806), in fact took more than half a century to complete. 
Gott steered the great firm for more than thirty years before two of his sons, John (1791-1867) and William (1797-1863), took over in the mid-1820s, when the factory was twice extended and power-driven spinning mules and cloth-finishing machinery were installed. Although few accounts have survived among the Gott papers, it was clearly a most profitable venture -- the return on Gott's great entrepreneurial vision. And in his early experiments with steam in the dyeing processes he was a bold innovator. The family's entry in the 1937 edition of Burke's 'Landed Gentry' described him simply as 'one of the founders of the modern woollen industry in Yorkshire'. Yet in many ways Gott was not in the Arkwright mould of 'nouveau riche' factory masters. 
On 30 November 1790 Gott married Elizabeth (1768-1857), the daughter of William and Elizabeth Rhodes of Badsworth, with whom he had four sons and six daughters. A cultured woman, a regular churchgoer, and a socialite, she proved to be the ideal wife for the Conservative, Anglican Gott. A friend described her as 'a woman of infinite charm... possessed of great dignity and good looks' (Gott MS 194). At first Gott did the things expected of a leading member of the tory merchant elite in Leeds: he was mayor in 1799 and captain commandant of the Leeds Volunteers. In 1803 he acquired Armley House, a pleasant villa on the edge of Leeds, as a rural retreat for his large family. Seven years later he commissioned the leading landscape architect Humphry Repton to design its 76 acre park, most unusually incorporating distant views of his factory and Leeds into the plans. And in 1822 Sir Robert Smirke was engaged to remodel Armley House in the Greek-revival style as a fitting home for his growing art collection. 
The Gotts led a cultured life in Leeds. He was prominent in the affairs of the Northern Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in 1809, lending Dutch and Italian pictures from his collection for its exhibitions, and generously patronizing a clutch of contemporary artists practising in the West Riding -- Charles Schwanfelder, J. H. Rhodes, and J. C. Ibbetson. He was instrumental in securing commissions in Leeds for Francis Chantrey (Gott owned busts of James Watt and John Rennie by him) and John Flaxman, and he and Mrs Gott sat to Sir Thomas Lawrence for two fine portraits in 1826. Above all he patronized his second cousin, the sculptor Joseph Gott (1785-1860), from whom he commissioned between 1826 and 1840 'work for the Gott family... striking both in its quantity and diversity: monuments, portrait busts, medallions and figures, groups of children and children with animals, ancient and modern mythology and pugilism' (Friedman and Stevens, 16). Gott was the first president of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society (established 1818) and a founding member of the Leeds Mechanics' Institute (1824). 
Life was not all profits and paintings. At times Gott was dogged by controversy. About 1800 he was involved in a protracted and bitter dispute with the master cloth dressers about the introduction of finishing machinery and apprenticeships. In 1824 he was prosecuted for smoke nuisance: the emissions from his and neighbouring mills, driven down the Aire valley by the prevailing westerlies, had effectively ruined the Georgian Parks development for its middle-class inhabitants. He was chairman of the Leeds and Selby Railway Company (1830), an early rail venture established, amid conflict, to provide an alternative route to Hull to that afforded by the long-founded, immensely profitable Aire and Calder Navigation Company. 
Gott died at Armley House on 14 February 1840 and was buried at Armley Chapel. Joseph Gott erected a monument (removed to St Bartholomew's Church, Armley, in 1890) archly described by Sir Nikolaus Pevsner as a 'comfortable semi-reclining figure on a mattress rolled up at the top. He is wearing a dressing gown' ('Yorkshire: the West Riding', 1959, 323). Gott was survived by two of his four sons (Benjamin had died in Athens in 1817 while collecting classical marbles, his brother Henry in Paris in 1825), who ran the firm until 1867, when it ceased cloth production. 


@@@@@


doc= 49969


Staper, Richard (c.1540-1608), merchant, was the eldest surviving son of Rowland Staper (died 1559), a London artisan clothworker and his otherwise unknown wife, Dorothy. He became free of his father's livery company by patrimony in 1559. Richard became involved in commerce, participating in the coastwise shipping of corn in the mid-1560s, and in trade with Spain from Ipswich and London. The 1568 port book shows him importing raisins, rice, almonds, silk, and taffeta from Spain. As English merchants re-entered the Mediterranean in the 1570s his trade interests broadened, and he became a pioneer of the Levant trades. Acting in conjunction with his trading partner, Edward Osborne, he sent two agents to Constantinople by way of Poland in 1575 with a view to obtaining a safe conduct for Osborne's factor and Staper's lifelong friend, William Harborne, who followed in 1578, and negotiated trading rights for English merchants equivalent to those already enjoyed by the French. It was a mission that had the backing of key figures in the government like Sir Francis Walsingham, who grasped the commercial opportunities of trade with Turkey. In 1581 Staper and Osborne were among the founder charter members of the Turkey Company, which traded as a joint stock company until 1588; four years later its merchants were subsumed in the newly formed Levant Company, which brought in the rival Venice merchants and operated as a regulated company. Staper was also named a member of the Eastland Company in 1579, and he was a member of the group formed in 1585 around Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester (including the earl's secretary Arthur Atye, and another London merchant Alexander Avenon) that traded in partnership to Morocco, Staper contributing $800 of the starting capital of $5000. 
The expanding horizons of Staper's business ventures were reflected in his growing wealth, his subsidy assessments rising from $20 in 1564 to $80 in 1582, and $100 in 1589. This may not have put him at the pinnacle of the plutocratic elite, but he was numbered among the wealthiest 2 per cent of the capital's inhabitants. Like all in his class he pursued a marital politics designed to cement his business position. On 22 April 1567 he had married Denise or Dionis, the daughter of Thomas Hewett (died 1576), another clothworker, and brother of Alderman Sir William Hewett (died 1567), whose daughter and heir Staper's partner Osborne had married, and in whose house Denise was lodged shortly before the marriage. His loyalty to the Hewett family is suggested by Staper's giving the name Hewitt to one of his sons, and the connections may have been crucial in giving Staper much needed start-up capital: Denise received $200 from her uncle Alderman Hewett. Staper's own children moved into advantageous marriages, his daughter Joanne marrying Nicholas Leate, and his son marrying the daughter of Roger Owfield (bringing a portion of $3000), both leading Levant merchants themselves. Another daughter, Mary (who predeceased him), married the prominent city lawyer James Altham. 
Staper's religious position is not crystal clear. His will breathes a more than conventional piety, but it is not specifically Calvinist. In it he bequeathed his soul to God 'nothing doubting but that for his infinite mercies sake set forth in the precious blood of his dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our only saviour and redeemer he will receive my soul into his glory and place it in the company of heavenly angels and blessed saints which God grant me for his mercies sake. Amen. (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/112, fol. 120)' His faith was enmeshed in his business affairs; as a pioneer in commercial expansion, he seems to have been the moving force behind the Clothworkers' patronage of their propagandist and evangelist Richard Hakluyt, whose exhibition the company remarkably continued to pay after he left Oxford. Staper knew that his factors, captains, and sailors risked their lives in the Mediterranean trades, prey for the persecuting inquisitors of Spain, as well as Barbary pirates seeking lucrative ransoms. Two of his sons appear to have lost their lives in the Mediterranean, one at least suffering persecution at the hands of the Spanish Inquisition. Richard Haselton recognized Staper's efforts on behalf of redeeming captives ('the pattern of bounty'; 'Strange and wonderfull things', preface), but his captivity narrative, published by William Barley and dedicated to Staper in 1595, seems to have reserved its real venom for the Spanish. That said, Staper's anti-Spanish sentiments did not apparently extend to support for privateering, which merely encouraged Barbary reprisals against legitimate trade. When he died he made the kind of charitable bequests conventional for a man of his standing, with bequests to the suburban poor, the prisons, and hospitals, but his pragmatism characteristically shines through in the bequest of $20 to the parish of St Martin Outwich for the building of shops at the east end of the church, the income from which might defray the cost of church repair. 
Although Staper fined out of the office of alderman on his election in 1594, he did not neglect city politics. He was a common councillor of Broad Street ward from 1576 onwards, an active committee man, and governor of St Thomas's Hospital from 1590 to 1602. He was equally active in company affairs, first serving as warden in 1570 at the unusually young age of thirty, and reaching the office of master in 1590-91. Perhaps he was impatient with city feasting; in 1570 he sought to escape the obligation to provide his fellow liverymen with two quarter dinners, but offered to wainscot the company's armoury instead. He was one of those merchant princes who, probably because he was never a merchant adventurer, retained the confidence of the artisan clothworkers, who turned to him for support in their campaign against merchants exporting undressed cloth. 
In July 1605 a letter to Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury (to whom he seems to have been quite close), complaining about the decay of the Levant trade he had done so much to foster, Staper noted that 'I am old and almost past trade; I have but one son left' (TNA: PRO, SP14/15, fol. 4). But there are few indications that he was winding down his commercial enterprises in later years. He was a founder member of the East India Company with a subscription of $800 in 1599; about the same time only five merchants are listed as having more factors than Staper in the Levant; he was presumably the Mr Staper with whom the astrologer Simon Forman discussed the affairs of Virginia over dinner in 1604; and in his will he refers to 'divers adventures to come in which were in foreign countries or on the seas' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/112, fol. 121'v'). 
Staper died suddenly on 30 June 1608 while taking supper. He had asked that he be buried in the church of St Martin Outwich 'under my father's stone upon which I will there be a memory made both of my father and me' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/112, fol. 120). In the event Staper stole the show. The monument, which was later moved to St Helen, Bishopsgate, recorded that: 'he was the greatest merchant in his time, the chiefest actor in discovery of the trades of Turkey and East India: a man humble in prosperity, painful and ever ready in the affairs public, and discreetly careful of his private, a liberal housekeeper, bountiful to the poor, an upright dealer in the world, and a devout aspirer after the world to come, much blest in his posterity and happy in his and their alliances (Stow, 188)'. 


@@@@@


doc= 49970


Robert Thorne the younger (1492-1532), merchant, followed his father into the international trade of Seville and Bristol, investing heavily in the woad trade from the Azores and the Canary Islands as well as in pearls, which he bought at Venice and stored in two trunks until his death. In 1523 Thorne the younger became MP for Bristol. On his father's death he inherited $60, much plate, and a home in Seville. His Sevillian business invested 1400 ducats in Sebastian Cabot's ill-fated voyage to the River Plate in 1526-30, also sending two Englishmen, Roger Barlow (died 1554) and Henry Latimer, as skilled pilots. Although Barlow returned from La Plata with an unfavourable account and the syndicate refused further funds, Robert Thorne kept faith with Roger Barlow. 


@@@@@


doc= 49974


Simms, George Otto (1910-1991), Church of Ireland archbishop of Armagh, was born in Dublin on 4 July 1910, the third of the four children of John Francis Arthur Simms, of Combermore, Lifford, co. Donegal, crown solicitor for co. Tyrone, and his wife, Ottilie Sophie, 'nee' Strange (1879-1960). His mother had been born in Australia, the daughter of Otto Georg Christian Strange, a professor of music. The family returned to Germany on the death of her mother, and she was educated in Germany and England; she married Simms's father in 1903. The Simms family had been resident in co. Donegal since the seventeenth century. J. F. A. Simms was scholarly, gracious, kind, and deeply involved in the life of the Church of Ireland, a member of the general synod and legal assessor to the bishop of Derry and Raphoe. 
Simms attended the Prior endowed school in Lifford, beside the family home (1915-20). In May 1920 he went to St Edmund's School, Hindhead, Surrey, where W. H. Auden was head boy, and where Simms himself was also later head boy. There he showed a strong propensity for classics. In 1924 he entered Cheltenham College on winning a scholarship. He took an enthusiastic part in all aspects of college life, including sport, scholarship, and social and cultural activities. He considered ordination seriously at this time. In January 1929 he entered Trinity College, Dublin, to read classics, ancient history, and political science. He was elected a foundation scholar in classics in 1930 and was awarded the Berkeley gold medal for Greek, the vice-chancellor's Latin medal, and the Booke prize for classics. He won a double moderatorship in 1932, then won a theological exhibition and graduated BD in 1935. He was ordained deacon in the Church of Ireland on 25 March 1935 for the assistant curacy of St Bartholomew's parish, Dublin, where Walter Cadden Simpson, a strong Oxford Movement Christian socialist, was vicar. In 1938, at the invitation of Eric Abbott, supported by William Temple, he became chaplain of Lincoln Theological College. There he developed his interest in modern European theology, assisted by his fluency in German and French, and made many long-lasting friendships in the Church of England. 
In 1940 Simms returned to Ireland as dean of residence (chaplain) at Trinity College, Dublin. He transformed this office into a vital part of university life, having an effective ministry to the whole university by force of his personality and commitment. He augmented his salary of $212 p.a. by lecturing in theology and examining in classics. In 1943 he was appointed chaplain-secretary of the Church of Ireland Training College (for primary teachers). His fluency in the Irish language was vital for this post. He carried a very heavy burden of work which was necessary in later years to support a growing family, having married, in September 1941, Mercy Felicia Gwynn (1915-1998), a lecturer in Italian at Trinity College and daughter of Brian James Gwynn, of Temple Hill, Terenure, Dublin. The Gwynns were a family of distinguished scholars who, like the Simms, had settled in co. Donegal in the seventeenth century. Simms and his wife -- who were to have three sons and two daughters -- shared a strong commitment to the social expression of Christianity. During the difficult war years Simms kept alive a strong Christian witness in Trinity College, organizing reading parties, conferences, and missions, and promoting ecumenism through the Mercier Society, a group of Anglican and Roman Catholic scholars which flourished in Dublin in the 1940s. Tall, handsome, with elegant classical features, Simms grew skeletally thin, kinder if possible and holier, as he flew from one commitment to another on a ramshackle bicycle in the midst of Dublin traffic, a well-known and greatly loved figure in university, church, and the city. While chaplain at Trinity College he commenced his life's scholarly work. He collated the manuscript of the 'Book of Kells' and wrote the introduction for a facsimile edition (3 vols., 1950-51) as joint editor with Ernest Henry Alton (provost of Trinity College) and Peter Meyer. Simms was awarded the degree of PhD by Trinity College for his work on the 'Book of Kells' in 1950 and an honorary DD degree in 1952. More than a dozen of his later published works were on the 'Book of Kells' and other early Irish manuscripts (including the 'Book of Durrow'), and on figures from the early Irish church, such as St Patrick, St Brendan, and St Columba. 
In 1951 Simms was appointed dean of Cork; he was installed on 16 April 1952. He immediately opened up St Fin Barre's Cathedral to the public, and published a monograph and guide to it. In October 1952 he was elected bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross. His energy was prodigious. He organized a diocesan conference in Cork city hall which attracted in excess of 2000 people per night for five nights. Henry Robert McAdoo, who succeeded him as dean, described Simms's episcopate as 'a sort of springtime in the diocese' ('The Independent', 23 Nov 1991). In 1953 he commenced writing a weekly article on spiritual matters for the 'Irish Times', 'Thinking aloud', which he continued to write for thirty-eight years. 
In December 1956 Simms was elected archbishop of Dublin and primate of Ireland. He was enthroned in Christ Church, Dublin, on 25 January 1957. His election was widely welcomed by all denominations and by all sections of the state and the community in Ireland, he being perceived as representing a new generation of the Church of Ireland. He played a major part in each of the Lambeth conferences which he attended, in 1958, 1968, and 1978. In 1958 he was chairman of the liturgy committee, the report of which was very well received. His wisdom and dexterity in ecumenical matters won the admiration of Archbishop Michael Ramsey, who appointed him co-chairman of the Anglican-Roman Catholic international commission on the theology of marriage and its application to mixed marriage. In 1975 this committee produced a report indicating constructive ways ahead, some of which were adopted and implemented. In 1963 he attended the Toronto Anglican Congress, and in July 1963 he represented the Church of Ireland at the fourth assembly of the World Council of Churches in Uppsala. His contribution at both conferences was widely reported and appreciated. His activity in the Church of Ireland was also noteworthy. He was instrumental in establishing ecumenical conferences and he revived unity talks with the Methodists and Presbyterians. Together with his wife, he helped establish the Church of Ireland marriage counselling service, which soon became non-denominational and state funded. He also helped to establish a central advisory council of training for the ministry and a new election process for bishops. He chaired the liturgical advisory committee for eighteen years. He also chaired the advisory committee on administration which produced a radical and far-reaching report in 1967, which, however, did not find the support of the general synod. 
In July 1969 Simms was elected archbishop of Armagh and primate of all Ireland. He was enthroned in St Patrick's Cathedral, Armagh, on 25 September 1969. Northern Ireland was by then in the grip of political turmoil and violence. Simms spent himself in every endeavour to restore peace in the province, to the point of exhaustion: visiting riot areas in Belfast, making a television appeal, preaching in churches throughout Northern Ireland, and writing pastoral letters. On the most dangerous missions and in the most dangerous areas he always refused police protection, as he felt that it could interfere with his pastoral freedom and credibility. It was said that 'in all his years in Armagh the hostility he encountered was rarely from Roman Catholics, but rather from extreme Protestants' ('The Times'). During this troubled and dangerous period he never neglected the burden of the administration of the whole of the Church of Ireland, and his wider remit on international and inter-church bodies. He kept a peaceful mind in the midst of turmoil through prayer and meditation. He retired in February 1980. Basil Blackshaw's portrait of him (1979), which was later hung in the Alexander Synod Hall in Armagh, shows him careworn and tired, in comparison with other portraits from his early days as archbishop of Dublin. 
Simms retired to live in a semi-detached house in Terenure, Dublin. There he enjoyed good health and an extensive programme of ministry, conducting quiet days, taking services to assist clergy, and, at the request of his successors, remaining president of the Sunday School Society; president of the Association for Promoting Christian Knowledge; chairman of the board of 'Search' (a theological journal); a member of the religious education curriculum committee of the general synod Board of Education; and president of the Leprosy Mission. He enjoyed occasional commissions as lecturer on a Swan Hellenic tour, and lectured extensively in Germany in 1983 while representing the Church of Ireland at the Lutheran quincentennial celebrations. In retirement he was also able to return to his first love -- the early history and great religious manuscripts of the Irish church. Among his many books were 'Irish Illuminated Manuscripts' (1980), 'In my Understanding' (an exploration of the spiritual wisdom of the Celtic church, 1982), and biographies of Brendan the Navigator (1989) and St Patrick (1991). He wrote or co-operated in writing several parish histories. He also wrote innumerable articles in theological journals, mainly on subjects related to Celtic spirituality. He kept up a correspondence by letter with friends, fellow scholars, pupils, and people he met incidentally, in several languages. Communicating by letter was a great part of his faithful ministry. He continued to give his greatly appreciated illustrated lectures on the 'Book of Kells' to the end of his life, by which time he had given more than 450 lectures all over the world. He brought a freshness and enthusiasm to each one. He died after a brief illness at the Meath Hospital, Dublin, on 15 November 1991, and was survived by his wife and five children. His ashes were interred in the churchyard of St Maelruan's parish, Tallaght, co. Dublin, after cremation on 23 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 49976


Fonseca, Alvaro da (1657?-1742), diamond merchant, was born in Lisbon, the second of three children of Manuel Alvares and Brites Gomes. His full name was probably Alvaro da Fonseca Alvares. The family were New Christians from Trancoso in northern Portugal. In 1667 his uncle and namesake was arrested by the Coimbra Inquisition and convicted of Judaizing. Fear of the Inquisition forced the family to leave Portugal. Fonseca converted to open Judaism, probably in Amsterdam, and took the name of Jacob Jessurun. In 1673 he settled in London as a merchant, using the name Jacob Jessurun Alvares; he paid the synagogue $4 10's'. in consulage or 'imposta', which, at 1's'. per $100, implies a trading turnover of $9000. On 6 May 1674 he married Sarah, daughter of Isaac Henriques Faro, at the Portuguese Synagogue in Amsterdam. They had one son, Isaac Jessurun Alvares ('c'.1675-1711). In 1675 Fonseca was endenizened as an English subject. In 1676 he was the fourth highest contributor to the synagogue 'imposta', paying $32 4's'. 7died, which implies a year's turnover of $64,400. The ledger of Manuel Levy Duarte of Amsterdam shows that Fonseca bought polished diamonds from Amsterdam for resale in London. He is listed in the 'Little London Directory' of 1677 as Jacob Jesrum Alvarez in St Mary Axe. In 1677 he was elected treasurer of the Portuguese Synagogue in London and acquired the copyhold of their cemetery at Mile End, which he held as a trustee until 1736. From 1675 to 1679 he figures in the port books as one of the seven most active London Jewish merchants. In 1680 he was in partnership with Abraham do Porto. 
In that year the East India Company sought to monopolize the diamond trade. This induced Simon Henriques and Alfonso Rodrigues, diamond importers in London, to open a branch house in India outside the company's jurisdiction. In 1682 they sent their brother Bartholomew Rodrigues, their brother-in-law Domingo do Porto, and Fonseca out to India on the interlopers' ships. Fonseca left his wife and son in London and was not to see them again for nineteen years. After an unsuccessful attempt to enter Masulipatam, they settled at Covelong, 20 miles south of Madras. The East India Company's directors reacted quickly to this well-organized competition. They threw open the trade in diamonds, pearls, and other 'fine goods', and instructed the council in Madras to allow the Jewish merchants to settle and trade at Fort St George, which they did. In 1686 the Dutch East India Company responded by allowing Abraham do Porto and two other Portuguese Jewish merchants to settle at Surat. The English company reacted by reducing their 'permission' rates for aliens and by setting up the corporation of Madras with an English mayor and 120 burgesses and twelve aldermen: three Englishmen, three Hindus, three Portuguese Catholics, and three Jews. Fonseca was sworn as an alderman of Madras in 1690, in succession to Domingo do Porto, who had died. He traded to Bengal, Burma, and the Philippines, and finally returned to London in 1700. 
On first meeting him then, Sir John Chardin wrote to his brother Daniel in Madras that Fonseca seemed to him to be an honest man of good commerce. Thomas Pitt, the governor of Fort St George, was of the same opinion, referring to him as 'Mr Alvares', and addressed him cordially as 'Dear Sir and Friend'. When Pitt's famous 426 carat diamond was sent to London, Fonseca refused to accept its consignment, but advised Robert Pitt on how to have it cut and polished and to market its offcuts. In London he traded in partnership with Roger Bradyll and became a leading London importer of Indian diamonds. In 1709 the company fined them for smuggling. He served six times as a warden of the Portuguese Synagogue in Bevis Marks (in 1702, 1707, 1712, 1716, 1720, and 1726). He died in London in 1742 at the age of eighty-five and was buried on 16 November next to his wife, Sarah (died 1723), in its old cemetery at Mile End. Fonseca was a prominent member of the group of Jewish diamond merchants who were forced to flee Portugal and who diverted this profitable trade from Lisbon to London. 


@@@@@


doc= 49982


Meinertzhagen, Daniel (1915-1991), merchant banker, was born on 2 March 1915 at Blundell House, Campden Hill, Kensington, London, the eldest of the three sons of Louis Ernest Meinertzhagen, a merchant banker, of Theberton House, Leiston, Suffolk, and his wife, Gwynedd Marion, the daughter of Sir (Samuel Henry) William Llewellyn, portrait painter and president of the Royal Academy from 1928 to 1938. His father's family was of Danish origin, and had settled in Bremen, but this branch of the family had lived in England for several generations. His grandmother was a sister of Beatrice Webb, his uncle was the ornithologist and traveller Richard Meinertzhagen, and both his brothers went into the City: Luke became senior partner of the stockbroking firm Cazenove & Co. and Peter was general manager of the Commonwealth Development Corporation. 
After Eton College and New College, Oxford, where he was awarded a third in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1936, Meinertzhagen joined Lazard Brothers, a leading City merchant bank, and began by working in the gilt-edged department. During the Second World War he served with the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve and reached the rank of wing commander. On 12 November 1940 he married Marguerite Josephine ('b'. 1913/14), the daughter of Albert Edward Leonard, a solicitor. They had two sons. 
After the war Meinertzhagen went back to Lazards, where he was appointed managing director in 1954 and a partner in 1955. In January 1957 he organized the sale of the 'Financial Times' to S. Pearson & Son Ltd, after his brother Luke advised Oliver Crosthwaite-Eyre, whose family controlled the 'Financial Times', and who was involved in a dispute with the chairman, Brendan Bracken, to sell the paper and spread his capital over a wider range of investments. Lazards was the merchant banking arm of Pearsons, and Meinertzhagen was able to arrange for Pearsons to buy a controlling interest in the 'Financial Times' before it was generally known that the paper was for sale. 
Meinertzhagen became director of a number of City companies and companies for which Lazards acted, including Trolloppe and Colls, the Costain Group, and Alexanders Discount. He advised Rootes Motors on its merger with Chrysler in the 1960s, and when Lord Poole, chairman of Lazards, suffered a stroke in 1973, Meinertzhagen succeeded to his post. The following year he was appointed non-executive chairman of Royal Insurance, a client of Lazards. He was also chairman of Mercantile Credit, a prominent hire-purchase company. During the secondary banking crisis of 1974-5, and the collapse of the stock market, Meinertzhagen played an important part in the restoration of confidence in the secondary banks through the recovery operation mounted by the big banks: Mercantile Credit was one of the financial institutions to be helped through the crisis, with support loans to the value of $167 million. Meinertzhagen retired from the chairmanship of Lazards in 1980, but continued to advise Pearsons. He was chairman of Alexanders Discount from 1981 to 1984 and remained chairman of Royal Insurance until 1985. 
Meinertzhagen was a leading figure in the financial world from the mid-1950s until his retirement, highly respected for his wisdom and sound judgement. He loved gardening at his home in Bramshot, Hampshire, and had a fine collection of porcelain. He died of pneumonia and chronic lymphatic leukaemia at the Cromwell Hospital, Kensington, London, on 22 March 1991, survived by his wife and their two sons -- one of whom, Peter Meinertzhagen, was chairman of the stockbrokers Hoare Govett. 


@@@@@


doc= 49984


Thomas, Sir Dalby (c.1650-1711), merchant and writer, was the eldest son of William Thomas ('c'.1599-1668), a sea captain and merchant, and his second wife, Susanna ('b'. 'c'.1629), the daughter of John Dalby of Stepney, Middlesex. His father was a prominent figure in Stepney, and left him a very respectable estate, including property both there and in Berkshire. Thomas was able to advance himself further by marrying, on 9 May 1673, Dorothy ('c'.1656-1722), the daughter of John Chettle of Blandford St Mary, Dorset, a match which produced at least two offspring, a son, Dalby, and a daughter, Susanna. 
Thomas soon established himself as a colonial merchant, taking particular interest in the West Indies. In March 1688 he was granted permission to recover wrecks off the coast of Hispaniola, and the following month he was ordered to investigate the activities of treasure hunters in that area. He was also prominent as a lobbyist at court, and attempted to obtain the repeal of a new duty on sugar which threatened the livelihoods of his colleagues in the plantation trade. Failure to achieve this objective led to the publication of his first major work, 'A Historical Account of the Rise and Growth of the West Indian Colonies' (1690), which displayed a thorough knowledge of both planting and shipping. The tract championed the establishment of a common factory and credit bank to encourage the development of West Indian commerce, and also called for the creation of a council of trade composed of experienced merchants, rather than the peers and gentry who dominated the lords of trade. 
Having displayed great energy in the cause of the colonists, Thomas found further opportunities for expounding his views on mercantile affairs. Alongside Hugh Chamberlain, he put forward one of the many schemes for the revival of the English fishing industry, which, it was later claimed, received the approval of a Commons select committee appointed in January 1692 to review the matter. In December 1693 they made another attempt to impress parliament, publishing 'A Proposal... for the Erecting and Managing of a Trade by a General Fishery', as well as 'A Supplement'. Thomas again argued for the creation of a bank to encourage commercial development, although on this occasion his scheme was to be founded on landed securities. However, the scheme was not adopted. 
Thomas found greater success in the pursuit of personal advancement. In March 1694 he gained appointment as a commissioner for the 'Million Act' lottery, in which capacity his name appeared twice more in print the following year with advertisements concerning the exchange of blank tickets. It has also been suggested that he may have been the author of another publication of 1695, 'Some Thoughts Concerning the Better Security of our Trade and Navigation' (Appleby, 177). In that year he was given co-responsibility for the collection of the glass duties, and his familiarity with government revenue probably encouraged him to draft the 'Propositions for General Land Banks', in which he betrayed a deep antipathy to the 'monied directors' at the recently created Bank of England. Not surprisingly, he was one of the commissioners appointed in 1696 to receive subscriptions for the new land bank, but the experiment failed through lack of investment. He met with further disappointment in 1697 when his bid to administer the leather duties was rebuffed, but he was chosen to manage the 'Malt Act' lottery, and to oversee the collection of the stamp taxes. 
In June 1698 Thomas was again at the forefront of national debate on trade when he appeared at Westminster on behalf of the Royal African Company. The following year he was appointed an assistant of that company, his experience of the West Indian slave trade an obvious recommendation for that post. Although prominent in the City, he soon found himself humbled before the Commons, who questioned him on 25 February 1699 concerning rumours that bribes had been paid to MPs to obstruct the passage of a bill to ban the distilling of spirits from corn. After prevaricating under interrogation before the house, he was found guilty of complicity in the scandal and placed in the custody of the serjeant-at-arms, presumably for the rest of the session. He was no stranger to controversy, having been arraigned on charges of manslaughter several years before. Disgrace before parliament was doubtless a factor behind the subsequent curtailment of his career in government finance, and his reputation was further tarnished by allegations that he embezzled public funds. In early 1700 he was preoccupied with setting his estate in order and obtaining the passage of a private act to sell off the Islington lands which he had settled on his marriage. Such a move may have reflected temporary financial difficulties, perhaps linked to his decision to take up residence in Low Leyton, Essex. He was undoubtedly most eager for favour at the court of Queen Anne, and petitioned in June 1702 to become a commissioner of prizes. However, despite a reminder to the new ministry that he was 'long conversant in business', he did not secure the post, and such failure may have led him to accept the potentially hazardous office of agent-general of the African Company on the Gold Coast (Shaw, 17.40). Whether he was motivated by greed (the post carried an annual salary of $1000) or pride, the appointment brought him the recognition of the queen, who knighted him on 1 August 1703, shortly before his departure for Africa. 
Even for a businessman of Thomas's experience and qualities, the Gold Coast proved too great a challenge. The company's position was already undermined by interloping English traders, while foreign competition and native unrest conspired to render his task impossible. His correspondence back to England demonstrated the obduracy with which he met these difficulties, but he was forced to trade with the English free merchants, such was the weakness of the company's settlements. He was bitterly criticized for this, and for other aspects of his governance, but some of his initiatives were astute, most notably his alliance with the Asante. One of his last letters back to England, written in September 1710, was later published to alert parliament to the desperate plight of the company, but Thomas did not live to see any improvement in its affairs. He died at his post in 1711, and by his will, proved in May 1711, left the bulk of his estate to his wife. His son, Dalby, who served as a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, did not long survive him, but his widow lived until 1722, and his daughter, Susanna, until 1731. Both women were buried at Hampton, Middlesex, where Susanna had displayed her piety by erecting a new vicarage. 


@@@@@


doc= 49985


Stern, (Joseph) Peter Maria (1920-1991), German scholar, was born into a Catholic-Jewish family at Prague on 25 December 1920. He was the son of Gustav Stern, economist, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Bondy (died 1939). His father, who had fought in the Czech legion in the First World War, later worked for the United Nations. Only Czech was spoken at home, and Peter was educated at Czech schools, in Prague and at the Comenius School in Vienna, though he began to learn German at the age of eleven. After German troops entered Prague in March 1939, Stern's father travelled to London to make arrangements to receive the rest of his family; his mother and her brother and his wife, however, could not bear the prospect of leaving, and chose suicide. His grandparents died in Theresienstadt concentration camp, but his half-sister Ilsa (born to his mother in a previous marriage) survived the ghetto at Lodz. Stern himself narrowly escaped by crossing into Poland on foot. Having obtained a British visa at Katowice, he travelled in a sealed train to Gdynia where he caught the last boat to England, and rejoined his father in London. 
Having arrived with not a word of English, Stern set about acquiring mastery of it, listening intently to the orators at Speakers' Corner in Hyde Park and even speaking there himself. He completed his education at Barry County School for Boys in Glamorgan (1939-40), which must have been a very different milieu from cosmopolitan Prague and Vienna. In 1940 he planned to study economics at the London School of Economics (LSE), but when the LSE was evacuated to Cambridge he chose instead to read German and Russian, with Sanskrit, at St John's College. In 1941 he volunteered for the Czech army but soon became a 'tail-end johnny', a rear-gunner, in a Wellington bomber of the Czech squadron of the RAF. In September 1942 he was shot down over the Atlantic: severely wounded, he lost half his left hand and spent fourteen hours in a rubber dinghy before being picked up by a small British vessel returning from a secret operation in France. In 1943 he returned to Cambridge, and the following year he married a fellow student, Sheila Frances McMullan, daughter of Joseph Patrick and Frances McMullan; they had two sons and two daughters. Sheila Stern taught French at Cambridge. 
Stern graduated in 1945 and took his MA degree in 1947. He trained as a teacher, but with financial assistance from his father he embarked on academic research under A. H. J. Knight and Michael Oakeshott. He received his PhD degree in 1949 for a study of the eighteenth-century Anglophile scientist and aphorist Georg Christoph Lichtenberg, which he eventually rewrote and published as 'G. C. Lichtenberg: a Doctrine of Scattered Occasions' in 1959. Stern's affinity to Lichtenberg expresses itself in some measure in his own work, for Stern's writing had 'the density of the extended aphorism, and must therefore be read closely' (Robertson, 249). Throughout his career Stern continued to be concerned with German thinkers who had found an audience in England, whether Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Spengler, or Freud. This period in Cambridge in the late 1940s was marked by Stern's somewhat prickly friendship with the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, who tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade him that it was his moral duty to return to Czechoslovakia. The relationship was bound to fail in the long run. Stern himself recalled: 'There is no philosopher fuller of metaphors than Wittgenstein, but there is no account of metaphor 'anywhere' in his work. Our own relationship broke apart on a metaphor. I had some idea about Lichtenberg and rushed around to see him one Saturday morning. [He] was very angry... 'Look here, Stern', he said, 'the difference between us is this: You are like the golfer cutting about and driving balls into the woods. I am the skulker on the margin, looking for the balls people like you have lost. We have completely different approaches.' (J. P. Stern, 'The Dear Purchase', xiv)' To which Stern replied, 'Yes, but the golfers are the people who are playing the game'. Wittgenstein refused to greet him thereafter, yet, as Stern's last book, 'The Dear Purchase', made clear, Wittgenstein's influence on his own thinking remained profound. 
After a brief spell teaching at Bedford College, University of London, from 1950 to 1952, Stern returned to Cambridge. In 1954 he was elected a fellow of St John's, where he directed studies in modern languages, and in 1957 he was promoted from assistant university lecturer in German to a full university lectureship. He left Cambridge in 1972 to become professor of German at University College, London, a post he held until his retirement in 1986. It was a testimony to his pre-eminence in his field that he should have been elected to the oldest chair of German in Great Britain. From 1981 to 1985 he served as honorary director of the University of London Institute of Germanic Studies. He held numerous prestigious appointments, and various visiting professorships between 1958 and 1989 (at New York, Berkeley, Buffalo, Virginia, Gottingen, Williamstown, and Vienna). He was fellow at the Center for Humanities at Wesleyan University in 1972, and professor-at-large, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, from 1976 to 1982. He was British Academy master mind lecturer in 1978. He was awarded the Goethe medal by the Goethe Institut, Munich, in 1980, the same year as he received the Alexander von Humboldt research prize. In 1975 he was awarded the LittD degree of the University of Cambridge, and in 1988 was elected a member of the Academy of Sciences at Gottingen. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1990. 
Stern was remarkably widely read in world literature. Although he was essentially a literary critic, his work linked literature with both philosophy and history. He wrote and lectured indefatigably, making use of the 'longueurs' of dreary meetings to write his next lecture, article, or book longhand on blocks of yellow lined paper. His earliest publications were his own 'Ernst Junger: a Writer of our Time' and translations of R. W. Meyer, 'Leibnitz and the Seventeenth-Century Revolution', and H. E. Holthusen, 'R. M. Rilke: a Study of his Later Poetry' (all 1952). One of his major concerns was nineteenth-century German literature, and his magisterial 'Re-Interpretations: Seven Studies in Nineteenth-Century German Literature' (1964, repr. 1981) was followed by 'Idylls and Realities: Studies in Nineteenth-Century German Literature' (1971) and 'On Realism' (1973, rev. German version, 1982), a book in which Wittgenstein's influence was very evident. 'Nietzsche' appeared in the 'Fontana Modern Masters' series in 1978, and 'A Study of Nietzsche' came out in 1979, with a revised German version in 1982. For 'Nietzsche on Tragedy' (1981), written jointly with Michael Silk, he was awarded the J. G. Robertson prize of the University of London. He was fascinated by how Hitler had risen to prominence through the power of his rhetoric: his 'Hitler: the Fuhrer and the People' (1975, 3rd edn, 1990) was outstandingly successful, and was translated into German, Japanese, French, and Czech. 
Stern wrote innumerable contributions for academic and more popular journals and newspapers, both British and German. Several of his best pieces, dealing with politics, philosophy, language, and literature and evoking a remarkably vivid picture of a now fading world, he selected for publication in a volume on central Europe, 'The Heart of Europe: Essays on Literature and Ideology' (1992). This was dedicated to the memory of his friend and colleague Erich Heller (1911-1990), whom he had first met on the quayside at Gdynia in 1939, and who had influenced him greatly in his early years at Cambridge, especially through his book 'The Disinherited Mind' (1952). One of the essays in the book, 'A crisis of identity', contained some moving recollections of his family, but in general Stern was a private man, not much given to autobiography, though all his writings bore the stamp of what he called 'the weightiness of lived experience' ('On Realism', 1973, 20). 'The Heart of Europe' showed how Stern was simultaneously attracted and disturbed by the problematic German and central European culture, and these issues were also central to his last book, 'The Dear Purchase' (1995), the culmination of thirty years' work. The underlying idea of 'the dear purchase', which he traced back in particular to Nietzsche, was that man needed to be redeemed, but could only be so through the most rigorous exercise of the will and even then might still fail. He argued that German literature of the first half of the twentieth century was 'dominated by a morality or moral theology of strenuousness which also makes its appearance in politics' (Stern, 'Dear Purchase', 382). He saw this theme as providing common ground for such writers as Thomas Mann, Robert Musil, Ernst Junger, Hans Carossa, Stefan George, Georg Trakl, Rainer Maria Rilke, Gottfried Benn, Bertolt Brecht, Hermann Hesse, and Franz Kafka, authors whose ideologies appeared to be so widely divergent. Stern belonged to a generation that, repelled by the descent of Germany into barbarity, did not find the reading of German literature easy, and he found himself questioning his earlier assumption that the politics of the era could be separated from its literature. 
Stern was an inspiring teacher, a man of fearsome intellect, and a severe critic. Yet he was approachable and remarkably kind. He took it in good part when he was lampooned in 'Private Eye' for riding to hounds like an archetypal English gentleman -- he was in fact the most unpompous of men. Although some of his friends and acolytes saw it as a slight that he was never given a chair in Cambridge, he was modest and private enough not to show whether it rankled with him. He died of pancreatic cancer at his home, 83 Barton Road, Cambridge, on 18 November 1991, and was buried that month in Cambridge. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 49986


Stewart, Andrew (1907-1991), broadcasting executive, was born at 49 Benview Street, Glasgow, on 23 June 1907, the only son of James Stewart, railway clerk, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' McCheyne. He was educated at North Kelvinside secondary school, Glasgow, and at the University of Glasgow, where he took his MA in French language and literature. He was prominent in his school dramatic society, and after leaving university he worked briefly as an actor and assistant stage manager with the Scottish National Players, then under the direction of Tyrone Guthrie. It was on Guthrie's recommendation that he went to London to see John Reith, general manager of the British Broadcasting Company. The nineteen-year old Stewart saw him in his office at Savoy Hill and, after being quizzed for an hour, was told he was appointed a programme assistant in Glasgow. Apart from a short break during the war he went on to serve the BBC for nearly forty-two years. On 17 April 1937 he married, at Sherbrooke church, Glasgow, Agnes Isabella Burnet (Lily) McKechnie (1905-1991), daughter of James McKechnie, managing director of a general warehouse, and his wife, Jessie, 'nee' Murdoch. There were no children of the marriage. 
Stewart's early progress was swift: he was appointed Scottish programme director, based in Edinburgh, at the age of twenty-eight. When war came he was anxious to take a commission in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. Two days before he was to join them at Maryhill barracks, Glasgow, he was seconded to the Ministry of Information. There he worked again with Sir John Reith, during his brief tenure as minister of information. Stewart admired him inordinately. After Winston Churchill had decided to replace Reith with Duff Cooper, Stewart left the ministry, in May 1941, and rejoined the BBC as programme director in Glasgow. 
Promotion came in 1948 when Stewart was appointed controller, Northern Ireland. Within the BBC the Belfast posting was not thought of highly and he was at first reluctant to go, but as a staunch Presbyterian he went down well in Northern Ireland and won the respect of the Unionist establishment, so much so that on one occasion he was invited by Sir Basil Brooke, the prime minister of Northern Ireland, to attend a cabinet meeting when broadcasting was discussed. Unlike Scotland and Wales, which had national broadcasting councils, Northern Ireland had only an advisory council. Even at that time -- the early 1950s -- broadcasting in Northern Ireland faced special stresses, and independent reporting from London on issues within Ulster was almost impossible because of local sensibilities. 
In 1953 Stewart was promoted to one of the most senior posts within the BBC as controller, Home Service, based at Broadcasting House in London. There were then three national radio programmes -- the Home, the Light, and the Third -- and there was still a BBC monopoly. Radio, boosted by its immense achievements during the war, was the senior partner, with television regarded as an upstart. Stewart was an austere man with a strong sense of hierarchy; for him Reith's currency was 'still the only legal tender' (Bridson, 227). He insisted on high standards, but in spite of his somewhat cold, unbending manner he was liked and respected by many within Broadcasting House. But change was not far away: commercial television arrived in 1955, and suddenly the BBC had to be competitive. Stewart's hopes of succeeding Sir Ian Jacob as director-general diminished; this was not the time for the BBC to be led by an instinctively cautious man. 
In 1957 Stewart went back to Scotland as controller. The Scottish National Council of Broadcasting greeted this news 'with acclamation' but suggested that he should be promoted to director, Scotland. This was rejected by the board of governors as 'invidious', but the board emphasized that going back to Scotland would not prejudice his chances for future promotion. Nevertheless Stewart returned to Glasgow a disappointed and, in the view of many, a bitter man. His relationship with the man appointed (in 1959) director-general, Hugh Carleton Greene, was frosty. Stewart took with him to Broadcasting House, Glasgow, the desk that Reith had used as the BBC's first director-general. His leadership had echoes of his old master: firm, unbending, and out of sympathy with the spirit of the 1960s. On occasion he differed from his colleagues in the south on issues such as 'moral standards in television programmes'. He told the board of governors that he was opposed to broadcasting the film 'Hiroshima mon amour' because in his view 'a particular sequence' made it unsuitable. The director-general argued that showing the film at 9.25 p.m. was justified by its 'acknowledged artistic value' (Briggs, 366). When a member of staff suggested to Stewart that Scotland might follow the example of the BBC West Region with its pioneering specialization in wildlife programmes his reply was: 'No, we are a nation' ('The Independent', 21 Dec 1991). The service continued as before, reflecting the wide range of Scottish interests. 
When Stewart was due to retire, having reached the age of sixty, Alasdair Milne was named his successor. An arrangement was made whereby Milne would take up residence in Glasgow and start work with the BBC there before taking over as controller on Stewart's official retirement date of 1 July 1968. In the event he took over on 1 January 1968 because Sir Hugh Greene learned that Stewart would join Scottish Television (STV), the BBC's commercial rival, as a director. Greene asked him to go at once. Stewart remained on the board of STV until 1977. He was also chairman of the Films of Scotland Committee, a governor of the National Film School, and chairman of the Scottish Music Archive. There was one other distinction in his retirement: when Lord Reith became lord rector of Glasgow University he invited Stewart to be his assessor. The LLD conferred on him by the university in 1970 was regarded as a well-deserved battle honour. He was appointed CBE in 1954. He died 5 November 1991 at his home, 36 Sherbrooke Avenue, Glasgow, from lung cancer. His wife predeceased him by a few months. 


@@@@@


doc= 49989


Stone, Sir (John) Richard Nicholas (1913-1991), economist and statistician, was born on 30 August 1913, at 19 York Mansions, Battersea, London, the only child of Sir Gilbert Stone (1886-1967) and his wife, Elsie Lawton Scott (1884-1969). His father was a barrister who became a high court judge in Madras in 1930 and was knighted by Edward VIII in 1936. After attending Cliveden Place preparatory school and Westminster School, Stone spent a happy year in India and the Far East with his parents before going to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1931 to read law. But he was unable to sustain an interest in the subject, any more than he had been enthused by classics at school. In his second year he started to read economics texts and he changed to study economics at the end of his second year in 1933 and read part two of the tripos, graduating in 1935 with a first-class degree. Even as an undergraduate Stone attempted a statistical analysis of the link between inputs of labour and capital and the output to which they gave rise. He showed this to the professor of political economy in Cambridge, A. C. Pigou, who admitted that he had no real understanding of the exercise. 
On graduating Stone joined a firm of Lloyd's brokers, C. E. Heath & Co., and on 29 May 1936 he married Winifred Mary Jenkins, known as Pix (1912/13-2000), who graduated from Newnham College in economics in the same year as Stone. But Stone did not lose touch with economics; he and his wife took over from another of his teachers, Colin Clark, the production of 'Trends'. This appeared as a supplement to the monthly 'Industry Illustrated' and provided a regular survey of data on the British economy. It was a forerunner of 'Economic Trends', one of the most important publications of the Office for National Statistics. Stone was divorced in 1940. 
The start of the Second World War led the government to recruit a large number of economists and, instead of military service, Stone was assigned to the Ministry of Economic Warfare. He was given the job of following shipping movements. As he said, it was assumed that he knew about shipping because he had worked in insurance. He was involved in tracking Italian shipping and, in May 1940 noticed that Italian ships were heading for neutral ports. He plotted the date when the last Italian ship was expected to reach port and forecast that Italy would declare war on 10 June. His forecast was correct but it offended his superiors and the Italophile part of the Foreign Office. 
However, Stone was able to move to a job more suited to his skills. In 1940 Keynes had published a classic essay on war finance, 'How to Pay for the War'. At much the same time an Oxford economist and subsequent Nobel prizewinner, James Meade, had returned from a post at the League of Nations in Geneva. Meade argued that, in order to use Keynes's framework, it was necessary to set out tables of income and expenditure for the major sectors of the economy. Only by doing this could one hope to work out where there were the spare resources needed for fighting the war, or consider how the capacity might be created. However, Meade's conceptual tables needed filling out and Stone was made available to him as an assistant to put numbers round them. 
The result was the appearance of the first national accounts for the United Kingdom. These were published as a white paper alongside the 1941 budget and formed the beginning of regular national income accounting throughout the world. Other countries had, of course, produced regular economic statistics and worked out their own measures of national income. The key contribution of Meade and Stone was to show how the various transactions in the economy were interrelated -- hence the distinction between national accounts and the concept of national income, studied by many, including Colin Clark. Meade related how Stone gradually took over the development of national accounting; he remained in the economic section of the Cabinet Office which he subsequently directed, while Stone worked in the central statistical office set up by Churchill in 1941. He also ran a research project at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research and married its secretary, Feodora Sonya Leontinoff, 'nee' Radetsky (1909-1956) on 22 November 1941. Their daughter and Stone's only child, Caroline Elizabeth Miranda, was born on 10 September 1946. 
The fact that national accounting was a data framework meant that, in 1942, it was possible for Stone to set out national accounts for the United States. In 1944 he was discussing with Canadian and United States statisticians the question of harmonizing concepts so that international comparisons of national accounts would be facilitated. In 1945 he left the civil service to become the first director of the department of applied economics in Cambridge. 
At Cambridge there were two main thrusts of Stone's research. One was the development of econometric techniques. For example, simple methods of fitting lines to data had been known for many years, but it was increasingly realized that such methods, when applied to observations for successive years or quarters, could be highly misleading. The work in Cambridge was the beginning of the development of techniques to remedy this problem and also, along with work done by the Cowles commission at Yale University, the beginning of the formal study of econometrics. Such work continues fruitfully as an increasingly distinctive branch of economics. 
The second strand continued Stone's interest in national accounts. To measure what is going on in the economy is best done with properly structured data collection systems. But Stone was interested in producing national accounts for the period before 1938 (the first year studied in his earlier work), and set about reviewing such data sources as existed so that these could be consolidated into the national accounting framework. The work, involving many other researchers, produced six volumes of data with careful descriptions of their sources. 
The first volume of this series included detailed estimates of consumer spending, item by item, for the British economy for the period 1920 to 1938. There was also a great deal of careful econometric analysis looking at influences on the composition of spending. But the data in the book gave rise to a paper which was certainly of equal importance to Stone's work on national accounting. Economists had long used the concept of utility and considered how this might be expressed as a function of the goods and services that people consume. But the concept had remained abstract and unconnected with empirical work. In 'Linear expenditure systems and demand analysis: an application to the pattern of British demand', ('Economic Journal', 255, 1954, 511-27), Stone showed that, on the one hand, with an appropriate specification of a utility function, it was possible to estimate the parameters of this function from his consumption data. These parameters depended on the sensitivity of spending patterns to price changes. On the other hand, this was the first empirical application of the concept of a representative consumer in empirical work. Both the analysis of patterns of demand derived from utility functions and the analysis of the empirical phenomena using the tool of a representative consumer became mainstays of research in economics, providing a structure for empirical work which otherwise would be limited to the analysis of regularities in the data. 
Work on international comparability of national accounts continued with a group Stone ran in Cambridge, producing reports on the structure of national accounts in 1950 and 1952 for the Organization for European Economic Co-operation (the precursor of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development). In 1953 Stone chaired the production of a more substantial United Nations report, 'A System of National Accounts and Supporting Tables'. 
Stone's work in the department of applied economics, for all its revolutionary characteristics, did not prove popular with some of his colleagues in the faculty of economics. In particular, Joan Robinson and one of his former teachers, Richard Kahn, doubted the value of his econometric work and his demand analysis. In 1955 Stone was appointed to the P. D. Leake chair of accounting and finance; accepting this chair meant giving up the directorship of the department. Stone nevertheless continued to work with a substantial group of researchers there. In the same year he was president of the Econometric Society, an international body designed to further the development of formal techniques of economic analysis. More sadly, a year later, in 1956, his wife died leaving him with their daughter to look after. 
He continued his work on the demand for goods and services, using the framework he had pioneered. One study looked at the importance of durable goods and showed a link between this and the effects of habit on the demand for non-durable goods. He was becoming increasingly interested in the link between these behavioural models and the working of the economic system as a whole. In 1959 'Social Accounting and Economic Models' appeared, showing how his consumption model could fit into a framework which represented all the transactions shown in his national accounting system. This was co-authored by Giovanna Catarina Andreina Vassilissa Croft-Murray, 'nee' Saffi ('b'. 1919), whom he married on 16 May 1960. Giovanna became a supportive partner in much of his subsequent work. 
Stone's colleague Alan Brown encouraged him to take his analysis further and in 1960 the Cambridge growth project was set up with the goal of modelling the economy in a coherent manner which was consistent both with detailed behavioural models and with the constraints imposed by the national accounting structure on the economy as a whole. This project ran for more than twenty years and gave an opportunity for a number of researchers to develop their skills while benefiting from Stone's kind encouragement. Perhaps the most widely known of this group was Mervyn King, deputy governor of the Bank of England, while Angus Deaton, who carried on Stone's work on consumer demand, also developed his own outstanding international reputation. In 1968 the project of maintaining international standards for national accounts took up Stone's time yet again. A new 'System of National Accounts' was prepared by the United Nations as a revision of the 1954 manual. Stone was the author of the first four chapters. 
While Stone continued to work on econometric problems, he developed a new interest in demographic data, with the idea that these, like economic data, could be set out in an accounting framework. This eventually led to a UN manual, 'Towards a System of Social and Demographic Statistics', published by the United Nations in 1975; the work did not have the same impact as that on economic accounting. 
Stone was appointed a knight bachelor in 1978. In 1980 he was president of the Royal Economic Society. He retired in the same year saying that it would make little difference because he had always worked most happily from his house at 13 Millington Road, Cambridge, where he and his wife enjoyed entertaining their friends. The award of the Nobel prize for economics in 1984 referred to his 'fundamental contributions to the development of national accounts'. It gave great pleasure to everyone who knew him and probably to none more than James Meade, a close friend since they had worked together in 1940. The importance of the achievement can be judged by the fact that national accounts are now only rarely attributed to Stone: they are simply taken for granted. 
Although plagued by ill health in his retirement, Stone accepted an invitation from the Banca Commerciale Italiana to give the Raffaele Mattioli lectures in 1986. His chosen subject was later published as 'Some British Empiricists in the Social Sciences, 1650-1900' (1997). He died on 6 December 1991 at his home, 13 Millington Road, Cambridge, and was buried at St Mark's Church, Cambridge, on 10 December. Thanks to the work of his wife these lovely essays covering characters such as William Petty (the first national accountant) and Florence Nightingale, who found statistics 'more enlivening than a novel', were published in 1997. One suspects that, in noting this, Stone saw reflected his own enthusiasm for empirical work built round a rigorous theoretical framework. 


@@@@@


doc= 49991


Sutcliffe, Reginald Cockcroft (1904-1991), meteorologist, was born on 16 November 1904 at Wrexham, north Wales, the third son in a family of four brothers of Ormerod Greenwood Sutcliffe (1870?-1928), manager of Wrexham Co-operative, and his wife, Jessie (died 1942), daughter of Robert Cockcroft. Both parents were from Yorkshire, where they returned soon after Sutcliffe was born, his father becoming manager of the Co-operative at Cleckheaton, between Huddersfield and Bradford. After attending the local primary school, Sutcliffe won a scholarship to Whitcliffe Mount grammar school. He was a brilliant student, excelling in mathematics and physics, becoming head boy, and captaining the school at both football and cricket. From Whitcliffe he gained a scholarship to Leeds University, where he obtained first-class honours in mathematics and was among the best four students of his year. He continued his studies for a PhD in statistics under Professor Berwick, whom he later followed to University College, Bangor. He then joined the Meteorological Office in 1927 and served in a number of posts, including four years in Malta where he worked for a time with the distinguished Scandinavian meteorologist Tor Bergeron. In Malta he married, on 25 March 1929, Evelyn Williams (1908-1998), whom he had met at Bangor. They had two daughters. 
After returning to Britain in 1932 Sutcliffe worked at a number of outstations and was to make a major impact upon meteorology with his renowned book 'Meteorology for Aviators', published in 1939. This became the standard meteorological text for Royal Air Force flight crews during the Second World War -- and hence for senior captains of Britain's civil airlines afterwards. To the British aviator of this generation the terms 'meteorology' and 'Sutcliffe' were almost synonymous. His wartime career saw him forecasting for flying operations in northern France; being evacuated to Britain just before Dunkirk; returning to southern France to forecast for operations over northern Italy; and, with the final collapse, being one of the last British servicemen to escape via the sea route through Marseilles and Gibraltar. Perhaps his greatest contribution came at 3 group headquarters, Bomber Command, with his crucial role in forecasting for bombing operations over Germany. He also participated in the discussions on forecasts for D-day. At the end of the war he became chief meteorological officer to the British forces in Germany with rank of group captain, and played a vital part in rebuilding the German meteorological service. 
Sutcliffe laid the foundations for his work on atmospheric dynamics before the war, publishing important papers during 1938-9 and somehow finding time to extend his thinking in 1942 with a fundamentally important paper written in collaboration with the little-known Belgian meteorologist O. Godart, whom he held in high regard. Vital to Sutcliffe's thinking was the use of pressure instead of height as vertical co-ordinate in the atmosphere, and his ideas attained operational usage at 3 group. His most famous publication, the seminal 'A contribution to the problem of development', appeared in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society' for 1947, during the post-war reconstruction period. He was now in the forefront of British, and indeed world, dynamical meteorologists. In subsequent reorganizations he became, in 1948, the first assistant director of forecasting research and, in 1957, the first director of research in the office's history. He was president of the Royal Meteorological Society from 1955 to 1957 and, in the wider field of the World Meteorological Organization, served as president of the commission for aerology from 1957 to 1961, president of the International Association for Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics from 1967 to 1971, and chairman of the WMO advisory committee from 1964 to 1968, making important contributions to the education and training programme. His election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1957 was widely regarded as an indication that weather forecasting had advanced to the status of a true mathematical and physical science, and could henceforth be ranked with any other branch of geophysics. 
Retirement from the Meteorological Office in 1965 did not end Sutcliffe's career. The paucity of tertiary level teaching of meteorology in Britain had always concerned him, and he now turned his attention to founding a new meteorological department at Reading University -- a task he accomplished before finally retiring from working life in 1970, handing over the reins to Professor Robert Pearce. Sutcliffe contributed two books and well over eighty publications to the literature on meteorology. His many honours included appointment as OBE in 1942 and CB in 1961. He received the Buchan prize (1950) and Symons gold medal (1955) from the Royal Meteorological Society, being elected an honorary member in 1976, and receiving the Charles Chree medal from the Physical Society in 1959. Tall and distinguished, he was a stimulating and sometimes controversial companion whose world status was shown by his obtaining the International Meteorological Organization prize in 1963, and by his election to honorary membership of the American Meteorological Society in 1975. He died at Cadmore End, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, on 28 May 1991 and was buried at Halkyn churchyard, Holywell, Flintshire, overlooking the Dee estuary. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 49993


Sutton, Denys Miller (1917-1991), art critic and journal editor, was born on 10 August 1917 at Pyne House, 64 South Side, Clapham, London, the son of Edmund Miller Sutton, a jeweller's assistant, and Dulcie Laura Wheeler, an actress. He was educated at Uppingham School and Exeter College, Oxford, where he received a third class in English in 1939 and a BLitt. On 4 July 1940 he married Sonja Klibansky ('b'. 1915/16); they later had a daughter. In the same year he joined the Foreign Office research department, where he worked for five years, and in 1945 he served as secretary of the international commission for the restitution of cultural material. In the following year, he published an anthology, 'Watteau's Les charmes de la vie', and his first biography, 'Matisse'. In 1948 he published 'Picasso, Blue and Pink Periods' and became a fine arts specialist at UNESCO, resigning after a year because of political interference. The following year was spent enjoyably as a visiting lecturer at Yale University, with publications on 'French Drawings of the 18th Century' and 'American Painting', followed by 'Flemish Painting' in 1950. These were all popular treatments. After his first marriage was dissolved, he married Gertrud Koebke-Knudson in 1952; they had a son. 
Sutton worked as an art critic for 'Country Life' and the 'Financial Times', his articles for the latter being published as 'Delights of a Dilettante' (1980); he was also a salesroom correspondent for the 'Daily Telegraph'. He continued to write books, including 'Artists in 17th Century Rome' with Denis Mahon (1955), and 'Catalogue of the French, Spanish and German Schools in the Fitzwilliam Museum' with J. W. Goodison (1960), which were more academic works. His second marriage having ended in divorce, on 3 May 1960 he married his third and last wife Cynthia Leah Abrahams, 'nee' Sassoon ('b'. 1925/6). Three impressive biographies followed: 'Toulouse-Lautrec' in 1962 and 'Titian' and 'The Art of Whistler' in 1963. 
Sutton became the editor of the arts magazine 'Apollo' in March 1962 and remained in that position for a quarter of a century, renowned for his attention to detail and his encyclopaedic knowledge of his field. The magazine, founded in 1925, was thin and dullish, but Sutton immediately expanded it, made it more attractive, and widened its scope to cover a range of contemporary issues, from the destruction of the English country house to the possible threat of capital gains tax to works of art. This enthusiastic personal vision attracted many prominent art historians, including Kenneth Clark, Graham Reynolds, Peter Thornton, and Ralph Edwards. Sutton, himself a prolific and elegant writer, filled many issues virtually alone, turning out four numbers on 'aspects of British collecting' and four on 'the world of Sacheverell Sitwell'. Entire issues were also devoted to museums throughout the world and their collections, and many museums used these as guides before they produced their own. He also wrote another, more impressive book on Whistler (1966), edited the 'Letters of Roger Fry' (1973), and published a biography of Sickert (1976). 
In addition to his editing and writing, Sutton organized some twenty exhibitions, including those on Bonnard at the Royal Academy in 1966 and on France in the eighteenth century at the Royal Academy in 1968; for the latter he collected and catalogued, with Cynthia's help, more than 1000 works of art. Other impressive exhibitions under his direction were two in Columbus, Ohio: 'British Art' in 1971 and 'Irish Art' in 1974. He also organized seven exhibitions in Tokyo, including those on Constable (1985), Whistler (1987), and Sargent (1989). 
Sutton was a dapper figure with a closely trimmed beard. He had a gregarious personality with strong opinions, an explosive temper (especially to those who did not meet his high standards), and a delightful sense of humour. Despite his busy schedule, he spent an inordinate amount of time telephoning friends and enjoying life, often at the theatre. He became wealthy and was an astute collector of art. His colleague Brinsley Ford recalled him rushing from the office to his daily swim at the Royal Automobile Club in Pall Mall before lunching at Wheeler's restaurant on three dozen oysters washed down with Muscadet or Sancerre. He also remembered Sutton for his eager pursuit of women, creating the office joke that this drove some of his secretaries to a local nursing home, nicknamed the Sutton sanatorium. 
Sutton faced a crisis in his last years, after being stricken in 1975 with cancer of the throat. After an operation to remove his larynx he began the tenacious effort of learning to use breath control to create a whispering speech. He received exceptional support from Cynthia. Colleagues were awed by his optimism, courage, and energy in those dark days as he continued to produce his magazine for another twelve years. In 1985, two years after surrendering the reins, he was made a CBE, and a year later produced his last biography, 'Degas: Man and Work' (1986). He died on 25 January 1991 at his home, 22 Chelsea Park Gardens, London. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 49998


Tovey, Douglas Arnold Robert (1908-1991), property developer, was born on 21 March 1908 in Portishead, Somerset, the son of George Arnold Tovey, ironmonger, and his wife, Lilian Mary, 'nee' Nott. He won a scholarship to the choir school at Wells Cathedral, leaving at sixteen to work as a clerk in the Great Western Railway's surveyors' office. He later became the right-hand man of the assistant chief surveyor, Reginald Scarsbrook. On 9 September 1930 he married Norah Scott ('b'. 1905/6), secretary, and daughter of Edward Scott. They enjoyed more than sixty years of a happy marriage. In 1938 Tovey moved to Edward Lotery's company, Greater London Properties -- one of London's most important developers of suburban shopping parades. He was put in charge of shop letting, bringing him into contact with Healey and Baker, Britain's leading estate agents for retail property. At the start of the Second World War, Lotery emigrated to the USA and Tovey was invited by Aubrey Orchard-Lisle of Healey and Baker to join the practice; in 1945 he was made a partner. During the following twenty years Britain experienced an unprecedented boom in commercial property development, in which he was to play a leading role. Known to colleagues as Dart -- an acronym of his initials -- he acquired a reputation for forthrightness in business, especially in his letters, which abandoned the staid style of contemporary business correspondence in favour of a hard-sell line, with the important words and phrases in capitals. His business propositions justified this bullish tone, proving key to the fortunes of several of Britain's most important post-war property entrepreneurs. 
Tovey had a remarkable flair for creating the 'big deal', which led him to play a major role in the 1950s takeover boom. He often arranged a large part of the business transactions for his clients, offering them proposals as a full package, including acquisition, occupiers, and institutional funding. His three most important clients were Montague Burton, Hugh Fraser, and Charles Clore. Burton had been one of the pioneers of leaseback finance, in which properties were sold to financial institutions to realize their value, while being simultaneously leased back to their occupiers on very long, fixed rent, leases. During the early 1950s Tovey applied this technique on behalf of Fraser and Clore to acquire entire companies that were rich in property assets. Tovey had the original idea for Clore's acquisition of the J. Sears Trueform Boot Company in 1953, establishing Clore as the leading figure of the takeover boom. This chain owned some 800 shops, the value of which was quickly realized via sale and leaseback deals, providing Clore with $10 million for further takeovers, many of which Tovey also arranged. In September 1960 Clore sent Tovey, in company with Clore's right-hand man, Leonard Sainer, to New York to purchase the biggest skyscraper he could find. He bought, from the legendary American developer Bill Zeckendorf senior, 40 Wall Street, a 71 storey, 1 million sq. ft block which, at the time, was the tallest on Wall Street. 
In the same year, while crossing the Atlantic, Tovey came up with the idea for the merger of Clore's property company, City and Central Investments, with City Centre Properties, owned by Jack Cotton, probably the most famous property developer of the 1950s. Tovey believed that merging the two property empires would avoid the duplication of effort involved in himself and Aubrey Orchard-Lisle (his fellow partner at Healey and Baker, who represented Cotton) separately searching for developments for the two companies. The merger -- which created the world's largest property company -- proved ill fated. Tensions between Clore and its other leading lights, Jack Cotton and Walter Flack, culminated in a notorious boardroom battle in which Cotton and Flack were out-manoeuvred by Clore. Both Cotton and Flack died tragically shortly afterwards, while the merged concern was eventually acquired by Harold Samuel's Land Securities. 
Tovey's career coincided with the heyday of the British property development industry, in which its leading figures were household names and lived in considerable style. This was reflected in Tovey's business and social life; he would often put forward deals for Hugh Fraser, with whom he became close friends, while on holiday with him at St Moritz in the winter or Monte Carlo in the summer. Another leading commercial estate agent, Edward Erdman, recalled that 'Douglas was exhilarating company. He had an engaging warm personality and an uninhibited flow of conversation and was a complete extrovert' ('The Independent'). Tovey was also famously superstitious: his favourite talisman was a spotted Dalmatian dog which was constantly at his side. He retired from Healey and Baker in 1968, at the age of sixty. By then he owned Highmoor Park, a 110 acre estate near Henley-on-Thames, and a house in the Bishop's Avenue, Hampstead. However, he continued to lunch at Claridge's once a week, arriving in his chauffeur-driven Rolls-Royce. He died at the Dunedin Hospital, Bath Road, Reading, on 9 July 1991, leaving an estate valued at $3,872,860. He was survived by his wife, Norah. A memorial service was held at St George's, Hanover Square, on 23 September 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 50001


Eagles, Fanny Elizabeth (1836-1907), Church of England deaconess, was born on 10 December 1836 in Bedford, the youngest of the three children of Ezra Eagles (1804-1865), solicitor, coroner, and clerk of the peace, and his wife, Elizabeth Halfhead ('c'.1804-1866). Fanny survived both her brothers, the eldest, Ezra, dying in 1862 and her younger brother, Edward, in 1900. Fanny, being a delicate baby, was baptized privately, and was later received at St Peter's Church, Bedford. Her family was staunchly Anglican in a town which had strong nonconformist connections. 
Nothing has been recorded of Fanny Eagles's early life except her confirmation at St Mary's, Bedford, by Bishop Thomas Turton of Ely in 1860. After the death of her father in 1865 and her mother in 1866, she decided to enter an Anglican sisterhood. As a member of St Paul's Church, Bedford, she had been influenced by the Revd John Donne and his successor, the Revd Michael Ferrebee Sadler, vicar since 1864. Sadler was a Tractarian who, as well as restoring the church building and introducing daily services, became a national figure within the Tractarian movement. It was he who dissuaded Fanny Eagles from joining a sisterhood and persuaded her to stay in Bedford and serve the poor there. 
Initially, Fanny Eagles went to King's College Hospital, London, to train in nursing, and thence to St Peter's Home in Brompton Square to experience life in an Anglican sisterhood. But it was as a deaconess that she chose to fulfil her vocation, and on 5 February 1869 (seven years after the admission of the first Anglican deaconess) she was admitted in the palace chapel at Ely by Bishop Harold Browne in the presence of a few friends. She then returned to Bedford to work among the poor in St Paul's parish, using her home, St Loyes, together with a stable loft in Allhallows Lane. She founded the Ely Deaconess Institution at St Loyes but this body grew very slowly. In 1870 two deaconesses were admitted but numbers never exceeded more than half a dozen (the last died in 1934). Habited like religious sisters and living in a community bound by a rule, it was very difficult to distinguish them from Sisters of Mercy. They were always known as 'sister', which added to the confusion, and in the nonconformist environment of Bedford they encountered much prejudice. 
At first the deaconesses ran Sunday schools, night schools for men and boys, guilds for young girls, and women's meetings. But in the winter of 1871-2 Bedford was struck by a smallpox epidemic. Together with Harry Hocken, curate of St Paul's, Sister Fanny went into the homes of the sick to comfort and minister. They worked day and night for three months, often going where no other ministers would venture, and they frequently had to put the dead bodies into their coffins. A few months later their work was attacked by the minister of the Bunyan Meeting and dismissed as 'mimicries of the black veil and other monastic mummeries' ('Bedford Times and Independent', 28 May 1872). Despite these difficulties Sister Fanny was described as 'always cheerful, almost indeed exuberant in spirit and with a keen sense of humour' ('Bedfordshire Mercury'). 
The work grew steadily and was assisted by the gift of a substantial house in Bromham Road, Bedford, provided by Anthony Gibbs of Bristol who had heard of her heroism in the epidemic. In 1881 the deaconess community moved from St Loyes to Bromham Road and soon afterwards Sister Fanny took in a homeless orphan girl. From this small beginning grew St Etheldreda's Home, which cared for about twenty children. In 1890 the home was extended by the addition of a chapel and refectory, and in 1907 the neighbouring house was acquired. 
Sister Fanny died peacefully at St Etheldreda's on 7 March 1907, having been seriously ill for some time. Her funeral took place at St Paul's on 11 March in the presence of a large congregation, including many poor people, and was followed by interment in the family plot at Ampthill. She was described as a 'gentle, good woman' ('Bedfordshire Mercury') whose work would long be remembered, and indeed St Etheldreda's Home continued until 1983. A friend wrote that 'Sr Fanny belonged to the same School as Harriet Monsell, Mother Susan (of St Peter's Community), Pusey and Keble' ('A Short Memoir', 25). Sister Fanny was a pioneer of women's ministry at a time when both deaconesses and religious sisters were new in the Anglican church. 


@@@@@


doc= 50002


Crealock, John North (1836-1895), army officer and artist, was born on 21 May 1836, the second son of William Betton Crealock of Langeston, Littleham, near Bideford. Educated at Rugby School, he was commissioned as ensign in the 95th (Derbyshire) regiment on 13 October 1854 and promoted lieutenant on 9 February 1855. From May 1855 to June 1856 he was inspector of musketry at Aldershot. He served with his regiment in the Indian mutiny (1858-9), and was present at the siege and capture of Kotah, Chundaree, and Gwalior, and at the battle of Kotah-ki-sarai, where he was wounded. He was mentioned three times in dispatches. On 6 May 1859 he was promoted captain and was aide-de-camp to the lieutenant-general, Bombay, from 16 December 1862 to 11 March 1864. He passed staff college in 1868. In London, on 20 May 1869, he married Marion, the daughter of Morgan Lloyd; they had three sons. 
Crealock was promoted brevet major on 5 July 1872, becoming a major in the 95th regiment on 30 March 1875. Between 1870 and 1878 he held a series of staff appointments, first as aide-de-camp to the general officer commanding the forces, headquarters, Ireland, between 1 August 1870 and 15 November 1871, then as deputy assistant adjutant-general at Aldershot from 16 November 1871 to 19 May 1875, and finally as deputy assistant quartermaster-general, intelligence branch of the army at Adair House, London, from 30 September 1877 to February 1878. 
On 25 February 1878 Crealock was appointed assistant military secretary, Cape of Good Hope, to Lieutenant-General the Hon. F. Thesiger (later Lord Chelmsford), the officer commanding in South Africa, and accompanied him to the Cape. In recognition of his services in the Cape Frontier War of 1878 he was made a brevet lieutenant-colonel on 11 November 1878. During the 1879 Anglo-Zulu War he continued on Chelmsford's personal staff and was promoted military secretary in May 1879. He served as senior staff officer to the Eshowe relief column and was slightly wounded at the battle of Gingindlovu on 2 April 1879. He was present at the battle of Ulundi on 4 July 1879 which ended the campaign. He returned with Chelmsford to England when the general resigned his command in July 1879, and was made CB on 27 November 1879. 
During his service in South Africa, Crealock had been Chelmsford's constant companion and was suspected of wielding undue influence over the general and of shielding him by withholding information. Yet he was not noted for his efficiency as military secretary nor for the legibility of his dispatches. Crealock was privately critical of the general's military capabilities, but he always staunchly defended him in public, gaining a reputation for haughtiness, facetiousness, and sharp retorts. His overbearing manner did nothing to ease Chelmsford's always difficult relations with the local colonial officials upon whom he relied for transport and supplies, and alienated many of his fellow officers. 
Promoted lieutenant-colonel in the 95th regiment on 21 July 1880 and colonel in the army on 11 November 1882, Crealock commanded his regiment (which became the 2nd battalion, Sherwood Foresters, in 1881) from 1880 to 1885 while it was deployed in Gibraltar, Egypt, and India. During the Egyptian expedition of 1882 he was commandant at Alexandria and at El Mex. Subsequently he held senior staff appointments, first as assistant adjutant-general at Aldershot from 1 April 1887 to 22 May 1890, and then from 23 May 1890 to 29 February 1892 as assistant quartermaster-general, headquarters of the army. On 24 December 1891 he was promoted major-general, and on 1 April 1892 given command of the 3rd infantry brigade at Aldershot. Crealock returned to India as major-general, Madras, first-class district commander, a post he held from 13 November 1893 until his retirement on 5 March 1895. He died at Rawalpindi on 24 April 1895. His body was brought back to England and was buried in Littleham churchyard. 
Crealock excelled at watercolour paintings and sketches, many executed while on campaign and, presumably, to the detriment of his military duties. On his death, 189 of his watercolours of the eastern Cape, Natal, and Zululand, executed during 1878-9, were given to the Sherwood Foresters Museum, Nottingham. They depict landscapes, camp scenes, forts, battles, and military and civilian personalities (both black and white) during the Cape Frontier War and the Anglo-Zulu War. They are a valuable historical record of the campaigns and of the South African countryside, besides being of pleasing artistic quality. Their detail, wit, and accurate sense of topography have been commended by historians, botanists, and geographers alike. 


@@@@@


doc= 50003


Greaves, Sir George Richards (1831-1922), army officer, was born on 9 November 1831 at Briery Close, Lowwood, Windermere, Westmorland, one of the eight children of George Greaves, a retired captain in the 60th rifles. Greaves's mother had poor health and the family went abroad in 1838, eventually settling at Gratz, with the result that three of his brothers subsequently joined the Austrian services. Greaves himself attended a number of continental day schools but, intended by his father for the Royal Artillery, returned to Quartman's preparatory school, Woolwich. The unexpected death of Greaves's sponsor left him without nomination to the Royal Military Academy, but an uncle secured nomination to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, on 13 October 1846, and Greaves was commissioned as ensign without purchase in the 70th foot on 30 November 1849. 
Greaves joined the 70th in India in October 1850, being promoted lieutenant on 16 January 1852. The routine of regimental service was alleviated by a spell as deputy assistant adjutant-general during the Usofzai expedition on the north-west frontier in 1857-8, Greaves's regiment remaining on the frontier throughout the mutiny. After becoming regimental adjutant in May 1858, Greaves married Ellen, the daughter of Brigadier-General Hutchison, on 9 July 1859. Promoted captain on 11 October 1859, Greaves next accompanied his regiment to New Zealand in January 1861, becoming deputy assistant quartermaster-general on the staff and surveying the Waikato River country. He was present at actions against the Maori at Mangatawhiri, the Gate Pa, and Weraroa Pa. Promoted to both a brevet majority and a lieutenant-colonelcy as a result of his services on 1 March 1864 and 21 March 1865 respectively, he brought part of the 70th home and, having turned down the offer of an appointment in Ceylon, became brigade major at Dover in April 1867. Greaves was then appointed deputy assistant adjutant-general at the Horse Guards on 1 June 1870, sharing an office with Garnet Wolseley. 
Greaves's particular passion in India had been sport; introduced to a form of callisthenics by a fellow officer, he had developed a powerful physique. Wolseley laid particular store on physical strength and later described Greaves as 'a good sportsman, strong and healthy in body and resolute in mind' (Wolseley, 'Story of a Soldier's Life', 2.280). However, Wolseley also added that Greaves was 'with strong opinions -- I might even add prejudices' and, in many respects, this was to become Greaves's defining characteristic to the ultimate detriment of his career. One officer wrote that Greaves was a 'short, sharp-featured individual, with a pompous and rather disagreeable manner, a loud voice, a quick temper, and a sense of his own importance which defied everything' (E. G. Parry, 'Suakin', 1885, 120). Another recalled Greaves as having 'an old-fashioned vocabulary of exceptional virulence and potency' (Younghusband, 95). Yet, he also had a roguish charm. His first wife died in 1880, but Greaves had already made the acquaintance of Julia Rose Venour, daughter of the Revd E. Morris and wife of W. Venour, the doctor of the 15th hussars. Mrs Venour was certainly Greaves's mistress by 1884, but he then took up with Mrs Rochfort-Boyd (Lady Wolseley to Wolseley, 27 Nov and 25 Dec 1884, Hove, LW/P 10/28 and 30). He married the widowed Mrs Venour in 1908; she survived him. 
Wolseley wanted Greaves as chief of staff on his Asante expedition in 1873, but the commander-in-chief, the duke of Cambridge, feared criticism if two of his staff secured the principal appointments while also claiming Greaves was too young, despite being older than Wolseley. However, the wounding of John McNeill led to Greaves, who had received a brevet colonelcy on 12 September 1872, being sent in December 1873, receiving the CB for his services. Greaves then returned to the Horse Guards as assistant adjutant-general in April 1874, serving on the Stanley committee in 1877. In July 1878 Greaves again accompanied Wolseley as chief of staff to Cyprus, succeeding him as administrator in May 1879. However, Greaves believed the island insufficiently healthy for a major British base, offending government by the forthright public expression of his views. As Wolseley was to remark, Greaves 'has yet to learn that it does not do to insert the whole truth in official correspondence' (Wolseley to Lady Wolseley, 8-13 Aug, 1879, Hove, W/P 8/19). Indeed, Greaves did not secure the KCMG for which Wolseley had recommended him until May 1881. 
Greaves escaped Cyprus in July 1879 on appointment, at Wolseley's suggestion, as adjutant-general in India, the Second Anglo-Afghan War having broken out. Cambridge had favoured T. D. Baker, but he was private secretary to the viceroy, Lord Lytton, and the commander-in-chief in India, Sir Frederick Haines, advised against any impression that the new incumbent was Lytton's nominee. Greaves, who took up his post on 30 October 1879, suggested in his memoirs that he acted as chief of staff to Haines at Lytton's request, at the same time loyally supporting Haines in his frequent clashes with Lytton. In reality, as Lytton complained, Greaves's 'incessant endeavour' was to 'get the entire control of military operations, little by little, through the CinC, into his own hands' (Lytton to Roberts, 20-21 March 1880, Roberts MSS 7101-23-37/84). Moreover, Greaves urged himself on Haines as chief of staff directing field operations while simultaneously endeavouring to prevent Haines from taking the field personally by communicating Haines's intentions to Lytton through his fellow Wolseley protege Henry Brackenbury. 
Having been promoted major-general on 25 October 1882, Greaves completed his term in India on 31 October 1884, being chosen almost immediately for the expedition to Suakin in February 1885. Wolseley had urged the appointment of either McNeill or Greaves to command, but Cambridge refused on the grounds that both were junior to the commander at Suakin, Major-General A. J. Lyon-Fremantle. The unhappy compromise was Sir Gerald Graham in command, with Greaves as chief of staff and McNeill and Fremantle each commanding a brigade. Even before they left England, Greaves was referring to Graham as a 'fiddle headed fool' (Lady Wolseley to Wolseley, 11 Feb 1885, Hove, LW/P 11/7). Sent to report on the situation after the near-disastrous action at Tofrek in March, Wolseley concluded that 'every one seemed to desire to play his own hand and to think solely of himself whilst he hated and ridiculed his neighbour' (Wolseley to Lady Wolseley, 20-27 May 1885, Hove, W/P 14/13). Indeed, Wolseley now believed Greaves could not be entrusted with more than a divisional command in future. Greaves briefly commanded at Suakin after the main expedition's withdrawal and was rewarded with the KCB in August 1885 before returning to India to command the Meerut division in November. 
Greaves was made commander-in-chief in Bombay on 14 March 1890, receiving promotion to lieutenant-general on 11 October 1890. His tenure was marked by improvements to the hospitals and barrack accommodation of Indian troops as well as the establishment of Deolali as a convalescence camp for British troops. Greaves also improved musketry standards and marked the young Douglas Haig as suitable for Staff College training. Greaves expected to succeed Roberts as commander-in-chief in India in October 1892, blaming his subsequent passing over by the much junior Sir George White on the accession of the Liberal government at home and the machinations of Roberts. However, as Brackenbury noted, Greaves's defects of character had ruled him out of consideration from the beginning: 'He is very quarrelsome & rude -- jealousy being always the cause of his rudeness' (H. Brackenbury to R. Buller, 19 July 1892, Buller MSS 2065M/SS4/27). Greaves promptly resigned his command and left India two years early on 31 March 1893. 
Greaves was promoted full general and created GCB upon his retirement in 1896, becoming honorary colonel of the East Surrey regiment in 1898 to add to that of the Bengal-Nagpur Railway volunteer rifle corps, which he had assumed in India. He settled at Netherwood, Saundersfoot, Pembrokeshire, where he died on 11 April 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 50005


Trecothick, Barlow (1718?-1775), merchant and politician, was born either at Stepney or at sea, the son of Captain Mark Trecothick, mariner, and Hannah Greenleaf. From 'c'.1724 he lived in Boston, Massachusetts, where he served as an apprentice to Charles Apthorp between 1734 and 1740. Thereafter he moved to Jamaica, and acted as the agent for Apthorp and Thomlinson for seven years. He returned to Boston, married Grizzell Apthorp, the daughter of his former master, on 2 March 1747, and remained there for three years. He settled in London about 1750 as a North American commission merchant. Among other things, he served as the London correspondent for Apthorp and Thomlinson, supplied other American merchants with European manufactures, provided food and provisions to the troops on a victualling contract he held with Thomlinson, and managed the finances of several military companies with Sir George Colebrooke and other Londoners. Like most influential merchants, he subscribed to government loans during the Seven Years' War. 
In 1764 Trecothick was elected alderman of London for Vintry ward and he held this post for ten years; in 1766 he served as London's sheriff and in 1770 as its lord mayor. In addition, from 1766 to 1774, he was employed as New Hampshire's colonial agent, acting as its advocate in Whitehall and parliament. Trecothick's best-known service occurred before he took a seat in the Commons. Throughout the 'Stamp Act' crisis in 1765 and 1766, he performed invaluable services for Rockingham and Newcastle: with other colony agents, he opposed the passage of the act; with other London merchants, he led the search for a legislative remedy in the wake of passage; he marshalled the support of American and Caribbean interests in London and the outports for repeal; and he served as an effective witness in house investigations. 
Trecothick had been proposed as MP for the City in the early 1760s but, not possessing the freedom of the City, he was not nominated. He was next considered in 1765, when the duke of Newcastle offered him the seat at New Shoreham. But he baulked at the cost of buying the support of the constituency (Newcastle mentioned $1050, in addition to the purchase of a ship from local builders), not to mention the venality of the system, and refused the seat. He was returned as one of the members for London in the election of 1768. The fight was fiercely competitive among seven candidates, some of whom openly questioned his American background and his willingness to serve as a tool of the colonies. During the next six years, until he retired with the dissolution of parliament in May 1774, he adopted a stricter attitude towards protest. For instance, he spoke warmly during the strike of the seamen and the 1768 City riots. Yet he continued to vent his outrage at what he believed to be the inept handling of American trade matters. The Boston massacre in 1770 or the subjugation of Native Americans on St Vincent in 1772 were, to Trecothick, only the latest instances of misguided despotism. Throughout his tenure he sided with the opposition. 
In 1768 Trecothick purchased an estate of 5000 acres in Addington, Surrey, for $38,500. At the same time, he acquired a share in a plantation in Grenada and several estates in Jamaica. After the death of his first wife on 31 July 1769, he married Anne Meredith, the sister of Sir William Meredith, third baronet, on 9 June 1770. From 1771 onwards, Trecothick's health failed him and, when parliament was dissolved in 1774, he stood down. He died in Addington on 28 May 1775, and was buried in the churchyard at Addington. 


@@@@@


doc= 50006


Hildyard, Sir Henry John Thoroton (1846-1916), army officer, was born on 5 July 1846, the son of Thomas Blackborne Thoroton Hildyard (1821-1888) of Flintham Hall, Newark, the Conservative MP for Nottinghamshire South (1846-52, 1866-85), and his wife, Anne Margaret, second daughter of Colonel Rochfort of Clogrenane, co. Carlow. Henry Hildyard was educated at the Royal Naval Academy, Gosport, and served as a lieutenant RN from 13 September 1859 to 28 November 1864. In 1867 he became an ensign in the 15th foot (9 March) and then the 71st foot (1 May). Promoted captain in October 1876, he graduated from the Staff College at Camberley in 1877 with special credit in German and Spanish, and he frequently contributed translations of German articles to the 'Journal' of the Royal United Service Institution. He served as brigade major in Cyprus and Gibraltar from 1878 to 1882, achieving his majority on 6 May 1882. His first major campaign was the 1882 expedition to Egypt, where he served as Sir Garnet Wolseley's deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general, and was at Qassasin and Tell al-Kebir. He was mentioned in dispatches and received the Osmanieh (fourth class). 
For the next nine years Hildyard, who became a brevet lieutenant-colonel on 18 November 1882, held a series of posts, including deputy assistant adjutant-general and assistant adjutant-general at headquarters, that reflected his growing reputation as a competent administrator and his status as a member of the Wolseley 'ring'. On 12 August 1893 he became commandant at the Staff College. According to 'The Times', 'The College had long been a byword for pedantry, but under his direction it became infused with a fresher and more practical spirit' ('The Times', 27 July 1916). He aimed to combat the old evil of cramming: 'we do not want any cramming here', he declared, 'we want officers to absorb, not to cram' (Bond, 154). He vainly tried to secure abolition of all written examinations by outside examiners. He restructured the examination system, abolishing the final examination and classifying students by their work during the course, and placed greater emphasis on the practicalities of command and staff work. The timing of his reforms was important, for many of the men who were to lead the British army in the First World War -- Haig, Robertson, and Allenby among them -- studied at Staff College in Hildyard's day. 
Hildyard left Staff College on 25 February 1898 to command 3rd brigade at Aldershot, being promoted major-general on 14 May 1899. At the outbreak of the South African War, on 9 October, he was appointed to command 2nd (or English) brigade in Methuen's 1st division. Hildyard handled his brigade competently in the defeat at Colenso (15 December 1899), and during the attempt to relieve Ladysmith made a successful attack at Rangeworthy Hills (20 January 1900). This was but a prelude to the disaster at nearby Spion Kop on 24 January. This defeat was rapidly followed by another at Vaal Krantz (5-7 February 1900). Again, Hildyard and 2nd brigade performed creditably but were let down by Buller's poor generalship. The capture of Monte Cristo by Hildyard's brigade on 18 February was an important preliminary to the relief of Ladysmith ten days later. 
Promoted lieutenant-general on 20 April 1900, Hildyard's reward for his steady if unspectacular leadership was promotion to command 5th division. Under his command it fought a series of actions, the most important being at Alleman's Nek (June 1900), where Hildyard succeeded in moving round the flank of Boer forces strongly entrenched at Laing's Nek, 'the Gibraltar of Natal', thus handing Buller an important victory. Hildyard took on further responsibilities in October, when the Natal field force was formally disbanded; he commanded both in Natal and in part of the Transvaal. He had to hold and pacify the area as the war moved into the guerrilla phase; the Boer offensive of 1901 demonstrated the essential soundness of the arrangements. 
In September 1901 Hildyard returned to Britain on leave. Mentioned in dispatches, in 1900 he had been made KCB. In 1903 he was appointed director-general of military education. In 1904 he returned to South Africa as lieutenant-general on the staff commanding troops, and from 1905 to 1908 served as general officer commanding-in-chief, South Africa. 
On 20 May 1871 Hildyard had married Annette, daughter of Admiral James Charles Prevost (1810-1891). They had three sons, two of whom entered the army. A 1903 photograph depicts an alert, striking-looking man of soldierly bearing, with the obligatory military moustache; anecdotes suggest an amiable personality. Hildyard retired in 1911, living at 20 Eccleston Square, Pimlico, London, and died on 25 July 1916 at his sister's residence, Apsley Heath House, Woburn Sands, Bedfordshire. His wife survived him. At the time of Hildyard's death the British army on the Somme was undergoing its first major experience of large-scale modern industrialized warfare, led by commanders who had benefited directly or indirectly from his reforms of Staff College. Hildyard deserves a share of the credit for that army's victory in 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 50007


Myers, William Joseph (1858-1899), army officer and collector of antiquities, was born near Primrose Hill, London, on 4 August 1858, the eldest son of Thomas Borron Myers (1826-1882) of Porters Park, near Shenley, south Hertfordshire, and his wife, Margaret Storie, daughter of Henry Melvill, canon of St Paul's Cathedral. In November 1858 Myers's father inherited the family property in Hertfordshire, and Myers spent his boyhood there. He attended private schools at Brighton and Great Malvern, and Eton College (1872-75). He went to a coach at Ehrenbreitstein on the Rhine, and after a short preparation passed into the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1877. 
Myers was commissioned second lieutenant in the 16th foot on 1 May 1878; he became second lieutenant in the King's Royal Rifle Corps (KRRC) on 19 February 1880, lieutenant on 10 November 1880, and captain on 14 March 1888. He served with the 3rd battalion in the Anglo-Zulu War from April to September 1879. From 1882 to 1887 he served in Egypt, acting as aide-de-camp to Sir Frederick Stephenson in operations of the Sudan frontier field force in 1885-6, and taking part in the battle of Giniss (30 December 1885); he was awarded the Mejidiye, fourth class. He also served in Gibraltar, Cyprus, and India. He was on the north-west frontier in 1891 with the 1st battalion, KRRC in the Hazara and Miranzai expeditions -- which included the engagements at Sangar and Mastan -- and served on the 1892 Isazai expedition. He left the regular army in 1894 and joined the KRRC 7th (militia) battalion in February 1897; he was promoted major in February 1899. He was devoted to, and a generous donor to, Eton College, and from February 1898 was adjutant of the Eton College rifle volunteers. In May they formed a guard of honour at Gladstone's funeral. 
Myers had strong artistic and musical tastes and was a keen collector. From his schooldays he collected stamps, in South Africa Zulu weapons and trophies (and the pen with which the treaty of Ulundi was signed), in Egypt oriental fabrics and carpets, and later old prints and furniture. His most important collection was of Egyptian antiquities, purchased during his service in Egypt and on private visits there. At a time when extensive excavations were flooding the market with antiquities, Myers, with the advice and assistance of the German Egyptologist Emile Brugsch of the Bulaq Museum, purchased much from dealers and villagers. Among his friends was Percy Edward Newberry (later professor of ancient history and archaeology at Cairo University) who was to catalogue Myers's collection. It was wide-ranging and idiosyncratic: Myers bought what he considered aesthetically pleasing rather than archaeologically significant. He was especially fond of faience, 'Egyptian blue', glazed steatite, and glass. His collection was among the finest in England, and in 1895 he was one of the principal contributors to the Burlington Fine Arts Club 'Exhibition of the art of ancient Egypt'. In 1898 he was elected FSA. He travelled extensively in Europe, Asia, the West Indies, and South America -- he rode across the Andes -- and attended music festivals, operatic productions, and the Oberammergau passion play. Apparently a confirmed bachelor, he was devoted to his widowed mother, and 'it has been said by those who know him best, that after his mother's death, Eton seemed in some sort to supply her place in his heart' ('Eton College Chronicle', 19 Dec 1899, 763). 
In 1899 Myers went to South Africa to fight in the South African War. He wrote back, 'Eton is never out of my thoughts... we shall all remember 'Floreat Etona'' ('Eton College Chronicle', 19 Dec 1899, 763). He served with the 1st battalion, KRRC in Sir George White's force based at Ladysmith, Natal. Within three days of reaching the front he took part in White's unsuccessful offensive (variously named the battle of Ladysmith, Farquhar's Farm, Lombard's Kop, and Modder Spruit) on 'Mournful Monday', 30 October 1899. British officers were conspicuous and were targeted by Boer marksmen. Myers was killed, shot in the head, near Farquhar's Farm, near and east of Ladysmith, Natal. The 'Eton College Chronicle' stated, 'We cannot but believe that it was the death of all others that he would have chosen' (ibid.). He is thought to have been buried at or near Ladysmith. Myers was commemorated by a memorial window in the lower chapel at Eton. He bequeathed his collection to Eton College, to form part of Eton's education and to inspire future generations. It is still held there, in the Myers Museum, together with his diary in thirty-six volumes. 


@@@@@


doc= 50008


Newdigate, Sir Henry Richard Legge (1832-1908), army officer, was born at Astley Castle, Nuneaton, Warwickshire, on 24 December 1832, the seventh son of Francis Newdigate and Barbara Legge, daughter of the third earl of Dartmouth. He was born into a large family and was educated at Eton College before purchasing a commission as second lieutenant in the 2nd battalion, the rifle brigade, in September 1851. His elder brother Edward was already serving in the same regiment, and Edward's career in many ways mirrored Henry's own. In June 1854 Henry purchased his lieutenancy, and sailed with the regiment to the Crimea. He was present at the battle of the Alma, in which the rifle brigade was heavily engaged, and in March 1855 was promoted captain in the field and given a company command. He was, however, appointed to depot duties thereafter, and to his disappointment had no further chance to distinguish himself. In 1857 Newdigate was sent to India with the troops to suppress the mutiny. He took part in the action at Cawnpore and the relief of Lucknow. His energy and adaptability apparently brought him to the notice of his superiors, and he was selected to join an experimental camel corps, with which he served throughout the central Indian campaign. Although his service was appreciated by his commanding officer and recognized by the award of a brevet majority, he saw no further active service for the next twenty years. 
Newdigate was promoted substantive major in May 1868. In June 1875 he was appointed to the command of the 4th battalion of the rifle brigade, which was then stationed in India. In 1878 in the Second Anglo-Afghan War Newdigate was attached to the Peshawar valley field force. He served throughout the war, but much of the fighting -- and therefore laurels -- fell to Major-General Roberts, who emerged from it with a reputation which overshadowed the officers under his command. Newdigate commanded the Kurram valley field force from April 1880 until it was disbanded the following autumn, but was disappointed that he had found no opportunity to shine. The campaign earned him a brevet colonelcy and the CB, but was his last opportunity to command troops in the field. His appointment as commander of the 4th battalion having expired, he returned to the United Kingdom, and the rest of his career was spent in several significant but unglamorous peace-time appointments. Between 1883 and 1886 he commanded the rifle depot at Winchester, and in 1886 he married Phillis, the daughter of the Revd Arthur Shirley. They had one son and three daughters. In December 1886 he was promoted major-general, and in 1888 he was appointed to the command of the infantry brigade in Gibraltar. He left in 1897, when he was created KCB. He was made colonel commanding the rifle brigade in June 1897, and retired in April 1898. His wife died in 1906. He died at Northgate House, Warwick, on 17 January 1908 from the effects of a seizure he had suffered a week before. He was buried on 21 January near his home at Allesley, near Coventry. Newdigate's career in many ways typified the late Victorian officer class; he was a competent soldier who lacked the flair and luck to achieve popular renown and royal favour, but instead progressed steadily through service in a number of campaigns and peace-time posts to achieve high rank. 


@@@@@


doc= 50009


Parr, Sir Henry Hallam (1847-1914), army officer, was born on 24 July 1847, the second son of Thomas Clements Parr, a barrister, and Julia, eldest daughter of Sir Charles Elton, bt, of Clevedon. He was educated at Eton College and Sandhurst and commissioned in the 13th light infantry on 8 September 1865. Regimental service took Parr to Ireland, Gibraltar, Malta, and South Africa, with promotion to a lieutenancy on 30 October 1869. 
While serving at the Cape in 1874 Parr was appointed district staff officer for Natal, and Sir Garnet Wolseley, then high commissioner, recommended him as private secretary to J. A. Froude, who was being sent out to organize a conference on South African federation. The conference did not take place, but in 1877 Parr became successively aide-de-camp and military secretary to the high commissioner for South Africa, Sir Bartle Frere. Promoted captain on 23 January 1878, Parr was responsible for inspecting colonial units during the Cape Frontier War of 1877-8. Frere then released him to act as assistant staff officer to the ill-fated No. 3 column for the invasion of Zululand. Fortunately for Parr, he accompanied that part of the column absent from camp at Isandlwana when it was overwhelmed by the Zulu on 22 January 1879. Parr returned to Frere's staff in April and took part in Frere's negotiations with Boer representatives in the Transvaal. Apparently due to opposition from the commander-in-chief, George, duke of Cambridge, Parr failed to receive a brevet for his services in South Africa, but he was created CMG. 
With Frere's recall, Parr briefly rejoined his regiment but, following the death of Sir George Colley's private secretary in action at Ingogo on 8 February 1881 during the Anglo-Transvaal War, he was sent for as a replacement. However, Colley himself was killed at Majuba before Parr reached Natal, and he then acted as chief staff officer in Natal before taking charge of the remount depot. Parr commanded an experimental mounted infantry unit in the closing stages of the war before returning to England in May 1882. Almost at once, Wolseley appointed him to command the mounted infantry for the Egyptian campaign on 2 August. Parr was severely wounded in the leg at Tell al-Mahuta on 24 August but, on recovering, commanded the mounted police in occupied Egypt as provost marshal, receiving his brevet majority on 18 November 1882. 
Subsequently, Parr transferred to the reorganized Egyptian army, and in February 1884 went to Suakin to command a mixed force of Turkish cavalry and Sudanese infantry. He was present at Tamai and received his brevet lieutenant-colonelcy on 21 May 1884. After commanding at El Shallal, he became adjutant-general of the Egyptian army, becoming colonel on 24 November 1886 and an aide-de-camp to the queen. However, his health broke in 1887 and, after declining appointment as military attache both at Berlin and in Australia, he became assistant adjutant-general to southern command in October 1889. In 1888 Parr married Lilian, daughter of George Monck Gibbs. His eldest son died of fever while serving with Parr's former regiment on Malta in February 1910 and his second son was killed with the same regiment in December 1914. 
Command of his former battalion came in November 1890 and Parr served with it in Aldershot, Gibraltar, and India, as well as being briefly attached to Sir Charles Ewan-Smith's mission to Fez in early 1892. He was made CB in 1893 and, having turned down the post of assistant adjutant-general in India, he took the appointment of assistant inspector of ordnance at the War Office. In 1898 he went to the Shorncliffe command and was promoted major-general on 1 July 1899. Parr was mentioned as a possible chief of staff to Sir Redvers Buller at the outbreak of the South African War, but his health was not considered sufficiently robust, and from Shorncliffe he went to command the south-east district. He moved to the north-west district in 1902 but recurring health problems led to early retirement in November 1903. 
In retirement, Parr became a deputy lieutenant for Somerset and a justice of the peace in Dorset. With the creation of the Territorial Force in 1908, Parr joined the county Territorial Association for Somerset and commanded the county's contingent of the national reserve. He was made KCB in 1911. He died, shortly after writing to 'The Times' to support the incorporation of the Ulster Volunteer Force within the Territorials, on 4 April 1914 at his residence, Chaffeymoor House, Bourton, in Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 50010


Russell, Sir Baker Creed (1837-1911), army officer, was born at Ravensworth, New South Wales, on 7 December 1837, the son of Captain the Hon. W. Russell of the 73rd foot and his wife, Mary, eldest daughter of Dr Martin of the 73rd. Commissioned as an ensign in the 6th dragoon guards on 2 November 1855, Russell joined his regiment in India. Promoted lieutenant on 1 August 1856, Russell was stationed at Meerut in 1857 at the outbreak of the mutiny. He saw action at Karnaul and distinguished himself with Sir Thomas Seaton's column at Gungaree and Patiali, the recurring casualties among senior officers propelling Russell into squadron command. In 1858 he served in central India with the Agra field force in its pursuit of Tantia Topi. Promotion to a captaincy by purchase was on 18 February 1859 and, following transfer to the 13th hussars in 1862, Russell received a brevet majority on 24 January 1865. In 1866 he married Pauline Henrietta, daughter of Captain Henry Hunter of the 5th dragoon guards. A striking woman, Pal, as she was known to Lady Wolseley, apparently had a somewhat stormy relationship with Russell. 
Regimental service followed until, in September 1873, Russell's reputation as a good fighting man led to selection as a special service officer on Sir Garnet Wolseley's Asante expedition: he commanded one of two locally raised native regiments and played a prominent part in the action at Abrakampa on 5 November. Subsequently his regiment formed part of the advance guard during the march on Kumasi. Wolseley wrote, 'I wish I had a hundred men like him here' (Wolseley to Lady Wolseley, 27 Nov 1873, W/P 3/15). To H. M. Stanley, then a war correspondent, Russell appeared 'a resolute, hard-handed man, with vim and nerve in him, a sharp sword for an enemy, and a soft tongue for a friend' (Temple, 124). For his services Russell received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy on 1 April 1874 and the CB. 
Russell was now identified as one of the Wolseley ring (act. 1873-1890), which was advantageous and disadvantageous. He was assured of employment on expeditions commanded by Wolseley, as in July 1878 when he accompanied Wolseley to Cyprus as assistant military secretary, although staff work was not his strength. However, Wolseley's opponents in the military establishment obstructed his advancement, and in March 1879 he resigned his Cyprus appointment rather than be seconded from his regiment. Later in 1879 Russell joined Wolseley in South Africa for the closing stages of the Anglo-Zulu War, employed primarily as a column commander operating against the Pedi chief Sekukuni, against whose final stronghold Russell personally led the assault, having his horse shot under him. However, Russell was able to remain in South Africa only by Wolseley's refusal to return him to his regiment in India. Russell had been promoted major on 15 July 1878 and he was now created KCMG but was not given the further promotion for which Wolseley strove on his behalf. Russell was given the unattached rank of colonel on 18 February 1880 and regimental rank as lieutenant-colonel on 29 September 1880. 
In 1882 Wolseley wanted Russell for his Egyptian expedition, but opposition from the commander-in-chief, the duke of Cambridge, and the prince of Wales restricted his initial appointment to assistant adjutant-general to the cavalry division. Once in Egypt, however, Wolseley promptly gave Russell local rank as brigadier-general and appointed him to command the 1st cavalry brigade. Again Russell showed great skill as a cavalry commander -- he had once remarked that the purpose of cavalry was 'to look pretty in time of peace and to get killed in war' (Lehmann, 'First Boer War', 227) -- again having his horse shot under him, at Qassasin on 9 September. Russell's reward was the KCB. 
Egypt was Russell's last campaign, since in 1884 Wolseley was unable to find a place for him on the Gordon relief expedition, with a resulting cooling of their relationship. In 1886 Russell became inspecting officer of auxiliary cavalry but took up the command at Shorncliffe later that year. He was promoted major-general on 1 April 1889 and took command of the cavalry brigade at Aldershot from 1890 to 1895. He commanded north-west district from 1895 to 1898, receiving promotion to lieutenant-general on 20 January 1897. His final appointment before retirement was at southern command from 1898 to 1904. He had become colonel of the 13th hussars on 20 January 1904 and received promotion to full general on 19 December 1903. He was made GCB in 1900. Russell died at his home, 10 Trinity Crescent, Folkestone, on 25 November 1911, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50011


Wimund (fl. c.1130-c.1150), bishop of the Isles and pretender, is unquestionably one of the most enigmatic figures of twelfth-century Scottish history. His story is related in its fullest form by the English chronicler William of Newburgh, who claims to have spoken personally with him. According to William, Wimund was born in England and educated as a clerk. After becoming a monk at Furness Abbey, he was sent to the Isle of Man and became bishop of the Isles. It was now that he announced himself to be the son of the earl of Moray, 'despoiled by the king of Scots of the patrimony of his fathers' (William of Newburgh, 'Historia rerum Anglicarum', ed. R. Howlett, Rolls Series, 1884, 74) and began waging war on the Scottish king, David I ('r'. 1124-53). To Ailred of Rievaulx, Wimund was a false bishop whose lies brought some sorrow to David, a judgement at least partly confirmed by Newburgh, who records that the Scottish king was forced to cede land to Wimund which included the monastery of Furness in Lancashire. Soon, however, Wimund's arrogance caused his own subjects to capture and mutilate him. Following this he was sent to Byland Abbey in the North Riding of Yorkshire, where he is said to have boasted that 'had he only the eye of a sparrow his enemies should have little occasion to rejoice at what they had done to him' (Newburgh, 'Historia', 76). 
William of Newburgh's account is devoid of specific dates for Wimund's activities, but internal references, corroborated by external sources, suggest a floruit in the 1130s and 1140s. Furness Abbey was founded in 1124 (it was moved from Tulketh to Furness in 1127), and a new bishop of the Isles was chosen between 1148 and 1152, suggesting a 'terminus post quem' and a 'terminus ante quem' for Wimund's activities. The origins of Wimund are problematic: William of Newburgh claimed that he was born in England, although other sources linked him with the Western Isles. He was probably buried at Byland Abbey. 
The main questions surrounding Wimund concern his true identity and the motivation for his challenge to David I. The first question cannot be solved on the basis of the available evidence, but the support which Wimund obtained as well as his eventual fate -- mutilation, but not death -- suggest that he was not a nonentity and may have had a sound genealogical claim on his side. If this is so, he must have been related in some way to the Moray dynasty in Scotland, the last native earl of which, Angus, was killed in 1130 by David I's army at the battle of Stracathro, in Angus, after which the administration of the earldom passed to the Scottish kings. The Moray dynasty was descended from Lulach (died 1058), whose stepfather, Macbeth, had been ruler of Moray before assuming the Scottish kingship ('r'. 1040-57), and whose descent was traced back to the Cenel Loairn, one of the three major kindreds of Scottish Dal Riata. Despite William of Newburgh's claim that Wimund was lying in proclaiming himself to be the son of the earl of Moray, it appears likely that he was somehow connected with this dynasty, and therefore represents either a claimant to the earldom of Moray or perhaps even one to the Scottish kingship. 
Despite the uncertainty surrounding Wimund's identity, his significance is clear. The consolidation of the descendants of Malcolm III (Malcolm Canmore) and Margaret in the Scottish kingship between 1097 and 1286, their organization into a lineage, and their territorial expansion, had the effect of displacing several localized dynasties and altering long-standing principles of succession. Both Wimund's activities and the considerable support which he obtained suggest that the expansion of the Canmore dynasty caused a good deal of resentment and even hostility. The significance of Wimund is not so much personal or genealogical, but rather what his story reveals about Scottish society in the formative era of the twelfth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 50012


Ada, countess of Northumberland (c.1123-1178), consort of Prince Henry of Scotland, was one of the family of three sons and two daughters of William (II) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (d. 1138), and his wife, Isabel (Elizabeth) de Vermandois (died 1147), widow of Robert de Beaumont, count of Meulan and earl of Leicester (died 1118), daughter of Hugues le Grand, count of Vermandois, and granddaughter of Henri I of France. Her eldest brother, William (III) de Warenne, had succeeded as earl of Surrey by 1138 and her sister Gundreda married as her first husband Roger, earl of Warwick (d. 1153). Ada's wider family included the eight children of her mother's first marriage, most notably the mighty Beaumont twins, her half-brothers Robert, earl of Leicester, and Waleran, count of Meulan and earl of Worcester. Her marriage to Prince Henry (c.1115-1152), the only surviving son of David I, king of Scots, was celebrated in England soon after the second treaty of Durham of 9 April 1139, when King Stephen had sought peace with the Scots by confirming Henry's rights to the earldom of Huntingdon, and in addition granting him the earldom of Northumberland. Although Orderic Vitalis speaks of a love match, the marriage was almost certainly arranged at Stephen's command; and possibly one of the Durham treaty's terms (its text is lost) had specifically provided for it in order to bind Henry more effectively to Stephen's cause, in the support of which the Beaumont twins were then at the forefront. 
While Ada's marriage failed to settle relations between the kingdoms, her contribution to Scottish history was profound. Her public role as first lady of the Scottish court (there was no queen of Scotland from 1131 to 1186) was originally limited by her numerous pregnancies; but her fecundity averted a catastrophe when Henry, the expected successor to the kingship, died prematurely in 1152. During her widowhood she enjoyed in full measure the respect and status to which she was entitled as mother of two successive Scots kings, Malcolm IV and William the Lion. After Malcolm's enthronement as a boy of twelve in 1153, she figured prominently in his counsels and was keenly aware of her responsibilities. According to the well-informed William of Newburgh, Malcolm's celibacy dismayed her, and she endeavoured, albeit fruitlessly, to sharpen his dynastic instincts by placing a beautiful maiden in his bed. She was less frequently at William the Lion's court from 1165, no doubt because of the periodic illnesses that obliged her to turn to St Cuthbert for a cure. Her chief dower estates were the burghs and shires of Haddington and Crail, and Haddington possibly became her main residence. She also had lands in Tynedale at Whitfield, near Hexham, and in the honour of Huntingdon at Harringworth and Kempston. 
Ada's cosmopolitan tastes and connections reinforced the identification of Scottish elite society with European values and norms. Reginald of Durham regarded her piety as exemplary, and she played a notable role in the expansion of the reformed continental religious orders in Scotland. If she had a preference, it was for female monasticism, and by 1159 she had founded a priory for Cistercian nuns at Haddington, apparently at the instigation of Abbot Waldef of Melrose (died 1159). Her household attracted Anglo-Norman adventurers, and she personally settled in Scotland knights from Northumberland and from the great Warenne honours in England and Normandy. Ela, the wife of Duncan (II), earl of Fife (died 1204), was probably one of Ada's Warenne nieces, and her great-nephew Roger (d. 1202) became chancellor of Scotland and bishop of St Andrews. Two of Ada's three sons became kings of Scots; David, the youngest, was the fifth Scottish earl of Huntingdon. She and Henry also had three daughters: Ada ('c'.1142-1205), who married Florence (III), count of Holland; Margaret ('c'.1145-1201), who married first Conan (IV), duke of Brittany (c.1135-1171), and second Humphrey (III) de Bohun of Trowbridge (died 1181); and Maud, or Matilda, who died in infancy in 1152. Ada outlived Henry by twenty-six years and died in 1178. 


@@@@@


doc= 50013


Murray, Andrew (d. 1297), patriot and soldier, came of a family, originally Flemish, which had settled in the province of Moray about the middle of the twelfth century. His father, Andrew Murray, was the lord of Petty, near Inverness, and of Avoch, in the Black Isle. In the war of 1296 between John, king of Scots, and Edward I of England, Murray fought from the outset on the Scottish side, and was captured with his father and his uncle, Sir William Murray le Riche, lord of Bothwell, at the battle of Dunbar on 27 April. He escaped from imprisonment in Chester in the following winter, however, and returned to Moray. The government which Edward imposed on Scotland after the defeat and forced abdication of King John had proved repressive and there was already growing opposition to it throughout the country. Although his father was still an English prisoner, in early 1297 Murray assumed leadership of what had by now become open rebellion in the north of Scotland. His campaign against the English opened inauspiciously with an abortive attempt on Castle Urquhart in May 1297, but over the next two months he enjoyed greater success, and his tactic of harassing and isolating garrisons gradually loosened the English grip on Moray. He was aided by the incompetence of the administration under John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1304), Edward's lieutenant, and Hugh of Cressingham, the treasurer, and by the equivocal attitude to the rebellion of Scottish magnates ostensibly loyal to Edward, and by August the principal castles in the region, including Elgin, Banff, and Inverness, had fallen to him. 
Murray's achievements in the north had been matched by those of William Wallace to the south and, probably in late August, they merged their forces to meet the threat of an English army led by Warenne and Cressingham. At Stirling, on 11 September, the highly disciplined Scottish infantry under the joint command of Murray and Wallace inflicted a signal defeat on the English, whose losses in cavalry and infantry, with Cressingham among the dead, were high. But Murray himself received wounds which were ultimately fatal, and it is uncertain exactly what part he played, with Wallace, in the events which followed the battle. He and Wallace are named as 'commanders of the army of the kingdom of Scotland' in a letter of 11 October to the mayors and communes of Lubeck and Hamburg, and a similar style is employed in a letter of protection to Hexham Priory on 7 November. There is, however, no evidence that Murray actually participated in the invasion of northern England by then in progress and it is Wallace alone who is thereafter named as being in command of the Scots, suggesting that Murray died at some time during the month of November. His posthumous son, another Andrew Murray, who was born at Whitsun 1298, later married Christian, sister of Robert I, and was guardian of Scotland during the minority of David II. 


@@@@@


doc= 50014


Patrick, fifth earl of Atholl (c.1222-1242), who was a minor in 1231, was brief. In 1242 he was about to enter his inheritance, when his murdered body was found in his burnt-out lodgings in Haddington. No satisfactory explanation for his murder presents itself, but his Comyn kinsmen accused John Bisset and his uncle, Walter Bisset of Aboyne, husband of Patrick's aunt, Ada. While the Comyns claimed that control of Patrick's paternal lands in Galloway and Ireland was the motive, their accusations may have been prompted by territorial rivalry in Scotland. This was believed by many contemporaries, including Alexander II, who was reluctant to act until he was forced to banish Walter Bisset by the earls of Buchan and Dunbar. Atholl passed to Patrick's maternal aunt, Forueleth, and her husband, David Hastings. 


@@@@@


doc= 50015


Bernham, David of (d. 1253), bishop of St Andrews, came of a family of prominent Berwick burgesses, probably immigrants from England in an earlier generation, and became a master (at which university is unknown) before joining the 'familia' of Bishop William Malveisin of St Andrews about 1224. His extraordinary promotion to be the king's chamberlain, probably in 1235, the only clerical chamberlain before 1306, is to be explained by the king's need for cash to marry off his sister, and the prominence of David's brother, Robert, who became the first mayor in the new commune of Berwick, which was probably established in the 1230s. When Malveisin died in 1238 the choice of the chapter was almost certainly opposed at Rome by the king. A new election was ordered and David of Bernham, now precentor of Glasgow, the king's choice, was successful; he was consecrated by three Scottish bishops on 22 January 1240, about which time he gave up the office of chamberlain. 
Bernham played little part in secular affairs during his episcopate and, although he participated in the inauguration of Alexander III on 13 July 1249, he was not involved in the coup against Alan Durward at Christmas 1251. His energies were devoted to the affairs of his diocese and of the church, stimulated by the legation of Otto, who held a council at Edinburgh in October 1239. The canon 'Basilicarum' required the dedication of existing churches within two years, and between 6 May 1240 and 24 August 1249 Bernham conducted about 140 dedications, over 110 of them by October 1244. In addition he held a synod for Lothian archdeaconry in May 1242, promulgating an eclectic set of canons which drew on legislation of the legate Otto and of a number of English sees. There was surely a parallel synod for the rest of the diocese, and within weeks the second known provincial council of the Scottish church, held at Perth in his diocese in July 1242, probably issued the early canons in the collection of provincial canons. He held another diocesan synod at Perth on 2 June 1248, whose business is largely unknown. 
The effectiveness of these synodalia and provincalia is unquantifiable, but their concern is undoubted. Residence, the provision of a vicar who must be a priest (as must any chaplains), the avoidance by clerics of secular office, trade, the passing of capital sentences, and the annual visitation of parishes by the archdeacon, are some of the matters covered. Perhaps the most important provincial canon was that laying down (as the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215 had required) a minimum stipend for vicars -- a modest 10 merks annually. This applied to the whole Scottish church and seems to have been or become effective except, perhaps, in the poor fringe dioceses. 
In 1241 Bishop Bernham had tried to attend the abortive council summoned by the pope to Rome; he was more successful in July 1245, when he attended the Council of Lyons, using the occasion to forward the canonization of Queen Margaret, whose cult had been promoted by kings William the Lion and Alexander II. The exact date of canonization about 1249 is not known, but the event was celebrated by a translation of her relics at Dunfermline Abbey on 19 June 1250, conducted by Bishop Bernham and six other bishops, in the presence of the king and his mother. 
About this time Bernham and the other six bishops protested at the infringement of the liberties of the church by the king's council, apparently by an attack on some possessions of St Andrews Priory, but probably in other unrecorded episodes also. There are hints that the government of the king's minority encroached upon the generously wide jurisdiction of canon law, and the bishops, led by Bernham, took their grievances to the pope, who, on 31 May 1251, ordered an inquiry into the liberties of the Scottish church. It seems to have come to nothing. 
Not all the evidence is favourable to Bernham, but it is rare that both sides of ecclesiastical controversy are known. The canons of St Andrews complained of his extortions, and he certainly supported the rival collegiate church of St Mary in the struggle to secure its revenues against opposition from the priory. He also resisted a number of papal provisions of Italians who would have drained wealth from parishes in his diocese. He was as tenacious of his rights as any medieval cleric, but as Bishop Bernham was the outstanding Scottish representative of a reforming generation, whose achievement in providing a literate clergy serving in well-provided kirks has been undervalued. He died at Nenthorn, Berwickshire, on 26 April 1253 and was buried in Kelso Abbey. 
In spite of his concern for residence, David of Bernham was himself content to divert the revenues of Inchture, properly in the patronage of the priory, to support in the schools of Paris his nephew, 
Bernham was no great scholar, but in the margins of the manuscript of William of Malmesbury's works which he owned, he copied in pencil all or parts of eighteen letters from Paris and Oxford, mostly written home, in connection with his affairs. They are all undated and mostly undatable (though one can be firmly attributed to July 1256), but they give an unequalled insight into the life of an absentee pluralist, into the difficulties of a university student and teacher in gathering his income, and into the use and abuse of teinds which his uncle's synodalia sought to regulate. These letters are the only claim of W. of Bernham to fame. 


@@@@@


doc= 50016


W. of Bernham (fl. 1248-1256). More probably William than Walter, he may have been the son of William of Bernham, a Berwick burgess ('c'.1200-1250), and certainly came from that Berwick family, since Bishop Bernham was his uncle. His mother was called Ema. He studied at Paris, probably arts, in the 1240s, and regented there for two years, at latest in 1252-4. After a visit to Scotland, he went to Oxford to study law. He is unknown to sources in Scotland, yet held a number of parsonages there from which he drew the revenues which supported his studies. Thus he was absentee parson of Inchture when his mother told him that his uncle had given a pension of 60 merks therefrom to Peter of Ramsay, bishop of Aberdeen. Bernham went to the papal curia about 1248 to litigate unsuccessfully against this diversion, and was left with only 32 merks annually from this benefice; but he had others yielding a further 80 merks. He farmed or sold the teinds (tithes) which yielded such rich revenues, using relatives or clerks in neighbouring Scottish benefices as his agents, and his servants as go-betweens. 


@@@@@


doc= 50017


Bondington, William of (d. 1258), bishop of Glasgow, was probably of Scottish birth, his family name coming from one of the several (now) Bonningtons in Scotland; that in Peeblesshire has been particularly favoured because his first preferment was as parson of Eddleston. He seems not to have attended a university, and first appears as clerk of two chancellors of Alexander II between 1226 and 1231, an office to which he was himself appointed in 1231. He may have been archdeacon of Lothian briefly before he was elected to the see of Glasgow at some time between April and June 1233 and consecrated at Glasgow on 11 September of that year. 
The cathedral in which the ceremony took place had been dedicated in 1197, but under Bishop Walter (1207-32) a new and enlarged nave had been begun. This work was now halted and Bondington began rebuilding the eastern arm on a new spacious plan, containing a larger choir and presbytery, with a square ambulatory and eastern chapels, but supported on a lower church or crypt of superb quality, the finest structure of its kind from thirteenth-century Britain. It includes carved heads of old and boy kings, placing its construction in the years around 1249. An Aberdeen synodal decree of 1242 solicited contributions from the faithful every year during Lent for the work on the fabric -- and this may have been copied from Glasgow and imitated in other dioceses. 
Bondington was generous to his chapter, enlarging its common property, providing the archdeacon of Glasgow with a prebend, conceding free election of the dean, and only four days before his death granting to it the liberties and customs of Salisbury, a repetition of the grant of Bishop Herbert (died 1164) which still left the canons puzzled as to what rights they had acquired; but the bishop's goodwill is undoubted. He also divided the diocese into two archdeaconries in 1238, a move which the parish clergy may not have welcomed. It must have been Bondington and his chapter who had brought the Dominicans to Glasgow by 1246. 
Although he did not go to the Council of Lyons in 1245, Bondington had gone in 1240-41 to attend the abortive church council summoned to Rome and he then obtained from the abbot of Cluny the right of Paisley Abbey to elect its own abbot. He took a close interest in the affairs of this abbey, whose west front is also of this period. It had escaped being converted into a Cistercian house, and the endowments of the abortive Gilbertine foundation of Dalmilling went to it in 1238. This was balanced by Bondington's resolution in 1244 of a dispute whereby he required Paisley to build a monastery at Crossraguel. Although no synodalia can be attributed to him, he appears in the records as a caring, active, even proactive, bishop. 
It is the more remarkable, therefore, that Bondington retained the chancellorship until at least 8 February 1247, evidently by association with the powerful Comyn family, and thereby secured promotion for his friends. His influence was then eclipsed until the Comyns seized power in 1251; the bishop subsequently secured the see of St Andrews for his protege, Gamelin. Both were ousted in the coup of September 1255, when Bondington was already an unfit man. He died at his manor of Ancrum on 10 November 1258 and was buried in Melrose Abbey, though he had no close association with it. 


@@@@@


doc= 50018


Clement (d. 1258), Dominican friar and bishop of Dunblane, was of Scottish, English, or, least probably, French birth. He may have been the Father Clement Rocha, who owned a manuscript now in Edinburgh; Rocha could be the Scottish name Rock. He had entered the Dominican order by the later 1220s and knew Edmund of Abingdon (to whom he wrote a tribute) before becoming bishop. He presumably studied at Paris or Oxford -- he is once called master -- and a sermon by Friar Clement surviving in a Dominican collection was probably by him. 
The Dominican order spread slowly in England, having only five houses by 1230, when it was said to have gone to Scotland. That may be an anticipation, for no foundation is attested before 1233. The see of Dunblane, traditionally in the patronage of the earls of Strathearn, had fallen vacant in 1231-2, and on this occasion, perhaps because the only chapter was a dilatory diocesan synod, the pope was able to delegate nomination to three Scottish bishops. They chose Clement, who was consecrated by Bishop William Malveisin of St Andrews, at Stow in Wedale, on 4 September 1233. Whether he was a Scot, whence he came (Oxford or another house), and why a Dominican in general and Clement in particular was chosen, are unanswered questions. The choice of the first friar-bishop in the churches in Britain can only be called daring. 
Clement found his see in a state of extreme dilapidation, and in his twenty-five years in it he probably began or built the transeptless cathedral which has lent Gothic architectural touches to many later Scottish kirks; he established a cathedral chapter after a visit to the pope in 1237, as a result of which religious houses with revenues from the diocese were persuaded to yield some of them; and he held at least two diocesan synods, in 1235 and 1239. There is no evidence of his promulgating diocesan canons, but, in the wake of the legate Otto's visit in 1239, such activity is likely. Clement contributed evidence to the dossier for the canonization of Edmund of Abingdon in 1241-2 and was one of those appointed to inquire into the saintliness of Queen Margaret, leading to her canonization about 1249; he granted indulgences to those from his diocese visiting the shrines of St Cuthbert at Durham and of St Edmund at Pontigny. And he was appointed, as Dominicans often were, as collector of taxation of the church for the Holy Land in 1247. 
The diocese of Argyll, lacking a bishop from 1241, was placed in Clement's charge, as a result of which he probably persuaded the pope to commission him in 1248 to move its cathedral from Lismore to the mainland, and to secure a new bishop. This charge explains why he urged Alexander II to make an expedition to Argyll, and accompanied him there, persuading the king to endow the episcopal 'mensa' of Argyll on the day of his death there, 8 July 1249. In the following years Clement was active in ecclesiastical business, but not prominent in political debates, despite which he was associated with the Comyn ascendancy of 1251-5, and, with many others, was on 20 September 1255 excluded from the council for seven years by the young Alexander III, himself prompted by Henry III. Clement died in 1258 and his death was remembered on 19 March, so it probably occurred on that day. 
Clement was the first of a number of friar-bishops, usually Dominicans and usually in the less important and wealthy sees in the church in Scotland, but he stands out from the rest by the energy of his efforts to advance the organization of the church within his diocese, and in that of Argyll. His reputation as a preacher and teacher must have been more than posthumous 'pietas' among his brethren, for in May 1250 a general chapter of the Dominicans at London decreed that when he died a special mass was to be said for his soul throughout the order. Whether Clement was present then or not -- and he was surely at Dunfermline for the translation of St Margaret on 19 June 1250 -- he clearly enjoyed a reputation far wider than his domestic accomplishments alone would explain. He represents the occasional triumph of the ideal of reform of church life over the careerism which generally motivated thirteenth-century clergy. 


@@@@@


doc= 50019


John (d. 1203), bishop of St Andrews and of Dunkeld, was probably identical with John, nephew of Robert (died 1159), bishop of St Andrews, and was certainly the nephew of Matthew of Kinninmonth, archdeacon of St Andrews and bishop of Aberdeen (1172-99). If he was Robert's nephew, his early career was passed in the 'familia' of that bishop; he was absent during the episcopate of Arnald (1160-62), perhaps in the schools of Oxford or Paris, but returned under Richard (1165-78), when his father or uncle, Odo, was steward to the bishop and the priory of St Andrews. 
The uncertainties end in 1178, when, speedily after the death of Bishop Richard, John was elected bishop by the canons of the priory, to the fury of the king, William the Lion, who secured the election of his chaplain Hugh (probably by the 'Culdee' chapter). John, evidently in Scotland, appealed to the curia, and after the consecration of Hugh at St Andrews, went to Rome where Alexander III quashed the election of Hugh and removed him from administration of the see. But Hugh had been consecrated bishop, and John had not. To sort matters out a legate, Alexius, held a synod under the protection of Henry II's garrison in Edinburgh Castle, negotiated with King William (who was unyielding), deposed Hugh, and on 15 June 1180 had John consecrated in Holyrood Abbey by, among others, his uncle Matthew and Hugh, bishop of Durham. 
It is uncertain how long they remained in Edinburgh, but Alexius certainly laid the diocese of St Andrews under interdict, while William roughed up John's supporters and burned the property of Bishop Matthew, who fled, along with others. As this party crossed to Normandy to seek help from Henry II, who sent for William, Hugh went to Rome with an appeal. In the second quarter of 1181 Henry II, John, and William met, probably fruitlessly, for the settlement said to have been reached was the chronicler's anticipation of that proposed in 1182. Hugh, meanwhile, was unsuccessful with the pope, who appointed the archbishop of York as legate in Scotland, ordering him to secure St Andrews for John, if necessary by interdict of the kingdom and excommunication of the king, who at the same time was warned that the pope's exclusion of York's authority from Scotland by the bull 'Super anxietatibus' in 1176 could be reversed if William persisted in his 'violence'. 
Unaware of these papal moves, the king returned through England, meeting again with John and Bishop Hugh of Durham at Redden on the Border. That they quarrelled bitterly over admitting John to Scotland is evidence that there had been no settlement in Normandy; John excommunicated some of William's household, and when the bishop of Durham summoned the clergy of St Andrews, and Archbishop Roger of York the bishops of Scotland, to come to John and profess obedience to him, King William seized the goods of, and exiled, those who responded. The archbishop, a sick man, now pronounced the excommunication of the king and an interdict on the kingdom, but without validity if after the death of Alexander III on 30 August 1181; Roger himself died in November 1181. The way was open for 'compromise'. 
In the winter of 1181-2 King William the Lion sent an embassy headed by Bishop Jocelin of Glasgow to the curia, where their and Hugh's persistence (he had been at the curia for two years) persuaded Pope Lucius III to lift the sentences on 17 March 1182, send the golden rose to King William as a mark of favour, and appoint two legates, once again to sort matters out and, if a mistake had been made, to restore Hugh. It is not known where the legates met the king, nor in what circumstances, but it may be relevant that Hugh had returned to Scotland, while John, exiled since 1180, could go no further north than Roxburgh and its English garrison. The settlement agreed between the legates and king in the summer of 1182 was that both John and Hugh should resign St Andrews, that John should have the see of Dunkeld, the king's chancellorship, 40 merks from the revenues of St Andrews, and restoration of his personal income; if this was not enough, Hugh was to resign St Andrews and receive Glasgow, a proviso which suggests that Bishop Jocelin of Glasgow was intended for St Andrews, and that he had brokered the deal. 
It was not to be. John accepted, and King William reneged, asking that Hugh should keep St Andrews; but the legates refused to dishonour the deal. King William then asked John to come to talk to him, but even when offered sureties for his safety 'he would never come to the king unless first [the prelates and nobles] would swear that the king would observe all those things which had been offered to him by [the legates]' (Anderson, 'Scottish Annals', 285). Hugh, aware how weak his position was, now appealed to Rome, and the two were told to appear there on 1 October 1182. By June 1183 the settlement wanted by the king had been achieved at the curia. Both men were induced to resign the see, which the pope conferred upon Hugh, while Dunkeld and some revenues were given to John. Sold short, John could do no more; with Hugh he returned to take up office, and for three years blessed peace descended. 
But John was not made chancellor (this was not in the pope's gift, and why should William pay his stake after he had won the game?), and somehow, back in Italy with Hugh by mid-1186, with his friends in Scotland under attack, John persuaded Urban III to allow the case of St Andrews to be reopened in July. He and Hugh went back to Scotland to collect evidence, but only John returned to Rome in 1187, securing the removal of Hugh from office probably in early January 1188. But having gone back to Scotland with bulls which recognized him and ordered his restoration as bishop of St Andrews, John's persistence then collapsed; Roger Howden offers only 'Proverbs' 17:1, 'better is a morsel of bread with joy than a house full of sacrifices with strife' (Anderson, 'Scottish Annals', 298n.), as explanation of his throwing in his hand -- for that is what he did. In return for the king's 'mercy' he gave up St Andrews and received Dunkeld again with his revenues but without the chancellorship. Hugh went to Rome to obtain absolution and restoration and to die in a Roman plague in 1188. In the following year John stood by while the king secured the election of Roger of Leicester to the see of St Andrews. 
John now served for some fourteen years as bishop of Dunkeld, and may have acted also in his old diocese: Roger was not consecrated bishop until 1198, so John led at the consecration of Reginald, bishop of Ross, at St Andrews on 10 September 1195 and his family remained well dug in at St Andrews. His most striking act as bishop, however, was to renounce the western part of his diocese, because he did not understand the language of its people, who knew only their (presumably) Gaelic mother tongue; his chaplain Harald, it was said, became first bishop of Argyll. Argyll certainly appears as a diocese by 'c'.1220, but there is a certain improbability about the suggested motives, which do not fit with John's devotion to his own rights. It may be that a secular lord of Argyll (perhaps Reginald, son of Somerled) secured the new diocese from the pope. 
John died in 1203, supposedly at Newbattle Abbey where he was buried, having taken the Cistercian habit there. The doubt arises because this statement, along with the claim that he was born at Podoth, now Little Budworth in Cheshire, and his renunciation of Argyll, comes from Bower's 'Scotichronicon', which may have used a life, now lost, of John written by William of Binning, prior of Newbattle and later abbot of Coupar Angus. How far Binning confused John with John of Leicester, bishop of Dunkeld (1211-14), cannot now be discovered, but Bower makes John the Scot archdeacon of St Andrews, in error for John of Leicester. John remains an enigmatic figure, a valiant pigmy in the time of the giant Pope Alexander III; until the compromise of 1183 he stood sensibly for ecclesiastical liberty against royal interference in the church, anxious as much to exclude Hugh as to install himself. The failure of that compromise by 1186 makes his surrender in 1188 the more remarkable -- but it might be better understood were William the Lion's version of events known. Certainly John was not of the stuff of martyrs, but was willing to put his family and supporters through many difficulties for the sake of his canonical rights. 


@@@@@


doc= 50020


Butler, Edmund, earl of Carrick (d. 1321), justiciar of Ireland, was a younger son of Theobald Butler (died 1285), butler of Ireland, and Joan, daughter of John Fitzgeoffrey. He may have visited England as early as 1289, and was certainly of age at the death of his childless elder brother, Theobald (V), in 1299. The death of his mother in 1303 brought him a share of the Fitzjohn lands in England and Ireland, and he also acquired some of the English and Irish estates of the Pippards. In 1302 he married Joan, a daughter of John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald (died 1316), later first earl of Kildare. 
In 1303 Butler was ready to join an Irish expeditionary force to Scotland, but was asked to remain in Ireland for its security. He acted as deputy justiciar from November 1304 to May 1305, when John Wogan was out of the country. During a visit to England in 1309-10 he was knighted by Edward II. He was deputy again from August 1312 to June 1314. In the winter of 1312-13 he organized a major campaign in Leinster which brought the Ui Bhroin of Wicklow to the peace. At a Michaelmas feast in Dublin in 1313 he is said to have dubbed thirty knights. He served once more as justiciar from February 1315 to April 1318, for the last year under Roger Mortimer, who had been appointed king's lieutenant. His period of office coincided both with the invasion of Ireland by the Scots under Edward Bruce and with the great famine of 1316-17. He brought the magnates of Ireland to Dundalk to confront Bruce in July 1315. When the Scots retreated north, he did not follow, assuming (reasonably but wrongly) that the earl of Ulster was capable of defeating them. When Bruce came south early in 1316, he was present at an inconclusive battle at Skerries in Kildare, after which he and other magnates gave hostages and assurances of loyalty to John Hotham, the king's emissary. A year later, when Robert Bruce had joined his brother in Ireland, Butler left Dublin to its own devices and concentrated upon mustering Munster against the Scots. The army he raised confronted them near Limerick in April 1317, leaving King Robert's forces no choice but to retreat, starving. Shortly before Butler died, Edward II issued a declaration 'to clear the fair fame of Edmund le Botiller who has been accused of having assisted the Scots in Ireland, that he has borne himself well and faithfully towards the king' ('CPR', '1317-21', 535). Any suspicions seem groundless. It fell to Butler to organize a highly regionalized country in the most difficult circumstances; if his performance was not glorious, it compared favourably with that of Edward II himself and of those who defended the north of England at the same period. 
On 1 September 1315 Edward II had granted Butler the manors of Carrick-on-Suir and Roscrea in Tipperary, with the title of earl of Carrick. He was also given return of writs in three Tipperary cantreds, a grant that foreshadowed the later liberty of Tipperary. He was occasionally referred to as earl by the king (and in April 1317 by Pope John XXII); but, perhaps because of its limited endowment, his comital status failed to gain acceptance, and he did not normally use the title. In 1320 the pope released him from a vow to undertake a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela because of the state of Ireland. He spent his last months in England, in March 1321 arranging a marriage (which was outrun by events) between his daughter, Joan, and Roger, the second son of Roger Mortimer, involving the settlement of the Mortimer lands in Ireland on the couple. He died in London on or shortly before 13 September 1321, and was buried the following November at Gowran (Kilkenny), where the bishop of Ossory and the prior of the hospitallers had earlier agreed to supply four priests to pray for his soul and those of members of his family. He was succeeded by his son, James Butler, who in 1328 became first earl of Ormond. 


@@@@@


doc= 50021


Butler, James, first earl of Ormond (c.1305-1338), magnate, was the eldest surviving son of Edmund Butler (d. 1321) and his wife, Joan, daughter of John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald (d. 1316), who was created earl of Kildare in 1316. He married in 1328 Eleanor de Bohun (died 1363), daughter of Humphrey (VII) de Bohun, earl of Hereford (died 1322), and granddaughter of Edward I, an alliance that augmented the Butlers' English properties. James's name may reflect his father's devotion to Santiago de Compostela, for in 1320 Edmund, his wife, and son were released from a vow to visit the shrine of St James. James, who was in Ireland when Edmund died at London, was summoned to England and by February 1323 was a yeoman ('valettus') in Edward II's household. In 1325 the king granted him his lands and marriage before he was of full age and the court speeded his return to Ireland where his lordships in Munster and Leinster were threatened by Irish raids. The first steps of his career were thus taken during the ascendancy of the Despensers, who established links with several leading Anglo-Irish families. Their fall in 1326 left Ireland unstable and the new rulers of England uncertain of the allegiance of the magnates. James Butler was drawn into regional feuds and was among those who received reprimands from England between December 1326 and June 1328. At that point, however, his father's close relations with Roger Mortimer (Edmund had been justiciar of Ireland during Mortimer's lieutenancy in 1317-18 and they had negotiated a marriage alliance in 1321), and the search for stability in Ireland on the part of the Mortimer regime, worked to his advantage. At the Salisbury parliament in October 1328, where Mortimer became earl of March, James Butler was created earl of Ormond and given a life-grant of the liberty of Tipperary, which in the event his descendants were to hold until 1716. At the same time his marriage to Edward III's cousin drew him towards the apex of aristocratic society. 
The new earl's career was often dominated by campaigns against the native Irish who threatened his lands in Tipperary and south Leinster. In 1329, for instance, he burnt the territory of the O Nuallain family in Carlow in revenge for the capture of his brother; and in 1336 he made a compact with the O Ceinneidigh family of north Tipperary, in which they agreed to provide rent and military service, while Ormond accepted arrangements for mutual compensation between the Irish and the English settlers. His role in Irish marcher society was compatible with a career on a wider stage and could indeed be used to advertise his indispensability. The fall of Mortimer in 1330, and the resumption of grants made under his influence, rendered Ormond's gains of 1328 vulnerable. Faced by the strong methods of the justiciar, Anthony Lucy, the earl crossed to England and spent part of 1332 at his town of Aylesbury, subjecting Edward III to petitions in which he stressed his military services in Ireland, his relationship to the royal house, and the antiquity of his family and its possession of the butlerage of Ireland since the time of King John. As well as protecting his threatened endowments, he obtained financial rewards. His relations with Edward were further advanced when he led a retinue of 318 men from Ireland to the Scottish campaign of 1335. 
Ormond died on 16 or 18 February 1338 at Gowran, Kilkenny, before his intention to endow a Franciscan house at Carrick-on-Suir in Tipperary was carried through. The Kilkenny chronicler, Friar John Clyn, an admirer of the Butler family, lamented his death: he was 'a generous and amiable man, elegant and courteous; in the bloom of youth the flower withered' ('Annals of Ireland', ed. Butler, 28). Ormond was buried with his father at Gowran. Inquisitions taken at his death show that, besides his Irish lordships, he had property in ten English counties, all held jointly with his wife, who by 1344 had married Sir Thomas Dagworth. The earl was succeeded by his surviving son, James Butler, who was granted his lands in 1347 while still under age. 


@@@@@


doc= 50022


Butler, James, third earl of Ormond (c.1360-1405), magnate and justiciar of Ireland, was the son of James Butler, second earl of Ormond (1331-1382), and Elizabeth (died 1390), daughter of Sir John Darcy. He was about twenty-three when he was granted custody of his lands on 2 March 1383. As head of a great lordship centred on Tipperary and Kilkenny, Ormond played a key role in Anglo-Irish affairs. He was justiciar in 1384-5, 1394-5, and in 1404. Richard II clearly regarded him as the premier Irish earl when he appointed him as justiciar during his first expedition to Ireland. The Irish annalists readily acknowledged him as 'head of the chivalry of Ireland' at his death. 
This leadership did not go unchallenged. Like his father, Ormond became embroiled in a lifelong struggle against his neighbours and tenants, the earls of Desmond, notwithstanding the fact that Gerald fitz Maurice Fitzgerald, third earl of Desmond (died 1398), was married to his sister Eleanor and was father of Katherine of Desmond, who bore Ormond four sons out of wedlock. In October 1384 the king's lieutenant established a high-ranking commission to treat for peace between Desmond and Ormond. One of the members of the commission, the earl of Kildare, was ordered to intervene again in March 1387. In 1396 Ormond's brother Thomas was killed by John Fitzgerald, son of the earl of Desmond, in a dispute in Waterford. Peace was eventually restored when Desmond agreed to forfeit 800 marks to the earl of Ormond for the death of Thomas. War broke out again in 1399 when, shortly after the arrival of King Richard's second expedition, some English magnates (apparently at Ormond's instigation) captured the Desmond castle of Dungarvan, devastating the surrounding region. In response John Fitzgerald, now earl of Desmond, ravaged the barony of Cahir. Peace was re-established when the earls with their opposing armies met near the monastery of Inishlounaght (Tipperary). Desmond was drowned some days later (11 October) crossing the River Suir. 
Ormond restored the fortunes of the family lordship, diminished by territorial losses suffered at the hands of the renascent Irish. He secured his borders through marriage alliances with Tadhg O Cearbhaill, lord of Ely (Eile), and with the Burkes of Clanricarde (1401). An indenture between the earl and the O Braonain family of Odogh (1401) provided for the adjudication of frontier disputes in time of peace. Doubtless similar political and military indentures with Irish and Gaelicized Anglo-Norman lords, since lost, extended the earl's influence well beyond his borders. No less significant was the purchase of the Despenser purparty in Kilkenny in 1391, making the Butlers undisputed lords of the strategic Barrow-Nore-Suir basin. 
Richard's choice of Ormond as justiciar in Ireland on 24 July 1394, before his own arrival there in October, must be seen in this context. Besides being a fluent Irish speaker, Ormond's network of alliances with Irish and Gaelicized Anglo-Norman lords was a decisive factor in inducing them to submit to the king. 
Ormond married Anne ('fl'. 1386-1397), daughter of John Welles, before 17 June 1386; to her James Butler, fourth earl of Ormond (the White Earl), was born. A younger son, Richard, was ancestor of Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond. Another son, Thomas Butler, prior of Kilmainham, may have been illegitimate. Ormond had in addition four sons -- James, ancestor of the Butlers of Cahir, Edmund, Gerald, and Theobald -- with Katherine of Desmond. Later tradition, emanating from sources sympathetic to Piers Butler, eighth earl of Ormond, suspected Katherine of incestuous relations with her own brother and of attempting to poison the countess of Ormond together with her children. In December 1399 Katherine offered to surrender $200 granted to her by Ormond if he were successful in securing in Rome a dispensation for their marriage. A curious agreement (18 January 1399) between the earl and the bishop of Cloyne, who undertook among other things to act as the earl's agent in the Roman curia, may represent the opening moves in a legal campaign to clear the way for a marriage that, in the event, never took place. Ormond died on 6 September 1405 and was buried at St Mary's Church, Gowran, Kilkenny. 


@@@@@


doc= 50023


Clare, Thomas de (1244x7-1287), magnate and administrator, was a son of Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester and of Hertford (1222-1262), and Maud, daughter of John de Lacy, earl of Lincoln. He studied at Oxford in the late 1250s with his younger brother, Bogo de Clare (1248-1294). Like his elder brother, Earl Gilbert de Clare (1243-1295), he was associated with the Montfortians during the barons' war, and was knighted by Simon de Montfort before the battle of Lewes in 1264. With Earl Gilbert he changed sides in the following year, and helped the Lord Edward to escape from captivity; their close association continued until his death. He took the cross at St Paul's in 1267, went with Edward to Paris in August 1269 to make arrangements for the crusade, and was on crusade from the summer of 1270, returning to England early in 1272 ['see also 'Lord Edward's crusade]. He was then sent to Gascony, where he did homage to Philippe III for the Agenais on behalf of Henry III and his heir. From 1265 he held constableships of various English castles, had the stewardship of several royal forests, and served as a judicial commissioner. He gained, through seizures and royal grants, considerable wealth in the form of contrariants' lands in the wake of the barons' war. He was also granted the custody of the heir of Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1268), lord of Offaly, which he sold for 3500 marks to William de Valence in 1269. This windfall, as well as supporting his crusade, probably drew the possibilities of Ireland, where Earl Gilbert was lord of Kilkenny, to his attention. 
Even before Edward I returned to England in August 1274, he may have decided to use Thomas de Clare in Ireland. He was connected with the Dublin government between 1274 and 1276, assisting the justiciars in their wars against the Irish of Wicklow, serving as sheriff of Limerick, and possibly as chancellor for a time in 1275. At about this time he also formed a connection with the local aristocracy through his marriage to Juliana, daughter and eventual coheir of Maurice fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1286), which immediately brought him property in Cork and Limerick, including the port of Youghal. In January 1276 Edward granted him the lordship of Thomond. He augmented his holdings in the region by exchanging some of his English acquisitions with former grantees in south-west Ireland. The final ten years of his life were dominated by a partially successful attempt to establish control of Thomond. He refortified the castle of Bunratty, and in 1281, with the help of the justiciar and the feudal service of Ireland, built a castle at Quin. His path, like that of earlier conquistadores, was smoothed by segmentary competition among the Irish. The Gaelic historical tract on the wars of Thomond, 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh', highlights the disputes within the O Briain dynasty that formed the backdrop to his activities. It also provides a vivid account of his execution of Briain Ruadh O Briain, with whom he had first allied, in 1277 -- an act that was to figure in the remonstrance of the Irish against English rule sent to Pope John XXII in 1317. 'Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh' is more hostile to Clare and his descendants, and the 'common English' ('Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh', 2.8) they introduced, than to the older colonists who had long-standing links with the Gaelic nobility. 
Thomas de Clare died on 29 August 1287. His widow, who married Adam of Creting, lived until 1300. His elder son, Gilbert (died 1308), concentrated on his English interests. But his younger son, Richard de Clare (died 1318), who was sheriff of Cork in 1309 and one of the magnates who resisted the Bruce invasion of Ireland between 1315 and 1318, devoted his energies to rebuilding the lordship of Thomond through war and diplomacy. His death at the hands of the O Briain dynasty at the battle of Dysert O'Dea led to the collapse of the English position west of Limerick. After the death of his young son, Thomas, in 1321, his lands were partitioned between coheiresses. They and their descendants were mostly absentees; and in the later fourteenth century much of what remained of Thomas de Clare's Irish interests was sold to the earl of Ormond and other resident lords. 


@@@@@


doc= 50024


Clyn, John (d. 1349?), Franciscan friar and annalist, is said by John Bale and James Ussher to have been born in Leinster. There is a Clinstown near Kilkenny, and variant spellings of the surname Clyn can be found in the Kilkenny area. The same name can also be found in the Somerset area: an indenture of 1413 relating to the earl of Ormond was witnessed by a John Clyne, mayor of Bristol. 
Clyn is the author of the 'Annalium Hiberniae chronicon, ad annum MCCCXLIX', which is a compilation until 1332 and thereafter original. The original manuscript was at one time in the possession of Sir Richard Shee of Kilkenny and later with David Rothe, bishop of Ossory in the first half of the seventeenth century, but is no longer extant. The four main seventeenth-century transcripts state that the annals were taken from the community book of the Franciscans of Kilkenny. Although unquestionably a Franciscan annal, information regarding the order is minimal; perhaps the presence of the annal within the community book made it seem unnecessary to duplicate Franciscan material in the former. Clyn probably began writing in 1333; three transcripts agree that there was a second heading in the original manuscript at that date. From the years 1333 to 1349 each year is entered only once; and the annals also expand in detail and personal comment from that year. 
Nearly all that is known of Clyn is recorded in or can be deduced from the annals, or from later annotations on them. A note in Ussher's hand names Clyn as 'doctor'; according to Sir James Ware, the seventeenth-century Irish antiquary, Dublin University created three friars doctors of divinity at an unspecified date not long after its foundation in 1320, and Clyn may have been one of these. Entries in the annals for 1331 and 1332 concerning Dublin might indicate Clyn's presence there, particularly as he does not report a chapter held in Kilkenny in 1332. According to the annals, Clyn was the first guardian of the friary of Carrickbeg, near Carrick-on-Suir, in 1336. He probably left Carrickbeg after 1338 when the donor, the earl of Ormond, died; building did not commence there until 1347. A rough seventeenth-century transcript of the annals claims that Clyn was guardian of the friary of Kilkenny. 
Clyn may have attended the general chapter of the Franciscans at Marseilles in 1343. Apart from his notice of a general chapter in 1313, the one at Marseilles is the only other referred to by him. There is a lack of precise dating in the annals at this period and the entries following 1343 include items concerning Fortanerius Vassali, King Robert of Jerusalem and Sicily, the plague and Tripoli prophecy in Avignon, and the rise of Cola di Rienzo (who was at Avignon in 1343). Entries like these relating to continental Europe are uncommon in the annals and might have been prompted by a journey to Marseilles in 1343. 
The annals are famous for a dramatic firsthand account of the black death in Ireland in 1349, during which Clyn identifies himself as the author of the annals. It has been assumed that Clyn died of plague. However, following his report of the epidemic, he has two further entries: the first reports the price of corn and ginger, the second relates the death of Fulk de la Freigne. Clyn's main interest was the military society of the area surrounding Kilkenny. He exhibits a personal knowledge of various members of the Mac Gilla Patraic family, whose later principal stronghold and residence was at Cullahill, about 10 miles from Clinstown. All the internal evidence would suggest that Clyn was a member of a knightly family, albeit of a minor rank. He reports the knightings of local military personnel and the interrelationship of a hierarchy of knights. He had a special relationship with the Freigne family and especially with Fulk, the dominant personality in Clyn's narrative. One mile from Clinstown is Foulksrath, Fulco's Rath, which was named after its earlier proprietors, the Freignes. Clyn's greatest praise in his annals is reserved for Fulk and for other members of his family, and it is with great sorrow that in his last entry Clyn reports the death of Fulk in 1349. Immediately following the notice of this death the four main manuscripts contain the words, 'Videtur quod author hic obiit' ('Here it seems the author died'). 
According to Bale, Clyn also wrote 'De regibus Anglorum', 'De custodiis provinciarum', and 'De Franciscanorum cenobeis et eorum distinctionibus'. Ware adds 'Catalogum sedium episcopalium, Angliae, Scotiae et Hiberniae'; none of these works is known to survive. 


@@@@@


doc= 50025


Fitzgerald, John fitz Thomas (b. before 1213/14, d. 1261), magnate, was the son of Thomas fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1213/14), probably with his wife, Sadhbh, a native Irishwoman. Thomas, a younger son of Maurice Fitzgerald (d. 1176), a leading participant in the conquest of Ireland, had established himself in the south-west, where he received ten knights' fees in Limerick from King John before his accession. Precisely when and how these acquisitions were enlarged is not clear, but by 1244 his son held much more extensively in Limerick and Kerry. He granted the church of Shanid (co. Limerick), where he had an important castle, to the cathedral of St Mary at Limerick; and he is said to have founded the Dominican priory of the Holy Cross at Tralee (Kerry) in 1243. 
Fitz Thomas was under age at his father's death. His custody and marriage were granted to Thomas Fitzanthony, seneschal of Munster under King John and Henry III. By 1231 he was married to Margaret or Margery, one of Fitzanthony's five daughters. In 1235 he was among the magnates of Ireland urged to support Maurice Fitzgerald, the justiciar, in the aftermath of the murder of Richard Marshal. Like many barons of Ireland, he served Henry III on the expedition to Poitou and Gascony in 1242-3. In 1244 he had a grant of free chase and warren in his Limerick and Kerry lands, and was summoned for the projected Scottish campaign. His activities in south-west Ireland at this period are poorly recorded, but he was clearly engaged in the warfare and alliances with Gaelic dynasties which were a normal part of maintaining and expanding lordship. In 1244 he executed Domnall Ruadh Mac Carthaigh, who had been handed over to him by his brother, Domnall Gall; and in 1252 he and his son, Maurice, killed Domnall Got Mac Carthaigh, the king of Desmond. His actions were not conducted in isolation from the English court. Throughout the 1250s he was assiduous in his attendance on Henry III and the Lord Edward, and seems to have been in England in 1250-51, 1255, 1256, 1258, and 1259. His chief aim was to obtain a grant of the lordships of Desmond in Cork and the Decies in Waterford, together with the shrievalties of Waterford and Cork, which King John had given to his father-in-law. He succeeded in November 1259, when Edward awarded them to him in fee-farm, for 500 marks a year. This grant was a key foundation for the extensive claims of the earls of Desmond, but it remained vulnerable to challenges from the other coheirs of Thomas Fitzanthony, from the crown (since Henry III had forbidden Edward to make alienations), and from the Mic Charthaigh, who were now direct competitors of the Fitzgeralds for the lordship of Desmond. 
Towards the end of his life fitz Thomas was immensely powerful in south-west Ireland. He served as sheriff of Limerick and of Tipperary, as well as holding the shrievalties of Waterford and Cork (and apparently also of Kerry) in fee. His importance is reflected in the description of him in the annals of Inisfallen as 'seneschal of Munster and a great and noble baron' (Mac Airt, 'Annals of Inisfallen', 363). His career ended dramatically on an expedition with the justiciar of Ireland and other magnates into Desmond in July 1261, when he and his son were slain by Finghin Mac Carthaigh at Callann, near Kenmare (Cork). They are said to have been buried in the Dominican priory at Tralee. Rapid revenge was taken on the Irish by other settler lords; but the infancy of fitz Thomas's grandson and heir, Thomas fitz Maurice Fitzgerald (died 1298), meant that the family's expansion lost its impetus for a time. This is visible in references to loss of value because of the 'war of the Irish' in the extents of fitz Thomas's lands taken in 1282, after his heir came of age. Fitz Maurice followed his grandfather's example by combining military and diplomatic activity in south-west Ireland with the pursuit of influence in England, where about 1284 he married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Berkeley. In 1292 Edward I restored Desmond and the Decies to be held by him and his wife jointly, and in 1295 he served as deputy justiciar of Ireland. In 1329 his son, Maurice fitz Thomas Fitzgerald, became the first earl of Desmond. 


@@@@@


doc= 50026


Fulbourn, Stephen of (d. 1288), justiciar of Ireland and archbishop of Tuam, came from a Cambridgeshire family. A hospitaller, he became precentor and treasurer of the order's priory at Clerkenwell and in 1269 was appointed as his deputy by Roger de Vere, prior of the hospitallers in England. In 1270 the grand master of the order granted Fulbourn the personal use for life of all the property that he had acquired for Clerkenwell or might acquire in the future. 
Fulbourn acted as Queen Eleanor's proctor in Ireland in 1270. He was appointed auditor of the tax of a twentieth on moveable property in England in 1273 and receiver of the tallage on the Jews in 1274. Early in 1274 he was elected bishop of Waterford by the dean and chapter at the king's request and on 25 September was appointed treasurer of Ireland, to hold office during the king's pleasure. His appointment and that of Robert of Ufford as justiciar in 1276 were accompanied by measures intended to reform the administration and place control of Irish revenues in the hands of the treasurer. The level of exchequer receipts rose and considerable sums were contributed to Edward I's military activities. In 1281 Fulbourn was responsible for the issuing of a new Irish coinage, much of which was sent abroad for the king's use. 
Fulbourn acted as deputy for Ufford, the justiciar, in 1280, and because of Ufford's ill health was himself appointed justiciar on 21 November 1281. He retained the office of treasurer, appointing his brother Walter as his deputy. As justiciar, Fulbourn was confronted with the problem of the Leinster Irish, which he dealt with by removing their leaders. At his instigation, Art Mac Murchadha and his brother Muirchertach were murdered at Arklow in 1282, although they had been received into the king's peace. He subsequently provided legal justification for the murders by taking inquisitions which found the Mac Murchadhas to have been felons. Despite the illegality of his actions, they achieved the desired result. Leinster became relatively peaceful and no major expedition was necessary for the next thirteen years. 
Fulbourn used his official position to obtain grants of wardships and lands for himself and preferment for members of his family, whom he appointed to positions in the administration. He antagonized the earl of Norfolk by encroaching on his liberty of Carlow and by furthering the growth of Waterford at the expense of the port of Ross. The aggrandizement of the Fulbourn family gave rise to hostility and envy and led to a series of complaints to the king which came to a head in 1284. The charges included taking bribes, making illicit profits from the mint, customs, and supply of provisions for royal armies in Wales, colluding with the usurpation of royal rights by the archbishop of Armagh, and receiving and paying royal revenues outside the exchequer. Most of the accusations could not be proved, but Fulbourn was discovered to owe the king $33,000, partly because his financial records contained so many alterations and erasures that the auditors refused to allow some sums that he had expended on the king's instructions. His real debt was about $13,000, the result of inefficiency as well as of peculation. 
The investigation resulted in a compromise. Fulbourn was replaced as treasurer by Nicholas of Clere, one of his principal accusers, but retained the office of justiciar and was pardoned all but $4000 of his debt to the king because of the great expenses he had incurred on war and defence in Ireland. At Edward's request the pope translated him to the vacant archbishopric of Tuam on 12 July 1286, while a disputed election to the see of Meath in which one of the parties was Walter of Fulbourn was settled by providing Walter to the now vacant see of Waterford in succession to his brother. Attempts at administrative reform after 1285 came to nothing, owing to the ineffectiveness of Fulbourn as justiciar and the general hostility to such measures among members of the administration. 
Fulbourn died on 3 July 1288, still in debt to the crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 50073


Aed mac Bricc (d. 589), bishop, of Rahugh and Killare in the midlands, and Slieve League on the south-west coast of modern co. Donegal, whose feast day was 10 November. The site of the church of Killare, close to the legendary centre of Ireland and of Mide at Uisnech, is an indication of the earlier power of Cenel Fiachach. His more important church, however, was Rahugh, a few miles to the east of the Columban monastery of Durrow. In spite of having a neighbouring house which was favoured by the Cland Cholmain kings of Mide, Rahugh retained enough importance to be the church of an abbot who was also a bishop, Dub da Thuath (died 788), and to be chosen as the site of a major royal assembly in 859 at which Osraige was alienated to Leth Cuinn (effectively, the Ui Neill) by the king of Munster. Aed mac Bricc's life in the 'Codex Salmanticensis' is early, probably eighth-century. Its political stance is ambiguous: on the one hand, it presents Aed as a peacemaker between Munster and the Ui Neill and between Mide and Tethbae, befitting his cross-border descent through his mother, Eithne, from the neighbouring Munster people of Muscraige Tire (north-west co. Tipperary) and his foundation of a church, Enach Midbren, in their kingdom; it also declares that 'kings were always hostile to him and used to be compelled by divine power to be obedient to him' ('Vita sanctorum', ed. Heist). However, the life also glosses over Aed's descent on his father's side from Fiachu mac Neill, ancestor of Cenel Fiachach, preferring to say, more generally, that he belonged to the Ui Neill. That Aed mac Bricc was influential among the Ui Neill is suggested by his having founded a church by Slieve League in the lands of Cenel Conaill in the far north-west. Although the life borrows from Adomnan's life of Columba, a copy of which may have been obtained from the nearby monastery of Durrow, it is more small-scale in scope: its central concerns are with local violence and with the poverty and insecurity of women, especially nuns, but it also gives Aed a special role as a healer of headaches. An episode in the life in which he heals Brigit of headache is echoed in the ninth-century Irish life of Brigit. A stone close to the existing church is still associated with the curing of headaches; it may be the stone mentioned in the Irish life of Brigit in association with Aed mac Bricc. 


@@@@@


doc= 50100


Cummene Fota (c.591-662), whose feast day is 12 November, was the most distinguished of Brendan's successors. Whereas his designated successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 50113


Finan Cam mac Moenaig (fl. late 6th-early 7th cent.), whose feast day is 7 April. Although Kinnitty was on the north side of Slieve Bloom, it was said to have been on the very border between Munster and the lands of the Ui Neill. Finan Cam himself came from the Corcu Duibne, the ruling group of the Dingle peninsula in west Munster. His mother is named as Becnat, daughter of Cian, but it is not said to what kindred she belonged. In the 'West Munster Synod', a propaganda text written in west Munster 'c'.800, in which particular saints were so closely identified with their peoples that they could swear on their behalf, Finan Cam swore allegiance to the alliance on behalf of Corcu Duibne. Like Aed mac Bricc and Colman Elo, Finan Cam was the subject of an early, probably eighth-century, life in the 'Codex Salmanticensis'. The life portrays him as the defender and representative of his people: he protects them from the attacks of the Ui Fhidgeinte (modern co. Limerick) and secures a remission of tribute from Failbe Flann, king of Munster (died 637). He was a disciple of Brendan of Clonfert and Ardfert, but it is not made clear whether this was in the southern church, Ardfert, or in Connacht, Clonfert being much closer to Kinnitty, Ardfert to Corcu Duibne. The principal surviving physical testimony to the church of Kinnitty is the high cross, now in the grounds of a hotel. 


@@@@@


doc= 50114


Findbarr moccu Fiatach (d. 579), whose feast day is 10 September. None of the Irish collections of saints' lives contains his life. The only extant life is a brief text contained in John Tynemouth's fourteenth-century 'Nova legenda Anglie', derived from Welsh sources. It is intriguing that the stanza on Findbarr in the martyrology of Oengus says that he came to Ireland 'with [scriptural] law across the wind-swept sea' (Stokes, 'Felire Oengusso', 10 September). He is there described as a 'sui', by which is normally meant a scriptural scholar. In the martyrology of Tallaght, the source used by Oengus, there are two separate entries under 10 September, first Finnio maccu Fiatach and then Findbarr Maige Bili. It is likely that Oengus was working solely from the second entry, since the phrase 'maccu Fiatach' would have suggested to him that Findbarr was a native of what is now co. Down and did not come to Ireland from across the sea; also, he uses the full name form, Findbarr, rather than the pet name Finnio. At the beginning of the ninth century, therefore, Irish scholars may have been having difficulty reconciling two personae for the founder of Movilla: one was that of a member of the local ruling group, Dal Fiatach; the other was that of a foreign scriptural scholar. In the genealogies, Findbarr is even ascribed to the same branch of Dal Fiatach as Dichu mac Trichim of Saul. Of course, these two personae might be reconciled, either by supposing that the foreign scholar was adopted into Dal Fiatach (full adoption was recognized in Irish law) or by supposing that a native of Ulster had gone abroad for his education. 


@@@@@


doc= 50136


Tigernach mac Coirpri (d. 549) of Clones, whose feast day is 4 April, held a similar position in Fernmag. There is, however, one major difference: whereas Clogher was at the secular centre of the kingdom, Clones was further away from the seat of kingship, a crannog that took its name from Lough nUaithne (Lough Oony near Smithborough). The topographical advantage that Clogher held in the northern kingdom of the Ui Chremthainn was held in Fernmag by Druim Snechtae (Drumsnat), said to have been the first foundation of Mo Lua moccu Oche ['see under 'Munster, saints of] after he had left Bangor, and thus before his major foundation of Clonfertmulloe. Tigernach's western scope of activity within Fernmag is also seen in the foundation -- earlier than that at Clones -- at Galloon Island (Gabail-liuin) on Upper Lough Erne (31/4 miles south-west of Newtown Butler, co. Fermanagh). This remained important since the site contains the shafts of two high crosses. Lough Erne was the western boundary of the Ui Chremthainn kingdoms, so that Tigernach's churches were, unlike Clogher, clearly peripheral in secular terms. 


@@@@@


doc= 50173


Robert Poer (d. 1228), who has been confused with his father. It was this second Robert Poer, described as a knight of the domestic and military household of the king of England, who in 1188 was seized by Raymond, count of Toulouse, as he returned from a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. In 1194 Richard I temporarily deprived him of lands in Knaplock (Somerset), Sexington (Oxfordshire), and Shenington (Gloucestershire), for siding with John, count of Mortain, during the latter's rebellion against Richard. Between 1186 and 1191 Robert Poer, who had a wife, Margaret, and a son, John, granted the churches of Dunshaughlin and the chapel of his castle there, as well as the chapel of Ratoath and other churches in Meath, to St Thomas's Abbey, Dublin. Since Hugh de Lacy had granted the ecclesiastical benefices of the fee of Dunshaughlin to St Thomas's Abbey in 1183, and since Walter de Lacy subsequently granted Ratoath to his brother, Hugh de Lacy (died 1242), it is likely that Robert Poer had been enfeoffed in Meath by John, lord of Ireland, who following the death of Hugh de Lacy in 1186 had attempted to retain the lordship of Meath in his own hands, and that Walter overturned this grant when he gained seisin of Meath. Robert Poer witnessed Irish charters relating to lands in Meath in the 1180s and 1190s, and about 1200 in Leinster and Tipperary also. From 1174 until 1221 a Robert Poer made an annual payment in reduction of a debt owed by Galfridus fitz Hawine, whose house in London was in king's hand and may have been given to Robert Poer; between 1218 and 1221, however, the templars answered for this debt on behalf of Robert Poer. Given the time-span of this continuous series of entries, it is evident that the first Robert Poer had been succeeded by his son and namesake. By November 1228 John, son and heir of the younger Robert Poer, had succeeded to his father's lands held of the king in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 50174


William Poer (fl. 1184-1200) and 


@@@@@


doc= 50175


Simon Poer (d. 1190). There is no evidence to support earlier suggestions that William and Simon were brothers. William may have been the son of William Poer, brother of the elder Robert Poer. He is said by Gerald of Wales to have distinguished himself at Waterford, and he is found witnessing charters relating to land in the vicinity. His expenses for crossing to Ireland were accounted for in 1184-5, and in October 1200 he witnessed two charters of King John relating to grants of land in Ireland. Simon Poer held lands of John of Clahull in Leighlin; he was enfeoffed also with lands in Cork by Milo of Cogan. He died in 1190. 


@@@@@


doc= 50188


Basil Longley (1904-1979), was born on 19 January 1904 at Rathcote, Goffs Park Road, Crawley, and educated at Clifton College. On 3 June 1931 he married Sylvia Hannah (1908-1990), the daughter of F. H. Garnett of Skipton, Yorkshire. They had two sons, Oliver, born in 1933, and Richard Paul, born in 1939, and one daughter, Gillian, born in 1936. The marriage was dissolved in 1940 and on 5 December 1942 he married Phyllis Lattey, 'nee' Henderson ('b'. 1905). They had a daughter, Charis, born in 1944. Basil Longley qualified as a chartered surveyor, but devoted his whole life to running the company. This enabled his brother Norman to participate in industry-wide organizations and public affairs. Basil was above all a technical man and involved himself closely in estimating and surveying. He was identified with the success of the company in carrying out a series of department store and university contracts in the 1950s and 1960s. He died on 13 September 1979 at West Chiltington, Sussex, and was buried at the parish church there. 
The Longley family thus ran one of the most important building firms in Sussex from the second half of the nineteenth century. Their business flourished during the railway boom, and they constructed many stations as well as churches. During the twentieth century they benefited from the inauguration of new towns, and in later years specialized in the construction of new department stores, as well as undertaking a number of university buildings. In the late twentieth century, under the direction of the fourth and fifth generations of the Longley family, the firm continued to undertake all types of building construction. 


@@@@@


doc= 50189


Charles John Longley (1862-1931) was born on 1 February 1862 at Turners Hill and educated locally. He began work in his father's building business at the age of fourteen and was taken into partnership in 1888. On 6 December of that year he married Alice Amelia (1863-1897), the daughter of John Howell of Newick. They had one son and two daughters, as well as three other children who died in infancy. Following his wife's death in 1897 Charles married, on 12 April 1899, Anna Gibson (1871-1938), the daughter of Henry Marchant of Eastbourne. They had two sons, Norman and Basil ['see below']. Charles's younger brother, George Thomas Longley (1863-1926), also entered the firm, but he is a shadowy figure, and appears to have played a supporting role to his father and elder brother. 
The business was incorporated in 1924 as James Longley & Co. Ltd, with Charles, George, and Charles's sons Norman and Basil as directors. The next year the company's joinery works was destroyed by fire but was soon rebuilt in spite of being underinsured. Charles inherited his father's energy and took a major part in the running of the firm but he became confined to a wheelchair by 1925 and died on 17 December 1931 at The Beeches, Crawley. He was buried at St John's, Crawley. He had served as overseer of the parish of Ifield. 
Following their father's death the two sons of Charles Longley became joint managing directors of the firm. The elder, 


@@@@@


doc= 50191


James Longley (1836-1915), who was born on 6 June 1836 and baptized at Lindfield, Sussex, the eldest son of fourteen children of James Longley (1810-1874), a timber merchant of Turners Hill, Sussex, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Beard, of Lindfield. His Sussex ancestry stretched back many generations. He was educated privately. On 13 September 1858 he married Louisa (1833-1902), the daughter of Thomas Fuller of Newington, London, and Turners Hill. They had seven sons and one daughter. 
James Longley was originally apprenticed as a carpenter to a Mr Anscombe, a builder in Lindfield. At the age of twenty-five he entered into partnership as a builder with his father-in-law, whom he bought out quite soon. In 1882 James moved to Crawley, where he established a steam joinery works, and in 1888 he took his own sons Charles ['see below'] and George into partnership. The business flourished as a result of the late railway boom, the development of Brighton, and church building. A peak of activity came at the turn of the century with contracts for the West Sussex Asylum, Chichester (1895), Christ's Hospital, Horsham (1896), and the King Edward VII Sanatorium, Midhurst (1903). About 1890 the firm invented and patented an interlocking wood-block flooring which was later used throughout the country. In 1897 James and Charles established the Crawley and District Water Company to provide the first public supply in the area. 
During this pre-First World War period the partnership carried out many works in Brighton, especially on the seafront, including swimming baths, a refuse destructor, groynes, sewers, schools, churches, roads, and bridges. The London, Brighton, and South Coast Railway Company commissioned dozens of stations including the whole of the Cuckoo line, Newhaven harbour (twice as a result of fire), East Croydon, Lewes, and Eastbourne. Church work, not necessarily complete churches, ranged from Bideford and Beaulieu to Harrow chapel and Eastbourne. A man of great energy, enthusiasm and ambition, James served on the local board of guardians and rural district council. He died on 23 June 1915, at his home, The Beeches, Crawley, Sussex, and was buried at St John's Church, Crawley. 
A key role in the firm was played by James Longley's second child. 


@@@@@


doc= 50193


McIntosh, Hugh (1768-1840), civil engineering contractor, was born on 4 December 1768 at Milntown of Kildrummie, Nairn, the second son of David McIntosh ('c'.1730-1790) and Margaret Tolmie. The family had an agricultural background. After a brief education at Inverness he went south in search of work with the canal contractor Alexander Mackenzie (1769-1836). His career began as a navvy on the Forth and Clyde Canal, then in its final stage of construction under Robert Whitworth. The first contracts which McIntosh took in his own name were on the Lancaster Canal, where the engineer was John Rennie. 
In 1797 McIntosh began work on a succession of contracts on the Grand Trunk Canal system. On 10 December 1798 he married Mary (1773-1833), the daughter of William Cross (1744-1827), an agent of the canal company, at Cheddleton, Staffordshire. Here, where their home was a contractor's hut, their only surviving child, David (1799-1856), was born. In 1803 they moved to Poplar to enable McIntosh directly to supervise the massive East India Dock excavations. Within ten years he had built up a national organization and his prosperity led to the opening of an office in Bloomsbury. His son attended Glasgow University, from 1814 to 1817, before starting to work for his father on the Edinburgh and Glasgow Union Canal. 
McIntosh's contracts are too numerous to detail. While the Grand Trunk Canal works were in progress he took other contracts on the Kennet and Avon, Croydon, Thames and Medway, and Regent's canals. With his son he took contracts on the Great Western, Thames and Severn, and Gloucester and Berkeley canals, and on Sharpness docks. He remained a canal contractor throughout his career; among his final works were contracts on the Aire and Calder Navigation and the Grand Junction Canal. Meanwhile, he was heavily involved in the construction of new docks and their associated roads in London, carrying out works for almost all the docks companies. Other road contracts included Highgate Archway and Vauxhall Bridge Road in London and turnpikes near Manchester and Brighton. He became an important contractor for gas and waterworks companies in the London and Bristol areas, and laid sewers around London. 
McIntosh's ability was rewarded by substantial government contracts. In addition to enormous works at Pembroke, Plymouth, and Portsmouth dockyards, he built the North Hyde Canal and mounds. He carried out much work for the royal parks and palaces. He was the contractor at Chetney Hill lazaretto near Sheerness. He was also possibly the first British contractor to work overseas when he undertook demolition work at Flushing for Lord Liverpool. He carried out harbour works at Shoreham, Whitstable, Dover, Hull, and Southampton, and various sea defence works, most notably at Dymchurch. 
McIntosh built bridges at Harmondsworth, Brentford, and Northampton, widened Clopton Bridge, Stratford upon Avon, and repaired Rochester Bridge. He was contractor for Telford's Mythe Bridge near Tewkesbury, and he built floating bridges over the Itchen and at Portsmouth. In 1821 he gave evidence to the House of Commons on London Bridge, and he carried out site investigations for the new bridge; his son provided evidence on the new bridge's stability in 1831 and also repaired Blackfriars Bridge (1834-42). 
McIntosh embraced the opportunities offered by the railway boom of the 1830s, and built the London to Greenwich railway. His son was responsible for extensive works on the London and South Western and Midland Counties railways, Dutton Viaduct on the Grand Junction, and smaller contracts on the Northern and Eastern, and Birmingham and Derby Junction railways, and together they also took eight contracts on the Great Western Railway. Their claims for payment were turned down by Isambard Kingdom Brunel, who refused to settle McIntosh's account until David McIntosh's accounts were submitted, and refused also McIntosh senior's demand for an independent arbitrator. One factor was probably the precarious finances of the railway company at the time, and it emerged that Brunel had never properly certified the work actually carried out by the contractors, concealing its true cost. Their claims were pursued through chancery and finally settled in their favour in 1866. McIntosh suffered an eye infection while working on the Gloucester and Berkeley Canal in 1826, and this resulted in blindness. This may in part explain why many of the later contracts, particularly the railway contracts, were taken in his son's name, although McIntosh remained active until his death and kept a tight control on site visits by asking detailed questions. 
McIntosh was one of the key individuals in developing the British civil engineering industry. He relied on his family, chiefly his brother James and his own son, to manage his works, but many famous contractors worked under him -- the Airds, the Betts, the Ross and Radford families, William Henderson, James Leishman, and William Mackenzie. They enabled McIntosh to establish himself as the first contractor with a nationwide organization. McIntosh died of apoplexy on 31 August 1840, while meeting his agents for his contracts on the North Midland Railway and Manchester and Leeds line, at the Strafford Arms Hotel, Wakefield. He was buried in the family vault at St Matthias Church, Poplar. He left a considerable fortune of $300,000, more than any civil engineer to that date, and had acquired numerous properties in the East End of London and Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 50194


McKellar, John Campbell (1859-1941), architect and builder, was born on 1 November 1859 in Glasgow, the son of Robert McKellar, bleacher, dyer, and property developer, of Newlandsfield, Pollokshaws, Glasgow. He left Queen's Park Collegiate School in 1875 to start an apprenticeship with James Munro, the Glasgow architect, later becoming Munro's chief assistant. 
In 1883 McKellar set up his own architectural practice. He soon began to employ contractors himself to build tenements to his own design, many of which he kept as an investment and source of income, and by 1896 he had built eighty-nine, mainly in Crossmyloof in south Glasgow, and in Kelvindale and Maryhill in the north-west of the city. He also designed churches, including the Hood Memorial Church in east Glasgow, a Congregational church. 
By 1896 McKellar had expanded enough to form a limited liability company, with capital of $40,000, increased in 1899 to $100,000. He was chairman of the new company, and kept his architectural practice, John C. McKellar, separate. The new company gradually sold off the older properties, while building new ones for rent and sale, mainly in Kelvindale, and buying up land for development. It also bought tenements in Troon, a seaside resort on the west coast, and began to acquire office buildings, such as Gresham House in Glasgow, bought for $24,000 in 1903. It continued to build tenements, including, in 1906, a block near where the new Yarrow shipyard was to be built. Between 1900 and 1906 nearly a hundred tenements were built. 
McKellar was badly hit by Lloyd George's 'people's budget' and the 'Finance Act' of 1909, which imposed heavy duties on builders' profits. In 1906 the company had embarked on building a development of small houses for sale on the Hillington Park estate to the south-west of Glasgow city centre, building thirty in the first stage, hoping to attract buyers by widespread advertising and instalment-plan buying schemes, but the houses proved difficult to sell, as owner-occupation was rare in Glasgow, and company profits fell from $2449 in 1909 to $266 in 1910. Eventually, the rest of the Hillington land was sold to Glasgow corporation, and the plan was abandoned. With the introduction of rent restriction during the First World War income from rents fell, and the company moved much of its capital out of property and into other forms of investment. 
McKellar was a Conservative, opposed to government and municipal intervention in the housing market. He gave evidence to the royal commission on housing in Scotland in 1913, arguing against government subsidies for local authority building, which enabled local councils to let houses at uneconomic rents, thereby hitting private builders and landlords. In his speech at the company's annual general meeting in 1934 he attacked 'the Hitlerite rule of unreasonable and unfair Socialists and Communists, who aim at the confiscation and theft of property that cannot be removed out of their reach' ('DSBB', 2.153). Unlike some of his competitors, who managed very successfully to combine working on local authority contracts with private house building, McKellar failed to appreciate the direction in which the construction industry was moving. 
McKellar remained managing director of John C. McKellar Ltd until shortly before his death on 27 March 1941, in Glasgow. He had been married to Jessie Nisbet (died 1925), daughter of the Revd Robert Hood of Muslin Street, Glasgow, and had one son. His leisure time was taken up with sailing and golf. 


@@@@@


doc= 50195


Froissart, Jean (1337?-c.1404), historian and poet, was born at Valenciennes in the county of Hainault, at a date now generally assumed to be late 1337. Details on his family and education are problematic; his father may have been a herald-painter, but it is more likely that he had an industrial or bourgeois background. Allusions in Froissart's voluminous poetry suggest a happy childhood in comfortable circumstances, but he never mentions his parents or any siblings. His contemporary fame and fortune were due to his intelligence and skill as a writer, admired by successive patrons who encouraged and sustained his endeavours. 
The first to recognize Froissart's talents was probably Jean de Hainault, seigneur de Beaumont (died 1356), who fought in the Anglo-Scottish wars at the beginning of Edward III's reign, and whose niece, Philippa, married the king. By the age of twenty, Froissart, already under the influence of Jean le Bel, whose chronicle recounting, 'inter alia', Beaumont's exploits, he later plagiarized almost entirely, had begun to collect material for his historical work. He later did this especially by travel and conversation with those whose knightly deeds he recounted. An early journey was to Avignon towards the end of the pontificate of Innocent VI ('r'. 1352-62). But it was the period 1361-8 in England, where he claims to have been a 'clerc de la chambre' of Queen Philippa, to whom he presented a now lost rhyming chronicle of events between 1356 and 1360, that marked a key stage in his development as a professional poet and writer. It provided him with contacts and a clientele that remained influential throughout his life. These English links, and the value of his chronicles for the Anglo-French wars of his day, will be particularly stressed here, though Froissart was known and his works read by contemporaries throughout the medieval West. 
In England Froissart met not only leading knights like Bartholomew, Lord Burghersh (died 1369), at the royal court when Edward III was at the height of his powers, but also many important French prisoners from the battle of Poitiers and hostages for the treaty of Bretigny-Calais (1360), including Gui, count of Blois, a future patron. He personally witnessed the departure of Edward, the Black Prince, for Guyenne in 1362 and the return to captivity in London in February 1364 of Jean II of France, before accompanying the latter's body for burial in France two months later. He was at Dover in October 1364 when (a favourite ploy) he was able to interview the herald who brought news of the Anglo-Breton victory (29 September) at Auray in Brittany. These years also saw his first surviving lyrical poetry in the style of Guillaume de Machaut: 'Le paradis d'amour' ('c'.1361-2), 'Le joli mois de mai' ('c'.1363), the 'Dit dou bleu chevalier' (written for the hostage duke of Berri), and the 'Dit de la marguerite' ('c'.1364), in which some see reference to an unrequited love for a certain Marguerite, a theme that recurs in some later verse (for example, 'L'espinette amoureuse', 'c'.1369-70). 
An important experience was a journey to Scotland between May and October 1365. Travelling probably via Carlisle (identified later with the Caerleon of King Arthur) and Lochmaben, and returning via Berwick, Froissart stayed in 'le sauvage Escosse' with David II at Edinburgh. He then visited Dalkeith, Roxburgh, Stirling, Perth, Kildrummy, and Aberdeen, the jetty of which is described in his long Arthurian epic poem 'Meliador' (30,000 lines), a first draft of which was probably penned shortly afterwards, while a humorous 'Debat dou cheval et dou levrier', in which the author's horse and dog discuss their services in Scotland, was also inspired by this journey. 
During a brief visit to Brabant at Easter 1366, perhaps as part of a diplomatic mission regarding Queen Philippa's family concerns, Froissart first made contact with the duke and duchess. This was followed by a tour of the west country with Edward Despenser (died 1375), including a brief stop at Berkeley Castle in the late summer, before he set out, via Nantes and La Rochelle, for Bordeaux. Here he arrived in time to keep Christmas with the Black Prince, Princess Joan, and their court, and to witness the baptism of the future Richard II at Epiphany 1367. By then preparations were advanced for the prince's expedition to Spain in support of Pedro of Castile that culminated in their crushing defeat of Pedro's bastard brother, Enrique de Trastamara, at Najera (3 April 1367), on which the chronicler later wrote at length. But he did not see this battle (nor, it appears, any others) at first hand since, although he accompanied the prince as far as Dax in February, he was then instructed to return to England with other messengers. 
Froissart's last major journey under the patronage of Queen Philippa was again with Edward Despenser in the company of Edward III's second son, Lionel, duke of Clarence, going to Italy to marry Violante Visconti. The party reached Paris on 16 April 1368 and, passing through Bourg-en-Bresse and Chambery, where contacts were made with the court of Savoy, finally reached Milan where the marriage took place on 5 June. Another in the party was Geoffrey Chaucer, and it is possible that they met Petrarch on this occasion. Despite Lionel's death only a few months later, Froissart seized the opportunity to see other places -- Bologna (where he met Pierre de Lusignan, king of Cyprus), Ferrara, and Rome -- before returning across the Alps with Guichard d'Angle, earl of Huntingdon (died 1380). News of Queen Philippa's death on 15 August 1369, received at Brussels, forestalled his return to England and led him to seek a new patron. On 29 August the duchess of Brabant purchased 'a new book in French' (perhaps 'Meliador' or 'L'orloge amoureus') from him and he spent much of the next fifteen years in Brabant. There he began, at the request of Robert de Namur, the first prose redaction of book 1 of the chronicles on which his enduring reputation stands; it was completed in 1373. 
Froissart also continued to write much poetry in varied styles -- one poem celebrates the release of Wenceslas of Brabant from captivity ('Entre Binch et le Bos de Haine', after 21 June 1372); some of Wenceslas's own verses were included in 'Meliador'; among his most important 'dits' were 'L'espinette amoureuse', 'La prison amoureuse' (1371-2), and 'Le joli buisson de Jonece' (1373). References in Brabantine accounts make it possible to trace his career in some detail. In 1372 he was in debt to certain Lombards; by 19 September 1373, renouncing chances of marriage by taking holy orders, he had become 'cure' of Estinnes-au-Mont in the diocese of Cambrai, worth 40 livres p.a., by gift of the duke of Brabant, and in the following year he received a further ducal grant for 'certain things which he has delivered to us' (Wilkins, 265). In 1377 a copy of 'Meliador' was being bound at Brussels and a new version was prepared 'c'.1380; payment in 1382 for 'a book which [Froissart] made for my lord [of Brabant]' (ibid., 265) may refer to this new edition. 'Meliador' was again revised in 1389. 
Increasingly, however, Froissart's attention turned to his narrative of the Anglo-French wars since 1327, and this absorbed most of his remaining working life. By 1376 he had begun a revision of book 1. As time passed he also extended the work's concluding date and, besides continuing to gather oral information, he drew on other written accounts like the Chandos herald's 'Life of the Black Prince' or the 'Grandes Chroniques de France', and occasionally consulted administrative or diplomatic documents. This process of compilation, adaptation, and revision (partly reflecting changes in patronage or the interests of his intended audience, and gradually moving from a position largely sympathetic to the English cause to a more French standpoint) continued for thirty years, by which time Froissart had created a gigantic panorama of (chiefly martial) events in the British Isles, France, Spain, the Low Countries, and sometimes even further afield, from 1327 to 1400, totalling about 3 million words in all. It has also created many still unresolved problems for establishing the order and chronology of the several different and overlapping recensions that survive in about 100 major manuscript copies. These pose, too, many questions about his art as a writer as well as his value as a historian of his times. 
To summarize detailed arguments very crudely: it is accepted that following the completion of book 1 (1373, revised from 1376), book 2, covering the years 1377-85 (and so including Froissart's well-known account of the peasants' revolt), was written at the request of Gui, count of Blois (died 1394), and was essentially finished in 1387; there is also a later recension of this book. Book 3, containing some of the most dazzling passages of writing in the whole work and covering 1385-9, was completed between 1390 and 1392, while book 4, for the years 1389 to 1400, was finished about 1400. At the same time, a third recension of book 1, thoroughly reworked but only covering the period 1327 to 1350, was also finished 'c'.1400. By this stage Froissart's considerable skills as an inventive and imaginative writer had been honed to perfection; strict accuracy of historical detail seldom stands in his way if he could shape a pithy phrase, mould an account or make a moralistic point for dramatic effect. Thus despite an often apparently artless simplicity, combined with cleverly observed descriptive or visual detail for verisimilitude and great subtlety of characterization, his narrative is deceptively sophisticated and demands careful attention to its many different registers if its full implications and meaning are to be understood. How he achieved this result is only partly explained by what is known of the latter stages of his life. 
In November 1380 Froissart accompanied Wenceslas of Brabant to Rheims for the coronation of Charles VI. Evidence for the growing popularity and knowledge of his work in French aristocratic circles comes a year later, ironically when some of his writings being copied in Paris were confiscated on the orders of Louis, duke of Anjou, possibly in revenge for Froissart's criticism of the duke's breaking parole in 1362, in his 'Dit dou bleu chevalier'. Another personal loss was the death of Wenceslas of Brabant in December 1383; by 1384 Froissart had become chaplain to Gui de Blois and was appointed a canon of Chimay and, later, of Lille as well. He served the count for the next decade, frequently visiting Blois and accompanying him to family occasions like the betrothal of Louis de Blois to Marie de Berry (on 29 March 1386) and their marriage at Bourges in August. He also witnessed other important political and military developments or sought out leading participants to garner their testimony. Hence in 1386 he went to Sluys to see the fleet assembled for an invasion of England, and in 1387 he travelled to Ghent to gather material on the city's recent revolutionary past. A visit to Angers in 1388 allowed him to talk to Guillaume d'Ancenis about events in Brittany in the 1340s. In the same year, most notably, he made a prolonged tour through southern France, 'en route' for the court of one of the most colourful princes of his day, Gaston de Foix (Phebus), count of Foix, arriving at Orthez in Bearn on 25 November. Here he spent ten weeks, rising at midnight to read passages of 'Meliador' to the count and interviewing old soldiers like the 'routier' Espan de Lion on his adventures, which are recounted in book 3, in some of the most vivid passages of the chronicles. 
Renewed contact with English knights came in January 1389, when Froissart went to Bordeaux and witnessed jousts presided over by John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, before returning slowly northwards via Tarbes, Toulouse, and Avignon. At the latter he was robbed, an incident commemorated in one of the last of his poems, 'Dit dou florin'. He was present at the marriage of the duke of Berri and Jeanne de Boulogne at Riom on 6 June 1389, and was back in Paris for the arrival of Queen Isabella of Bavaria on 22 August. After a brief sojourn in his native Valenciennes, to which he had increasingly returned in recent years, he rejoined Gui de Blois at Schoonhoven. At Middleburg in 1390 he talked to Dom Joao Fernandez Pacheco about recent events in Portugal, and another visit to Paris in June 1392 coincided with the attempted assassination of the constable of France, Olivier de Clisson. In June 1393 the duke of Orleans paid him handsomely for a book of his poems, which he shortly afterwards arranged in definitive chronological order (with the exception of 'Meliador'). At least two fine manuscript copies of this anthology, written over thirty-four years and prepared under the author's eye, survive, one of which (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Francais 831) may be that presented to Richard II in 1395, when Froissart returned to England for the first time since 1368. 
Froissart arrived in England on 12 July. After paying homage next day at the tomb in Canterbury Cathedral of the Black Prince, in many respects the hero of book 1 of the chronicles, Froissart was granted an interview with the king on 25 July at Eltham, where over thirty years earlier he had seen the prince's prisoner, Jean II of France. Visits followed to Chertsey Abbey, Windsor Castle, and the duke of Gloucester's castle at Pleshey, but Froissart was cruelly disappointed by the changes that had occurred at the English court since his youth, and by the offhand treatment that he received, though some old acquaintances were renewed, most notably with the former diplomat and soldier Sir Richard Stury. Although he left England in October with a large silver goblet and 100 nobles in cash, his memories of this visit were tinged with regrets and nostalgia for a chivalric era that had passed. A last opportunity to meet leading English figures occurred in October 1396 when he attended the marriage of Richard II and Isabella of Valois at St Omer. Now about sixty years old, although continuing to work on recensions of his chronicles, Froissart largely retired from the world, possibly entering the abbey of Cantimpre at the gates of Cambrai. Still active in 1400 and probably as late as 1404, he died shortly afterwards, though the date and place of his death remain uncertain. An epitaph at Chimay was allegedly extant as late as 1873 but has since been lost, its details apparently unrecorded. But wherever 'Chivalry lifts its lance on high' (Elgar's inscription on the title page of his concert overture 'Froissart'), the 'Chroniques de France, d'Angleterre et des pais voisins', that remarkable mirror of his age, keep his name green. 


@@@@@


doc= 50196


Bel, Jean le (c.1290-1370), ecclesiastic and chronicler, was of noble rank, according to the chronicler Jean d'Outremeuse. He was born about 1290 into a patrician Liegeois family with important dynastic links to the more rurally based nobility. His father was the armigerous Gilles le Bel, a money changer who became 'echevin' of Liege like his father and grandfather before him. The name of his mother is unknown, but she was descended from the noble Renier de Thys. His great-uncle, Jean de Cange, a canon of St Lambert and provost of St Jean at Liege, and a shrewd political operator, may have been a formative early influence. He had two younger brothers (Henri, who travelled with him to England and was knighted at Harwich in 1327, and Gilles, also a Liegeois cleric), and a sister who married a local knight. In old age he fathered -- and handsomely endowed -- twin sons, Jean and Gilles, the fruit of his liaison with a woman of noble descent, Marie le Hardy, from the des Pres family. 
Le Bel's lifestyle was very much that of the worldly cleric, and the chronicler Jacques de Hemricourt provides a vivid description of his sumptuous, richly jewelled clothing, his hounds, hawks, and horses, comparing his appearance with that of a knight-banneret. His hospitality was legendary, and a retinue rivalling that of the bishop of Liege accompanied him to church on feast days. He saw active service in his youth in both war and tournament, and Hemricourt's description of his joyful, pleasure-seeking character, composing secular verse, is in many ways reminiscent of Chaucer's squire. His good sense and ability to manage men were turned to good account, not only in obtaining substantial pensions and grants of land with his versifying, but in the management of his household and the bringing-up of squires there. 
By 1313 le Bel had become a canon of St Lambert, and from 1331 to 1361 he was also provost of St Jean. He became actively involved in local and regional politics, and was evidently an able negotiator: documentary references reflect his close links with the Hainault comital family, as well as the duchy of Brabant, and Jean de Luxembourg, king of Bohemia ('r'. 1310-46). In 1327 he formed part of the retinue of John of Hainault, the count of Hainault's brother, who was aiding Edward III against the Scots. It is impossible to assess whether and how often he accompanied John of Hainault in the latter's wide-ranging activities in the Low Countries, but the recording of capitular business transacted in the chronicler's house at Liege from time to time after the mid-century may reflect an increased degree of residence there. 
Le Bel's narrative, usually known as his 'Chronique', was intended as an accurate relation of the wars and events of 1326-61, focusing predominantly on the great achievements of the kings of England and France. Although his method requires further analysis, the first section, covering 1326-40, is generally believed to have been written between 1352 and 1356; the second (1340-58) in 1358; and the final chapters (1359-61) piecemeal, as he noted events. According to d'Outremeuse, John of Hainault was responsible for initiating the 'Chronique', specifically requiring an accurate and objective account and (with other witnesses) correcting it. 
Le Bel's narrative of the campaign of 1327 against the Scots is essentially an eyewitness account, and includes invaluable details -- notably of the miseries inflicted by terrain and climate, Scottish military practices, and tensions among the lower ranks. Le Bel is also an important source for dealings between the Low Countries and England in 1338-40, besides detailing the diplomatic activities that resulted in Edward III's accession in 1327 and his marriage to Philippa of Hainault in the following year. 
Le Bel himself repeatedly emphasizes both the superior accuracy of his prose account and his endeavours to obtain information, a claim supported by d'Outremeuse. Nevertheless, he should be used with caution, for despite his evident regard for accuracy and his plain style there are occasions where his reliance on oral testimony is misleading, resulting not simply in factual error but reflecting any bias in his source or uncorroborated stories then current and generally accepted as true. The exaggerated notion of Robert d'Artois's influence in England in 1334 is such an area (a misconception shared by another Low Countries chronicler, 'Le Bourgeois de Valenciennes'), and his account of Edward III's supposed rape of the countess of Salisbury may similarly reflect a tale current and accepted in le Bel's milieu. His narrative perspective was inevitably influenced by the defection of Jean of Hainault, Edward III's uncle by marriage and long-standing ally, to Philippe VI of France, as well as by the links of Liege with Philippe's ally, the king of Bohemia. It is no coincidence that his account of the battle of Crecy (1346) focuses on the heroism of the blind Jean de Luxembourg. Much of Froissart's 'Chronique' is heavily dependent on le Bel's; however, some later versions depart considerably from le Bel's narrative. Although ultimately overshadowed by his successor, le Bel nevertheless remains a vital source for the early decades of the reign of Edward III. 
According to Jacques de Hemricourt, who knew him well, Jean le Bel enjoyed robust good health until the end of his long life, and this is borne out by the wording of his will. He died at Liege on 15 February 1370, and was buried in the cathedral church of St Lambert, where he was commemorated by a chantry and an epitaph until these were destroyed in 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 50197


Creton, Jean (fl. 1386-1420), historian and poet, was probably a native of the Ile-de-France. Nothing is known of his family, his early life, or the place and date of his birth and death. By 1386 he had entered the service of Philip, duke of Burgundy, supplying him with a book, possibly his own composition. In April 1399 he was sent by Charles VI of France ('r'. 1380-1422) to accompany Richard II on his fateful expedition to Ireland. When news of Henry Bolingbroke's invasion reached Richard in Ireland, Creton sailed for north Wales with the earl of Salisbury, 'for the sake of song and merriment' (Creton, 'Metrical history', 314). After Richard II had rejoined the earl, Creton remained in his entourage until his capture at Conwy. Creton returned to France in September 1399, where he composed an account in verse and prose of 'La prinse et mort du roy Richart', presented to the duke of Burgundy before July 1402. The 'Prinse' reported the official story of the death of Richard II by starvation, but expressed Creton's belief that the body buried with royal pomp and circumstance was that of Richard Maudeleyn, who strongly resembled the king. He believed that Richard himself was alive and in prison. Shortly after completing his work, however, news arrived at the French court that Richard was at liberty in Scotland. In the spring of 1402 Creton was dispatched there by the duke of Burgundy to ascertain the truth of this report. The letter he wrote upon his return reveals that he was now convinced that Richard II was dead. In 1403 Creton was rewarded for his efforts by the honourable position of 'valet de chambre' of the duke of Burgundy. By 1410 he was also 'valet' to the king of France, and in the following year was given the important post of 'clerc payeur des oeuvres du roy' in the provostry of Paris, a post he held in 1413 and again in 1420, when he was given assistance in paying his ransom. His terms of office coincided with periods of Burgundian ascendancy in Paris, so he may, as a servant of the duke of Burgundy, have been seized during the Armagnac proscription of 1413. Nothing is known of his subsequent career. 
Creton's historical importance rests on his history of 'the capture and death of King Richard' and his letters recounting his Scottish journey. The former contains a vivid account of Irish customs and manners, but its principal interest is the light it throws upon the Lancastrian usurpation. For many of the key episodes Creton is the sole witness, and for others his testimony conflicts with the official story propagated by English sources. Creton alone, for instance, reports the circumstances in which news of Bolingbroke's invasion was received in Ireland, and he is the sole source for the division of Richard's army, and for the activities of the earl of Salisbury in north Wales. Creton, too, is the only authority for the situation of the king and his tiny entourage in north Wales. Above all, however, Creton is responsible for the circumstantial eyewitness account of the capture of the king and of 'how he was falsely enticed out of his fair and strong castles in Wales' (Creton, 'Metrical history', 423) by the promise, given by the earl of Northumberland under oath, that nothing was intended against him, and that Bolingbroke asked only for the return of his inheritance and the punishment of traitors in parliament. This is entirely at odds with the official report of Richard's promise to renounce the crown, given while at liberty at Conwy. Creton was aware of the significance of what he had witnessed or had been told by the earl of Salisbury. While still in England he trembled for his life. But he solemnly declared that he wrote only the truth, which he feared would otherwise be suppressed. He was probably right to think so. 


@@@@@


doc= 50198


Burton, Thomas (d. 1437), chronicler and abbot of Meaux, was the author of the most authoritative Cistercian chronicle to be written in late medieval England. The place of his birth, and the details of his early life are unknown. Although the continuator of his chronicle described him as 'well educated', there is no evidence that he studied at a university. Late in the fourteenth century he became a monk at Meaux, Yorkshire, where his name first appears in two lists of members of the abbey in 1394 and 1396. In the first list he is described as 'bursar and sergeant of the abbey'. In the second list no office appears after his name, but in 1396 Burton was elected abbot in a disputed election which was referred to the papal curia. As abbot of Meaux he attended the general chapter of the Cistercian order in Vienna in 1397. None the less, despite a papal judgment in his favour Burton resigned his position as abbot in 1399. According to the evidence of an incised slab now in Wawne church, Yorkshire, he died on 4 October 1437 at what must have been an advanced age, having lost his sight during the final years of his life. He was buried in Meaux Abbey. 
Burton's chronicle survives in two manuscripts which contain an early and a revised version of his text respectively. He appears to have begun his work 'c'.1388, and to have completed the first version of his chronicle by 1396. He then revised his text, probably between 1397 and 1402. The Meaux chronicle, which is built around the history of Meaux, is divided into sections dealing with the tenure of each abbot. It possesses the unique feature that each section is further divided into local and general history, and each of these subsections further subdivided to deal with particular aspects of their subject matter. Burton also included in his chronicle a list of abbots of Meaux, of chapter-headings, and a table denoting the properties of each abbot. A continuation to his chronicle which was written during the time of Abbot John Horton (1445) is found in the revised version only. This continuation omits the sections on general history. 
Although certain of his sources appear to be lost, Burton took his account of general history mainly from a number of well-known chronicles. Many of these were of northern origin, and would have been readily available in the Meaux Library, whose catalogue survives as part of Burton's collectanea. The sections on general history contain useful information, but the most valuable parts of his work are undoubtedly those that deal with the history of Meaux. In these parts of his chronicle Burton provided an exceptionally detailed account of a Cistercian community, describing such matters as the numbers of monks, the state of religious observance, dissensions in the monastery, particularly during the time of Abbot William Scarborough (1372-96), and, most importantly, an account of the abbey's properties and finances. As a former bursar Burton possessed an expert knowledge of the finances of the house, and it was this knowledge that gives his work its unique value. 
Because he could draw on his own practical experience, Burton's description of the community at Meaux constitutes the best extant account of the domestic history of a Cistercian monastery during the later middle ages. His work is also of some interest because of his skilled use of charter evidence, and his antiquarian outlook. Burton based his account upon a thorough examination of the records of the house, and his critical examination of these documents marks him out as a historical writer of unusual ability. Not surprisingly, he included a register of documentary material relevant to Meaux in the revised version of his chronicle. He was also interested in the topographical changes in the area around Meaux, and in the history of the abbey's buildings. Altogether his work, which stands at the end of a long tradition of Cistercian writing in the north, shows how effectively the history of a corporate body could be written by an individual with an enduring interest in its past. 


@@@@@


doc= 50199


Stone, John (d. in or before 1481), Benedictine monk and chronicler, is known almost solely for the chronicle that he compiled while a monk in the cathedral priory of Christ Church, Canterbury. He was a member of that house for over sixty years, but never achieved higher offices than those of refectorar (1451), sub-sacrist (1457), and third prior (1461). In 1468, no doubt as a reflection of his general seniority, he was placed by the prior at the head of the choir. 
Stone's chronicle survives in a single manuscript, now Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 417. It was edited by W. G. Searle in 1902. At its front is the statement that it is the book of John Stone, who composed it in 1467, in the fiftieth year of his monastic life. This statement is in a different hand from that of the main part of the text, most of which therefore cannot be autograph. The chronicle begins at 1415, and yet Stone only became a monk in December of either 1417 or 1418 (there are apparent discrepancies of date between the main list of Christ Church professions and Stone's own chronicle); for the first two or three decades the text is almost entirely made up of obituary notices of Christ Church monks. Stone must therefore have drawn upon some record now lost -- perhaps that used by his brother monk Thomas Cawston, whose own collection of summary obituaries of Christ Church monks is dated 1466 (Canterbury Cathedral, MS Lit. D. 12). 
Stone indicates his use of Christ Church registers, chapter ordinances, letters, and a martyrology; he must also have drawn increasingly on his own powers of observation and memory, and presumably on notes of his own, as the chronicle drew closer to the time of its compilation. Stone's focus is always on his own monastic convent, and he usually provides a note on each member of the house at the time of his death, but he gradually widens his scope to include major events in the life of the monastery, such as visits by monarchs. In 1440, for instance, he records that Henry VI came on foot to Canterbury, as a pilgrim, and at the twelfth hour after vespers was received at the door of the church by the prior and convent in white copes. He provides particularly full accounts of the enthronements of successive archbishops, and is also informative in his coverage of funeral services held at Christ Church. 
From the 1460s Stone shows a greater tendency to report events outside the priory precincts, whether elsewhere in Canterbury (such as the absence of a boy bishop in the town's grammar school, in December 1464), or in other parts of England (such as the battles of Barnet and Tewkesbury in 1471). He comments that the prior of Christ Church was present at neither the coronation of Edward IV, in 1461, nor that of Elizabeth Woodville, in 1465. His perspective is always that of the claustral monk, devoted to his house and its religious observance, but his touch can be vivid as well as direct. He is tantalizingly brief, however, in his statement that a malign spirit entered the priory's belfry during a storm in the summer of 1458. 
The chronicle stops in 1472, after two entries for February. There is an entry in yet another hand for an event in October 1472 (but no mention of the death of Prior William Petham in August that year), and then nothing more. However, Stone lived on for about another eight years, dying about 1480, and certainly by April 1481. 


@@@@@


doc= 50200


Favent, Thomas (fl. 1388-1400), tract writer, cannot be securely identified. He has been identified with Thomas Favent, a clerk in the diocese of Salisbury, who in 1393 obtained a papal licence to choose his confessor, and in 1400 received a ratification of his estate in the church of Donnington in the diocese of Salisbury. This Thomas Favent presumably took his name from Fovant in Wiltshire, and was probably related to Cecily Fovent, the abbess of the nunnery of Shaftesbury who in 1406 founded a chantry in memory of her parents. But there also appears in the government records of this time a Thomas Fovent, clerk, who in 1391 was appointed collector of tunnage and poundage in the port of London, a position that he relinquished in 1395. This Thomas Fovent would have been well placed to comment upon events in London, and it is tempting to identify him with the Salisbury clerk. Yet if he was the author of a treatise in favour of the appellants little else is known about him, and there is no evidence relating to the circumstances that lay behind his appointment in 1391. It is possible that his treatise, on the Merciless Parliament of 1388, which survives only in a late medieval transcript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley misc. 2963), was relatively unknown in Richard II's reign. 
The treatise itself is a highly partisan piece of writing. Its purpose was to justify the action of the lords appellant in seeking to condemn certain of Richard's supporters in the parliament of 1388. Misleadingly called a history of the Wonderful Parliament of 1386, the opening part of the treatise is of some slight historical value, and includes an account of Nicholas Brembre's attempt to hold London against the appellants. Despite the bias of his writing, Favent's description of the Merciless Parliament itself constitutes a useful record of that assembly, and enables us to establish more clearly the sequence of events. In his work Favent included a good deal of procedural information which must have derived from a well-informed source, possibly Geoffrey Martin, one of the clerks of the crown. Favent also had an eye for dramatic detail, seen in his account of the capture of the chief justice, Sir Robert Tresilian, and he occasionally supplies information which is not to be found elsewhere. His treatise, which seems to have been written immediately after the Merciless Parliament, may never have circulated outside an extremely small circle. It had some influence later, however, for during the reign of Charles I 'a rough English translation' (McKisack, v) was used by parliamentary pamphleteers to encourage resistance to the crown. Published in 1641 as 'A true relation of that memorable parliament, which wrought wonders', this version was attributed to Thomas Fannant. 


@@@@@


doc= 50201


Strecche, John (fl. 1407-1425), Augustinian canon, historian, and antiquary, of St Mary's Priory, Kenilworth, was in 1407 presented to the custody of the 'cellula' of Broke in Rutland, a cell of Kenilworth. He resigned this office in 1425 and returned to his mother house. He was a compiler and copier of texts as well as author of a chronicle and of other texts, and two volumes survive that were probably compiled by him. BL, Add. MS 38665 contains five Latin works in his hand, and he was probably author of three of them: verses against the Augustinian friars; a 'Cronica cuisdam amici veritatis in argumentum fundacionis canonicorum regularium ordinis sancti Augustii', which forms a reply to the work of an Augustinian friar claiming priority for his order over that of the Augustinian canons; and a treatise on the thirty different colours or kinds of rhyming verse, with examples. Two further texts, the 'Liber Catonis' and Aesop's fables, are in his hand. The remaining texts, which include materials on the Augustinian canons (a list of houses and a chronicle of their general chapters between 1325 and 1350), are not in Strecche's hand. 
BL, Add. MS 35295 contains a mixture of his own compositions along with other works of romance and history. The 'Historia Trojana' of Guido delle Colonne and the 'Historia regum Britanniae' of Geoffrey of Monmouth are in the hand of John Aston, but Strecche's appears as corrector, and the opening poem on the fall of Troy is in his hand. Strecche was the author and scribe of the 'Historia regum omnium Anglorum' which concludes the volume. This is divided into five books, preceded by a brief history of England from Brutus to 827 and the story of Albina and her sisters. The first book deals with the early Saxon kings, the second with Alfred and his successors, the third with the Danish kings, and the fourth with kings from the Norman conquest to the usurpation of Henry IV. The fifth book devotes three folios to Henry IV and twenty-four to Henry V, the latter being by far the longest section in the work, and historiographically the most important. It was compiled shortly after 1422, and deals mainly with the French war in typically patriotic tone, including the story of the dauphin's gift of tennis balls, which is also found in Thomas Elmham's 'Liber metricus'. The desire to eulogize Henry led Strecche to omit any reference to the king's supposedly riotous youth and to misrepresent certain events in the war, playing down, for instance, the defeat at Bauge in 1421. Although its approach is sometimes anecdotal, the chronicle does include details not found elsewhere, providing the fullest account by any early commentator of Henry's brief visit to England in 1421, during which, as on several previous occasions, the king visited Kenilworth. Strecche has set short pieces of verse by himself and by others throughout his 'Historia', and there are frequent references in the text to the priory of Kenilworth. His compilations and compositions provide a useful example of the intellectual tastes and activities of an early fifteenth-century canon. 


@@@@@


doc= 50202


Reading, John (d. 1368/9), Benedictine monk and historian, was a monk of Westminster Abbey by 1339/40 and had been priested by 1341/2, when he sang his first mass. He is recorded as 'custos ordinis' of the abbey in 1349, and from 1350 to 1353 he held the office of infirmarer. His death is recorded in the abbey's infirmary roll for 1368/9. He wrote a continuation of the 'Flores historiarum', the St Albans chronicle acquired by Westminster Abbey in 1265 and thereafter augmented by a series of independent narratives. Reading's continuation covers the period 1346-67, though it was not begun until 1366 and the chronology of some of its earlier sections is distinctly confused. Down to 1356 the account of Edward III's French wars is dependent on the chronicle of Robert of Avesbury; Reading also drew on the continuation of the 'Polychronicon' of Ranulf Higden. After 1356, however, the account appears to be independent, or at least to draw on sources now lost. Reading provides one of the most detailed accounts of English history in the 1360s, a period otherwise largely devoid of good historical writing. 
Reading apologized for his lack of learning; certainly, the work has little literary merit and the Latin is sometimes ungrammatical. On the other hand, it represents a very interesting catalogue of information drawn together by a well-informed man living in close proximity to the centres of political power in Westminster and London. The chronicle includes a good deal of material on the internal history of Westminster Abbey: for example, Reading blamed the financial problems of the abbey in the mid-fourteenth century on the extravagance of Abbot Simon Bircheston (1344-9), and recounted the visit of Edward III to the abbey church on the eve of his departure for France in 1359. However, the chronicle is much more than a set of monastic annals, and provides information and commentary on the black death and its socio-economic consequences, various items of parliamentary legislation from the 'Statute of Labourers' (1351) to the abolition of 'Peter's pence' (1365), the contemporary tensions between the black monks and the friars, and the ratification of the treaty of Calais (1360) in the parliament of 1361. Reading was highly critical of the mores of the age, and regarded the plague as God's vengeance on an unworthy people; he also contributed to the contemporary debate on the laziness and wilfulness of the labouring classes. His moralizing is typical of the reactionary attitudes of the upper classes -- and particularly of the monastic orders -- during the period of turmoil that followed the black death. 
John Reading's chronicle survives in only one medieval manuscript (BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra A.xvi). However, a number of later chronicles (various continuations of the 'Polychronicon' and the chronicle of Adam Murimuth, and especially the St Albans 'Historia Anglicana' and the continuation of the English 'Brut' chronicle) borrowed extensively and sometimes transcribed or translated directly from Reading; this indicates that other manuscripts of the latter's text must have circulated in the later fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Slight variations and a greater degree of accuracy in certain of the relevant passages in the 'Historia Anglicana' and the 'Brut' also suggest that the surviving manuscript is a slightly inferior transcription of Reading's lost original. 


@@@@@


doc= 50203


Yelverton, Sir Hastings Reginald (1808-1878), naval officer, born in March 1808, was the son of John Joseph Henry of Straffan, co. Kildare, and his wife, Lady Emily Elizabeth Fitzgerald, daughter of the duke of Leinster. He entered the navy on 20 August 1823 as a first-class volunteer with Captain Samuel Pechell on the frigate 'Sybille', in the Mediterranean. In June 1826 he was present at a severe action with pirates off Candia, Crete. He later served as a midshipman and mate on the home station in the brig 'Columbine' (Captain William Symonds), the frigate 'Undaunted' (Captain Augustus Clifford), and the battleship 'St Vincent' (Captain Sir Hyde Parker). On 18 December 1830 he was promoted lieutenant, and in the following year joined HMS 'Asia', flagship of Rear-Admiral Sir William Parker, at Lisbon. In 1834 he joined the 'Rattlesnake' (34 guns, Captain Hobson) in the East Indies, and was promoted commander on 28 June 1838. Between 1840 and 1843 he served on the home and Mediterranean stations aboard the steam vessels 'Styx' and 'Devastation' and as acting captain of the battleship 'Queen' and the frigate 'Aigle'. He achieved post rank on 23 September 1843. 
On 9 April 1845 Henry married Barbara (1810-1858), widow of George Augustus Francis Rawdon Hastings, second marquess of Hastings, and only daughter of Henry Edward Gould (afterwards Yelverton), Lord Grey of Ruthin, and 'suo jure' Baroness Grey of Ruthin. Henry in January 1849 by royal licence took the name Yelverton in place of Henry. In 1853 he was appointed to command the steam screw frigate 'Arrogant' (46 guns) in the western squadron, and he remained in her during the Baltic campaigns of 1854 and 1855. On 19 May 1854 he led a cutting-out expedition at Eckness, several miles from the coast. The following year he was often in independent local command, destroying Russian government buildings, forts, and supplies along the Finnish coast. In July 1855 he was created CB for his services. For the 1856 campaign he moved to the 80 gun steam battleship 'Brunswick' with command of a gunboat flotilla for inshore operations. The war ended before he could see any service in this capacity. 
On 3 August 1859 Yelverton was appointed comptroller-general of the coastguard, a post he retained until April 1863. Promoted rear-admiral on 30 January 1863, he served as second in command on the Mediterranean station until 1866, when he became commander-in-chief of the channel squadron for one year, in recognition of his ability, to conduct sailing and steaming trials. The results convinced Yelverton that shorter, handier ironclads were required. Promoted vice-admiral on 25 May 1869, he served on the committee appointed by Hugh Childers to consider the turret ship design, later HMS 'Devastation', put forward by the chief constructor, Edward Reed. As a result of the committee's report the design was adopted. On 2 June 1869 Yelverton was created KCB (GCB 29 May 1875). 
Yelverton was again temporarily commander-in-chief of the channel squadron from July to October 1870, before assuming command in the Mediterranean, where he remained until January 1874. The major episode of this period was the international effort to restrict the Cartagena revolt in 1873, where he helped to suppress the rebellion, prevented a bombardment of Valencia, and blockaded the rebel fleet. 
Yelverton, by then profoundly deaf, was an unexpected choice to succeed Sir Alexander Milne as first naval lord in September 1876; the shortage of suitable flag officers left the government little choice after the post was refused by Admiral Sir Geoffrey Phipps Hornby. Yelverton, always a stopgap, served little more than a year before ill health forced him to resign in November 1877. He died in the Grand Pump Hotel, Bath, on 24 July 1878. 
At the Admiralty Yelverton proved an ineffective member of an ineffective board, under George Ward-Hunt, entirely subordinate to the economic demands of the Disraeli ministry. The mid-1870s marked the nadir of the navy in the nineteenth century, and reflect no credit on those involved. Yelverton's appointment in succession to Milne, replacing the most experienced and effective naval lord of the era with a man who had never before served at the Admiralty, was indicative of the limited interest of the Disraeli ministry in naval policy. At sea Yelverton was a fine officer, as his extended periods of active service demonstrated. His opinions on ship design and tactics were highly regarded, although his predilection for short and handy ships resulted in the 'Ajax' and 'Agamemnon', two of the worst battleships ever built for the navy. A conservative in all things, Yelverton made a worthy contribution to the efficiency of the seagoing navy, and his short term at the Admiralty proved a sad coda to an otherwise successful career. 


@@@@@


doc= 50204


Grey, Sir Frederick William (1805-1878), naval officer, third son of Charles Grey, second Earl Grey (1764-1845), and his wife, Mary Elizabeth, daughter of William Brabazon Ponsonby, first Lord Ponsonby, was born at Howick, Northumberland, on 23 August 1805. He entered the navy on 18 January 1819, serving as a midshipman aboard the frigate 'Naiad' (Captain Robert C. Spencer) in the Mediterranean. He took part in a notable boat action against Algerine pirates at Bon in 1824. On passing for lieutenant in April 1824 he joined the 'Sybille' (Captain Sir Samuel J. B. Pechell) and returned to Britain in August. In 1825 he joined the 'Volage' (Captain Richard S. Dundas) for the South American station, where he obtained command of the 'Heron' (18 guns) on 17 April 1827. He was promoted captain on 19 April 1828. Between 1830 and 1834 Grey commanded the frigate 'Actaeon' (26 guns) on the Mediterranean station. In August 1835 he was appointed to the 'Jupiter' to convey William Eden, Lord Auckland, to India as governor-general, and he returned to Britain in 1836. In 1840 he was appointed to the frigate 'Endymion' and sent to the East Indies, where he served in the First Opium War and was created CB in January 1842 for his services. The ship paid off in late 1843. On 20 July 1846 he married Barbarina Charlotte, daughter of the Revd F. Sullivan; they had no children, and she survived him. 
In 1854 Grey was appointed to command the screw steamship 'Hannibal' (90 guns). In August he became a first-class commodore commanding a mixed fleet of warships armed 'en flute' and steam transports conveying 10,000 French troops to the Aland Islands. After the fall of Bomarsund, Grey's squadron returned to Britain, and he then took the 'Hannibal' to the Black Sea, where he was ordered to become captain of the fleet for Vice-Admiral Sir Edmund Lyons. However, Lyons preferred to rely on his flag captain, and Grey was redeployed as principal agent of transports in the Bosphorus, a post which he filled with energy and good sense until the removal of the army from the Crimea. Grey became a rear-admiral on 22 January 1855. His brother-in-law, Sir Charles Wood, became first lord in February. For his services during the war Grey was created KCB in 1857. 
After a brief period ashore Grey was appointed commander-in-chief at the Cape of Good Hope and on the west coast of Africa in April 1857, and he remained there until February 1860. On his return to Britain he published a pamphlet, 'On the Organisation of the Navy' (1860), largely concerned with manning. In June 1861 he took office as first sea lord under the duke of Somerset, following the sudden death of his former captain and close friend Richard Saunders Dundas. Promoted vice-admiral in August 1861 and admiral in April 1865, he retained his post, which was his last naval service, until the fall of Earl Russell's ministry in 1866. He received the GCB in 1865. 
As first sea lord Grey called for increased estimates, to provide ships and men to place the fleet on equal terms with foreign powers, and for improved administration. He was largely content to follow the work of his predecessor and to sustain the ironclad policy that by the mid-1860s reasserted British naval mastery with superior ships, guns, and resources. He was not an alarmist but supported the maintenance of a two-power naval standard. On the question of ship design, Grey was conservative. He did not favour the experimental turret ship designs of Captain Cowper Coles, and considered Coles's publicity campaign impudent. His main concern was manpower, as he declared in the preface to his short pamphlet on manning, 'Suggestions for improving the character of our merchant seamen and for providing an efficient naval reserve' (1873): 'During the five years I held the office of Senior Naval Lord under the Duke of Somerset, the questions of manning the Navy, raising the character of our seamen, making the Coast Guard a really efficient reserve, and providing a further reserve in the merchant service occupied much of the attention of the Board of Admiralty. Many important measures were adopted which, followed up by succeeding administrations, have given us the finest body of seamen, ever, I believe, in the service of the Crown. (F. W. Grey, 'Suggestions', 1873; repr. in Bromley)' Grey did not take a seat in the House of Commons, which meant that he was a less public figure than the sea lords who preceded him. This was an important step in the professionalization of the board. It was a mark of the growing controversy over naval policy, under attack from radical economists and the projectors of alternative designs, that on leaving office Grey published a pamphlet, 'Admiralty Administration, 1861-1866' (1866), in defence of the Liberal naval policy of his term. He was placed on the retired list by Childers' reform of 1870. In later life he served as a magistrate for Northumberland, Berkshire, and Sussex. Grey died on 2 May 1878 at his home, Lynwood, Sunningdale, Berkshire. 
With powerful family connections at the highest level of society, and within the navy, Grey had a head start to his career. His later service coincided with whig-Liberal administrations, including his father's term as prime minister, and those of his brother-in-law Sir Charles Wood as secretary and later first lord of the Admiralty. However, Grey was among the most able flag officers of his generation, respected for his administrative abilities and sound judgement. His term at the Admiralty was marked by the increasing community of interest among naval officers of all political persuasions, in spite of their differences in other areas. 


@@@@@


doc= 50205


Mackenzie, William (1794-1851), civil engineer, was born on 20 March 1794 at Marsden Chapel, Nelson, Lancashire, the eldest of the eleven children of Alexander Mackenzie (1769-1836), contractor, and Mary Roberts (died 1828). His father had moved south from Muirton, Ross-shire, working as a navvy on the Forth and Clyde Canal, and as a contractor on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, for both of which Robert Whitworth was engineer. Following a peripatetic childhood linked to his father's contracts around Lancashire, William began an apprenticeship with a Blackburn weaver, but abandoned this for civil engineering. In 1811 he became a pupil of Thomas Clapham, a lock carpenter on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal. He then worked for John Clapham on a dry dock at Troon harbour before joining John Cargill, one of Thomas Telford's favourite contractors, on Craigellachie Bridge. He completed his early training as an agent for his father's old friend, Hugh McIntosh, on the Edinburgh and Glasgow Union Canal from 1816 to 1822. On 9 November 1819 he married Mary (1789-1838), daughter of James Dalziel, a Glasgow commission agent. 
In 1822 Mackenzie assisted McIntosh in estimating for the completion of the Gloucester and Berkeley Canal, becoming one of the agents when McIntosh was awarded the contract. Soon after he was appointed resident engineer on Telford's Mythe Bridge, Tewkesbury. Mackenzie described this work in a paper published in the 'Transactions' (2.1) of the Institution of Civil Engineers, which he had joined in 1828. Before the bridge was completed Mackenzie was appointed resident engineer, again under Telford, on the Birmingham Canal improvements. This involved the supervision of some of the largest excavations ever built on a British canal. On its completion Mackenzie returned to contracting, and in 1832 successfully tendered for the tunnel works on the Liverpool and Manchester Railway between Edge Hill and Lime Street. The work proved profitable. As the 1830s progressed Mackenzie took other profitable contracts on the Grand Junction, north Union, Midland Counties, and Glasgow, Paisley, and Greenock railways. He took other, less successful, contracts on the London and Birmingham, and Glasgow, Paisley, Kilmarnock, and Ayr lines, combining this with consultancy work for canal and waterworks companies, and more general contracting such as the Liverpool Haymarket and the Manchester and Sheffield Junction Canal. Some of his outstanding works were on the Shannon navigation (1841-7), where he was the only contractor who did not become involved in litigation with the commissioners. 
Despite the personal setbacks of the loss of his father in 1836 and the death of his first wife in December 1838, Mackenzie's business prospered. He had already had a small staff while working on the Birmingham Canal, notably his brother-in-law William Dalziel, and Francis Jenkins. His youngest brother, Edward (1811-1880), joined him in 1834, and George Woodhouse in 1840. 
Mackenzie's experience and reliability led to an approach by Joseph Locke (1805-1860) in the summer of 1840 about a tunnel contract at Rolleboise on the Paris to Rouen railway. After visiting France, Mackenzie agreed with Thomas Brassey (1805-1870) later that year to tender jointly for works on the line. Construction began in 1841, when Mackenzie moved to Paris, and over the next decade Mackenzie and Brassey became the dominant force in European railway contracting. Following the successful completion of the Paris to Rouen line in 1843 Mackenzie was approached by capitalists from all over Europe. In France he was heavily involved with the companies which obtained the Orleans to Bordeaux and Tours to Nantes railway concessions, as well as several other companies which failed or had their concessions revoked in the 1848 period. In Spain, which he visited twice, he was involved in several schemes including a railway from Madrid to Bilbao, improvements to the Ebro navigation, and organizing surveys on behalf of railway promoters, such as Salamanca. He was active in the Italian states. In Belgium he was a major shareholder in the concession for the Tournai to Jurboise and Landen to Hasselt railways, and tendered for other works. 
As contractors Mackenzie and Brassey built the Rouen to Le Havre railway and its extension to Dieppe, the Abbeville to Boulogne section of the Amiens-Boulogne line, the Orleans-Bordeaux railway, and part of the Rhine and Marne Canal. They also built the first line in Spain, between Barcelona and Mataro. In Britain they built the Eastern Union Railway, part of the Chester and Holyhead Railway, the North Staffordshire Railway, the north Wales mineral lines extension to Shrewsbury, the Liverpool and Ormskirk Railway, the Trent valley railway, and the Lancaster and Carlisle and the associated line to Kendal and Windermere. They built the massive railway system associated with the Caledonian Railway, including subsidiary lines such as the Scottish Midland and Scottish Central railways. Dock and harbour work was carried out at Greenock and Birkenhead. Many of the British contracts were carried out in partnership with John Stephenson ('c'.1794-1848) beginning with the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway in 1844. Contracts were taken in a variety of names: William Mackenzie & Co., Mackenzie and Brassey, John Stephenson & Co., Thomas Brassey & Co. 
Mackenzie had other investments outside railways. He was one of the original shareholders in the scheme to revive Brymbo ironworks with other former associates of Hugh McIntosh. With Brassey he took shares in the Allcard and Buddicom works near Rouen, and, less successfully, ironworks at Evreux and Pont-Audemer. In Liverpool, in association with Henry Edwards, a local architect and builder, he began to develop land for housing. He also acquired estates at Craigs, Newbie, and Auchenskeoch in Scotland. 
For most of his life Mackenzie had followed work around the country. From 1832 he maintained a home and offices in Liverpool and from 1841 in Paris. In 1843 he moved to 74 Grove Street, Liverpool, and began to improve it extensively, no doubt influenced by the fashionable standards of Paris. Like other distinguished engineers such as Telford he surrounded himself with images of engineering. He commissioned illustrations of his own works, and he bought or commissioned portraits of other engineers whom he knew such as Telford, John Woodhouse, and Alexander Mackenzie Ross. The portrait of Mackenzie by T. H. Illidge was presented to his second wife, Sarah Dewhurst (1807-1867), whom he had married on 31 December 1839, at a banquet in Paris in January 1846. It portrays a commanding stout figure, with receding hair, dominating the landscape. Mackenzie was then at the height of his powers and influence. 
Mackenzie was, with Thomas Brassey, the leading European contractor in the 1840s. He had far more experience than most of the engineers and contractors working at the time, which contributed to the rapid and successful expansion of the network in the years of railway mania. His financial resources, enormous by the standards of previous generations, enabled him to invest in plant to a greater extent than before. He was the first contractor to purchase locomotives for moving spoil, in 1832, and in the 1840s pioneered the use of steam excavators on the Rouen to Le Havre railway. In January 1848 he fell seriously ill from gangrene. This coincided with serious problems arising from the near bankruptcy and subsequent death of John Stephenson, and the general financial and political crisis of 1848. Although Mackenzie recovered, and was active for a further eighteen months until he again fell ill at the end of 1849, Brassey decided to end the partnership. By separate agreements in February and October 1850 concerning their British and continental contracts the responsibility for completing the majority of the contracts was passed to Brassey, with the exception of the Orleans to Bordeaux line, which Mackenzie was to complete with his brother Edward. By the arbitration of Robert Stephenson and Alexander Mackenzie Ross, Mackenzie received a payment for his share in the profits of the outstanding British contracts, which included several, such as the Great Northern Railway, which Brassey claimed were carried out using his capital alone. 
Although Mackenzie continued to conduct business until his death on 29 October 1851 he never fully recovered his health, having lost his left foot in 1850. He died at his home, 74 Grove Street, Liverpool. Both his marriages were childless, and although his widow continued to live in the family house until her death in 1867, he left almost his entire estate of $341,848 to his youngest brother, Edward, including his interest in the Orleans to Bordeaux contracts, which Edward completed. Edward went on to die a millionaire. In 1868 he erected a monument to William Mackenzie at the Scottish church of St Andrew, Rodney Street, Liverpool, where he had been buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 50206


Mason, Sir Thomas (1844-1924), civil engineering contractor, was born in Airdrie, Lanarkshire, Scotland, the son of John Mason, builder, and his wife, Marion Hamilton. He was educated at Anderson's University, Glasgow, before starting an apprenticeship as a mason. In 1861 he moved to Edinburgh, where he was mainly involved with railway works, both as a mason and as a subcontractor. After six years in Edinburgh, Mason was taken on as foreman mason by the contractor James Brand, and put in charge of the building of the Ayr Viaduct for the Glasgow and South Western Railway. He worked for Brand until 1875, in charge of his tramway contracts, including one for the Govan and Greenock Tramway Company. 
In 1875 Mason won a contract for the building of the Stobcross docks (later the Queen's docks) in Glasgow, and shortly after this he joined the building firm John Morrison & Co., with the job of tendering for and managing future contracts at Queen's Dock. The name of the company was changed to Morrison and Mason in 1879. During the 1880s the firm began to win railway contracts, including the building of the first section of the Cathcart Circle, a local railway on the south side of Glasgow, in 1884-6, and the Paisley Canal branch line of the Glasgow and South Western Railway. They also built the Citadel Station at Carlisle. Morrison and Mason branched out into waterworks with the construction of the Thirlmere Reservoir for Manchester corporation, and a joint contract with the structural engineer William Arrol for 26 miles of aqueducts in connection with the Thirlmere waterworks. The company also tendered for public building contracts, building offices for the Clyde Navigation Trust in Glasgow in 1883-6, and the municipal buildings for Glasgow corporation in 1883-8. 
The firm became a limited company, Morrison and Mason Ltd, in 1889, with capital of $100,000: Morrison was chairman. While continuing to build reservoirs, such as those at Criagmaddie for the Glasgow waterworks, in 1893-4, the company began to build bridges, including the Great Western Bridge in 1890, the Glasgow Bridge in 1895, and the Rutherglen Bridge in 1896. They also continued to build offices, with new offices for the 'Glasgow Herald' completed in 1910, and won contracts for hospitals, including the Ruchill Fever Hospital, finished in 1900. Morrison and Mason Ltd undertook major dock-building projects on the Clyde, notably a new dock at Clydebank, and work for Arrol on the new dockyard for Yarrows at Scotstoun in 1907. As the European powers built up their navies in preparation for war, the company won lucrative Admiralty contracts, including in 1907 one of $1 million to build lock gates at the entrance to Portsmouth naval dockyard, and a $0.5 million contract for a dock for battleships, also at Portsmouth. During the First World War the company was mainly engaged in building harbour defences. 
Mason, a Liberal, was elected to Glasgow town council in 1891, and represented the city on the board of the Clyde Navigation Trust. After he left office he remained on the board as a representative of the Merchant's House. As chairman from 1908 to 1919 he was involved in the deepening and widening of the river, and also the construction of the Rothesay Dock at Clydebank and the installation of hydraulic power at Princes Dock. While he was on the board the tonnage of shipping using the Clyde doubled, from 7 million to 14 million tons. Mason was knighted in 1909. Following the death of John Morrison in 1919, Mason sold the company to Sir William Arrol & Co. He was a director and chairman of Arrols, and the two companies had collaborated on many projects from 1876 onwards, when Morrison and Mason worked for Arrol on a bridge over the Clyde for the Caledonian Railway. 
Mason was married twice; first to Jeanie Paton, and second to Charlotte Wyllie. He had two sons and three daughters. At one point he owned a small stable of racehorses, and he continued to own racehorses at Newmarket. He died on 26 April 1924 at his home on the south side of Glasgow, Craigie Hall, 6/8 Rowan Road, Bellahouston, survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50207


Garrett, George William Littler (1852-1902), clergyman and submarine designer, was born on 4 July 1852 at 45 Waterloo Road, Lambeth, London, the third son of John Garrett (died 1893), an Irish curate, and his wife, Georgina. The Garretts moved to Manchester in the early 1860s, and George attended Rossall School in Fleetwood until 1867, when the family was financially ruined and he was moved to Manchester grammar school. From 1869 he worked as a schoolteacher and studied chemistry at Owens College, Manchester. The combination of work and study reflected the financial pressures on his father. At Owens he developed an effective system for self-contained breathing, using caustic potash to remove carbon dioxide from the exhaled air. Work on this device probably damaged his lungs, and brought about his early death. In 1871 he went to work and study in Ireland, and graduated from Trinity College, Dublin, with an honours degree in experimental sciences in 1875. After a year travelling in the south seas Garrett married Jane Parker of Waterford -- they had four children -- took the Cambridge theology examination, and in 1877 became curate to his father. 
The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8 and the war scare that gripped the British empire inspired Garrett to develop a simple one-man submersible, built in Birkenhead and demonstrated by the autumn of 1878. This secured support for a company from a mystery backer, possibly the Swedish armaments magnate Thorsten Nordenfelt, for the construction of a larger, 33 ton, steam-driven version. This craft, the 'Resurgam', was completed at Birkenhead in November 1879. Extensive trials were conducted at Liverpool and at sea, demonstrating that it could be submerged, if only briefly, and propelled underwater. This was the first time any vessel had been mechanically propelled below the surface. In February 1880, while on a voyage to Portsmouth for Royal Navy inspection, the boat was lost off Rhyl in a storm. 
In August 1882 Garrett travelled to Sweden to work for Nordernfelt's Submarine Torpedo Boat Company. Here the interests of inventor and owner clashed; Garrett sought an effective submersible, while Nordenfelt wanted a torpedo boat that could submerge. While Nordernfelt's name graced the product, the design was essentially Garrett's. The new boat carried a single locomotive torpedo. The boat was completed in August 1883, but underwater trials were hampered by the poisonous fumes from the steam plant. However, public trials were held in September 1885. Despite Garrett's best efforts the flawed design did little more than show that it could operate on the surface and run briefly underwater. It was sold by Nordenfelt's agent Basil Zaharoff to the Greek navy, and delivered in January 1886. While trials in Greece were a failure the Turks were persuaded otherwise, and bought two boats. These were badly built, inferior, if larger, versions of the prototype, and did not work when completed in 1887, though Garrett did manage to carry out the first submerged launch of a torpedo. In their efforts to make the boats work the Turks even commissioned Garrett as commander, though on an honorary basis. A fourth boat was built at Barrow in Furness to an improved design, but the hectic schedule of work in Britain and Turkey finally caught up with Garrett, never in good health, who suffered a breakdown. He recovered in time to demonstrate the latest craft at Portsmouth in May 1887, and at the jubilee naval review in July. Eventually the Russians agreed to try the vessel on a sale-or-return basis, but it was wrecked, 'en route' on the Danish coast. Garrett, who was living in some style at Southampton, continued to work on enclosed steam systems, but when the Nordenfelt company was subsumed into the new Barrow Shipbuilding concern, which eventually became Vickers, Garrett lost his major backer. The Germans built two Garrett/Nordenfelt submarines, but paid no royalties. Not surprisingly, they also made them work rather better than the originals. 
In 1890, after discussions with John Jacob (IV) Astor, Garrett moved to the United States to become a farmer in Florida. He was already seriously ill with the pulmonary disease that was to kill him. Farming proved disastrous, and after a spell as a railway fireman in New York, and an American soldier during the Spanish-American War of 1898, when he became an American citizen, he died of tuberculosis in New York Metropolitan Hospital on 26 February 1902, aged forty-nine. He was buried in Mount Olivet cemetery, Maspeth, New York on 1 March. 
Garrett's career combined innovation, triumph, absurdity, and failure in a way that quickly obscured his real contribution. By creating a submersible, though it failed, he spurred the work of others, notably the American John Holland, which resulted in effective submersible warships entering service within a decade of Garrett's death. The Garrett family remained in the United States, and subsequently prospered. At the time of writing the 'Resurgam' had been located by divers, with the possibility of being raised. 


@@@@@


doc= 50209


Samuel, Howard (1914-1961), property developer and publisher, was born on 2 February 1914 at 1 Maisemore Mansions, Canfield Gardens, Hampstead, London, one of at least two sons of Henry Samuel, jeweller, and his wife, Grace Jacobs. He was educated at St Paul's School, where he became interested in rare books and while still very young acquired sufficient expertise to contribute to trade catalogues. His business career put a stop to his book collecting activities, but after he had amassed his fortune he resumed this interest and assembled what his 'Times' obituary called 'an important and highly individual collection'. 
Samuel went into surveying after leaving school, founding the agency Basil and Howard Samuel with his brother Basil. Their cousin, Harold Samuel, was also active in the commercial property market; he eventually became Britain's most successful post-war property developer and founder of Land Securities, the country's largest property company. Howard Samuel served in the army in the ranks throughout the Second World War and turned to property dealing during the post-war property boom, and with his brother formed a company which acquired extensive properties in London. Great Portland Estates Ltd was subsequently formed to hold these interests and rapidly grew into a major concern. The firm obtained some of its initial mortgage finance from the church commissioners and later took part in the redevelopment of the commissioners' Hyde Park estate. Samuel's property interests formed the core of a considerable business fortune, worth almost $4 million at his death. 
Howard Samuel was said to be a man with a strong social conscience, which a long friendship with Aneurin Bevan and Jennie Lee served to develop, and was an active supporter of the Labour Party. He was able to develop his political interests via a close association with the left-wing newspaper 'Tribune' -- he joined its board in 1952 and was an active contributor -- and the 'New Statesman'. While visiting the Bevans he met his wife, Jane Lane, the artist. They married in 1944 and later divorced, but remarried in 1959. The couple had a son and a daughter. 
In addition to his property interests, Samuel's other main area of business activity was publishing, which allowed him to further his enduring interest in books. By the beginning of the 1960s he controlled a number of publishing houses, and shortly before his death he had made an unconditional offer for all the outstanding ordinary shares of Associated Publishers. In addition to his interest in books, Samuel was also recognized as a discriminating connoisseur of painting. 
Samuel was found dead in shallow water off Glyfada, near Athens, on 6 May 1961, having drowned after a heart attack. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50211


Steel, Sir James, baronet (1829-1904), builder and property developer, was born on 13 March 1829 at Buchts, Cambusnethan, Lanarkshire, the fifth of nine children of a Lanarkshire tenant farmer, James Steel (1792-1862), and Marion Reid. Apprenticed as a mason in Wishaw, by the 1850s he had developed his own successful building firm there and served on the Wishaw police commission and on the parochial board. He subsequently became financially overextended, however, while building tenements in Glasgow, and was declared bankrupt on 27 August 1861. 
Without established financial backing, Steel's business options were limited in Lanarkshire, and this probably explains his move to Edinburgh in 1862/3. Work as a tradesman and subcontractor there produced sufficient collateral to recommence building on his own account from 1869. Part of the Wester Dalry estate was acquired, and the working-class tenements built on it were the result of an integrated strategy of land purchase, estate development, building, and housing management. This integration typified Steel's business strategy after 1869, enabling him to spread risks and to change the blend of his activities according to the phase of the building cycle or the composition of demand. Further business integration resulted from his operation of quarries at Wishaw and Gunnerton (Northumberland), and from the construction of powered workshops for building materials in Edinburgh. His business acumen in making realistic assessments of the creditworthiness of business associates was another ingredient of his success. 
Although Steel continued to build sporadically in the Dalry area until the 1890s, attention was directed from the mid-1870s towards upper middle-class housing built to a high design standard on lands feued from the Heriot Trust in 1877. The exclusive social tone was reflected in its location on the western periphery of the New Town, its classical Georgian elegance, quality of materials and amenities, and not least in the street names -- terraces and crescents called Belgrave, Buckingham, Palmerston, Douglas, and Eglinton. Built in the later 1870s and 1880s, the west end development was sold promptly and provided a cash injection for the third phase of development. This was based from the mid-1880s on the Dean estate and a further 78 acres bought from the Learmonth trustees in 1894, upon which large numbers of lower middle- and middle-class properties were built between 1895 and 1904. 
Within a few years of moving to Edinburgh, Steel was active in local politics. His opposition to the proposed St Mary's Reservoir project in 1871 brought local prominence, and, though defeated in that year, he was elected in 1872 for the George Square ward, which he represented uninterruptedly as Liberal councillor, bailie (from 1888), and lord provost (from 1900) until his retiral from local politics in 1903. Steel was not an initiator of municipal projects; his main contributions were informed specialist comments on council committees where his business experience was relevant, on gas and water boards, the infirmary, and Heriot's Hospital (school). He represented the city of Edinburgh at the funeral of Queen Victoria and the coronation of Edward VII, and in May 1903 Steel was raised to the baronetcy during a royal visit to Edinburgh. He took the title of Murieston, Mid-Calder, with the motto 'Firmiter et durabile'. 
Steel possessed many influential personal friends through his directorships, notably in the Broxburn Oil Company (chairman 1879-1904) and Niddrie and Benhar Coal Company (chairman), through his building business contacts with landowners, solicitors, and financiers, such as the earl of Moray, and through his membership of the Liberal Club. A United Free Church member, Steel married, on 4 August 1883, Barbara Joanna Paterson ('b'. 1857), a minister's daughter from Dalry, Kirkcudbrightshire. They had no children. The couple lived at Boroughfield, 32 Colinton Road, Edinburgh, from 1883 until his death at home on 4 September 1904. Steel, who was survived by his wife, was buried at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. His will provided for modest contributions towards foreign church missions, and to support building trades workers in need. 
Between 1880 and 1904 Steel built 148 houses and 129 tenements in Edinburgh, a building programme equivalent to at least $15,000 annually throughout the period. Steel's annual rental income in 1904 was $17,428; his feuing income $4734. A moveable estate in shares, debentures, and loans was valued on death at $114,197. Steel's contribution to the physical development of late-Victorian Edinburgh was not simply as a builder, but as landowner and proprietor, and through his considerable control over the spatial development and character of large tracts of north Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 50212


Sunley, Bernard (1910-1964), property developer, was born on 4 November 1910 at 46 Jugela Street, Catford, London, the son of John Sunley and his wife, Emily Martha Gillies. He was educated at St Anne's School, Hanwell, Middlesex. He left school at the age of fourteen to help his father, who worked as a muck shifter with a pony and cart. Described in 1910 as a landscape gardener, by 1931 John Sunley was listed as a retired florist and fruiterer. Sunley himself made a brief move into the landscape gardening business, but earned his first fortune from earth moving, via Blackwood Hodge Ltd, a company of which he was chairman until his death. This firm also acted as agents for a number of motor vehicle-related products. Its clients included General Motors, Cummins Diesel, and Rolls-Royce. 
On 18 November 1931 Sunley married Mary ('b'. 1910/11), daughter of William Goddard, a farmer from Southall; they had one son and two daughters. Like several other property developers, Sunley entered the property industry first as a contractor, establishing his building company, Bernard Sunley & Sons Ltd, in 1940. It became a wholly owned subsidiary of Bernard Sunley Investment Trust shortly before the latter company went public. During his thirties Sunley considered leaving business for a career in politics. He stood as Conservative candidate for Ealing West in 1945, but was defeated. 
By this time, however, Sunley had already established the property development company which was to form the basis of his post-war fortune. Bernard Sunley Investment Trust Ltd was founded in 1944. Its development projects were to range from office blocks in the City and West End to flats, hotels, and shops in the Bahamas, and Sunley served as its chairman and managing director until his death. The company was publicly floated in 1959, with an issued capital of $1.5 million. In 1960 a further development company, Sunley Homes, was acquired as a subsidiary, to develop residential property. 
Bernard Sunley Investment Trust developed close financial links with Eagle Star. In 1961 Eagle Star agreed to finance Bernard Sunley's property development programme by making $12 million available over a five-year period, to be secured by a twenty-year first mortgage debenture stock. At the same time Eagle Star purchased $4 million of Bernard Sunley Investment Trust's shares -- one third of the company's equity -- from existing shareholders. Eagle Star's chairman, Sir Brian Mountain, and one of its assistant general managers, H. J. A. Harbour, joined the company's board as part of this agreement. 
Sunley ranked alongside the most successful property developers of the 1950s property boom; Bernard Sunley Investment Trust had assets of $33 million at the time of his death in 1964. While he is said to have become carried away by success towards the end of his life (Marriott, 38), Sunley remained proud of his working-class origins and was happy to recall his early days working as a muck shifter with his father. Edward Erdman recalled Sunley as 'a rumbustious character. Blunt and with little regard for convention' (Erdman, 120). 
Sunley's recreations included golf, swimming, and horse-racing. One of his horses, Slippery Serpent, started as third favourite in the 1959 Grand National, but fell at the thirteenth fence and had to be destroyed. In addition to his property development activities, Sunley also served as a director of the Bank of Nova Scotia Trust Company (Bahamas) Ltd, from 1961, and as a member of the council of the Royal Society of St George. He was also well known for his many gifts to charity, and donated about $500,000 in the year before his death. The beneficiaries included a number of Oxford colleges. 
Bernard Sunley suffered from obesity and hypertension and died of a heart attack at his home, 26 Harley Road, Hampstead, on 20 November 1964, at the age of fifty-four. Bernard Sunley Investment Trust was eventually taken over by Eagle Star in 1979, following an earlier bid in 1973 which was thwarted by referral to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and the 1973-4 property crash. Sunley's personal estate was worth at least $5 million at the time of his death. Although Sunley's will stipulated that no funeral or committal or memorial service be held, a sum of up to $3500 was provided for a banquet to be held at Claridge's Hotel for his employees and business friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 50213


Hay, Sir John Charles Dalrymple, third baronet (1821-1912), naval officer and politician, was born at 113 Princes Street, Edinburgh, on 11 February 1821, eldest surviving son of Sir James Dalrymple Hay, second baronet (1788-1861), and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Maxwell (died 1821). Hay's career was dominated by his close family ties and friendship with prominent Scottish naval officers, including the Cochranes and Sir Houston Stewart. In 1833 Hay entered Rugby School. In 1834 he joined the navy as a first-class volunteer aboard the frigate 'Thalia', flagship of Rear-Admiral Campbell on the Cape of Good Hope station. In 1835 and 1836 he served in the brig 'Trinculo' on the west coast of Africa anti-slavery patrol, and was very nearly turned out of the navy by Sir Robert Peel's brief administration, which disapproved of his entry by the preceding Admiralty board. After his return to Britain in 1836 Hay was briefly appointed to the 'Minden' (72 guns) in the channel squadron before he joined the frigate 'Imogene' (Captain Henry Bruce) for the South America and Pacific station. On 25 January 1837 he became a midshipman. He returned to Britain in November 1839 and then joined the 'Benbow' (72 guns, Captain Houston Stewart) in the Mediterranean. During the Syrian campaign of 1840 he was noticed for his conduct during the boat attack on Tortosa on 26 August. Having been passed for lieutenant on 17 February 1841, he joined the steamer 'Spiteful' (Captain William Maitland) for the China station in late 1842. Despite a severe illness Hay remained on the station, relying on his relative, the new commander-in-chief Admiral Sir Thomas Cochrane, for promotion. In October 1844 he was appointed by Cochrane his flag lieutenant aboard the 'Agincourt', where he served for a year before promotion to commander of the 'Wolverine' on 28 August 1846. He returned home in 1847. 
On 18 August 1847 Hay married the Hon. Eliza Napier, third daughter of William Napier, eighth Baron Napier. He was appointed to the brig 'Columbine' in December, and joined her in Chinese waters. In 1849 he engaged and destroyed the fleet of the notorious pirate Shap'ngtzai. In the first action with a pirate squadron, on 28-9 September 1849, he was helped by the P. & O. steamer 'Canton'. The main pirate fleet was pursued by Hay, with the steamers 'Fury' and 'Phlegethon', and destroyed in the Tonkin River. There were no British casualties. For this service Hay was promoted post captain on 20 January 1850. He attended the Royal Naval College at Portsmouth in 1851, and saw no further service until 1853, when he was appointed captain of HMS 'Victory', flagship of Vice-Admiral Sir Thomas Cochrane at Portsmouth. Early in 1854 Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Napier applied for him as flag captain for the Baltic fleet, but Cochrane and Sir James Graham, the first lord, retained him at Portsmouth to supervise the manning of ships being fitted for service. 
At the end of 1854 Hay took command of the steam screw battleship 'Hannibal' (91 guns) in the Black Sea as flag captain to Rear-Admiral Houston Stewart. He took part in the capture of Kerch and Kinburn and the re-embarkation of the Crimean army. When the 'Hannibal' paid off in October 1856 Hay followed Stewart, and in 1857, after an illness, took command of the sailing battleship 'Indus' (70 guns), flagship on the North America and West Indies station. He left the 'Indus' in September 1859 and came ashore for the last time. In October he served on the royal commission to investigate the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, and the following year he chaired the committee to inquire into armour plate, which sat for nearly five years. This resulted in his election as a fellow of the Royal Society in 1864. 
On 19 March 1861 he became third baronet, and in March 1862 Hay was elected Conservative MP for Wakefield and continued in parliament until July 1865. His main themes were the crowded state of the navy list, and the inadequacy of the navy. He secured the payment of the prize money for the capture of Kerch in 1862. In June 1864 he became chairman of the Millwall Shipbuilding Company and several other commercial concerns. On 6 April 1866 he was promoted rear-admiral, missing the offer of a ship. A month later he was elected for Stamford, a seat at the disposal of Lord Exeter, which he retained for the next fourteen years. In 1866 he was appointed junior naval lord in the Derby ministry, and by threatening to resign helped to secure four new battleships, which did not endear him to Disraeli, who, as chancellor, wanted to keep down the estimates. He directed the transport arrangements of the Abyssinia campaign. 
On 1 March 1870 Hay, who had not served afloat as an admiral and was only forty-nine years old, was placed on the list of officers to be retired under the reform introduced by the Liberal first lord, Hugh Childers. When Hay protested in parliament, Childers offered him the East Indies command, but this was refused on the advice of Disraeli. Hay had applied for a command while at the board, but had been dissuaded by his political colleagues. He was offered the post of first or second naval lord in 1874 by Disraeli, but turned this down as he believed that retired officers should not be placed in authority over those still serving. Disraeli did not reappoint him to the active list -- Hay's friend Henry Corry had promised to do so, but he had died in 1873. Hay remained on the retired list, serving as chairman of the explosive substances committee. In 1874 he published 'Ashanti and the Gold Coast', which dealt with an area he had visited in his youth (1834-5). During the 1878 Russian war scare, Hay advised Disraeli to reinforce the fleet by purchasing four ironclads that were being built in Britain for foreign powers. In 1880 Hay lost his seat at Stamford, but was returned for the Wigton burghs until he stepped down in 1886. He was made CB (1869), KCB (1885), and GCB (1902). He was one of the last admirals to believe that it was possible for a naval officer to be first lord. In 1898 he published his memoirs, 'Lines from my Log-Books'. He died at his London home, 108 St George's Square, on 28 January 1912, leaving three sons and five daughters. 
Hay entered the navy surrounded by relatives and close friends, and his marriage to a daughter of Lord Napier increased the family group to include almost every significant Scottish sea officer. An able, hard-working, and well-connected officer, Hay reached the rank of captain through the support of Sir Thomas Cochrane and his own exertions. He never commanded a private ship as a captain, and despite his talents and youth was denied the opportunity for a flag appointment. His later career was dominated by tory politics, and by the animus against him and the navy generally that was evident in Disraeli's conduct before 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 50214


Berkeley, James, first Baron Berkeley (c.1394-1463), nobleman, born in Raglan, Monmouthshire, was the son of Sir James Berkeley and Elizabeth Bluet and claimant to the Berkeley barony. He was dubbed 'James the Just' by the family historian James Smyth. The castle and hundred of Berkeley, Gloucestershire, had descended in the direct line of the lords Berkeley from the early twelfth century. By 1346 the value of the estate under Lord Thomas ('the Rich') had increased to $1150 p.a., and the marriage of his grandson Thomas to Margaret, daughter and eventual heir of Lord Lisle, added extensive properties in southern England. About 1400 this Lord Thomas ('the Magnificent'), the fifth baron (counting from a writ of summons issued to Thomas de Berkeley in 1295), commanded an income and retinue the size of a lesser earl, his household numbered upward of three hundred persons and was a centre of culture and patronage, and the family had a tradition of distinguished military service and high standing in national affairs. But Lord Thomas's sole child was his daughter Elizabeth Berkeley, married to Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. Though heir-general to all the Berkeley and Lisle estates, her claim to the castle and hundred of Berkeley with its twelve manors, along with one in Somerset, was barred by an entail made in 1349 which limited these to a male heir. This was Thomas's nephew James Berkeley. Such a division would have dismembered the Berkeley inheritance and undermined the family's local hegemony. Lord Thomas never resolved this dilemma; indeed he worsened it through his own indecision, on the one hand seeking to bypass the entail to favour his daughter, on the other rearing James at Berkeley Castle as his heir. James Berkeley probably married first a daughter of Sir John St John (he was certainly contracted to her, though there is some doubt as to whether the marriage actually took place), and second, in 1414, one of Sir Humphrey Stafford ('c'.1379-1442), MP for Dorset, but both women died young and their names are now unknown. In 1423 or 1424 he married Lady Isabel (died 27 Sept 1452), widow of Henry Ferrers and daughter of Thomas (I) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk. 
When Lord Thomas died on 13 July 1417 Elizabeth and her husband quickly seized Berkeley Castle and secured interim custody of it from Henry V. James Berkeley found it impossible to implement his claim to the entailed lands, for Warwick's occupancy was legally safeguarded while he was fighting with Henry in France. In 1420 Berkeley (who was summoned to parliament as a baron in the following year; this summons was held in the modern period to have created a new peerage) secured the backing of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, then keeper of the realm in the king's absence, by a bribe of 1000 marks, while the countess of Warwick solicited support from his brother John, duke of Bedford. Each side sought to strengthen its claims by acts of self-help, involving armed confrontation and skirmishes around Berkeley. Fearing that the feud might grow, the council of the young Henry VI persuaded both parties to accept arbitration under heavy financial penalties, but only after a succession of awards had failed, and following Elizabeth's death in 1422 and Warwick's remarriage, was an abiding settlement agreed in 1425. By this Berkeley received Berkeley Castle and most of the entailed lands while the earl was given a life interest in seven manors and until his death in 1439 retained his wife's inheritance, the Lisle lands, 'by courtesy of England'. On this basis both sides lived in peace, though Berkeley, who had been knighted by the infant Henry VI in 1426, was forced to mortgage lands and goods 'and lived and died in far meaner part and condition than his ancestors' (Smyth, 2.48). In 1436 his income was assessed at no more than $333. 
If James Berkeley looked to recover not only the lands held by Warwick but the Lisle inheritance in 1439 he was disappointed. For Warwick's daughters claimed their mother's inheritance and were backed by their husbands, John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, Edmund Beaufort, then earl of Dorset, and George Neville, Lord Latimer, all men of greater power than Lord James. Once again both sides agreed under heavy recognizances to abide arbitration, which eventually in 1448 awarded the disputed lands to the three coheiresses for life. This was not acceptable to Berkeley who resorted to force in 1450, precipitating a private war with Shrewsbury. In September 1451 Shrewsbury's son, Lord Lisle, captured Berkeley Castle, taking Berkeley and his sons prisoners, and forcing him to hand over the castle for two years as security. The countess likewise seized Isobel, Lady Berkeley, to prevent her from appealing to the king, thereby hastening her death. But in July 1453 Shrewsbury and Lisle were both killed at the battle of Castillon in Gascony. Berkeley now found the new earl of Shrewsbury more ready to compromise and his marriage to the earl's sister, Joan, signalled the end of the dispute, formalized by a final reconciliation with the old countess shortly before his death in Berkeley Castle in late November 1463. He was buried in the family chapel at Berkeley church where his tomb and effigy survive. The final contest was a duel fought between his son William Berkeley and the new Lord Lisle, Thomas Talbot, with their followers, at Nibley Green on 20 March 1470 where Lisle was mortally wounded. 
James Berkeley's lifelong struggle to secure his inheritance seems to have monopolized his energies, for he took no part in war or politics, often absenting himself from parliaments, and was only intermittently named on local commissions. Whether this effacement reflected his circumstances or his temperament is now impossible to say. As Smyth wrote, 'the power and malice of the adversaries of this Lord James kept him for the most part within doors like a prisoner from youth to age' (2.96). Undoubtedly his lack of political standing and influence handicapped him in his contest with such major figures as the earls of Warwick and Shrewsbury. Technically a lawsuit between the heir-general and the heir male, it was essentially a struggle for land and power in Gloucestershire, fought by political rather than legal or even military means. Lord James's tenacity and longevity procured the survival of the Berkeley barony but as a mere shadow of its former wealth and esteem. 


@@@@@


doc= 50215


Hay, Lord John (1827-1916), naval officer and politician, was the ninth child and fourth son of George Hay, eighth marquess of Tweeddale (1787-1876) and his wife, Lady Susan Montagu (1797-1870), daughter of the duke of Manchester. He was born in Geneva on 23 August 1827. His namesake uncle significantly furthered his early career. He joined the navy in 1839, and served in the 'Vestal' on the China station from 1842 to 1847, including the final stages of the First Opium War. He was promoted lieutenant on 19 December 1846, and came home in the following year with the steam sloop 'Spiteful'. Between 1848 and 1851 he served in the 'Powerful' (Captain Richard Dundas) in the Mediterranean, and on 28 August 1851 he was promoted commander. He returned to the Mediterranean as commander of the steam screw sloop 'Wasp' in 1852 and remained in her during the Eastern crisis of 1853 and Black Sea campaign of 1854, playing a noteworthy part in the defence of Eupatoria in November. 
Hay was made captain on 27 November 1854, by which time he and most of his crew were serving ashore with the naval brigade. He left the command of the 'Wasp' in February 1855, and was wounded on 9 April while serving ashore. He then returned to Britain, and was made a CB on 5 July 1855. In December he was appointed to command the screw mortar frigate 'Forte', part of the 'great armament' assembled for an assault on Kronstadt in early 1856. After participating in the Spithead review of St George's day, which both celebrated the peace and issued a warning to rival powers, he continued in the ship until November that year. After he came ashore he took the parliamentary seat for Wick, but on the return to office of Palmerston in 1859 he was appointed to the paddle frigate 'Odin' for the East Indies and China station. He commanded a division of gunboats during the second capture of the Taku (Dagu) forts in August 1860, and became commodore on the station in 1861, remaining there until 1863. 
Having been elected MP for Ripon, a pocket borough controlled by Earl De Grey, in April 1866 Hay joined the Admiralty board, serving out the last three months of Russell's Liberal administration. Defeated at the polls in 1867, he returned to his Ripon seat in 1868 and rejoined the board. His tact and good sense helped to keep naval administration functioning during the turbulent period under Hugh Childers, when the Admiralty board was reduced to a cipher and the senior personnel were engaged in a bitter power struggle. In May 1871, shortly after the resignation of Childers, Hay resigned both his seats and took command of the ironclad 'Hotspur' until his promotion to rear-admiral on 7 May 1872. From 1875 to 1876 he was second in command of the Channel Fleet. During this command he married Annie Christina, daughter of Norman Lambert MP, of Denham Court, Buckinghamshire. 
Hay was appointed commander-in-chief of the Channel Fleet in November 1877, and was promoted vice-admiral on 21 December 1877. During the strategic redeployment caused by the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8 and the Russian war scare of 1878 he took three battleships from his fleet to reinforce the Mediterranean Fleet. Under the Cyprus convention he took formal possession of the island from the Turkish authorities on 8 July 1879. In 1880 he returned to the Admiralty as second naval lord on Lord Northbrook's board. He resigned in February 1883 to become commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, in the 'Alexandra' (Captain Rawson), where his fleet supplied naval parties to survey the Nile and support the Gordon relief expedition. While in the Mediterranean, Hay tried to draw attention to the weakness of the navy, but was largely ignored until the 'truth about the navy' alarm generated by Admiral Sir Geoffrey Hornby and W. T. Stead in 1884. In February 1885 Hay served as commander of an international fleet blockading Crete, then a Turkish possession, against Greek intervention. 
Hay left the Mediterranean command in March 1886, and that year was briefly first naval lord, under his old friend and patron the marquess of Ripon. Between May 1887 and December 1888 Hay served as commander-in-chief at Devonport, and on hauling down his flag he was promoted admiral of the fleet. He was placed on the retired list on 23 August 1897, and died at his home, Fulmer Place, Fulmer, Buckinghamshire, on 4 May 1916; his wife survived him. Hay was one of the last 'political' admirals: his family connections and Liberal politics played a vital part in his career, though his service in the Crimea and China justified his promotion. His Admiralty service always coincided with Liberal administrations, as did almost all his seagoing commands. An officer of solid talents, he had a career crowned with a rare distinction, even though he lacked the eminence of his near contemporary Geoffrey Hornby. 


@@@@@


doc= 50216


Berkeley, William, marquess of Berkeley (1426-1492), magnate, the eldest son of James Berkeley, first Baron Berkeley (d. 1463), and Isabel, widow of Henry Ferrers and daughter of Thomas (I) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk, and Elizabeth Fitzalan, was born at Berkeley Castle. He accompanied Cardinal Beaufort to the peace negotiations at Calais in 1439, presumably as a member of his household, and was knighted shortly after his return. His adolescence was dominated by the great feud between the Berkeleys and the Talbots over the descent of the Lisle barony which Thomas, Lord Berkeley, had enjoyed in right of his wife and which had passed via his daughter Elizabeth to his three granddaughters, among whom the Berkeleys' most committed opponent was Margaret, wife of the first earl of Shrewsbury. In 1451 a settlement was reached which was very much in the Talbots' favour, and which included the requirement that William Berkeley should enter the household of the earl of Shrewsbury's son Lord Lisle as surety for his father's observance of the agreement. The dispute lapsed until the death of James, Lord Berkeley, in November 1463, but was reopened by William and came to a head in 1470 when Margaret's grandson and heir, Thomas Talbot, Viscount Lisle, challenged Berkeley to battle during a period when royal authority had been defied by the rebellion of Warwick and Clarence. The challenge was accepted and the two forces met at Nibley Green, Gloucestershire, on 20 March, where Lisle was killed. 
The costs which Berkeley incurred in pursuing the dispute made him vulnerable to royal pressure when the descent of the Mowbray duchy of Norfolk became an issue on the death of the last duke in January 1476, leaving a daughter, Anne, whom Edward IV chose as the wife for his second son, Richard. In May 1476, when the marriage was being planned but had not yet been effected, Berkeley agreed to surrender all his reversionary rights in the Mowbray inheritance to Prince Richard and his heirs, and, failing such heirs, to the king and his heirs male. In return Edward took over Berkeley's debts totalling $34,000. In April 1481, probably as an encouragement to make the formal conveyance of the inheritance, which he had not yet done, Berkeley was made a viscount. On 19 November 1481 Anne died, and her estates, instead of reverting to the heirs general, Berkeley and his cousin John, Lord Howard, were settled on her young widower. 
On 28 June 1483, two days after his accession, Richard III, in response to a petition from Berkeley, cancelled the settlement and divided the Mowbray inheritance between Howard, who became duke of Norfolk, and Berkeley, who was made earl of Nottingham. It seems, however, to have been understood from the outset that Berkeley would make over his share to the king. The formal grant was not made until 23 October 1484, but the manors concerned were at Richard's disposal earlier in the reign. The agreement was voided by the king's death at Bosworth. Howard died in the same battle and the Mowbray title of earl marshal, which he had held, was granted by Henry VII to Berkeley during pleasure on 26 October 1485. 
To the disgust of the family historian, who dubbed him 'William Waste-all', Berkeley, who was by now childless and likely to remain so, continued to use his lands to buy advancement under the new regime. On 19 February 1486 he granted William Stanley his share of the Mowbray lands in Wales and the march, presumably in return for Stanley's support in having the title of earl marshal made into a life grant on the same day. In December 1488 he granted the reversion of Berkeley itself to Henry VII should he die childless and was rewarded with the title of marquess the following month. Grants were made on similar terms to several of the king's courtiers, including Reynold Bray, Thomas Stanley, earl of Derby, Richard Willoughby, and Humphrey Talbot, and it was evidently at court where Berkeley now spent most of his time. In 1490 he leased a house in the sanctuary, Westminster, and lived there for the remainder of his life. 
Berkeley married three times. His first wife, whom he married in 1466, was Elizabeth, daughter of Reynold West, Lord de la Warr, and Margaret, daughter of Robert Thorley. Berkeley repudiated her shortly afterwards, whereupon she appealed to Rome, but the dissolution was upheld and in November 1468 he married Joan, widow of Sir William Willoughby and daughter of Sir Thomas Strangways and Katherine, daughter of Ralph Neville, earl of Westmorland. She died on 24 February 1485 and was buried in the Augustinian friary in London, where Berkeley himself was subsequently buried. His third wife was Anne, daughter of Sir John Fiennes, Lord Dacre, and Alice, daughter of Henry, Lord Fitzhugh. Berkeley died on 14 February 1492. His widow married Sir Thomas Brandon; she died on 10 September 1497 and was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor. Berkeley had two children with Joan: Katherine and Thomas ('b'. 1470). Both died in 1475 or shortly afterwards, when negotiations were under way for Thomas's marriage to Mary, daughter of William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. Berkeley's heir was thus his brother Maurice. The two brothers had apparently been allies in 1470, when Maurice was granted an annuity for his support at Nibley Green, but Berkeley's land transactions from 1476 onwards were all at Maurice's expense, who inherited nothing at his brother's death. Only with the end of the male Tudor line at the death of Edward VI were the Berkeleys able to regain some of their alienated estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 50217


Bonville, William, first Baron Bonville (1392-1461), administrator and landowner, was probably born at Shute, near Axminster, Devon, the son of John Bonville (died 1396) and his wife, Elizabeth Fitzroger ('b'. 'c'.1370, died in or before 1421), and heir to both his father and grandfather, Sir William Bonville (died 1408). He was married twice, first in 1414 to Margaret, daughter of Reynold Grey, third Baron Grey of Ruthin, and second, by 1430, to Elizabeth (died 1471), daughter of Edward Courtenay, eleventh earl of Devon, and widow of John, Lord Harington (died 1418). Her tomb at Porlock, Somerset, survives. William Bonville's son and grandson were both killed in 1460, and his estates passed on his death to his infant granddaughter, Cicely, who later married Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset (d. 1501). 
Bonville's grandfather and namesake had been among the most prominent west-country gentry in the late fourteenth century, serving as MP for Devon and Somerset on ten and seven occasions respectively, and receiving a large number of local offices and commissions. He was a liveried retainer of the leading regional magnate, Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon, a close political and family bond that was destined to be violently sundered in the mid-fifteenth century. 
The elder Sir William's two marriages, and that of his son, John, brought substantial property with them, and this, together with many purchases and inheritances, ensured that William, Lord Bonville, enjoyed one of the most valuable estates in the south-west, valued in 1435 at about $900 net per annum -- a figure not far short of that enjoyed by the fifteenth-century earls of Devon themselves. Bonville's estates included outliers in many counties, but were concentrated in south-east Devon (where Shute was his principal seat) and mid-Somerset (including Chewton Mendip). 
Bonville entered most of his estates in 1414 (their keeping during his minority having been entrusted to Edward, duke of York) and cut his teeth in military service in 1415 under Henry V's brother, Thomas, duke of Clarence, one of whose executors he became. He was active in west-country administration from the early 1420s. While his extensive and complex inheritances led to some violent disputes with neighbours during these years, these were on nothing like the scale of disorder that was to characterize Bonville's notorious conflict with the Courtenays during the 1440s and 1450s. 
This power struggle was triggered by the appointment of Bonville in 1437 as royal steward in Cornwall for life. This was seen by the young Thomas Courtenay, thirteenth earl of Devon, recently come of age and in possession of a severely reduced inheritance, as a serious challenge to his own regional authority. The bitterness of the strife that grew from this was symptomatic of a change in the local balance of power and wealth that had over a generation tilted against the Courtenay earls (the traditional leaders of west-country society) in favour of a small group of powerful gentry among whom Bonville was pre-eminent. 
Violence reached an alarming level during the summers of 1439 and 1440, and the situation was worsened by a serious blunder on the part of the government -- the appointment of the earl to the stewardship of the duchy of Cornwall, a post so similar to that held by Bonville as to be hardly distinguishable from it. Urgent attempts at even-handedness and arbitration failed, and the dispute was only temporarily resolved by the appointment of Bonville as seneschal of Gascony in December 1442, thereby removing him temporarily from the scene (he sailed from Plymouth in March 1443 but was back in Devon by April 1445). Even though the government, coming increasingly under the influence of the duke of Suffolk, was careful not to antagonize the earl of Devon, the latter was clearly seen to be the principal culprit. Bonville's connection with Suffolk grew stronger. He was a member of Suffolk's entourage at Margaret of Anjou's betrothal ceremonies at Rouen in May 1444, and married his daughter Elizabeth to one of Suffolk's henchmen, Sir William Tailboys. This development culminated in the parliament of 1449, when Bonville was raised to the peerage as Baron Bonville of Chewton. 
Antagonisms hardened after the fall of Suffolk in 1450. The earl of Devon attached himself to the duke of York, and felt confident enough in the summer of 1451 to risk an encounter in the field with Bonville (and his ally, James Butler, earl of Wiltshire). Despite much plunder and violence, a major showdown was avoided when York's unexpected arrival in the west country persuaded the earl of Devon to lift the siege of Taunton Castle, which Bonville had made his headquarters. Although temporarily imprisoned (as were Devon and the other principal malcontents), Bonville was soon able to exploit the dramatically changed political situation that followed the humiliating submission of York and Devon to the king at Dartford on 3 March 1452. 
Between 1452 and 1455 Bonville became the dominant force in west-country politics. It was he who was made responsible for bringing Devon and his adherents to justice, and the king personally reinforced his position by staying at Bonville's house at Shute on his progress through the west country in the summer of 1452. Bonville was confirmed as steward of the duchy of Cornwall in 1452 (the post that had triggered the violence in 1439), and appointed constable of Exeter Castle in 1453, both posts to be held for life. He was active at sea as well as on land -- he had been appointed again as seneschal of Gascony in September 1453 but did not take up the post -- and his maritime activities were energetic enough to bring forth complaints of piracy from the duke of Burgundy. 
These partisan appointments of Bonville to positions within the earl of Devon's traditional zone of influence forced the earl to take increasingly desperate measures, especially as the marriage of Bonville's grandson about 1455 to Katherine, a daughter of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, further entrenched him within the dominant Yorkist circle. On 23 October 1455 Devon's son and other retainers murdered Nicholas Radford, one of Bonville's senior councillors, and embarked on a campaign of violence which this time did culminate in battle, at Clyst on 13 December. Bonville fared the worse but escaped; after a short period of incarceration Courtenay resumed his campaign of violence against Bonville which lasted well into 1456. 
While the level of local violence appears to have abated thereafter, the enmities that had grown over more than twenty years proved irresolvable. The death in 1458 of Bonville's old adversary afforded him little comfort. The new earl of Devon -- another Thomas Courtenay, the killer of Radford -- quickly gained favour with Queen Margaret, and this presented enormous risks for Bonville and his family. Bonville was probably present at the parliament of 1460 that recognized York's right of succession to the throne, and both his son and grandson were caught up with York's ill-judged march north and perished at the battle of Wakefield on 31 December 1460. Bonville himself, while consolidating his west-country alliances, remained about the court. Aged nearly seventy, he, with Sir Thomas Kyriell, was given custody of the king's person when the Yorkist forces under the earl of Warwick met those of the Lancastrians at the second battle of St Albans on 17 February 1461. The Yorkists were defeated and the king's guardians were captured. The earl of Devon had been present, too, and at his and the queen's instigation, two days after the battle, a mock trial was held before the young prince of Wales, and on 19 February 1461 Bonville and Kyriell were executed. 


@@@@@


doc= 50218


Courtenay, Thomas, thirteenth earl of Devon (1414-1458), magnate, was the only surviving child and heir of Hugh Courtenay, twelfth earl of Devon (died 1422), and Anne (died 1441), daughter of Richard, Lord Talbot. He married Margaret, a daughter of John Beaufort, marquess of Dorset and of Somerset (c.1371-1410), and had with her three sons -- Thomas ['see below'], who succeeded as earl, and Henry and John, who both died unmarried -- and a daughter of Elizabeth who married the royal servant Hugh Conway at some date before 1487. 
At the time of the twelfth earl's death the earldom of Devon was the single largest secular estate in that county. With lands concentrated in the southern and central parts of Devon, but with significant outliers in neighbouring counties, the earls enjoyed an annual landed income of about $1500 net in the later middle ages. These extensive estates, together with the family's comital status -- restored to the Courtenay family in 1335, and held in conjunction with the honours of Plympton and Okehampton -- gave the earls considerable political authority in the region. On a national scale, however, the Courtenay earls of Devon were among the poorest families of their rank. 
Thomas Courtenay's father had been one of Henry V's most active wartime commanders, and spent almost all his brief period as earl of Devon (1419-22) on service overseas. When Thomas, after a long minority, aged eighteen and already a father, was given leave to enter his estates in February 1433, they represented barely half the full resources of the earldom. Not only did his mother, Countess Anne, enjoy her customary dowager third of the estate, but Earl Hugh had also entailed various other lands upon her. She lived until 1441 and occupied the chief seat of the earldom -- Tiverton Castle, Devon, recently renovated by Thomas's grandfather -- forcing Thomas himself to dwell in a secondary seat not far away at Colcombe, near Colyton. 
Longer-term factors also exacerbated the situation. A significant redistribution of landed wealth within the upper echelons of west-country society had taken place since the late fourteenth century, and this meant that by 1441 the earl of Devon no longer possessed the clear ascendancy enjoyed by his predecessors. He was now challenged as a local source of patronage by a number of ambitious gentry families who enjoyed estates comparable in value to his own. Some of these families were elevated to the peerage during the course of the fifteenth century, such as the Brookes (lords Cobham), the Dynhams, and, pre-eminent among them, the Bonvilles. This local background helps explain Earl Thomas's response to national political developments. Henry VI's rule in the 1440s and 1450s, marked by drift and factionalism, served in the west country as elsewhere to inflame already heightened regional tensions. 
Despite these disadvantages, alliances forged earlier by his father served Devon well at first. It is probable that the eight-year-old Thomas had been placed in the care of his future wife's family, the Beauforts, in 1422. His career in the late 1420s and 1430s followed the conventional pattern for a young aristocrat of the period -- knighted in November 1429, he received numerous grants, saw military service abroad, and was appointed to commissions of the peace in the west country. 
As political life polarized in the late 1430s and 1440s, Devon's connection with the Beaufort clique began to pay dividends. More grants followed, and in May 1441 he was appointed steward of the duchy of Cornwall -- a blunder on the part of the government, since Bonville had been granted an almost identical post some years earlier which he still held. Nor were the benefits Devon acquired exclusively local for, in May 1445, he was appointed steward of England at the coronation of Queen Margaret -- a well-orchestrated demonstration of the Beaufort family's power at court. 
But an attachment to the Beaufort faction also carried risks. As it began to lose ground at court in the face of the growing influence of the duke of Suffolk's circle (to which Bonville was connected), so Devon came to be excluded from access to royal patronage. He did not help himself: aided and abetted by his Beaufort kinsmen, his struggle with Bonville for the stewardship of the duchy of Cornwall had turned violent enough to alarm the government in 1441, and (unlike Bonville) Devon refused to serve abroad in March 1443, hoping rather to strengthen his position at home. He was later to see action at Pont-l'Eveque, Normandy, in 1446, however, and after the death of Cardinal Beaufort in the summer of 1447 he began to attend court more regularly. The government attempted to deal even-handedly with both Devon and Bonville, but the former continued to lose ground to his rival, who was elevated to the peerage at the parliament of 1449 when, significantly, Devon suffered the indignity of losing his claim of parliamentary precedence over the earl of Arundel. 
Bonville's continued favour at court under Suffolk and, after the latter's death in 1450, the earl of Somerset, did not immediately undermine Devon's local power base in the south-west, and his control over the Devon electorate remained strong throughout 1449 and 1450. Devon's growing attachment to the duke of York enhanced his own authority; his and York's troops briefly controlled London in the last months of 1450, during York's display of strength on his return from Wales to challenge Henry VI's advisers, and Devon used his connection with York to challenge Bonville and his friends in the field. Most local gentry kept their heads down when events turned violent, but the forces mobilized by the earl of Devon in the west country, ostensibly in support of York, still contained a respectable gentry contingent. His military campaign against Bonville almost succeeded in catching his prey, but ultimately led to humiliation and temporary imprisonment following York's submission to Henry VI at Dartford (March 1452). The ensuing eighteen months of exclusion from court irreversibly undermined Devon's hold on power in the localities. 
Bonville used the period to good effect, and the local parliamentary returns and appointments to commissions favoured his associates and sucked the life out of Devon's 'connection'. The uncertainties that resulted from Henry VI's sudden insanity in July 1453, and the political crisis that followed, prompted Bonville to strengthen his forces both on land and at sea, and helped bring about Devon's indictment on a charge of treason. His acquittal cleared the path for York's appointment as protector (March 1454), but Bonville had so effectively entrenched himself in the west country that York had little alternative but to retain his services there. 
Although Earl Thomas attended a number of council meetings, his greatest energies were directed towards bolstering his position at home. Law and order in Devon deteriorated alarmingly, and reached their nadir late in 1455. In the short term the earl appears to have retained the confidence of the duke of York, who used him as an intermediary between himself and the king in a last-ditch effort to avert bloodshed on the eve of the first battle of St Albans, on 22 May 1455. He accompanied the captive king back to London after the battle as a member of York's entourage but, for reasons that remain unclear, Devon was unable or unwilling to exploit York's token of good will. York built up connections with a number of families, such as the extensive and powerful Neville clan, who were at the same time deepening or forging closer ties with Bonville. Feeling desperate and threatened, Devon and his sons resorted to extreme violence. The brutal murder by his retainers of Nicholas Radford, a greatly respected lawyer and councillor of Bonville, shocked even the hardened sensibilities of the age. A winter of widespread disorder led to a pitched battle between Devon and Bonville at Clyst Bridge, east of Exeter (15 December 1455). Indecisive though it was, the battle led to the earl's arrest and it was only Henry VI's intervention after his resumption of power that saved him from being tried for treason. 
Exclusion from court patronage significantly undermined Devon's position at home. Far fewer Devon gentry had supported him at Clyst than in his earlier campaigns, and the situation was not redeemed despite strenuous efforts by the earl to capitalize on a new alliance -- this time with the king and Queen Margaret. Pardoned for his offences, he was restored to the bench of JPs and granted the keeping of the park and forest of Clarendon (February 1457). Devon was believed by some to have attempted to bring about a reconciliation between York and King Henry, but he died suddenly (but probably naturally) at Abingdon Abbey on 3 February 1458. 
Thomas Courtenay, earl of Devon, has achieved notoriety as one of the more unruly of the 'overmighty subjects' who destabilized political life in the middle years of the fifteenth century. The private wars in which he was engaged in the 1440s and 1450s briefly pushed him to the centre of the national stage, first as a supporter of Richard, duke of York, and second as the instigator of violence so severe as to predispose many lords towards the establishment of York's second protectorate (in November 1455). But violence was entered upon only as a last resort when peaceful channels seemed closed to him, and Devon's career illustrates as graphically as any during the period the effects on a landed aristocrat of long-term financial crisis and exclusion from power and influence at court. 
The thirteenth earl's eldest son and successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 50220


Dacre, Thomas, second Baron Dacre of Gilsland (1467-1525), magnate and soldier, was born on 25 November 1467, the eldest son of Humphrey Dacre, first Baron Dacre (died 1485), and his wife, Mabel Parr (died 1508). Still a minor when his father died, Thomas's wardship was granted to his mother. He was already active in northern affairs, however, and was said to have 'raysed the north contrye' for Richard III in 1485 (Summerson, 'Carlisle and the English west march', 103). He quickly made his peace with Henry Tudor, who on 3 March 1486 gave him custody of the English west march, a position earlier held by his father. Dacre would hold it continuously, either as lieutenant or, from 1504, as warden, until a few months before his death. The wardenship was vital to his interests, since his principal possessions were the exposed border baronies of Burgh by Sands and Gilsland; their proximity to Scotland probably explains why Dacre was prepared to discharge the office's heavy military and administrative duties for a yearly salary of only 200 marks. In view of the region's solidly Yorkist sympathies, however, Henry VII also took care to divide authority in the north-west, appointing separate keepers for the city and castle of Carlisle (generally Sir Richard Salkeld), the lordship of Penrith (Sir Christopher Moresby), and Bewcastle (Sir John Musgrave). It was said of Dacre and Moresby that 'the kinges strength within the counte of Cumberland dependith in effect oonly betwixt thaym twoo' (TNA: PRO, STAC2/26/11), but the result was a struggle for power. Only following an improvement in relations with Scotland did the king's grip relax. Dacre was successively allowed to farm the shrievalty of Cumberland, Penrith (after Moresby's death in 1499), and in 1501 given charge of Carlisle. 
The gradual reduction in royal subventions which these changes entailed threw the marchers back on their own resources. Yet initially Dacre was in no position to meet the challenge. His battle-hardened tenantry constituted a significant military resource, but his ancestral possessions were scarcely worth $300 a year, even in peacetime, and Dacre's two baronies were acutely vulnerable to Scottish raids. In the long term Dacre's marriage in 1487 to Elizabeth Greystoke (1471-1516), granddaughter of Ralph Greystoke, fifth Baron Greystoke (d. 1487) ['see under 'Greystoke family], offered a solution. Greystoke was a much wealthier barony than Gilsland, and Elizabeth was heir to estates throughout the north worth some $850 annually, thereby not only providing a much more certain income but also transforming Dacre's standing from impoverished border baron to regional magnate. Dacre had abducted Elizabeth, a royal ward, from the Clifford castle of Brougham, Westmorland, but later suggested that there had been a pre-contract between them. The Greystoke inheritance was also claimed by Lord Greystoke's second son, Sir John Greystoke, as heir male. The resulting succession dispute was exploited by Henry VII as a means of controlling his turbulent warden. At first he allowed both parties to secure some estates, and although the unexpected deaths of Sir John and his son in 1501 and 1508 respectively made Elizabeth sole heir, the king still extracted substantial fines for livery from Dacre in 1501, and subsequently forced him to give no less than twelve recognizances, including one in 1506 for 'his goode aberinge' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/1 fol. 71'v'). Dacre was also subjected to a 'quo warranto' challenge to his rights and franchises in Gilsland. 
In spite of occasional clashes Henry VII, and Henry VIII likewise in the first years of his reign, was anxious to keep the peace with Scotland. Dacre was much involved in the diplomacy to which this policy gave rise, usually through agents but sometimes in person, most strikingly when in 1504 he collaborated with James IV when the latter led a force against thieves in Eskdale; the two men played cards as well as co-operating to hang border bandits. Dacre visited the Scottish court as late as 1513 in an attempt to prevent the outbreak of war, but the failure of this pacific policy gave him much greater scope for his particular talents. Henry VIII's military ambitions were chiefly directed against France, but Scotland's 'auld alliance' with that country automatically entailed war for England on two fronts. Dacre's wardenship of the west march had been renewed in July 1509. In 1511, with Berwick under threat, he became warden-general of all three marches, at the remarkably ungenerous salary of $433 6's'. 8died He distinguished himself at Flodden, leading a cavalry charge to repel a dangerous Scottish onslaught early in the battle, and as he himself later wrote, earning the hatred of the Scots afterwards 'by reason that I found the body of the King of Scots slain in the field' ('LP Henry VIII', 2/1 no. 2913). Thereafter Dacre's unrivalled knowledge of leading Scottish officials and borderers was constantly employed to keep the marches in uproar; in 1518 he was elected to the Order of the Garter for his services. 
Except when a lieutenant and army royal came north for major campaigns, Dacre remained in charge of the English borders until 1525. He had been warden of the middle marches before (1502-6), but he had no lands in the east marches, and although he was given custody of the archbishopric of York's liberty of Hexham and the Tailboys liberty of Redesdale, neither those lordships nor his own modest territorial base round Morpeth proved a match for the extensive Percy interest and connection in Northumberland. But the fifth earl of Northumberland could not win the king's trust and was excluded from border office. The more substantial gentry families, accustomed to Percy leadership, increasingly resented Dacre as an intruder, forcing him to develop closer ties with the more lawless upland squires and even with the barely controllable border clans or 'surnames'. On the west march, by contrast, where he was the obvious choice as warden, Dacre improved his holdings and extended his 'manred' by buying and retenanting strategic wastelands. He also built or strengthened key castles like Naworth, Askerton, Kirkoswald, Rockcliffe, and Drumburgh. In 1523, when he raised 4000 men for a Scottish campaign, the earl of Surrey reported that Dacre could 'bringe out of his contre 2 or 3000 men' to strengthen the east marches and may 'at all tymes with litle charge have 4 or 5000 men off his owne' to resist invasion, 'and so can noone other man doo' ('State Papers, Henry VIII', 4.12, 29, 51, 54). Yet despite this emphasis on military service rather than rents from his tenantry, Dacre's estates still yielded over $1500 per annum, making him the eighth most wealthy English peer. 
Dacre was still active on the borders in the early 1520s. In September 1522 he kept his nerve when a substantial Scottish army under the duke of Albany threatened to attack Cumberland, playing for time at first by claiming to be unable to read Albany's letters, which were written in French, and eventually persuading the Scots to withdraw. Wolsey, aware of the weaknesses of Carlisle's defences, saw their retreat as a miracle. A year later there was another invasion scare, and Dacre mustered the men of the west march, but in the end the Scots attacked in the east. By 1524, however, Dacre was pleading to be discharged from his increasingly unwelcome duties in Northumberland, on account of age, debility, gout, and a sore leg. But his suggestions that Henry, Lord Percy, the fifth earl's son, should succeed him were unavailing, and despairing of release he relaxed his grip on the 'surnames'. As the marches collapsed in disorder, Dacre was summoned before the council in Star Chamber in January 1525, charged with 'bearinge of theaves' (BL, Lansdowne MS 1, fol. 43). He was imprisoned, fined $1000, and dismissed. Released in September, he died on the borders on 24 October 1525, killed by a fall from his horse. He was buried in his family's mausoleum in Lanercost Priory. 
Surrey wrote of Dacre that 'there is no hardier or better knight' ('LP Henry VIII', 3/2, no. 3364). Yet to say that Dacre's disgrace in 1525 'marked the end of the age of the medieval robber baron' is misleading (Guy, 123), even though Tudor monarchs were henceforth distrustful of Dacre's style of marcher lordship. He was a cultured noble, with 'good wit and good fortune' (GEC, 'Peerage', 4.20 n. e), who served the Tudors loyally and well for forty years. When he received Queen Margaret at Morpeth in 1515, a courtier reported that he had 'not sene myche a better trymmed howse of a barons house in my lyfe', and he commented enthusiastically on the plate and 'the hangynges of the hall and chambyrs with the newest devyse of tappestry' (TNA: PRO, SP 49/1, fols. 58-9). Dacre was also a conscientious patron of Lanercost Priory. He contributed towards works there -- his arms appear on the church facade -- and in 1524 wrote to the convent expressing fears that the house's religious life might suffer because the prior was devoting so much time to building. Elizabeth Greystoke died in 1516, and two years later Dacre was hoping to marry the widow of Sir Christopher Pickering, but nothing came of this. His heir was his son William Dacre, whom he matched with the fourth earl of Shrewsbury's daughter Elizabeth, and who also came to rule the west march, though without achieving the wider ascendancy that his father had enjoyed. The other children of his marriage were Humphrey, Mary (who married Shrewsbury's heir Francis Talbot), Mabel (who married Henry, seventh Lord Scrope of Bolton), and Joan. He also had an illegitimate son Thomas, founder of the Dacre family. 


@@@@@


doc= 50221


Ballard, George Alexander (1862-1948), naval officer, son of General John Archibald Ballard (1829-1880), and his wife, the daughter of Robert Scott-Moncrieff, was born at Bombay on 7 March 1862. After a few months at the well-known naval crammer, Dr Burney's academy, at Gosport, Hampshire, he entered the training ship 'Britannia' in January 1875. He first went to sea in January 1877 in the ironclads 'Resistance' and then 'Achilles', in the channel and Mediterranean, and was present at the forcing of the Dardanelles in February 1878. In September 1878 he joined the corvette 'Tourmaline', part of the 'flying squadron' which made a 21-month voyage round the world. He returned in July 1882 as an acting sub-lieutenant. He then trained as a torpedo specialist, and in August 1883 was appointed to the experimental torpedo boat depot ship 'Hecla', a converted merchant ship, which was presently dispatched with troops to the Red Sea, where Ballard, with many of his shipmates, was landed to campaign with the army in the Sudan. In March 1884 he was promoted lieutenant in the field. After returning to sea he served briefly in several ships in the Mediterranean before joining the gunboat 'Woodlark' at Rangoon in May 1885, and serving up-country in the Third Anglo-Burmese War, where he became General Prendergast's naval aide-de-camp, and took part in the storming of Mandalay. Between 1887 and 1895 he had appointments at home, in the Mediterranean, and on the China station, and in October 1895 he received his first command, the destroyer 'Janus' at Sheerness. From her he moved in May 1896 to the torpedo gunboat 'Renard', and in December 1897 was promoted commander. The following year he married Mary Frances, daughter of James Paterson of Whitelee, Selkirk; they had two sons and one daughter, and his wife survived him. 
After service as commander of the cruiser 'Isis', Ballard joined the naval intelligence division in February 1902, and in December 1903 was promoted captain. In 1906 he attended the senior officers' war course at Portsmouth, from which he moved in June 1906 to command the large cruisers 'Terrible' and 'Hampshire' (August 1907), followed by the battleships 'Commonwealth' (December 1909) and 'Britannia' (December 1910), all four in home waters. In practice he spent five months from December 1906 ashore at Portsmouth presiding over a secret committee charged by Sir John Fisher with reviewing plans for amphibious landings against Germany -- which it dismissed as impossible. Ballard was judged 'a man of great intellectual power and character' (Hankey, 1.33), '100% the ablest officer of his rank and standing now in the Service' (Sir Charles Ottley, Esher MSS, quoted by Lambert, 265). Under Fisher he was used as an unofficial adviser, and when Winston Churchill took office in October 1911 he pressed for Ballard to be the next director of naval intelligence. He was considered too junior for this, but when the naval war staff was instituted in December Ballard became director of the operations division, where he remained until 1914. Rear-Admiral Troubridge, his new chief, did not take well to a subordinate with 'more brains in his little finger than Troubridge has in his great woolly head' (Major Grant-Duff of the imperial defence committee, Grant-Duff MSS, quoted by Lambert, 266), while Churchill likewise soon took against one who ruthlessly shot down his wilder schemes. Ballard's career was rescued by the approach of war. He was promoted commodore in May 1914 (rear-admiral in August) and admiral of patrols, commanding the defences of the east coast. As the Grand Fleet had now abandoned the southern North Sea, Ballard's flotillas were in the front line, and he was responsible for executing the strategy, based on submarines, minefields, and aircraft, that he himself had drawn up. His reputation may have suffered from the German raids of 1914 and 1916; certainly there was no vacancy in the naval war staff under Sir Henry Jackson for so clever and independent an officer, and he moved in September 1916 to the responsible but unglamorous position of admiral superintendent of Malta Dockyard. A vice-admiral in February 1919, he left Malta in September, and retired in June 1921. In March 1924 he became admiral on the retired list. 
Ballard occupied his retirement in historical research, writing a substantial study, 'The Influence of the Sea on the Political History of Japan' (1921), followed by 'Rulers of the Indian Ocean' (1927). He also published a long series of illustrated articles in the 'Mariner's Mirror' on the warships of the mid-Victorian navy, combining serious research, skilful draughtsmanship, and his own evocative memories. He died on 16 September 1948 at his home, Hill House, Downton, near Salisbury, Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50222


Devereux, Walter, first Baron Ferrers of Chartley (c.1432-1485), landowner and soldier, was of Herefordshire stock (at Weobley and Bodenham); his father was a retainer of Richard, duke of York, and he himself became Edward IV's councillor. The son of 
Walter Devereux continued to serve the house of York, even though he was overshadowed in Wales and the marches and at court by his brother-in-law, Herbert. He was with York at Ludford Bridge in October 1459, but threw himself on the king's mercy to save his life; though attainted in the Coventry parliament, he was able to recover his properties for a fine of 500 marks, and in March 1460 secured a pardon. Once Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, had captured Henry VI at Northampton in July, Devereux returned publicly to his Yorkist allegiance: he was appointed JP in Herefordshire and, along with Sir William Herbert, represented the county in parliament in 1460-61. After the duke of York's death in December 1460 he acted as steward of Duchess Cecily's Herefordshire estates. When her son, Edward, earl of March, gathered an army before the battle of Mortimer's Cross (2-3 February 1461), Devereux probably joined him; he certainly was among the group that proclaimed him king at Baynard's Castle in London on 3 March. He fought at Towton on 29 March and was knighted after Edward's victory. Edward IV summoned him on 26 July to his first parliament, Devereux taking his father-in-law's title as Baron Ferrers of Chartley. A few days earlier, the king granted him a brewhouse in London, appropriately named Le Walsheman. But Ferrers's new dignity required more substantial support, and in February 1462 he received forfeited Lancastrian estates of the earls of Devon and Wiltshire in the midlands and Welsh border shires. These grants were extended in March 1466 to Ferrers's heirs general, presumably because his son John was barely two years old. 
Ferrers was associated with Herbert in restoring order in Wales and the marches between the capture of Pembroke Castle in September 1461 and the fall of Harlech in 1468; in June 1463 he was appointed constable of Aberystwyth Castle for life. He was also active elsewhere: in February 1462 he foiled the earl of Oxford's plot against the king, and he accompanied Edward to the north later in the year. He was one of the king's councillors. At the time of the rebellion led by Warwick and Clarence in 1469-70 Ferrers was summoned to support the king, and, when Edward recovered his authority in the autumn, Ferrers, now that Herbert was dead, went to south Wales to suppress disorder. In November he was given control of the lordships of Brecon, Hay, and Huntington during the duke of Buckingham's minority, and in July 1470 became sheriff of Caernarvonshire and master forester of Snowdon for life. He offered protection at Weobley to his sister Anne, countess of Pembroke, and her young wards, Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond, and Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland; and although Lady Margaret Beaufort took steps to recover her son, it seems that Anne kept Richmond at Weobley until the readeption of Henry VI, in October 1470, when the boy was handed over to his uncle Jasper Tudor. Northumberland, however, was moved to the Tower of London, though he was granted his freedom on swearing allegiance to Edward IV and offering bonds, partly provided by Ferrers, in October 1469. 
At the readeption Ferrers lost not only his Tudor guest, but possibly also the manors he had enjoyed since 1462; he was removed, too, as JP in Herefordshire. When Edward IV regained his throne in April 1471, Ferrers returned to royal service, especially in Wales and the marches. He was among the lords who swore on 3 July to accept Prince Edward as the king's heir, and was made responsible for imposing order in Wales following the battle of Tewkesbury. In August he and Herbert's son, the earl of Pembroke, whom he presumably advised, pursued Jasper Tudor and his nephew; he was in Carmarthen by October, only to hear of the fugitives' escape to France. In September 1471 he was appointed steward of Elfael by the duke of Clarence. Ferrers's military experience earned him election as a knight of the Garter in 1472, and he was well qualified to join the prince of Wales's council, to which Edward IV gradually assigned governmental responsibilities in the marches and English borderland: on 20 February 1473 he became the prince's tutor as well as a councillor, and was active on numerous commissions in the region. 
The king's expedition to France in July 1475 mustered many nobles, including Ferrers, but there was no opportunity to display valour. In 1478 he was a trier of petitions in the parliament of January-February that condemned the duke of Clarence. In September that year he was nominated to investigate treasons and insurrections in Yorkshire, renewing an acquaintance with Richard, duke of Gloucester, that had been formed in Wales in 1470. Ferrers's rewards seem comparatively modest, but they included, in January 1476, the earl of Oxford's forfeited estates in Leicestershire to augment his own holdings. And trust between Ferrers and Edward IV may be indicated by the sale of the marriage of the former's son and heir, John ('c'.1463/4-1501), to the king in 1478-9. Ferrers himself, having been widowed in 1469, married in 1482 Joan, widow of Thomas Ilam, who outlived him. 
Ferrers attended Edward IV's funeral at Windsor in April 1483. His attitude to Richard III is not known, though he attended his coronation in July. But when Buckingham rebelled in October, the duke and his family made for Weobley to raise men, perhaps hoping to exploit Anne Ferrers's Tudor connection; it was while they were hiding in the neighbourhood that the duke was captured and subsequently executed. Richard III's treatment of Ferrers may therefore have been cautious. He gave him an annuity of 100 marks, and in August 1484, for life, the manor of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, which, as part of the earldom of Richmond, may represent an attempt to induce Ferrers to oppose Henry Tudor. He turned out for the king in 1485 and fell at Bosworth on 22 August. He was attainted in Henry VII's first parliament and his estates were forfeited. In 1486 his son John was allowed to acquire the lands of his mother but had to wait until 1489 for the recovery of the Devereux and Merbury estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 50223


Holland, Henry, second duke of Exeter (1430-1475), magnate, the only son and heir of John Holland, first duke of Exeter (1395-1447), and his first wife, Anne Stafford, dowager countess of March (died 1432), was born in the Tower of London on 27 June 1430. Through his grandmother Elizabeth (died 1425), sister of Henry IV, Henry Holland was closely related to the house of Lancaster -- a connection which grew in importance as Henry VI's uncles died without heirs. His proximity to the royal line justified Earl John's creation in 1444 as duke of Exeter: his estates, worth only $1002 p.a. including his wife's dower in 1436, fell substantially short of the 2000 marks p.a. normally considered the minimum for a duke. Probably it was Holland's Lancastrian connections that prompted Richard, duke of York, to offer the enormous marriage portion of 4500 marks to marry his eldest daughter, Anne ['see below'], born in 1439, to Henry on 10 August 1445: at this time several great families were speculating on the succession. The marriage was completed in January 1446, before John Holland's death in 1447, when custody of the young second duke was granted to York. On 23 July 1450, while still under age, Henry Holland was granted special livery of his lands, perhaps in response to his inclusion among the ancient royal blood of the realm that Cade's rebels wished to see involved in government. 
Duke Henry's reckless and violent conduct in the early 1450s may have been a desperate response to financial embarrassments. There was an obvious discrepancy between his royal blood and ducal title, which demanded a conspicuously ducal lifestyle, and his limited means. A customs annuity of 500 marks p.a. was resumed in 1451, his continental possessions were reconquered by the French, he did not even enjoy his whole patrimony until after the death of his stepmother in 1457, and he personally derived no direct benefit from his duchess's dowry which, if paid, passed to his father's executors. He had really needed to marry an heiress. Exeter bid with some success to supplement his Devon patrimony, securing the custody of the Gournay lands in Somerset and Dorset in 1450 and Lostwithiel, Restormel, and other duchy of Cornwall lands in 1451, but such gains were limited and temporary. 
Exeter inherited eight Bedfordshire manors from a cousin in 1451, which he hoped to augment into a second endowment by securing Ampthill Castle and its members. A shadowy title was improved by fraud. False charges of treason were laid against the current occupant, the rich but ageing and childless former minister Lord Cromwell, and on 2 June 1452 Exeter seized the estate by force. He was in residence on 28 August following. With right on his side, and hence support from both government and the Lords, Cromwell was a formidable opponent: the treason charge was easily repudiated; on 15 July Exeter was bound in recognizances of $4000 to abide an award; and he and his agents were sued in the court of common pleas. Defeat faced Exeter if the law ran its course, so, besides initiating counter-suits, he overawed jurors and judicial officials both in Westminster Hall and Bedfordshire, where nobody would act as sheriff in 1453-4, and on 19 January 1454 allied himself to Lord Egremont, one of the Percy enemies of Cromwell, the Nevilles, and hence of Exeter's father-in-law, York. At this point a local dispute acquired national political dimensions. The onset of Henry VI's madness about August 1453 might have given Exeter, as the nearest relative of the king and the young prince, power as lord protector. Instead York was appointed in March 1454, a Neville (Salisbury) became chancellor, parliament backed Cromwell over Ampthill, and Cromwell, not Exeter, was appointed to the royal council. Exeter asserted his Lancastrian claims on 21 May 1454 at Spofforth in Yorkshire by rebelling and allegedly distributing Lancastrian livery, claiming the government and the duchy of Lancaster, and plotting with the Scots. It is true that Exeter was next heir to the duchy of Lancaster, but these indictments may be best seen as the exaggerated allegations of his enemies. The lord protector rushed northwards to quell the uprising. When the rebellion failed, Exeter appeared at Westminster to answer Cromwell in court. In July York removed him from Westminster Abbey to prison at Pontefract Castle and in September Cromwell finally re-entered Ampthill. The duke was released in March 1455 after Henry VI's recovery, but was incarcerated once again at Wallingford Castle in June following the Yorkist victory at St Albans. Cromwell's death in January 1456 fortunately ensured that Exeter escaped ruinous damages and was acquitted of treason, but Ampthill was irretrievably lost. 
Exeter's alienation from York and the Nevilles was reinforced by Salisbury's subsequent appointment as keeper of the seas, an infringement of the duke's role as hereditary lord admiral, but he was not much better trusted by York's enemies at court. An attempt to seize Warwick in November 1458 resulted in his incarceration in Berkhamsted Castle, whence he was released only on bonds of $10,000 in February next year. Only then did Exeter commit himself politically to Henry VI. On the losing side at Bloreheath, he swore allegiance to Henry at Coventry on 11 December 1459, and was appointed constable of York's forfeited castle of Fotheringhay, Northamptonshire. On 19 March 1460 he indented to keep the sea with 3500 men against the Yorkist earls, but, uncertain of the loyalty of his men, dared not intercept Warwick on his return from Ireland. At the battle of Northampton Exeter was once again on the losing side; he was absent from the parliament of 1460, and joined Queen Margaret in the north, where on 20 January 1461 he was among those who guaranteed her treaty with the Scots. He marched south with her to the second battle of St Albans, retreated with her, and was on the losing side at Towton (29 March 1461). He was among those who attacked Carlisle in May, was with Jasper Tudor in Wales by July, and shared in his defeat at Twt Hill near Caernarfon on 16 October. He sailed with Queen Margaret from Edinburgh via Sluys to Burgundy, where he was in August 1463 and where Philippe de Commines allegedly saw him barefoot, begging from door to door. He was one of Margaret's impoverished court-in-exile at St Mihiel in Bar. Following Henry VI's restoration Exeter was encouraged to return to England by the duke of Burgundy, who saw him as a potential rival for Warwick. In England in February 1471, he was among those routed at Leicester on 3 April, and shared in Warwick's defeat on 14 April at Barnet, where he was wounded and left for dead. Exeter then took sanctuary in London, but was removed on 26 May and imprisoned in the Tower. Presumably Edward hesitated to execute a sick man, who had been taken from sanctuary, and was, furthermore, his brother-in-law. Exeter's wife secured a divorce on 12 November 1472 and his daughter had died by 1474, but he himself was released to join Edward IV's invasion of France in 1475, which might have led to his eventual restoration. Instead however he was drowned on the return journey, most probably by foul play; his rightful heir, Ralph Neville, later third earl of Westmorland, was not allowed to inherit. 




@@@@@


doc= 50224


Yexley, Lionel (1862-1933), naval reformer, was born James Woods, on 9 July 1862 in Martin Street, Stratford, Essex, one of two children of James Woods, journeyman bootmaker, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Yexley. He was educated at the Boys British School, Stratford. On 21 June 1878 he joined the navy as a boy seaman. Over the next twelve years he served in the Persian Gulf, East Indies, and Mediterranean, rising in 1890 to petty officer second class. While still an able seaman he married on 27 December 1884 Mary Ferry (1862-1943); they had two children. With family responsibilities, he opted in 1890 to complete his twenty years for pension in the coastguard. 
Woods began his journalistic career while in the coastguard, submitting anonymous articles to 'Hope: The Coastguard Gazette' with complaints of service conditions. After narrowly escaping a court martial for his campaigning, he applied for early discharge in October 1897 in order to edit 'The Gazette'. The following year he transformed the publication into a general lower-deck magazine and renamed it 'The Bluejacket'. Writing as Lionel Yexley, his aim was to expose bad lower-deck conditions, many of them unchanged for decades. His writing, which drew on firsthand experience and information from serving men, highlighted such disabilities as the inadequacy of food rations, graft and corruption in shore depots, the lack of increase in pay since 1853, the harshness of punishment, and the absence of prospects for promotion from the lower deck. Though viewed by some as a subversive, he was not 'anti-navy' but a patriotic advocate of a more modern, democratic service. 
Yexley resigned from 'The Bluejacket' in 1904, and in 1905 launched his own lower-deck monthly, 'The Fleet', in order to have greater editorial control. With his most productive reforming work about to begin, he settled at 8 York Road, Ilford, and remained in the district for the rest of his life. 

'The Fleet''s initial target was the inadequacy of victualling. Yexley's trenchant criticisms soon attracted the attention of first sea lord Admiral Sir John Fisher, who invited him to his home and was won over by his arguments. Between 1906 and 1909 Fisher presided over reforms in the feeding and clothing of sailors along lines proposed by Yexley. These entailed significant financial savings for ratings, the changes in victualling constituting arguably the biggest single improvement in the quality of lower-deck life in over half a century. Yexley's association with Fisher was now firmly established and they remained close until the latter's death. 
Despite ready access to first lord of the Admiralty Reginald McKenna from 1909, the major improvements that Yexley sought in pay, punishments, and promotion were blocked by the more conservative sea lords. Not until the appointment of Winston Churchill as first lord in 1911 did the climate improve. In retirement Fisher was instrumental in bringing Churchill and Yexley together, and the subsequent close collaboration between the two yielded the most significant improvements in conditions. Meeting him for the first time in December 1911, Yexley convinced Churchill of the need for change in the interest of justice and to allay growing unrest among ratings. Prodded by Yexley, Churchill introduced in 1912 far-reaching improvements in the disciplinary code, promotion prospects, and pay. 
Yexley was the chief witness before the 1912 Brock committee on naval punishments, whose recommendations prepared for wholesale change. 'The Fleet''s proposals for commissions for talented young petty officers provided the basis for Churchill's mate scheme. Moreover, the first substantive increase in pay in fifty-nine years announced in 1912 was also distributed on the basis of a formula that Churchill had asked Yexley to devise. 
Despite his influence with Fisher and Churchill, Yexley was loathed by many in the naval establishment. When in 1914 'The Fleet' reported on lower-deck unrest in HMS 'London' caused by harsh discipline, Captain Kemp brought a libel suit against Yexley. The action became a case of ward room versus lower deck, with fellow officers supporting Kemp financially and ratings in uniform appearing as defence witnesses. Yexley lost, was ordered to pay $3000 damages (though Kemp subsequently waived these), and was bankrupted. 
Amid growing agitation in the Grand Fleet in 1918, Yexley worked hard to prevent a proposed link between lower-deck benefit societies and the labour movement. In September he sent a memorandum on naval grievances to the king, the cabinet, and the Board of Admiralty arguing the case for judicious concessions to calm unrest. Despite MI5 suspicions of Yexley, shared by many in the Admiralty, the first lord took him seriously and met him to discuss his document. Then, to avert the possibility that the lower-deck societies would back the candidature of a rating as a Labour Party candidate in Portsmouth in the December general election, Yexley stood as an independent, changing his name by deed poll so as to enter the ballot under his professional name. He polled 7063 votes against the coalition candidate's 11,427. Coinciding with the declaration of the election result, Yexley also wrote an article for 'The Observer' on the urgent need for a pay increase, a call supported editorially by J. L. Garvin. The following day the Admiralty announced the setting up of the Jerram committee on naval pay, whose recommendations in 1919 led to increases of 50-80 per cent. Later, in September 1931, the abrupt withdrawal of the Jerram committee pay rises caused the Invergordon mutiny. 
Yexley's influence declined in the 1920s, when his health began to fail. However, by then the most pressing reforms had been achieved. For twenty years he had been the foremost champion of the naval rating, but equally a vital safety valve for the naval establishment in times of unrest. As an advocate of lower-deck reform he was unequalled. Yexley died from kidney disease at his home, 143 Cranbrook Road, Ilford, on 18 March 1933. He was buried five days later at the City of London cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50226


Ros, Thomas, ninth Baron Ros (1427-1464), soldier, was the son and heir of Thomas, eighth Baron Ros, and Eleanor, daughter of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. Born at Conisbrough Castle on 9 September 1427 Ros was just three years old at his father's death in 1430. In July 1431 his wardship and marriage were granted to John Tiptoft, Lord Tiptoft, whose daughter, Philippa, he married. Following his guardian's death in January 1443 he received a grant from the exchequer of $40 per annum for the remainder of his minority on 16 May 1443. In March 1446 young Thomas Ros, at the age of eighteen, was given licence to enter his lands: concentrated in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and the north midlands, they included not only the castle and lordship of Helmsley, Yorkshire, but also Belvoir, Leicestershire. Soon afterwards Ros journeyed to France where he became a member of the entourage of his mother's second husband, Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset, until, on the fall of Rouen in October 1449, he obtained a safe conduct to return to England. Regularly summoned to parliament from 1449 (as Lord Roos, rather than as Lord Ros of Helmsley, the style of his ancestors), and a commissioner of oyer and terminer in several counties in the early 1450s, he also had a role to play at home during the last disastrous phase of the Hundred Years' War: in September 1452, for instance, he was ordered to recruit crews for ships in order to defend the coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk. 
When, on the eve of the Wars of the Roses, the great northern families of Neville and Percy embarked on a full-scale aristocratic feud, Ros firmly sided with the Percys: indeed, in 1454 he became an active participant in Percy rebellion after Richard, duke of York, with Neville backing, became protector of England. Almost certainly he fought on the losing side at the first battle of St Albans in May 1455, but, when the Lancastrians reasserted themselves in 1456, he soon renewed his commitment to Henry VI's troubled regime, and in November 1458 he was prominent in an unsuccessful attempt to arrest Richard Neville, earl of Warwick. When civil war broke out in earnest in the autumn of 1459, Ros rapidly found himself in the thick of it. Following Warwick's flight to Calais after the Yorkist rout at Ludford in October 1459, Henry Beaufort, duke of Somerset, determined to assert his right to the captaincy of Calais, put to sea with a force of men: his half-brother Thomas, Lord Ros, was numbered among those who accompanied him. Finding entry to the port blocked, however, Somerset made instead for Guines where Ros, perhaps after escaping captivity in Calais, joined him. When, in January 1460, news reached Guines of a Yorkist raid on Sandwich, Ros was dispatched to England, probably on a futile quest for reinforcements. A few weeks later, perhaps in lieu of unpaid wages, he was granted an annuity of $40 and in July 1460 he may have been present in the Lancastrian force defeated at the battle of Northampton. Certainly, in the autumn of 1460, Ros helped assemble the substantial Lancastrian force near the city of Hull which, on 30 December, proved victorious at the battle of Wakefield where Richard of York himself was killed. Not only did Ros himself fight there but soon afterwards, at York in the presence of Queen Margaret, he solemnly renewed his oath of loyalty to Henry VI. As a consequence he immediately marched south as one of the commanders of the notoriously unruly northern army which on 17 February 1461 inflicted a crushing defeat on a Yorkist force at St Albans under the command of the earl of Warwick. Far from pressing home their advantage, however, the Lancastrians now chose to retreat northwards, allowing the Yorkist lords to enter London and proclaim Richard of York's eldest son the new king of England. 
Before the end of March Edward IV himself marched north, fought a successful preliminary skirmish at Ferrybridge, and on 29 March won a spectacular victory in the field at Towton. Ros, present at both Ferrybridge and Towton, no doubt recognized the magnitude of the Lancastrian humiliation and, like the king and queen he served, now had no option but submission or flight: before long all three had sought and found safe refuge in Scotland. By June 1461, however, he was once more militarily active: he led a bold raid across the Scottish border, marched through Northumberland, and on 26 June raised the Lancastrian standard at Brancepeth Castle in south Durham. A futile gesture this may have been, since Ros and his fellow loyalists were rapidly expelled, but it certainly showed the strength of his commitment to Henry VI as well as helping ensure his attainder for treason by parliament in November 1461. For Ros, moreover, there was to be no backsliding. In June 1462 he was a signatory of the truce of Tours between the Lancastrians and Louis XI of France; in the autumn of 1462 he participated in the defence of the Northumberland castle of Bamburgh; and when on 26 December 1462 the castle had to be surrendered to the Yorkists, he managed to obtain a safe conduct to Scotland. By the spring of 1464, however, Lancastrian resistance in the north was faltering: the end came with Yorkist victories in the field at Hedgeley Moor in April and Hexham in May. Ros fought in both battles and, although he escaped after Hexham, he was captured in a wood two days later, taken to Newcastle, and executed there on 17 May 1464. He was buried in Hexham. 
Ros's legacy was not a happy one. His early marriage to Philippa Tiptoft had provided him with a son and heir, Edmund. However, when during the first years of Henry VII's reign the sentence of attainder on the Ros family was reversed, it was soon followed by the granting of custody of the estates to Edmund's brother-in-law Sir Thomas Lovell since Edmund was incapable of controlling his own affairs. The Ros title passed to the Manners family through the marriage in 1469 of Thomas's eldest daughter, Eleanor, to Sir Robert Manners (died 1495). 


@@@@@


doc= 50227


Talbot, Thomas, second Viscount Lisle (c.1449-1470), magnate, was the son of John Talbot, first Viscount Lisle (died 1453), and Joan Chedder, and the grandson of John Talbot, first earl of Shrewsbury (d. 1453), and his second wife, Margaret Talbot nee Beauchamp ['see under 'Talbot, John, first earl of Shrewsbury]. He inherited his lands, titles, and claims from his paternal great-grandmother, Elizabeth Berkeley, countess of Warwick. His inherited lands, including Kingston Lisle in Berkshire, which he entered on coming of age in 1469, were worth approximately $200 p.a. His father died on the field of Castillon when he was just five and Talbot became the ward of his grandmother. On her death in 1467 he became the heir to two claims: lands settled on his father from the Talbot inheritance, and the lordship of Berkeley. She had been in possession of Painswick from the Talbot inheritance and the other Gloucestershire manors of Wotton under Edge, Cowley, and Simondshall from Berkeley. 
Lisle immediately faced a challenge from William, Lord Berkeley. Both parties resorted to violence; Berkeley attacked Wotton and Lisle attempted to seize Berkeley Castle. In March 1470, taking advantage of the Lincolnshire rebellion and the collapse of royal authority, Lisle challenged Berkeley to battle. Marching down to confront Berkeley at the head of a band of armed tenants and retainers, he was ambushed on 19 March on Nibley Green, between Berkeley and Wotton. Wounded in the face by an arrow, he was finished off by a dagger-thrust. The skirmish on Nibley Green is supposedly the last 'private' battle fought in England; it was certainly symptomatic of the manner in which the participants in private feuds took advantage of the dynastic conflicts of the Wars of the Roses to settle their own differences. 
Nibley Green brought half a century of local conflict to an end. In 1466 Lisle had married Margaret (died before 1503), youngest daughter of William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. He died childless; and she reputedly miscarried when Wotton manor was sacked after the skirmish. His title, inheritance, and claims passed to his sister Elizabeth, who in 1475 married Edward Grey, younger son of Edward Grey, Lord Ferrers, and brother of Queen Elizabeth Woodville's first husband. He made a formal release of all his claims on the Berkeley inheritance in 1482, but retained possession of Painswick. 


@@@@@


doc= 50228


Tropnell, Thomas (d. 1487), landowner and administrator, was the son of Harry Tropnell and his wife, Edith Roche. Both families were long established in north-west Wiltshire as minor gentry, but it is unlikely that Harry Tropnell owned land there or elsewhere. Thomas Tropnell was an ambitious pragmatist whose newly acquired wealth from commerce and judicious shifts of political allegiance enabled him to establish and maintain himself, often by dubious means, as a landed gentleman in his native county. The house he rebuilt at Great Chalfield, where the cartulary recording the title deeds of his purchases is still preserved, and chapels constructed for him at Great Chalfield and Corsham, survive as symbols of his success. Tropnell's early career, and presumably the basis of his wealth, was in commerce, and he was a merchant trading through Bristol in the 1450s. He married first in 1431 Agnes (died before 1453), widow of Thomas Bourton, and second, in 1456, his kinswoman Margaret Ludlow (died by 1479), daughter of William Ludlow (died 1478) and widow of John Erley. With Margaret, Tropnell had two sons, Humphrey ('fl'. 1463-1464), who predeceased him, and Christopher (died 1503), his heir, and two daughters, Anne ('fl'. 1464), and Mary ('fl'. 1464-1487). 
As a young man Tropnell became a retainer of the powerful Hungerford family, and, possibly under the patronage of Humphrey Stafford, earl of Stafford, was MP for Great Bedwyn in 1429-30 and for Bath in 1449. His business acumen and legal knowledge were also used by later Hungerfords: Robert, Lord Hungerford (died 1459), probably his contemporary, for whom he acted as receiver-general and feoffee, and who bequeathed to him a silver cup; his son Robert, Lord Hungerford and Moleyns (died 1464); and the younger Robert's sons Sir Thomas (died 1469), and Sir Walter (died 1516). His association with the Hungerfords and Staffords naturally brought him into prominence in the county. In September 1450, with Robert, Lord Hungerford, and his son Robert, Tropnell was appointed a commissioner to find, arrest, and try rebels in Wiltshire. He served on other commissions in 1451 and 1459. His service to the family was uninterrupted and unaffected by the attainder in 1461 and execution in May 1464 of Robert, Lord Hungerford and Moleyns, a Lancastrian in arms. 
Tropnell was also prepared to court the Yorkists. In his ultimately successful attempt to resist the claim of a retainer of James Butler, the Lancastrian earl of Wiltshire, on Lyngevers manor in Chicklade, which he acquired in portions between 1453 and 1460, he petitioned the future Edward IV and in August 1464 obtained a general pardon from him. During the readeption of Henry VI he was appointed on 27 October 1470, with George, duke of Clarence, and Richard Neville, earl of Warwick and Salisbury, as a commissioner of oyer and terminer in Wiltshire. He was also a JP for Wiltshire in late 1470. Those services, and acknowledgement of his considerable, though possibly informally acquired, legal ability, may have secured his admission to Lincoln's Inn as an honorary member at Michaelmas 1470. His appointment in August 1473 as a commissioner to inquire into farms paid to the crown from lands in Wiltshire shows that he was trusted by the Yorkists and prepared to serve them with equal diligence. He was pardoned in March 1484 by Richard III, possibly for complicity in Buckingham's rebellion in October 1483. His typical circumspection may have prompted him to obtain a general pardon from Henry VII in 1485. 
From 1431 Tropnell lived in a house at Atworth inherited by his first wife and conveyed to him on their marriage, and by 1453 he lived at Neston near Corsham in a house built on land acquired in 1442. From the time of his first marriage he built up by purchase a substantial landed estate in the county. The titles to all the properties were defective, except those to Atworth, Neston, East Harnham manor bought in 1453 from Robert, Lord Hungerford, and the advowson of Great Cheverell bought in 1476 from Margaret, Lady Hungerford and Botreaux. His claim on Great Chalfield manor and advowson, in which he bought an interest in 1437, was not established until 1467. An estate in Maiden Bradley, East Codford, and West Codford was acquired between 1441 and 1447, Lyngevers manor in Chicklade between 1453 and 1460, Hindon manor between 1452 and 1460, and Little Durnford manor with comparatively little trouble in 1474. The legal process, usually tortuous and lengthy, by which most of them were purchased, and a pedigree in which he claimed descent from the Percys of Great Chalfield were entered by Tropnell in a register of deeds which was begun on 2 November 1464 and added to until his death. In 1465 he bought a stone quarry at Hazelbury near Box and, presumably from 1467, began to rebuild the manor house at Great Chalfield in lavish style. He lived on the estate only in his last years. 
Richard Page and William King, adversaries of Tropnell in his negotiations for Lyngevers manor in 1453, described him as 'a perillous covetouse man', an assessment with which Tropnell may have concurred since it was transcribed into his cartulary (Tropnell, 2.39). That view of his character is echoed, with an element of caricature, in a wall painting, possibly of Tropnell himself, which survives on the south wall of the dining room at Great Chalfield. To Great Chalfield church, which stood north-east of the manor house and inside its precinct, Tropnell added a south chapel decorated with wall paintings and separated from the nave by a screen embellished with arms depicting his claim to descend from the Percy family and his marriage with Margaret Ludlow. He was said to have died on 31 January 1488 but his death must have occurred between 5 November 1487, when he made his will, and 22 November 1487, when a writ of 'diem clausit extremum' was issued. In the south chapel of Corsham church, rebuilt for him as his burial place, he and Margaret were entombed beneath a chest bearing their arms. In his will, proved by his son Christopher on 26 February 1488, he observed fashionable piety and endowed a chantry in the chapel for them both and for certain Hungerfords. Though his career had no national importance, he stands as an exemplar of a particular kind of late medieval gentleman on the make, often a lawyer or expert in the law, who was willing to play fast and loose in local politics and exploit all the opportunities offered by local and national political crises to build up a landed estate. Tropnell also happens to have left a superb memorial of his life, in records and in bricks, mortar, and paint. 


@@@@@


doc= 50229


Willoughby, Robert (III), sixth Baron Willoughby (1385-1452), military commander, was the son of William Willoughby, fifth Baron Willoughby ['see under 'Willoughby family (per. c.1300-1523)], and Lucy, daughter of Lord Strange, and succeeded his father in December 1409. The family had extensive lands in Lincolnshire, with their family seat at Eresby, near Spilsby. Robert's first military experience was probably with the duke of Clarence in Guyenne in 1412. He attended the great council in April 1415 which approved Henry V's campaign on which he served. He led a retinue of over 500 in the 1417 campaign, being present at the siege of Caen with Lord Talbot, and in December was granted an annuity of $100, on his election as knight of the Garter. In May 1418 Henry V granted him the lordship of Beaumesnil, requiring his personal service in the army with a quota of men, and, having joined the siege of Rouen, he was made the duke of Exeter's lieutenant there after its capture in 1419. Following the siege of Melun between July and November 1420 he accompanied Henry V to England in 1421 for Queen Catherine's coronation. It is uncertain whether he was at the siege of Meaux, for in May 1422 he was indenting with the council in England to take reinforcements to France in July. He must have returned to England following Henry V's death, for he indented to serve in France with the earl marshal in May 1423 and fought with distinction at the battle of Cravant on 31 July. Again in the winter of 1423-4 he was in England raising a fresh force which sailed under Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, in May to join the advance into Maine of John, duke of Bedford. At the battle of Verneuil in August 1424 he and Sir John Fastolf were joint captors of the duke of Alencon and other valuable prisoners, and he was further rewarded with the grant of the 'comte' of Vendome confiscated from Louis de Bourbon. With Warwick he pressed forward to capture Le Mans in August 1425 and complete the conquest of Maine. 
Willoughby was still in service with the duke of Bedford when Salisbury's expedition was assembled in 1428 but he did not join it and had returned to England by 1429 when he recruited men for the anti-Hussite crusade of Cardinal Beaufort. This force in fact was sent to Bedford's assistance following the English defeat at Patay in June 1429. He had a major role in the operations during Henry VI's coronation expedition, with Lord Scales and Sir John Fastolf at the siege of Louviers, and with Lord Beaumont and Matthew Gough in operations in Alencon and along the Sarthe. As the English lost ground to the south of Normandy he was granted the 'comte' of Beaumont-sur-Oise in compensation for that of Vendome. He was also made captain of Pontoise and subsequently of Pont de l'Arche. From 1432 to 1433 Willoughby held command as lieutenant in Lower Normandy and was engaged in strenuous defensive operations in 1434 resulting in the recovery of St Valery. In July 1435 he again raised and led a force of 2000 men from England to assist Talbot in capturing St Denis in October. When Talbot withdrew to Rouen he was left in command in Paris, remaining in the Bastille until forced to withdraw in April 1436. 
Willoughby now returned to England, but his days of soldiering were not quite finished, for when Warwick assumed the lieutenancy of Normandy in 1437 Willoughby accompanied him at his request. In indenting for service for the last time Willoughby secured the remission of all royal claims against him for ransoms and jewels held in lieu of wages of war. He also placed all his lands in feoffment as a precaution against his death. He actively campaigned with lords Talbot and Latimer but finally returned to England by the end of 1438. He was present in council in February 1439, a commissioner to raise loans in May (when he contributed $100), and in July had permission to go on pilgrimage to the Holy Land, perhaps following the death of his wife, Elizabeth Montagu, sister of Thomas Montagu, earl of Salisbury, which occurred after 1438. They had married some time before February 1421. He may well have made the journey, for he does not reappear in English records until May 1443 when he was again at the council and was appointed to a commission of oyer and terminer. 
Willoughby took no part in central politics in the 1440s but in Lincolnshire he became embroiled in a quarrel with Sir William Tailboys who, backed by the duke of Suffolk, and John, Viscount Beaumont, challenged the rule of the shire by Willoughby, his son-in-law Lord Welles, and Ralph, Lord Cromwell, the uncle of his second wife, Maud Stanhope (died 1497). Their attempts to prosecute Tailboys finally provoked him to assault Lord Cromwell in the parliament of 1449. Willoughby died on 25 July 1452, without male issue. The lands and title descended to his son-in-law Sir Richard Welles, later Lord Welles (died 1470). His will, drawn up on 6 June 1452, directed his burial in the chantry college at Mettingham, Suffolk, rather than at Spilsby where his ancestors lay. Nothing now remains of his tomb. His widow afterwards married first Sir Thomas Neville (died 1460) and second Sir Gervase Clifton (died 1471). She died on 30 August 1497. 
How profitable Lord Willoughby's long military career proved is difficult to say. Although he only received 1000 of the 5000 marks due to him for the ransom of the duke of Alencon he was well placed to reap the spoils of war and was never himself captured and ransomed. Besides the fiefs and 'comtes' received by royal grant he acquired properties in Paris second only in extent to those of the duke of Bedford, including the 'hotel' of the dukes of Orleans and houses of the count of Vendome. Yet he accumulated considerable arrears of wages, and borrowed heavily to finance his expeditions. Already by January 1431 he had granted 120 marks annual income from his manors to his brother-in-law Sir William Oldhall to repay debts to him; and was also in debt to Sir John Fastolf in December 1428. He sold French lands to Bedford for 1000 saluts. Yet some of the lands he enfeoffed in 1437 had been purchased and in his will he directed his executors to sell the lands he had acquired to pay his debts. There is no record of his building on an extensive scale like other war captains. 


@@@@@


doc= 50230


Woodville, Richard, first Earl Rivers (d. 1469), magnate, founded his fortunes on two remarkable marriages, one of which was to make him father-in-law of Edward IV. The Woodvilles were modest Northamptonshire gentry who failed in the male line on the death about 1435 of Thomas Woodville, esquire, whose heirs were two sisters rather than his half-brother, Richard, father of the future Earl Rivers. As a younger son, the elder Richard Woodville (d. c.1441) pursued a distinguished military and administrative career that became the model for future generations of the family. Allegedly brought up with Henry V, he was in the garrison of Henry's brother Thomas at Guines in 1411, was captain on Henry's campaigns of 1415 and 1417, and later served the regent, John, duke of Bedford. He was in English France almost continuously from 1417 to 1435 as captain and bailiff, as seneschal of Normandy (1420), chamberlain of the regent, and treasurer of finances (1423), lieutenant of Calais in 1427 and again in 1435, and councillor of France; he was employed in positions of trust in England in 1425 and 1436. Returning to England, where he already held the Mote estate at Maidstone and where his brother bequeathed him Grafton Regis, Northamptonshire, he was MP for Kent in 1433, constable of Rochester, and sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1437, before his death about 1441. He was never knighted and married his daughter no higher than the ranks of the Kentish gentry. 
The younger Richard Woodville added only a little to his father's modest estates. He was on Northamptonshire commissions from 1441, JP for Northamptonshire from 1448, and for Kent from 1454. His military career followed the pattern of that of his father. A captain in 1429, he was retained in royal service in France (1433) and was a knight of the regent, Bedford, in 1435. He was at Gerberoi in 1435, served under William de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, in 1435-6, Somerset and Shrewsbury in 1439, and the duke of York in 1441-2, when he was made captain of Alencon and knight-banneret, and was among the escort bringing Margaret of Anjou, who was connected with his wife, to England in 1444. With such a background he was an obvious choice as seneschal of Gascony in 1450, as lieutenant of Calais in 1454-5, and to defend Kent against invasion by the Yorkist earls in 1459-60. But Woodville was never in command and was not notably successful: he apparently suffered capture at Gerberoi in 1435, he failed to reach Gascony before its fall in 1453, and suffered humiliating capture at Sandwich in 1460. His joust against the Spaniard Pedro de Vasquez at Smithfield in 1440 anticipated the distinction in tourneying of his sons and grandson. 
The elder Richard's Lancastrian connections account for the knighting of the younger Richard by Henry VI in 1426 and for his presence in 1435 at the regent's court, where he encountered Jaquetta de Luxembourg, duchess of Bedford (c.1416-1472), whom, following the duke's death in 1435, he had married secretly by March 1437. For Jaquetta marriage to a mere knight was a shocking 'mesalliance', which was disapproved of both by her Luxembourg relatives and by Henry VI. Hence Woodville was fined $1000 for marrying her without licence and for possession of her dower. However, the match made Woodville's fortune. It made him kin to the house of Lancaster, to his wife's family, the Luxembourg counts of St Pol, and through them to international royalty and nobility, including Margaret of Anjou and the dukes of Burgundy. Jaquetta's dower greatly increased his income, presumably to at least 2000 marks, albeit only for her life, and enabled him to support a noble lifestyle and to marry his children into the lower nobility: thus his son Anthony Woodville was married to Elizabeth, Lord Scales's heir, his daughter Elizabeth to Sir John Grey, heir to Lady Ferrers of Groby, and another daughter, Jaquetta, to John, Lord Strange of Knockin. Woodville's royal connections were a further justification for his election as knight of the Garter in 1450 and his creation as a baron on 9 May 1448. His mysterious choice of title, Lord Rivers, and his addition of a griffin to his arms, which imply links with earlier barons that cannot be traced, suggest that he felt the need for a lineage separate from that of his wife: his dependence on her was disparaged by the Neville earls in 1460. Even with her lands and his barony, which raised him far above his birth and patrimony, his commands, offices, and status were decidedly of second rank. Without Jaquetta's dower his heir might have found it hard to support the dignity of a baron. 
Rivers took part in the suppression of Cade's rebellion and was apparently considered as a possible constable of England. Indicted in Kent as a member of the court in 1451 and closely associated with successive Beaufort dukes of Somerset in the 1450s, he was employed abroad and thus escaped some of the major crises. Rivers was not retained as lieutenant of Calais by Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, after 1456 and from 1457 occurs frequently on commissions in Northamptonshire and Kent. In 1457 he became constable of Rochester. Following the flight of the Yorkist earls to Calais he was preparing an expedition against them at Sandwich when he was surprised and borne off there as a prisoner. He later fought on the Lancastrian side at Towton, but was allowed to submit to the new Yorkist regime on the grounds that the Lancastrian cause was irretrievably lost. Like other erstwhile Lancastrians, he was required to serve against the northern rebels. Not only did he escape attainder, but he was again employed on royal commissions and from 1463 on the royal council. That his influence remained limited emerges from his daughter Elizabeth's use not of him but of the king's chamberlain to obtain access to Edward IV in pursuance of her suit for jointure from her late husband, Sir John Grey of Groby. 
Elizabeth's secret marriage in 1464 to Edward IV was a second remarkably unequal and inappropriate match that greatly advanced the Woodvilles and especially Rivers himself. He and his family constituted a numerous addition to the royal kin: with Jaquetta he had fourteen children, of whom five sons and six daughters achieved maturity, among them the soldier and courtier Sir Edward Woodville; there were also Haute, Dyve, and other cousins. Edward IV felt himself obliged not only to provide for them all, but to do so extremely generously. Rivers himself was appointed treasurer of England on 4 March 1466, created Earl Rivers on 25 May 1466, and became constable of England on 24 August 1467. Altogether his royal offices brought him an income, admittedly for life only, of $1586 a year. Although already provided for, his elder children were not ignored; Lionel Woodville ultimately became a bishop; John became prior of St John and married the dowager duchess of Norfolk; and Elizabeth's eldest son, Thomas Grey, married Anne Holland, heir of the duke of Exeter. Most striking of all were the matches arranged for Rivers's remaining daughters: between 1464 and 1467 Katherine Woodville ['see under 'Stafford, Henry] married Henry Stafford, duke of Buckingham, and Margaret, Anne, Mary, and Eleanor were married to Thomas, Lord Maltravers, William, Lord Bourchier, William Herbert, Lord Dunster, and Anthony Grey of Ruthin, the heirs respectively of the earls of Arundel, Essex, Pembroke, and Kent. These matches constitute one of the most remarkable series of arranged marriages in late medieval England. They were not merely incidental to Elizabeth's elevation as queen, but were actively promoted by Earl Rivers and the king. It was the king himself who broke an earlier agreement for Anne Holland's hand. He was the initiator of the contract between Pembroke and Rivers, in which Rivers agreed to put Pembroke's demands to the king and secure his compliance. Edward endowed both the Bourchier and Arundel matches directly. Not only were these marriages generally at royal expense, but in some instances Edward had to recover grants from others to patronize the Woodvilles. In Rivers's own case, the offices of treasurer and constable were surrendered by existing holders in return for inducements: the earl of Worcester actually sold the constableship, so that Edward could bestow it on Rivers. 
Such rapid advancement in such a short time was bound to cause resentment; the Woodville marriages in particular thwarted the legitimate aspirations of others, especially those of the earl of Warwick for his daughters and male heir. Warwick and the Nevilles also found themselves superseded in influence at court, particularly after the dismissal of Archbishop Neville as chancellor in 1467. Their advancement also signalled a change in foreign policy, from pro-French to pro-Burgundian, which certainly the Crowland continuator saw as the main source of political division between Edward IV and the Nevilles. Jaquetta's Burgundian connections were a factor here: in 1467 her son Anthony had a celebrated joust with Antoine, count of La Roche, the Bastard of Burgundy, and in 1468 Edward IV's sister Margaret married the duke of Burgundy himself. 
Hence in 1469 Earl Rivers was among the royal favourites whom Warwick, Archbishop Neville, and Clarence determined to destroy as the essential preliminary to their recovery of power. They supported a manifesto denouncing evil government and the king's upstart favourites supposedly issued by the Yorkshire rebel Robin of Redesdale, whose defeat of Pembroke's army at Edgcote (27 July) led to Warwick's capture of the king and hence of the government. Rivers was not at Edgcote, but he and his son Sir John Woodville were seized at Chepstow, taken to Kenilworth, and executed there on 12 August 1469. Charges of sorcery against the Duchess Jaquetta were withdrawn after Edward IV's recovery of power. 


@@@@@


doc= 50231


Cecily, duchess of York (1415-1495), Yorkist matriarch, was born on 3 May 1415, eighteenth child of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland (c.1364-1425), and the tenth from his second marriage, to Joan Beaufort (d. 1440). Some time before 18 October 1424 she was betrothed to Richard, duke of York, Neville's ward, and they married shortly before October 1429. This was one among what has been described as 'the most amazing series of child marriages in English history' (Lander, 121), designed to forge a network of aristocratic alliances. Between 1439 and 1452 Cecily gave birth to twelve children, of whom only six survived infancy. The first, Anne, and the last, the future Richard III, were born at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire, which appears to have been her favourite residence. Another daughter, Margaret, duchess of Burgundy, may also have been born there. Edward of March (later Edward IV) and Edmund of Rutland were born at Rouen, while their father was governor of France, Elizabeth, who married John de la Pole, second duke of Suffolk, and George, future duke of Clarence, at Dublin, while Duke Richard was lieutenant of Ireland. In 1441 her husband made provision for her, granting her Marshwood, Dorset, Bisley, Gloucestershire, and Pirbright, Surrey, and nine properties in East Anglia; this was probably part of a more comprehensive settlement. On Richard's attainder in 1459 manors worth 1000 marks p.a. were assigned to her, and in June 1461 Edward IV granted her property worth 5000 marks p.a. in recompense for her jointure lands, and probably also gave her an annuity of $107 17's'. 4died In 1486 Henry VII ordered the payment of arrears, and also renewed her licence to export 2501/2 sacks of wool. Thus, throughout the political vicissitudes in which Cecily's husband and sons were the central figures, her financial security was guaranteed. 
As the crisis developed in the 1450s, the fragility of the great marriage network became apparent. Even Cecily's brother, Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, was prominent among the supporters of Henry VI against York at Dartford in late February 1452. During this decade Cecily had no need to take a high-profile role akin to that of Margaret of Anjou, but when the conflict became open she could not avoid involvement. After Richard's flight from the 'rout of Ludford' in October 1459 she was captured by Lancastrian troops, and when her husband was attainted at the Coventry parliament in November, she apparently threw herself on Henry VI's mercy and intervened successfully for many of her people. She was assigned to the custody of her sister Anne, duchess of Buckingham. In late September 1460 she left London, where she was temporarily resident in John Paston's house rather than the Yorks' home at Baynard's Castle, to meet her husband on his return from Ireland, and the ceremonial nature of their reunion perhaps foreshadowed his ambitions for the throne. These were thwarted by his defeat and death at the battle of Wakefield on 30 December 1460. Cecily sent her two youngest sons to safety in Utrecht, but herself remained in London, where she must have felt extremely vulnerable after Queen Margaret's victory at the second battle of St Albans on 16 February 1461; but in the event eleven days later London opened its gates to the earl of Warwick and Cecily's son Edward, who on 4 March was recognized as king. 
For the next twenty-four years, save for brief periods in 1470-71 and 1483, Cecily was mother of the reigning sovereign. In 1461 the papal legate was advised to communicate quickly with her, because of her great influence over her son. This, however, can seldom be documented. Her disapproval of Edward's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville ['see 'Elizabeth (c.1437-1492)] was probably indicated by her absence from the new queen's coronation, on 26 May 1465. Later stories that in June 1469 she went to Sandwich to attempt to dissuade George of Clarence from rising with Warwick against Edward, and that as late as March 1470 she tried to reconcile the two brothers in a meeting at Baynard's Castle, may be apocryphal in their details, while still reflecting reality in showing Cecily as responsive to the extreme danger of division within the Yorkist family. It was now that the rumour of Edward IV's illegitimacy, due to his mother's adultery, was first circulated for political reasons. It re-emerged in 1483, when Richard of Gloucester began his attempt to wrest the crown from his young nephew. Mancini blames Richard for the calumny, and Vergil records that Cecily complained loud and long of the injury he had done her, but his campaign for the throne was launched from his mother's London house. Even after Richard III's death honourable provision was made for her by Henry VII, for she was the grandmother of his queen consort. 
Because of the survival of her detailed will, made at Berkhamsted on 31 May 1495, a few days before her death, and also of a household ordinance book dating from after 1485, Cecily has been taken as a prime exemplar of late medieval female aristocratic piety. These sources document the dedicated regime of literate and ascetic piety practised by an old lady, but against this must be set the ostentatious dynastic religiosity displayed in the reburial of her husband's body at Fotheringhay in 1476, in the planning of which she surely played a part. The scene of her devotions was a lavishly decorated chapel, but her domestic religion was formulated by monastic precept. Her reading included the visions of Mathilde von Hackeborn, a thirteenth-century German Cistercian, the life of St Catherine of Siena, and the 'Revelations' of St Bridget of Sweden -- a clear indication of a common European religious culture. Her personal contact with the scriptures was made through Nicholas Love's translation of St Bonaventure's 'Mirror of the Life of Blessed Jesu Christ'. One of her granddaughters was prioress of the Bridgettines of Syon, another a Dominican nun of Dartford, and she passed on her practical piety to her daughter Margaret, duchess of Burgundy, and, as is increasingly recognized, to Richard III. 
Cecily's religion was, however, essentially conservative compared to that of her cousin, Lady Margaret Beaufort, in that she felt no compulsion to educational endowment as a means of strengthening the faith. Perhaps most revealing is her reading of Walter Hilton's 'Epistle on the Mixed Life', an exhortation to contemplation by those necessarily involved in worldly concerns; and most evocative is her bequest to Henry VII of an arras depicting the wheel of fortune, whose revolutions she had experienced so dramatically during her long life. She was buried at Fotheringhay, beside her husband, with a papal indulgence hung round her neck. 


