@@@@@


doc= 50232


Perkins, John (c.1745-1812), naval officer and spy, was born in Jamaica. Nothing certain is known of his origin, but he is described as a 'mulatto', the child of a white father and a black mother, and if so it is highly probable that his mother was a slave. Under Jamaican law, this would have made the boy himself a slave, but the mixed-race sons of white men in positions of authority were often emancipated and educated to the level of clerks or overseers. Perkins must already have been an experienced mariner by the outbreak of the American War of Independence in November 1775, when he entered HMS 'Antelope', flagship at Jamaica, as a pilot, and he later claimed to have been 'from his youth... engaged in the Sea Service' (TNA: PRO, CO 140/75, 30). He continued on the books of various ships on the station throughout the war, but in practice he seems to have been detached most of the time in various small tenders cruising against enemy privateers. In command of the schooner 'Punch' in 1778 and 1779, Jack Punch, as he was nicknamed, won a remarkable reputation: his claim to have taken 315 prizes and captured over 3000 prisoners in the course of the war was officially endorsed by the Jamaican house of assembly. Perkins also scouted enemy preparations at Cap Francois and Havana, making clandestine visits to the shore. On 15 October 1781 he was commissioned by Sir Peter Parker as lieutenant commanding the schooner 'Endeavour'. In her he continued his spectacular career, taking a prize much larger than his own vessel, and in July 1782 Rodney, in a characteristically irregular promotion, made him commander of the 'Endeavour' with a lieutenant under him. This was disallowed, and he was still a lieutenant at the end of the war. 
What Perkins did during the peace is unknown, but on the mobilization in 1790 he offered his services to Rear-Admiral Affleck, was sent on an espionage mission to Hispaniola, and was about to go on another to Cuba when the threat of war receded. In February 1792, probably engaged again on intelligence work, he was arrested and condemned to death by the French authorities at Jeremie in St Domingue, and only rescued at the last minute by the interposition of a British warship. In June 1795 he was at sea once more, in command of the schooner 'Marie Antoinette', from which in June 1797, 'an old and deserving officer' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/250, P50), he was promoted by Sir Hyde Parker into the sloop 'Drake'. This time the commission was confirmed, and in September 1800 Parker made Perkins post in the frigate 'Meleager', from which he soon transferred to the 'Arab', and in 1804 to the 'Tartar' (32 guns). In the 'Arab' he occupied the island of St Eustatia on its evacuation by the French in April 1801. In the 'Tartar' he was much on the coast of St Domingue during the war between the French and the slaves, led by Dessalines. There he found himself caught between, on the one hand, Edward Corbett, 'extra minister' sent from England to assess the situation, who complained that Perkins was unduly friendly to the black population, and, on the other, his admiral, Sir John Duckworth, who firmly backed him, and Lieutenant-Governor Nugent, who sought his advice. By now Perkins was no longer young, and after several bouts of illness (described as asthma) he was forced towards the end of 1804 to resign his command. He retired to his home in Kingston, where he died on either 24 or 27 January 1812 -- probably the latter, as he was buried on the 28th. 
Perkins was a remarkable character, whose rise from obscurity, if not slavery, to the rank of post captain, coupled with his extraordinary skill, daring, and success, made a great impression on contemporaries. Though of no great education, he was functionally literate and sufficiently polished to move in naval and colonial society. He was probably unique among naval officers in apparently never once having visited Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 50233


Sir Walter Devereux (1411-1459) (with whom historians sometimes confuse him) and Elizabeth (died 1438), daughter and heir of John Merbury, another Herefordshire landowner, he grew up as his father and William Herbert (his sister's husband) strove to dominate south-east Wales and Herefordshire, partly in the Yorkist interest. The elder Walter had become York's tenant, retainer, and councillor by the 1440s: he joined the duke's expedition to Normandy in 1441 and held several captaincies there, and he was knighted about 1441-2. One of the most prominent of Herefordshire landowners and county officials, he was involved in York's protests against the government in 1450-52, sought to strengthen the duke's influence in Hereford itself, and was indicted of treason for his pains (though pardoned in 1452). After he and William Herbert led a force to west Wales in August 1456 to enforce York's authority in the principality shires, he was arrested and placed for a time in the Tower of London. Young Walter was involved in such disturbances in the spring of 1456, exploiting civic factions to control Hereford -- though he later claimed that he was falsely accused. When his father died on 22 or 23 April 1459, Walter inherited his estates in Herefordshire and Leicestershire; the Lincolnshire lands had been conveyed to him and his wife, Anne (1438-1469), daughter and heir of Sir William Ferrers of Chartley, Staffordshire, when they married in 1446. Much of Ferrers's estate was entailed to Lady Ferrers (died 1471), but the rest had been conveyed to Anne in March 1453, even though she was only fifteen. 


@@@@@


doc= 50234


Dynham, John, Baron Dynham (c.1433-1501), administrator, was the son and heir of Sir John Dynham and his wife, Elizabeth, the sister and heir of John Arches. At Nutwell in Devon since at least 1122 and patrons of Hartland Abbey, the Dinhams or Dynhams ['see 'Dinham family] were a leading family of gentry in the county. There were five successive Sir John Dynhams: Lord Dynham's grandfather, who died in 1428, left a widow who survived until 1465; his father's widow occupied Nutwell itself until her death in 1496. Thus John, Lord Dynham, who was twenty-four and more when he entered his father's lands in 1458, held his whole ancestral estate only very briefly: some compensation was afforded by his first marriage in 1467 to the widowed Elizabeth Ratcliffe ('nee' Fitzwalter), whose heir was her son from her previous marriage. 
Quite how Dynham was connected with the Yorkist earls is unclear. In 1459 he accompanied them to Devon, where they may have stayed at his mother's house at Nutwell, and it was he who purchased them the balinger for $40 that carried them first to Guernsey and thence to Calais. He was attainted with them at the Coventry parliament of 1459. From Calais he led two successful raids against the king's forces at Sandwich in 1460, capturing Lord Rivers on the first and being wounded on the second. Following the Yorkist victory he was appointed sheriff of Devon and, in November, chancellor of Ireland. He fought for Edward IV at Towton, was a member of the new king's household by July 1461, and was granted the custody of the lands of the widowed Elizabeth Fulford. However, Dynham's rewards came slowly and contrast sharply with those of Humphrey Stafford of Southwick, earl of Devon. Whereas Stafford's interests spanned all five south-western counties and he rapidly monopolized royal office and succeeded to the pre-eminence of the Courtenays, Dynham's importance was essentially within Devon and he had some limited interests in Cornwall. It is significant that all four of his sisters married into families prominent only in Devon and Cornwall, two of them baronial: lords Fitzwarine and Zouche, Sir John Carew and Sir Thomas Arundel of Lanherne. Dynham was granted eight Hungerford manors in 1464, but was unable to make his title good and had to content himself with a $100 annuity. His summons to parliament as Lord Dynham of Cardenham on 28 February 1467 was unaccompanied by any other grant. Following Stafford's execution in 1469 he became steward of all his lands and keeper of the forests of Exmoor and Neroche for life, but the Courtenay lands were granted in turn to the Marquess Montagu (1470) and George, duke of Clarence (1471), who was resident at Tiverton Castle and politically active in Devon for part of each year. The Courtenay lands were kept in royal hands after Clarence's death in 1478. 
Dynham was a member of the royal council in London during Warwick's coup in the summer and of Edward's great council in the autumn of 1469. He was ordered to act against the rebels the following March when, however, he inadvertently helped them. Dynham and the other commissioners were besieged in Exeter by the Courtenays of Bocannoc, perhaps before the king's commission arrived, and were relieved by Warwick and Clarence. It may have been at this time that Clarence extorted money from him, for which he was compensated with an annuity of $100 on the duke's fall. In 1471 Dynham was one of the commissioners who fined those who had rebelled with Thomas Neville, the Bastard of Fauconberg, in Kent. In 1475 he was commander of the fleet during Edward IV's Picquigny campaign and he was sworn as a royal councillor with a further annuity of $100. In 1480 he was granted the former Courtenay manor of Thorne. Already Lord Hastings's lieutenant at Calais in 1483, Dynham was retained as such by Richard III and was not promoted to the captaincy of Calais. Even though his west country importance was recognized by his appointment as chief forester of Dartmoor, steward of Bradninch, and the chief steward and surveyor of the duchy of Cornwall, it was not he but Sir Richard Ratcliffe and others who secured the major grants of forfeited lands in the west country. Offices and annuities he had secured, but the family patrimony was little changed. 
While Dynham did not betray King Richard, he evidently had better connections with Henry VII, most probably through Robert Willoughby, steward of the king's household, who was created Lord Willoughby de Broke. Dynham married Willoughby's sister Elizabeth in or after 1485. His brother-in-law Lord Zouche had been attainted and his sister therefore impoverished, so in 1488 Dynham was one of those granted 100 marks a year on her behalf. However, Dynham was not to be the king's man in the west country, but instead a royal minister and courtier. Elected knight of the Garter before 23 April 1487, he was appointed treasurer of England on 14 July 1486 and remained in office until his death. He was a frequent commissioner not just in Devon but elsewhere: indeed in 1497 he was one of those commissioned to act as constable and marshal of England for the trial of the rebel James, Lord Audley, who was duly executed. Henceforth, it seems, he was occupied continually at the exchequer at Westminster and resided for convenience at his house at Lambeth. It was there that his only two children died: George ('b'. before 1470) in 1487 and Philippa in 1485; both were buried at Lambeth church. It was there also that he died on 28 January 1501. He was buried two days later at the London Greyfriars. At his death he possessed a great stock of plate. As his three younger brothers Charles, Roger, and the clerk Oliver had also died childless, Dynham was the last of his line: his lands were divided among the families of his four sisters. A bastard son, Thomas, was endowed with land in Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50235


Percy, Thomas, first Baron Egremont (1422-1460), nobleman, was the second surviving son of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (1394-1455), and Eleanor Neville, daughter of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland. Born on 29 November 1422 at the Percy manor of Leconfield, Yorkshire, he has been described as 'Quarrelsome, violent and contemptuous of all authority' (Storey, 125). As a young man he was embroiled in riots and disturbances which may have embarrassed his father and elder brother, Lord Poynings ['see 'Percy, Henry, third earl of Northumberland]. In July 1447 he was involved in a skirmish at Stamford Bridge with tenants of the archbishop of York, with whom the Percys had been at odds; he was imprisoned at York as a result. Thereafter, Thomas concentrated on consolidating his family's power in Cumberland, where he held the Percy honour of Cockermouth. His father was doubtless instrumental in securing his creation, by royal patent, as Baron Egremont, a title derived from the Percy castle in Cumberland, on 20 November 1449, in expectation of his 'keping of the rest and pees of oure lande' ('Proceedings... of the Privy Council', 6.159), together with a modest annual grant of $10 from Cumberland's revenue. His regime in Cumberland was turbulent: during 1449-53 he was involved in disorder, lawlessness, and attacks on royal officials, including the sheriff (1453). This intensified Percy rivalry with the Nevilles, which the election of his brother William Percy as bishop of Carlisle in August 1452 doubtless accentuated. Nevertheless, on a visit to London in February 1452, he joined the king in confronting the duke of York at Dartford, Kent. By 1453 Egremont was recruiting followers on the Percy estates in Yorkshire and in the city of York, where he quarrelled with John Neville, the earl of Salisbury's younger son. In June both were summoned to the king's council; Egremont refused to respond and in July he was accordingly instructed to keep the peace and even to prepare to sail to Gascony. Towards the end of July an inquiry into disturbances in all the northern shires led to an order to Egremont and John Neville to keep the peace on pain of forfeiture; Northumberland and Salisbury were required to ensure their sons' good behaviour. But on 24 August Egremont, his brother Richard, and a large retinue of Yorkshiremen, with others from Cockermouth, attacked a Neville party returning from the wedding of Thomas Neville and Lord Cromwell's niece at Tattershall, Lincolnshire, to Sheriff Hutton, Yorkshire; at Heworth, near York, the ambush involved almost the entire Percy and Neville clans. The situation remained explosive, and in October another clash seemed likely between Percys and Nevilles at Topcliffe. When the duke of Exeter, for his own dynastic and territorial reasons, intervened on the Percys' side, the feud acquired a new dimension. Egremont met Exeter in January 1454 and at Tuxford, Nottinghamshire, 'ben sworne togider' (Gairdner, 2.296). After Egremont was reported to be raising forces in preparation for the forthcoming parliament, he was summoned to attend the council on 3 March and, following condemnation in parliament, another summons was issued on 10 May. That same month, the duke of York, as protector of the realm, decided to move in person against Egremont and Exeter and the men they were assembling at Spofforth and elsewhere in Yorkshire, Cumberland, and Westmorland; they were even negotiating with the Scots. Exeter, Egremont, and Richard Percy fled, but a commission at York in June investigated their activities: recruiting men and giving livery to those who were not their personal retainers, lawyers, or servants. Although Exeter was apprehended, Egremont eluded capture. At the end of October 1454, at Stamford Bridge, the Percys, led by Egremont and Richard, fought a battle with the Nevilles; the two Percys were captured and, in November, condemned by justices who ordered them to pay the Nevilles $11,200; both were consigned to Newgate prison. Two years later Egremont escaped, much to the Nevilles' anger. 
By 1458 the Percys were valued allies of the Lancastrian monarch. At the formal reconciliation of leading nobles organized by Henry VI in March 1458, Egremont concluded a bond of 10,000 marks with York and the Nevilles; but the large fine previously imposed on him was reduced to a bond of 4000 marks to keep the peace for ten years towards Salisbury, his family, and retainers. Moreover, in June, Egremont was granted for life the castle and manor of Wressle, Yorkshire, the former Percy manor whose possession by Lord Cromwell had been at the heart of the disturbances of 1453. A fortnight later he received permission to leave the realm with twelve servants in order to go on pilgrimage, as he promised at the March reconciliation. Whether he did so or not is unclear. He had certainly returned to England by December 1459, when he was granted the constableship of the duke of York's forfeited castle of Conisbrough, along with a life annuity of $40. Egremont was at the battle of Northampton on 10 July 1460, fighting in support of Henry VI whom Warwick captured. He was probably beheaded after the battle: Warwick could be pardoned if he felt satisfaction that the bane of his family's fortunes in the north for a dozen years had been dispatched. Percy is not known to have married, but his son, Sir John Egremont, was born 'c'.1459. 


@@@@@


doc= 50236


Beauchamp, William (V), first Baron Bergavenny (c.1343-1411), soldier and landowner, was the fourth son of Thomas Beauchamp, eleventh earl of Warwick (1313/14-1369), and of Katherine (died 1369), daughter of Roger Mortimer, first earl of March. 
As a younger son Beauchamp was destined for the church and attended Oxford University from 1358 until 1361, receiving his first benefice, by papal dispensation, in 1358. It was probably in 1361, following the deaths in quick succession of two of his older brothers, that he re-entered the lay world. He was a knight by 1367 and in 1375 was made a knight of the Garter. In 1367 he fought at Najera, on the Castilian campaign led by Edward, the Black Prince, and later that year he and his brother Thomas Beauchamp (d. 1401), now heir to the earldom, went on crusade to Prussia. In 1370 he fought in Gascony, in 1373 he participated in John of Gaunt's 'chevauchee' in France, and in 1381-2 in Edmund, earl of Cambridge's expedition to Portugal, but, allegedly because of failure to pay him in full, he backed out of Despenser's 'crusade' of 1383. In 1375 Edward III gave him a life annuity of 100 marks for his good service. He was also feed by his brother, who became earl of Warwick in 1369, but almost all this early service was performed in the retinue of John of Gaunt, from whom he received a fee of 100 marks in 1373. During the 1370s he was one of Gaunt's bannerets, but it seems Froissart is incorrect in stating that he went on Gaunt's Castilian expedition of 1386 (Froissart, 11.326). 
In 1369 Beauchamp was elevated far above the level of a younger son by the grant under his father's will of land to the value of 400 marks, mostly in the midlands. In 1372 his prospects were further enhanced: John Hastings, the last Hastings earl of Pembroke, then childless and at odds with his cousin and heir, Reynold, Lord Grey of Ruthin (died 1440), willed almost all his lands in England and Wales to his cousin William Beauchamp. The exception was Pembroke, which was left to the king. Beauchamp in return was to bear Hastings's arms and try to obtain the recreation of the earldom. Hastings died in 1375 but he left an under-age son who survived until 1389. However, in 1378 Beauchamp was given custody of Pembroke itself during the heir's minority. He also had dealings in Somerset arising out of his sister's marriage to John, Lord Beauchamp of Hatch. All the same, his main commitment in England was to the interests of himself and his family in the west midlands. These had been enhanced in 1376 by the grant for life from his brother of the former Montfort of Beaudesert lands in Warwickshire. In 1386, moreover, he exchanged two Wiltshire properties left him by his father for Snitterfield, also in Warwickshire. In 1377 he was made keeper of the king's forest and park of Feckenham, Worcestershire, for life, and from 1380 he was on a number of commissions concerned with Feckenham. In 1383 he and his brother helped found the Guild of the Holy Trinity and St Mary at Warwick. Many of his associates were from west midland families linked to the earldom, and during the 1380s he assisted his brother in dealing with the extended conflict over Ladbroke Manor, Warwickshire. 
Beauchamp's history in the first part of Richard II's reign is interesting for a number of reasons. He was one of Richard's earliest chamber knights, appointed in 1377, probably because he had been councillor to the Black Prince (he was executor to the prince's widow in 1385), and was chamberlain of Richard's household from 1378 to 1380. During the early 1380s he received various grants, including a life grant of 200 marks a year in 1380/81 and the alien priory of Pembroke in 1383. It is through the royal household that he is to be found in the company of some of the 'Lollard knights', and he himself may well have had Lollard sympathies. He was certainly involved with several of these men and with other suspect associates like Sir Philip de la Vache. He had an appropriate background: Oxford cleric during Wyclif's time at the university, member of the royal household under Richard II, and service to Wyclif's protector, Gaunt. Among the more notable transactions involving Beauchamp and others from this group is a release of all actions by the wife of a London citizen against Geoffrey Chaucer for rape. However, the deed is a reminder that these men may have been not so much heretics as a close-knit group in Richard's household, some of them part of the highly educated literary coterie to which Chaucer belonged, where Beauchamp would not have been out of place. 
Where Beauchamp stood in the turbulent politics of Richard II's reign is not entirely clear. As the brother of one of the leading lords appellant, he might be expected to have been an antagonist of the king, but he was also a member of Richard II's household, the object of hostility of both parliament and appellants in 1386-8, albeit one of those not singled out for attack. If, apart from the Feckenham commissions, he was hardly used on government business in England, this was surely because he was on campaign for much of the time, and, from 1383 until 1389, captain of Calais. There he performed with some distinction both on land and at sea and was several times on diplomatic missions. As late as February 1387 Beauchamp and his brother were among the group given custody of the lands of the infant earl of Stafford. However, a hostile inquiry into alleged neglect and asset-stripping in Pembroke in 1386-7 suggests that he had enemies at court. Although he was pardoned, the episode led to an informal arrangement by which he relinquished the lands to the heir. In 1387, as the political crisis deepened, Richard commanded Beauchamp to surrender the Calais captaincy. He not only refused but, according to Knighton (Knighton, 406-7), confiscated secret letters from Richard, carried by John Golafre, another chamber knight, requesting help from the king of France, and sent them to Richard's enemy, Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester. Later that year, Beauchamp refused to admit the disgraced favourite, Michael de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (died 1389), who had fled to Calais in disguise, and returned him to England. He may well have remained in Calais as the crisis unfolded in 1387-8 but he was awarded a three-year grant of land formerly belonging to Nicholas Brembre, one of the Merciless Parliament's victims. 
Beauchamp's relations with the king in the 1390s are, if anything, more opaque, although this may simply reflect the complexity and unpredictability of high politics in these years. He lost the Pembroke custody in 1390, to the same John Golafre whose letters he had opened, and in 1389 he was again being pursued for waste, this time as farmer of the alien priory of Monks Kirby, Warwickshire. He was also involved in a number of recognizances in the early to mid-1390s, some on his own behalf, some on behalf of others, whose purposes are obscure but which risked the loss of massive sums. Some could relate to the alleged temporary imprisonment he suffered, for his disobedience in 1387, on returning to England. In 1394 he and his brother were among those who mainperned for the future good behaviour of Richard's great enemy, Warwick's fellow appellant, Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, on his release from the Tower of London. It was probably about this time, and certainly before 20 February 1396, that he married Arundel's daughter, Joan. While this might seem a rash political act for the brother of a former appellant, given Arundel's worsening relations with the king, it may have had more to do with safeguarding Beauchamp's interests in the Hastings inheritance; Arundel's second wife, married in 1390, was widow of the last Hastings and had a third of the family lands in dower. Indeed, Beauchamp continued to serve on royal commissions until 1395, he acted on several occasions for the courts of chivalry and, above all, between 1390 and 1392 he was able to secure a large part of the Hastings inheritance. Despite the claims of other Hastings heirs, which even Beauchamp's lawyers allegedly told him were hard to gainsay, he was able to divide the lands with Reynold, Lord Grey of Ruthin, the heir-general, to whom he paid 1000 marks for Abergavenny, while the king's acquiescence was secured by the bequest of Pembroke. As well as obtaining extensive lands over much of England, Beauchamp became Baron Bergavenny, and from 1392 he received a personal summons to parliament. He was now a nobleman of considerable means. 
In 1397-9, when Warwick, and others considered enemies by the king, became victims of Richard II's vengeance, Beauchamp again managed to avoid complete identification with his brother. He seems to have escaped almost entirely unscathed and he was even given some of the earl of Arundel's moveables in 1398. But he was present when Richard resigned the crown and close enough to Henry IV to gain access for Adam Usk to the imprisoned Richard II. Only a month after Henry's accession, Beauchamp was made justiciar of south Wales. As lord of Abergavenny, Beauchamp did not replicate the neglect he had shown in Pembroke. Indeed, he was twice besieged in Abergavenny during the Glyn Dwr revolt. The rebellion may have made the justiciarship too much for a man of his age and he was relieved of the office in 1401, although he was lieutenant in south Wales for six months in 1405 and apparently on active service. He and his wife obtained a number of grants from Henry IV, including the custody of the lands of his nephew, Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1439), after his brother's death in 1401. From 1401 to 1409, to safeguard his own part in the Hastings lands, he assisted Grey's successful challenge to the use of the Hastings arms by Edward Hastings of Elsing. 
Under Henry IV, Beauchamp acted for the first time as JP: in Hereford, as befitted the lord of Abergavenny, but also in Warwickshire and Worcestershire, where he remained an active force. As in the previous reign, his associates in these counties overlapped with those of the Warwick earldom and he seems to have had an amicable relationship with his nephew. However, when he made his will his decision to be buried in the Black Friars, Hereford, the Hastings mausoleum, shows how far he now identified himself with that inheritance, even though in 1385 he had granted advowsons to St Mary's, Warwick, the religious centre of the Warwick earldom. He died on 8 May 1411. His executors were his wife, her uncle, Thomas Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1414), and her brother, Thomas Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1415). His will, made in 1408, is one of the earliest in English, perhaps another indication of 'Lollard' tendencies, although it ordains a large number of masses. 
Beauchamp's wife, 
It was in the west midlands that Joan Beauchamp had the greatest impact. Some of her energies were directed towards the defence of the Botetourt lands, a burden carried by her descendants for much of the rest of the century, caused by the number of claimants by heredity excluded by Joan's deal with Burnell. About 1418 she was at odds with the west midland esquire, Nicholas Burdet, a case of the meeting of two irresistible forces. But for much of the 1420s Joan's efforts were concentrated on her nephew, Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1439). The reasons for this falling-out within a hitherto harmonious family seem to be these: Joan's growing pretensions in the midlands, Warwick's new alliance with Edmund, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, a power in the Birmingham region where the Botetourt lands were making Joan a major figure, and the conflict in Ireland between Lord Talbot and the earl of Ormond, respectively sons-in-law of Warwick and Joan. Although Joan stood godmother to Warwick's son in 1424, in 1425 her men were involved in an affray with the earl's men in which Talbot's brother was killed. Doubtless to Warwick's embarrassment, it took place at one of Joan's properties in the heart of his Warwickshire lands west of Warwick. In 1427, although the evidence is difficult to evaluate, she seems to have been stirring up opposition to both Ferrers and Warwick in eastern Warwickshire, where the earl's tenurial power was weak, but where she could exert influence from Leicestershire, perhaps in conjunction with other local nobles. Then in 1429 there was a minor confrontation with Ferrers, and in 1431, at Birmingham, a major one, involving sizeable forces led by Joan and Ferrers themselves. Warwick had been in France during much of this local turmoil and would have found it especially awkward because the Bergavenny clientage in Warwickshire and Worcestershire was still closely entwined with his own, but his return in 1428 enabled him eventually to get the better of Joan. Her own suits against Ferrers got nowhere, while she forfeited $1000 pledged in an earlier recognizance to keep the peace. Thereafter she had to accept Warwick's rule in the west midlands, although she seems to have remained a force in Leicestershire. 
Like that of her husband, Joan's will, made in January 1435, was in English and it has some 'Lollard' characteristics. She died on 14 November 1435 and requested burial beside her husband in the Black Friars at Hereford, where, Lollard or not, she endowed a chantry. Their only son, Richard, earl of Worcester, had predeceased her in 1422, leaving a daughter as heir. Their daughter Elizabeth may have died unmarried but their other daughter, Joan (died 1430), had married James Butler, fourth earl of Ormond (died 1452), and it was this family that inherited the Botetourt lands, together with both the clientage and the litigation that went with them. The lands from the Warwick earldom and the Hastings-Bergavenny lands passed by entail to Joan's nephew, the earl of Warwick. When the Warwick male line died out in 1446 they became causes of dispute, between Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, and his uncle, Edward, who had married Worcester's daughter (the Hastings-Bergavenny lands), and among the Beauchamp of Warwick heirs (the Warwick lands). 


@@@@@


doc= 50237


Joan Beauchamp, Lady Bergavenny (1375-1435), was daughter of the appellant Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (d. 1397), and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William de Bohun, earl of Northampton (d. 1360). At Beauchamp's death both his principal estates -- the lands from his father and the Hastings-Bergavenny lands -- were held in tail male but, remarkably, both were left in entirety to Joan for her life. She enlarged her property further in 1420 with the primarily midland estate of the lords Botetourt, acquired from Hugh, Lord Burnell, husband of the Botetourt heiress. At her death Joan held lands over much of the midlands, East Anglia, and the south-east. Moreover, she and her two sisters were found heirs to part of the Arundel inheritance when their brother Thomas Fitzalan died in 1415, and in 1421 a council judgment authorized her to take $80 a year from it. Joan contrived to remain unmarried and, with her unusually large widow's portion, became perhaps the most formidable woman in England over the next twenty years. As a woman her influence was local rather than national -- although she did appear before the council in 1421, as witness in the Berkeley inheritance dispute -- but it was exercised on a wide scale. She had already made sufficient impression in Abergavenny for Adam Usk to refer to her as a 'second Jezebel' ('Chronicon Adae de Usk', 63). However, she seems to have spent most of her time after William's death in the west midlands, in Leicestershire, where the Botetourt lands had given her a major centre at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, and in Hertfordshire and Essex, where, on the basis of the Hastings lands, and perhaps of her own ancestry, she seems to have taken over much of the Bohun following. Her closer associates came mostly from these regions. Remarkably, she held local office, as commissioner for loans in Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, and Leicestershire, between 1426 and 1431. 


@@@@@


doc= 50238


Beauchamp, John, first Baron Beauchamp of Powick (c.1400-1475), nobleman and administrator, was the son and eventually the heir of Sir William Beauchamp of Powick in Worcestershire ('c'.1370- 'c'.1421) and his wife, Katherine Usflete (died after 1436). Sir William had been a royal retainer under Richard II, Henry IV, and Henry V, and, on his death, John followed him into the king's service, receiving an annuity of $40 and the designation 'king's servant and esquire' from Henry V on 18 December 1421. The family's handful of manors in the south-west midlands seem to have been shared between his mother and an elder brother, Walter. 
During the 1420s Beauchamp served under the duke of Bedford in France: he was captain of Pont de l'Arche in 1422-9, lieutenant of Rouen Castle in 1429, a participant in the Maine-Anjou campaigns, and a counsellor to the duke and member of his household. About the time of Henry VI's visit to France for his coronation, in 1430-32, however, he seems to have taken up a permanent post within the king's domestic establishment. Some time before October 1432 he became one of four king's carvers, receiving an annual wage of $40. Before 1434 he married Margaret Ferrers (who made her will in January 1487 or 1488). On 28 October 1434, and presumably in recognition of his landlessness, he was granted the custody of a manor in his home county of Worcestershire. When the king began to make grants on his own authority, in 1436-7, Beauchamp joined other household men in reaping the benefits: his royal pensions reached a total of $140 plus two tuns of Gascon wine per annum. 
The death of his distant relative Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, seems to have been the first major turning point in John Beauchamp's career. In May 1439 he was appointed to the panel controlling the Warwick estates, and in the following November he became a feoffee for the dowager countess. It seems likely that his position in the royal household lay behind his inclusion in these grants, though his close links with Sir Ralph Boteler -- another grantee, another household man, and Beauchamp's own cousin -- must also have been a factor. Together, these two set about filling the regional vacuum left by Warwick's death, drawing large parts of the earl's retinue into a new connection, focused on their interests in Worcestershire and Gloucestershire and Boteler's offices at Kenilworth. Beauchamp was probably landless until the mid-1440s, but his power was underwritten by a series of royal offices given him in 1439: the constableship of Rhuddlan in north Wales, joint custody (with Boteler) of the Forest of Dean, and a place on the Gloucestershire bench. 
During the following decade Beauchamp's importance grew. In 1439 or 1440 he rose up the household ladder to become master of the king's horse. Three years later, he joined the feoffees for the king's colleges at Cambridge and Eton, and in 1445 he became a knight of the Garter. At about the same time he seems to have inherited his father's estates, with their centres at Powick and at Alcester in Warwickshire (he bought the other half of the latter manor in 1444), and, by about the middle of the decade, the Boteler-Beauchamp connection had become the major power in the west midlands. On the death of the short-lived Henry Beauchamp, successively earl and duke of Warwick, in June 1446, Sir John felt sufficiently confident to launch a claim for the earldom of Warwick itself. While the powerful interests clustered around Henry's female heirs assured the failure of the initiative, Beauchamp was able to exact a handsome price for his acquiescence (finally secured in November). Amid a series of grants made in 1446-7, including his father's old office of constable of Gloucester and the post of justice of south Wales, he was on 2 May 1447 elevated to the peerage as Lord Beauchamp of Powick, with annuities worth a further $55 to help maintain his estate. 
Beauchamp had done well out of the royal service in the 1440s, but he emerged unscathed -- even enhanced -- from the crisis of 1449-50 which brought nemesis to so many of his colleagues. In the wake of the 'Act of Resumption' of 1450, from which he was exempted, he picked up a clutch of valuable custodies: the New Forest, the Isle of Wight, and the earldom of Pembroke. On 22 June 1450 he succeeded the hated Lord Saye and Sele as treasurer of England. How Beauchamp escaped the critical backlash of these years is hard to know: the evidence suggests that he was one of those most continuously about the king in the previous decade, and he remained in this position during the years that followed. One possible reason is that he was little involved in the controversial diplomacy of the 1440s; another, that his standing at the centre was matched by real power in the west midlands (even if this power had been composed with central help). In any event, it need not be assumed that he owed his appointment as treasurer to any association with the critics of the regime: as Cade and others protested, the post-Suffolk establishment was made up mainly of the same people as before. 
Beauchamp's tenure at the treasury lasted two years, during which policy was probably determined less by the treasurer than by the conflicting designs of parliament and the recipients of royal patronage. Beauchamp himself seems to have done well out of his office: although one chronicle describes him as having been expelled from the treasury (on 15 April 1452), he departed with a reward of $400, for his service during this 'moost troublouseust season' (TNA: PRO, E404/68/103), and secured repayment of some $528 owed to him with little difficulty. Between 1450 and 1453 he remained a central figure in the household, under the duke of Somerset, but avoided implication in the duke's more partisan activities, being chosen as a plausible mediator between the government and York's renegade agent Sir William Oldhall, for example. Beauchamp maintained a low profile during the crisis of 1453-4: he stayed at Henry VI's side during the latter's madness, and was allotted a place as one of two 'barons' of the household in the Yorkist ordinances of November 1454. 
If his appointment as a councillor on 21 February 1455 was intended to enlist Beauchamp as an ally of Somerset, it did not succeed: he attended the council sporadically (as he had done before) but he played no part in the fighting at St Albans a few months later. A poem of 1458 identified Beauchamp as a member of the royalist party, but this is almost certainly to be explained by his long-standing place in the household (where he became steward at some point in the second half of 1457). There is no evidence that he ever fought for Lancaster, and he attended both a council meeting and a chapter of the Garter during the winter of 1460-61, when the king was under Yorkist control. At the end of 1460 he lost his stewardship, but he was reinstated as a feoffee for the royal colleges, so there is little to suggest that the new regime was hostile towards him. What he did in the difficult early months of 1461 is unknown, but it is unlikely that he gave much serious consideration to the armed struggle on behalf of his former master: Edward IV clearly anticipated loyalty when he placed Beauchamp on a Worcestershire commission of array in August, and a few months later approved his petition for exemption from the 'Act of Resumption' of 1461. In February 1462 Beauchamp received a pardon, and in October of that year an exemption from the obligations of office and attendance, on the grounds of his great age. 
So it was that, with the downfall of Henry VI, Beauchamp went into retirement rather than opposition. In the midlands he and Boteler lost their former influence, and if the latter risked participation in the rebellions of 1469-71, the former apparently went to ground, failing to help either king against his enemies. Beauchamp had yielded up his place in politics to his son Richard long before his death between 9 and 19 April 1475. He was buried a few miles from Powick, in the Dominican friary, Worcester. 


@@@@@


doc= 50239


Beaumont, John, first Viscount Beaumont (1409?-1460), magnate and courtier, was the elder son and heir of Henry, fifth Baron Beaumont of Folkingham, Lincolnshire (1379/80-1413) and Elizabeth (died 1427), daughter of William, fifth Baron Willoughby of Eresby. He was one of the most powerful lords in eastern England during the reign of Henry VI, and a firm supporter of the Lancastrian royal family in the troubles of the 1450s. 
Four years old at the death of his father, Beaumont became a ward of Henry V, who granted custody of the boy and his substantial estates, which were concentrated in Lincolnshire and Leicestershire, to Henry Beaufort (d. 1447), bishop of Winchester. In 1425 Beaumont's marriage was granted to Sir John Radcliffe, and, possibly as early as 1428 (but certainly by July 1436), he wed Elizabeth Phelip, the daughter and sole heir of William Phelip, Lord Bardolf (1383/4-1441), a leading figure in the duchy of Lancaster connection in East Anglia. This was to be a valuable association: Beaumont inherited (in 1441) Bardolf's extensive and conveniently situated holdings in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Lincolnshire, and his close links with William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (died 1450), must have helped to secure for him a place in the establishment of the emerging king. Certainly, as the 1430s wore on, the young Beaumont's political standing increased rapidly, and he became one of the most extensively rewarded and important figures in the government. In the summer of 1436 he agreed to accompany the duke of Gloucester on his expedition to protect Calais and (even though this was his first and last involvement in the war in France) he was rewarded with a grant of the county of Boulogne. Two days after Queen Catherine's death on 3 January 1437 he succeeded to the stewardship of the duchy of Lancaster honour of Leicester, which had been part of her dower and which (together with the stewardship of Castle Donington, which he obtained from Henry V's feoffees at the same time) complemented his own holdings in the county superbly. On 12 February 1440 he was made a viscount, the first ever in England, and during the ensuing few years he acquired a life interest in a string of royal lands in Norfolk and Lincolnshire together with the stewardship of the duchy honour of Bolingbroke, Lincolnshire, and (fittingly) a grant of the 'vicomte' of Beaumont, Maine. In the same year he succeeded de la Pole as lord great chamberlain, a position he held until his death. In 1441 or 1442, he was elected to the Garter, and on 29 November 1443 he became a feoffee for the royal foundations at Eton and Cambridge. By 12 November 1445 he had been appointed constable of England. 
Beyond his links with Bardolf and the presence of a younger brother, Henry, among the king's esquires, it is difficult to know why Beaumont attracted such an extraordinary heap of honours and perquisites from the crown in these years. Clearly he was not being rewarded for military service overseas. Part of the reason for the favour shown to him must be that, although he does not seem himself to have held any official post in the royal household, he had been part of the royal coterie since Henry VI's childhood. He may actually have been living at court in the later 1420s, since an act of the council in 1425 provided that wards of baronial rank should be permanently about the king. On 12 November 1428, when he was still a minor, he was described as being in the king's service and when, in April 1430, Henry crossed to France for his coronation at Paris, Beaumont was among those accompanying him. It is possible that during these years he established some kind of friendship with the king, and, after Henry began to exercise his powers of patronage from the summer of 1436 onwards, simply petitioned for much, if not all, of what he got. It seems likely, however, that his requests for favour would have had to earn the approval of leading figures of the ruling group as well as that of Henry himself. It may be that Beaumont's partly Lancastrian descent (from Eleanor, daughter of Henry, third earl of Lancaster, his paternal great-great-grandmother) was a factor in obtaining this approval: it was sufficiently widely known for Lord Hungerford to bequeath him a cup of John of Gaunt's in his will. But one of the most important factors in his advancement must surely have been his territorial standing, and this appears to have grown alongside the mound of favours acquired at court. When he came of age, in 1430, he entered into the entire Beaumont patrimony, the widows of the last two lords having died in 1427. From 1441 he controlled the lands of his wife's inheritance and, by royal grant made shortly before her death (before 30 October 1441), the wardship of anything his children might inherit from her. By 25 August 1443 he had acquired an even richer prize by marrying, as her third husband, Katherine Strangways ('c'.1400-1483) ['see 'Neville, Katherine], the dowager duchess of Norfolk. The daughter of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland, and Joan Beaufort, she was the holder of a life interest in the Mowbray estates in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire (Isle of Axholme), Sussex, and the marches of Wales as well as an enormous dowry which included most of the Mowbray manors in Norfolk and Leicestershire. It was this privately held estate in the eastern counties that the grants of royal lands and custodies must have been meant to supplement: the government doubtless intended that the young viscount take his place in the extensive connection of magnates through whom Henry VI's advisers attempted to govern the country. 
When the time of reckoning came for Suffolk and his associates in 1450, Beaumont -- rather surprisingly -- escaped unscathed. He had been involved in some of the regime's most unpopular activities, including the arrest of the duke of Gloucester, the surrender of Maine (for which he was one of only two English lords known to have received the promised compensation), and the maintenance of the notorious William Tailboys (died 1464). Some local men attacked his manor at Boston, Lincolnshire, in July 1449 -- no doubt partly in reaction to the extraordinary franchisal powers he had acquired from the king in the previous year -- but none the less, to one of the doggerel writers of 1450, he was 'that gentill rache [hound]' (Robbins, 186): vindicated perhaps by his noble status and his role, as constable, in the arrest of Suffolk. Within days of Suffolk's death Beaumont succeeded him as chamberlain of England, and yielded up his office of constable to the earl of Northumberland a few weeks later. 
Although he had been quite closely associated with Richard, duke of York, during the 1430s and 1440s, acting as feoffee for the duke on a number of occasions and probably serving on his council, Beaumont was a consistent supporter of king and court during the 1450s. Initially he may have sought to avoid an open breach with York and his supporters. While he was reluctant to participate in the duke's protectorate of 1454, for example, he came to be on reasonable terms with York's regime: he retained his place in the household in the 'abridgement' of that year and secured a patent protecting his interests in the Bardolf lands; in 1455 he does not seem to have been in the royal army at the battle of St Albans. Even so, there were early signs that he might prove hostile to the Yorkists: he had taken part in the judicial commissions which harried Duke Richard's men in 1452-3 and he had joined the group opposed to York and the Nevilles in the tense winter of 1453-4. As the 1450s wore on, and the lines of division became sharper, his Lancastrian commitment became more overt. One of the most important factors in this was probably his close association with Queen Margaret. As a major Leicestershire landowner and leading courtier Beaumont was an obvious ally and agent for the queen, whose dower centred on the honours of Leicester, Kenilworth, and Tutbury. He had been the chief steward of her lands from as early as 1446 and, as Margaret assumed the leadership of the Lancastrian cause after the death of Edmund Beaufort in 1455, he was one of her principal lieutenants; he became chief steward of Prince Edward's lands on 20 January 1457 and of the northern parts of the duchy of Lancaster on 6 December 1459. It was Beaumont's prominence in the regime of the late 1450s that provoked the Yorkist lords to identify him as one of their three 'mortalle and extreme enemyes' ('English Chronicle', 88) in 1460 and, allegedly, to secure his excommunication at the hands of the papal legate at about the same time. Together with other leading associates of the queen (notably the duke of Buckingham, whose daughter had married William, Beaumont's eldest surviving son, in 1452), Beaumont was killed in the Yorkist victory at Northampton on 10 July 1460, possibly by the men of Kent. He was not attainted, and in November 1460 his son was allowed to succeed to his lands without suit, but the new government's conciliatory efforts were unavailing. By the time of the battle of Towton, in March 1461, William, second Viscount Beaumont (died 1507), had followed his father into the Lancastrian camp. 
John Beaumont's appearance is unknown and there is little evidence of his character. It is possible that he was a man of somewhat extreme, though conventional, piety, as he is known to have pressed for action to be taken against the controversial Bishop Pecock in 1457. In this display of orthodoxy, as in his detachment from the war in France and his close association with the royal court, he was perhaps a typical member of the later Lancastrian nobility. 


@@@@@


doc= 50240


Burgh, Thomas, Baron Burgh (c.1430-1496), administrator and soldier, was the eldest son of Thomas Burgh and Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Sir Henry Percy of Harthill, Yorkshire. He inherited his mother's estates, including Gainsborough (Lincolnshire) and a moiety of the Mitford barony in Northumberland, on her death in 1455, when he was said to be aged twenty-four and more. His early political affiliations were with the Staffords: he was a member of the household of the duke of Buckingham in 1456-7 and was one of the duke's feoffees in 1458. But after the duke's death at Northampton he appears to have made an early commitment to the victorious Yorkists, by whom he was made sheriff of Lincolnshire in autumn 1460. He was made an esquire of the body on 2 April 1461, just four days after the battle of Towton had confirmed Edward IV on the throne. He had been knighted by February 1463, and was master of the king's horse by February 1464. He was a knight of the body by 1466 and probably earlier. His rise in the king's service was accompanied by generous patronage, including forfeited land in Lincolnshire and elsewhere, and office within the duchy of Lancaster estates in Lincolnshire, notably the constableships of Lincoln Castle and of Bolingbroke. 
Tensions created by Burgh's arrival as a force within the county contributed to the Lincolnshire rising of 1470. Unrest began with the sacking of Burgh's house at Gainsborough by Richard, Lord Welles, his son Robert and his brothers-in-law Sir Thomas de la Laund and Sir Thomas Dymmock, and escalated when it was rumoured that Edward planned to bring an army into the county to punish the offenders. Burgh was a crucial figure for Lincolnshire loyalties to the royal household under Edward IV, but his influence was eclipsed during the readeption of Henry VI until Edward's restoration in 1471 brought a return to power. In the French war his importance was reflected in his provision of 160 archers, no other knight of the body raising more than 100. Burgh transferred smoothly to the household of Richard III, retaining all his local offices. He received further patronage from the new king, including land worth $200, and was elected a knight of the Garter. But he was never one of those closest to the king and he probably avoided the battle of Bosworth. The accession of Henry VII brought the loss of his gains from Richard III and of several of his Lincolnshire offices, but he remained a royal councillor (a post he had held under both Yorkist kings) and in 1487 received a personal summons to parliament, although there is no evidence that he took his seat in the Lords and in his will he describes himself simply as 'Thomas Burgh knight'. 
Burgh had married, by May 1464, Margaret, daughter of Thomas, Lord Ros, and widow of William, Lord Botreaux, who had died on 16 May 1462. She brought him extensive dower estates in Wiltshire, Somerset, and Dorset. She died on 10 December 1488. With her Burgh had two sons, Edward and Thomas, and two daughters, Elizabeth, who had married Richard, Lord Fitzhugh, by 21 May 1481, and Anne. In widowhood, Elizabeth was married in 1491 to Sir Henry Willoughby (c.1451-1528) ['see under 'Willoughby family (per. 1362-1528)]. Edward, Burgh's heir, was associated with his father in a grant of office in February 1469, and in 1477 married Anne Cobham, the widow of Edward Blount, Lord Mountjoy. By the time of his father's death Edward had three sons (Thomas, George, and Humphrey) and a daughter (Margaret). After a promising career he was judged lunatic in 1510 and died in 1528. 
Burgh died on 18 March 1496 and willed burial in the new chapel he had built within the parish church of Gainsborough, where a perpetual chantry was to be founded for himself, his wife, and parents. He also endowed five bedesmen, to be chosen from his former servants, or, failing that, from his tenants in Gainsborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 50241


Tuddenham, Sir Thomas (1401-1462), landowner, was born at Eriswell, Suffolk, the younger son of Sir Robert Tuddenham of Eriswell (1366-1405) and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Harling, esquire. Thomas inherited the Tuddenham estates on the death of his elder brother, Robert, in 1415. His wardship and marriage were granted to Sir John Rodenhale and John Wodehous, esquire, in July 1417. It was probably in the following year that Tuddenham married Wodehous's daughter Alice. The couple lived together until about 1425, and during that time Alice gave birth to a short-lived son. The marriage did not last; both later stated that it had never been consummated, and Alice acknowledged that her child had been the result of a liaison with her father's chamberlain. They separated formally by 1429, when Alice entered the Augustinian nunnery of Crabhouse, Norfolk. She seems still to have been living there in 1475. Although the marriage was annulled in 1436, Tuddenham never remarried. 
Tuddenham received livery of his estates in March 1423. His association with his father-in-law, Wodehous (which does not seem to have been compromised by the failure of his marriage), involved him with a powerful political network in Norfolk which had developed since 1399 around those local men who were associated with the management of the king's duchy of Lancaster estates in the north of the shire. Wodehous had held the duchy of Lancaster stewardship in East Anglia since 1415, but on 30 June 1425 he surrendered the office so that it could be granted for life to Tuddenham, who seems also to have been knighted about this time. It was probably through Wodehous's influence that Tuddenham became a member of the household of Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter, the most powerful nobleman in Norfolk until his death in 1426. Tuddenham's involvement in Norfolk politics was reinforced in 1434 when he inherited the manor of Oxburgh, which was to become his principal residence, from a distant cousin. 
By the later 1430s William de la Pole, earl (later duke) of Suffolk (1396-1450), succeeded in establishing himself as Exeter's successor at the head of the Norfolk network of which Tuddenham was a part. Suffolk was also by this time in the ascendant at court. Tuddenham's position as one of Suffolk's most influential supporters was reflected in his many appointments and grants in East Anglia and in the king's household. Tuddenham was appointed sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk in 1432; he was MP for Suffolk in 1431, and for Norfolk in 1432, 1435, and 1442. He was named to every peace commission in Norfolk between 1434 and 1450. On 29 September 1443 he was appointed chief steward of the north parts of the duchy of Lancaster jointly with Suffolk, and on 26 October 1446, as a king's knight, he was made keeper of the great wardrobe. 
The degree of influence wielded in East Anglia by Tuddenham and associates such as John Heydon of Baconsthorpe during the 1440s is usually described as the temporary hijacking of regional power structures by Suffolk's henchmen, a view reinforced by the hostility with which they were portrayed in the Paston letters, but the local influence of Tuddenham's broad circle had much deeper roots than their identification as a court clique allows. Their regional dominance both predated Suffolk's rise to power, and survived his fall in 1450. In that year and the next Tuddenham lost his position on the Norfolk peace commission, his keepership of the great wardrobe, and his stewardship of the north parts of the duchy, and charges were brought against Tuddenham and Heydon by their local opponents, prominent among whom were the Pastons. However, the influence of Tuddenham and his associates was quickly reasserted under the leadership of the dowager duchess of Suffolk and Thomas, Lord Scales. By 1452 Tuddenham and Heydon were again being appointed to special commissions, and in 1455 both were reinstated as JPs in Norfolk. 
The connections between Tuddenham's circle and the court meant that during the 1450s they aligned themselves with Queen Margaret against Richard, duke of York. Under the financial resettlement initiated by the queen at the end of 1458 Tuddenham became treasurer of the royal household. After the Yorkist victory in 1461 a commission for Tuddenham's arrest was issued, and he was executed on 23 February 1462 as a rebel and traitor. His lands passed to his sister Margaret, wife of Sir Edmund Bedingfield. Tuddenham was buried in the church of the Austin Friars in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50242


Bourchier, Sir William, count of Eu (c.1374-1420), magnate and soldier, was the son and heir of Sir William Bourchier (died 1375) and his wife, Eleanor Lovayne (1345-1397). 
Bourchier's family had risen to prominence during the fourteenth century through an unblemished record of service to the crown, gaining estates concentrated in Suffolk and Essex. Sir Robert Bourchier, William's grandfather, was the first layman to become chancellor of England, and was duly elevated to the peerage as a reward. Both he and his eldest son, John, the second lord, distinguished themselves in the wars with France, establishing a reputation for military prowess which many of their descendants sought to emulate. Ennoblement brought wealth, and a substantial estate centred upon Halstead in Essex, but since he was only a younger son William's father could expect little in the way of inheritance. He was, however, well placed to make a lucrative marriage, to Eleanor, the second daughter and coheir of Sir John Lovayne (died 1347). She eventually succeeded to all her father's property, which comprised seven manors in Essex and Suffolk, including Little Easton, the family seat. These passed directly to Bourchier's father when she died in 1397, providing him with an income of about $154 a year net and adding greatly to his influence in the region. 
The early death of his father, while he was still an infant, drew Bourchier into the orbit of his powerful neighbour, Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester (died 1397). He may well have spent some of his youth in the ducal household at Pleshey Castle, Essex; and in May 1392, when he was about eighteen, he contracted to accompany the duke to Ireland, where he then held office as king's lieutenant. Gloucester's summary dismissal meant that they never actually set sail, but in 1394 the duke accompanied Richard II on an expedition there, and Bourchier travelled with them. He was knighted shortly afterwards. That he made an extremely favourable impression is evident from Gloucester's decision to engage him for life, in 1396, as a member of his personal retinue at a substantial fee of over $36 a year. His patron's arrest and murder in the following year must have come as a bitter blow to Sir William; although he was too shrewd to show his hand (and even served on a royal commission to levy a fine imposed upon the duke's partisans in Essex and Hertfordshire), he remained in close touch with members of Gloucester's circle. One such was Walter, Lord Fitzwalter, with whom he sailed to Ireland in 1398, possibly remaining there for the rest of Richard II's reign. The value of his services was soon recognized by Henry IV, who arranged in March 1400 for the fee previously granted to him by Gloucester to be assigned directly upon the exchequer at Westminster and thus rendered more secure. Henry, prince of Wales, also thought highly of Sir William, assigning him a similar annuity as a knight of his chamber, in 1401, and entrusting him with the diplomatically sensitive task of negotiating two royal marriages with King Erik of Denmark. He returned to England in the spring of 1403, in time for Henry IV's victory at the battle of Shrewsbury on 21 July that year. 
Among the many fatalities on the king's side was Edmund Stafford, fifth earl of Stafford, who had been married to Gloucester's daughter, Anne of Woodstock. As sole heir to the great estates left by the duke and his wife, Eleanor de Bohun, she laid claim to an income worth over $2200 a year net. Although several of the properties in question were currently in other hands, she still ranked as one of the richest women in England and by far the greatest heiress. Then aged about twenty and the mother of one infant son, she offered any prospective husband the promise of great wealth combined with spectacular connections. Such a prize was not, however, within the common reach: Anne's proximity to the throne (she was a granddaughter of Edward III) and the extent of her holdings in eleven English counties, Wales, and Ireland made the question of her remarriage a matter of pressing political as well as financial concern to the crown. Until her cousin Henry V forced her to accept a repartition of the Bohun estates in 1421, she owned swathes of property across the south-east, including Pleshey Castle. In addition, her dower lands (from the third as well as the fifth earl) gave her control of well over half the Stafford inheritance, with a string of castles and lordships along the Welsh border. Fear that the rebels might seize one of these strongholds led Henry IV to entrust Sir William with the task of supervising the defences. He and Anne found themselves together at Huntington Castle in Herefordshire, and it seems to have been then, within a few weeks of Earl Edmund's death, that their clandestine marriage took place. Since they had almost certainly become acquainted at Pleshey in the 1390s, their conduct was less impetuous than it might at first appear. Not even Bourchier, a man of undoubted eloquence and charm, could expect to escape scot-free, but he was clearly prepared to risk the threat of Henry's immediate displeasure. His qualities as a soldier and administrator, as well as his proven loyalty to the beleaguered house of Lancaster, meant that he and his wife were soon excused the 'great sums' that Henry had ordered them to hand over personally in his chamber. Even so, there can be little doubt that, however highly they may have regarded Sir William, neither Henry IV nor his eldest son felt the slightest compunction in obstructing Anne's efforts to recover and retain substantial parts of her inheritance -- an inheritance that might, but for Sir William, have been enjoyed by one of their own kinsmen as her new husband. Bourchier's marriage received the unequivocal support of his neighbours in Essex, who had probably learned of it before the elections to the first parliament of 1404. This, his only known return to the House of Commons, reflects the warmth of feeling still felt in the county for the memory of the late duke, as well as the respect that he himself inspired. 
During the years immediately after their marriage Bourchier and the countess enjoyed a net annual income of between $1300 and $1700 from her estates, which were administered separately by a staff of experienced bureaucrats. This was considerably less than she might have hoped for, but it represented untold riches for Sir William, who now lived the life of an English nobleman in all but name. Over the year ending September 1409, for example, payments in excess of $894 were made into his own coffers by Anne's officials, she received her customary allowance of $266 for personal expenses, and their joint household cost about $442. Bourchier's private income from this source fluctuated considerably, but never appears to have fallen below $412. His new status brought with it a heavy burden of responsibilities, including the protection of Anne's lordships along the Welsh border, which were still vulnerable to attack. For much of the time he remained in attendance upon Prince Henry, fighting under his banner throughout the summer of 1404, and again, in 1407, when the rebel force supporting Owain Glyn Dwr at Aberystwyth surrendered after a long siege. As a marcher lord he clearly had a vested personal interest in the suppression of disorder in Wales. He did not, even so, miss the opportunity to extend his own holdings by leasing property in Essex and Norfolk that had been confiscated from a number of alien priories by the government. His membership of the Essex bench, on which he sat for approximately seven years, also bolstered his authority in the region. In this and many other respects, Bourchier profited greatly from his close association with Prince Henry, who mounted the throne in 1413, and (initially at least) looked more favourably upon some of the Countess Anne's claims as a widow and an heiress. He allowed her to recover her father's lordship of Oakham, Rutland, and to collect revenues from the Stafford family estates in Ireland, using these concessions to reward his former companion-in-arms. 
As one of Henry's most trusted advisers Bourchier played a significant part in the diplomatic negotiations that preceded the outbreak of hostilities with France in 1415. He spent several weeks in Paris discussing 'secret matters' with the French king's emissaries (TNA: PRO, E404/31/106), being paid $100 in expenses sustained on a mission which, despite its avowed intention of establishing a permanent peace between the two countries, was seen by the English as little more than a cosmetic exercise. Henry V was already mobilizing an army for the invasion of Normandy when Sir William returned home in March. An experienced commander, whose keen intelligence evidently matched his valour in the field, Bourchier now took his place among the leading English captains. He contracted to serve with a large contingent of ninety mounted archers and twenty-nine men-at-arms, and was singled out as one of the beneficiaries of the will that King Henry made in July 1415, just as the army was about to sail. He was promised one of the king's best horses, an appropriate legacy in view of the great bravery he is said to have displayed during the battle of Agincourt in the following October, when 102 men fought directly under him. A number of distinguished prisoners were taken back to England by the victorious army and held in the Tower of London. Since Edward, duke of York, the previous constable, had fallen at Agincourt, Bourchier seemed an ideal replacement. He held the constableship of the Tower from November 1415 until his death, with special responsibility for the safe keeping of the French captives. He was, in addition, granted the less demanding post of master of the royal hounds. As might be expected, given the confidence that he inspired, he was sent as an envoy to receive the visiting emperor, Sigismund, when the latter arrived at Rochester in the spring of 1416. King Henry showed his approval in more concrete ways, too, allowing him to farm some of the estates of his stepson, Humphrey Stafford, future duke of Buckingham (died 1460), and of other royal wards. 
Bourchier played an even more important part in Henry V's second expedition to France, which he joined with a personal retinue of 164 men, including 39 mounted lances. This was an army of occupation, whose commanders could expect a share of the conquered territories. After a summer of hard campaigning, in November 1417 Bourchier was given custody of the confiscated estates of the Hermanville family and of a large town house called the Golden Lion in Caen. He spent much of the following year at the sieges of Louviers and Rouen, and in February 1419 assumed the captaincy of Dieppe, which had surrendered to him just a few days before. In order to maintain open lines of supply and communication, it was vital for the English to keep the port firmly under their control, so the appointment was no sinecure. Bourchier became serjeant of Mantes and Meulan as well, being entrusted with the task of provisioning King Henry's headquarters while he was in the vicinity. It was at this time that Henry decided to take possession of the town and 'comte' of Eu (to the north-east of Dieppe), whose lord, Charles d'Artois, then a prisoner in the Tower, had consistently refused to acknowledge his suzerainty. Bourchier was instructed to appoint officials loyal to the English, and then, in June 1419, was himself given the 'comte' in tail male. In all, six of Henry V's most valued adjutants were rewarded in this way, as part of a policy designed to strengthen the English presence in Normandy and give leading commanders a personal stake in the success of the enterprise. A few months later Bourchier and his male heirs were likewise confirmed in possession of the Hermanville estates, but he himself did not survive to enjoy them. He died at Troyes on 28 May 1420, his body being sent back to England for burial at Llanthony Priory in Gloucestershire. 
As her correspondence with her great friend the prior of Llanthony reveals, the Countess Anne had avidly followed the progress of the English army in France, recording with pride 'the valiant prowess, wisdom and good governance' of her husband (TNA: PRO, C115/K2/6682 fol. 129'r'). Her sorrow at his death seems to have been real and lasting: she never remarried and asked, in her will, to be buried beside him. She employed two priests at Little Easton to pray daily for his salvation, and had two masses sung each day at Llanthony for the same purpose. Whatever distress he may have felt at the loss of an old friend, Henry V showed little sentiment in his dealings with Anne, who was forced to accept a repartition of the Bohun estates in 1421, and obliged to struggle on for another decade before all her inheritance was restored to her. This may have intensified her determination to see that her five children with Bourchier did well for themselves, for it was she who promoted their careers and arranged their marriages. They did not disappoint her. Henry Bourchier, the eldest, succeeded his father as count of Eu and eventually became first earl of Essex; Thomas Bourchier, archbishop of Canterbury, dominated the political stage for over three decades; and both William and John were elevated to the peerage as, respectively, Lord Fitzwarine and Lord Berners. Their sister, Eleanor, married John (VI) Mowbray, third duke of Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 50244


Phelip, William, Baron Bardolf (1383/4-1441), nobleman and soldier, was the son and heir of Sir William Phelip of Dennington, Suffolk (died 1407) and his wife, Juliana, daughter of Sir Robert Erpingham of Erpingham, Norfolk. His early political career was shaped by his close association with his maternal uncle, Sir Thomas Erpingham, a leading figure at court and in East Anglia after 1399. Phelip entered the service of Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter, with whom Erpingham was closely connected, and who was the leading magnate in East Anglia from 1405 when he was granted the Norfolk estates forfeited by Thomas, Lord Bardolf, because of his involvement in the Scrope rebellion. It was presumably through Beaufort's influence that Phelip married Joan (1390-1447), younger daughter and coheir of Lord Bardolf, by June 1408. 
Their connections with Erpingham and Beaufort led Phelip and his younger brother John into royal service under Henry IV, and both rose to greater prominence under Henry V. Both fought in the French campaign of 1415; John Phelip died at Harfleur, but William went on to serve at Agincourt. He spent the years from 1417 to 1422 mostly in France, and served as captain of Harfleur from July 1421 to November 1422. He had been knighted in 1413, and became a knight of the Garter in 1418. From October 1421 until November 1422 he also held office as treasurer of Henry V's household. This eminence in central government continued under Henry VI; Phelip was appointed to the royal council in May 1432, and became chamberlain of the king's household in November of that year, appointments that he held until his death. 
Phelip's influence in East Anglia was also increasing. He was MP for Suffolk in both parliaments of 1414; he became a regular member of the peace commission in Suffolk from 1423, and in Norfolk from 1429, and served on a wide variety of other local commissions. The childless deaths of Beaufort in 1426 and Erpingham in 1428 offered Phelip the opportunity, as Erpingham's heir and Beaufort's chief executor, to take their place at the head of the broad political connection that had developed under their leadership in East Anglia since 1399. However, the farm of the Bardolf estates which Beaufort had held was secured in 1431 not by Phelip but by William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (1396-1450), who was seeking to establish his own regional lordship after his return from France in 1430. 
Phelip had, with Erpingham, held the custody of Suffolk's lands during his minority from 1415 to 1418, but there is little evidence of further association between Phelip and Suffolk in a local context in the years immediately after the earl's return to England. Their respective authorities seem to have developed in parallel until 1437, when a series of manoeuvres resulted in an accommodation which allowed their regional interests to be assimilated into a single political connection. In November 1437 Suffolk surrendered his farm of the Bardolf lands in Norfolk so that a hereditary grant could finally be made to Phelip; two days later Phelip surrendered the lordship of Swaffham in Norfolk, the farm of which he had recently acquired, so that it could be granted to Suffolk. Phelip had therefore succeeded in recovering his wife's inheritance, in recognition of which he was thereafter styled Baron Bardolf, while Suffolk's regional authority had been safeguarded. Accommodation was again reached between Suffolk and Phelip in the reorganization of the duchy of Lancaster administration in the same year; the earl became chief steward of the north parts of the duchy, and Phelip was granted the equivalent office in the south. 
Phelip died on 6 June 1441, and was buried at Dennington, as was his wife, who died six years later. Their only child, Elizabeth, wife of John Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont, died shortly after her father (certainly by October 1441). Her heir was her son William, during whose minority Beaumont had custody of the estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 50245


James, Walter Haweis (1847-1927), army officer, politician, and military writer, was born on 9 July 1847, the youngest son of H. C. James and his wife, Elizabeth Jane, 'nee' Page. The family home was Bushmead Hall, Bedford. Educated privately, James entered the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and was commissioned in 1867 into the Royal Engineers. He married in 1871 Fanny Eugenia Mabel Caunter, the only daughter of the Revd G. Akehurst, and they had one daughter and three sons. 
In 1877 James passed the Staff College course with honours, going on to serve in the War Office intelligence department. Promoted captain in 1879, he served on campaign as a deputy assistant quartermaster-general in the Anglo-Zulu War, but failed to distinguish himself, and retired from the army in 1880 to go into politics. 
A staunch Conservative, James contested the parliamentary seat of West St Pancras unsuccessfully in 1885. Between 1889 and 1892 he was a member of the London county council, becoming a whip of the Moderate Party and chairman of the sanitary committee. In 1899 he was made vice-chairman of the Primrose League, on the grand council of which he served for several years. 
Re-employed by the army in 1901 at the height of the South African War, James served in the War Office as assistant to the permanent under-secretary, being promoted major in 1901 and lieutenant-colonel in 1903. Leaving the army once again, he played a small but significant part in the army reform movement as the author of numerous newspaper and magazine articles, and as editor of the famous 'Wolseley Series' of military textbooks, and established something of a reputation as a military pundit. He published two military books of his own, 'Modern Strategy' (1903), intended as a textbook for army officers, and 'The Campaign of 1815' (1908). 
Part of the conservative mainstream in military thinking as well as in politics, James's works contain some useful insights into war of the period, and are among many which disprove the myth that the armies of Europe had no conception of what awaited them in the First World War. He identified the impact on war made by improved railway and telegraph communications, and by the vastly increased size of armies. He also realized the strength given to the defensive by increased firepower and the increasing impossibility of successful frontal attacks. However, his solution, like that of most of his contemporaries, was to emphasize manoeuvre in the expectation that battle would become more, rather than less, decisive. His military thought, as expressed in 'Modern Strategy', inclines more towards the ideals of Jomini than of Clausewitz. 
On 14 September 1914 James was recalled to active service from the reserve for the last time, fulfilling the role of a typical army 'dug-out' officer by working as a general staff officer 2nd grade in the censor's department of the War Office. He retired on 31 May 1918, having reached the age limit. His main post-war achievement was in providing valuable assistance to 'The Times' in preparing its 'History of the War'. 
The family home in later life was 6 St Mary's Mansions, London W2. A member of the Author's Club, James's other recreations were shooting and tennis. He died peacefully of old age on 13 January 1927 in a nursing home in Ealing and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 17 January. One of his sons followed him into the army, becoming Lieutenant-Colonel R. H. James. 


@@@@@


doc= 50248


Bodrugan, Sir Henry (c.1426-1487x1503), landowner and rebel, sometimes called Henry Trenowith, was the son and heir of Sir William Bodrugan of Newham, Cornwall ('c'.1398-1441), and of Philippa, daughter of Sir John Arundel of Lanherne, Cornwall ('fl'. 1426-1450). He was descended through his paternal great-grandmother, Joan, wife of Ralph Trenowith, from an ancient knightly family. He married in 1454 Joan, widow of William Beaumont of Devon, whose illegitimate son he may have fathered. She died between 1466 and 1475; his second marriage, by 1475, to Margaret, youngest daughter of William, Lord Herbert, and widow of Thomas Talbot, Viscount Lisle, was childless. 
A ward of Thomas Courtenay, earl of Devon, from 1441 to 1447 (Devon paid the earl of Suffolk and other royal servants for the privilege), Bodrugan grew up during years of developing warfare between Devon and William, Lord Bonville. Described as 'scheff reulere of Cornwayle' (Warkworth, 27), he was regularly commissioned between 1454 and 1486 as JP, commissioner of array, and to investigate piracy. He befriended, by 1454, Devon's dissident cousins the Courtenays of Powderham, evidently following them into the Yorkist camp (he was ordered to be brought before the privy council in 1460 following a parliamentary petition, and the spate of commissions to him ceased between 1458 and 1460, resuming on 28 March 1461). While his mother held valuable dower lands at least until 1450, his estate possibly deteriorated under Devon's guardianship. He was in financial (and perhaps political) difficulties between 1450 and 1458: it was alleged that he sold, then fraudulently repossessed, timber, and that, immediately after Edward IV's accession, he forcibly repossessed lands that he had earlier quitclaimed. His own counter-petitions generally disputed landownership. He was charged in 1473 to besiege John de Vere, earl of Oxford, in St Michael's Mount. Deprived of commanding the siege, allegedly for double-dealing with Oxford, he subsequently retained some of Oxford's men, and was attainted in 1474. The commission to carry out the attainder was cancelled, following his petition in parliament. Unlike the Powderham Courtenays he did not support Clarence, taking no part in the readeption and becoming a consistent peace commissioner only after the duke's fall in 1478. Almost certainly knighted in 1475, he was a knight of the body of Richard III, and possibly present at Bosworth. His Ricardian stance gained him two manors; but helping Richard III ultimately seems to have proved expensive. In 1485 he mortgaged several manors held by his family since 1389. 
From 'c'.1456 to 1478 Bodrugan was repeatedly accused in chancery, privy council, and parliament of a range of violent, extortionary, and piratical offences. Detailed petitions suggest his practised expertise in extortion, but are hardly disinterested and may also reflect a hairbreadth medieval distinction between lawful provincial administration and the unjustified use of force. The statement that he 'manned twoo Karvels to the See' ('RotP', 6.138) implies piracy, but could easily be redefined as legitimate privateering whenever international alliances shifted. Accused of forcibly repossessing a tin mine, he claimed that his warrant as JP was to protect the original developer's interests. Charles Ross's statement that 'half the gentry of Cornwall' petitioned against him in the 1473 parliament (Ross, 410) is exaggerated; of five petitioners, Bodrugan had pre-existing land disputes with at least two. Contemporary allegations that the petitioners' lives were at risk if they pursued cases at common law must be read warily. It was not unusual, in any appeal to equity, to claim that for such reasons common-law justice was unattainable. However, the accusation that Bodrugan illegally altered wills and proved testaments to his own advantage is unusual enough to warrant suspicion, though no known supporting evidence of such misdeeds survives. Finally, the picturesque story that in 1484 he systematically persecuted Sir Richard Edgcumbe, who retaliated in 1487 by pursuing him so hotly that he escaped only by leaping over a cliff to a waiting boat, though possibly based on tradition, apparently stems from persistently over-imaginative readings of Richard Carew's 'Survey of Cornwall' (1602). 
Though named on one Tudor commission, Bodrugan early supported Lambert Simnel. On 8 February 1487 a commission was issued to arrest him and his putative son as rebels. Both attended Simnel's 'coronation' in Dublin that May, and though not listed as fighting at the battle of Stoke in June, were attainted on 11 November 1487. Bodrugan died in exile between then and 1503, when his next heirs petitioned the king for reversal of his attainder. Though often thought to typify fifteenth-century aristocratic lawlessness and prodigality, he may be better understood in the light of undoubted political (and, at least between 1450 and 1458, financial) constraints, and of fifteenth-century administrative realities. 


@@@@@


doc= 50249


Williams, Sir Robert, baronet (1860-1938), engineer and businessman, was born on 21 January 1860 at Regent Quay, Aberdeen, one of seven children of William Williams ('bap'. 1822, died 1866), whisky distiller, and his wife, Mary (died 1906), daughter of John Duthie, shipbuilder. After completing his time at the Gymnasium School, Old Aberdeen, Williams was apprenticed to the Aberdeen engineers Blaikie Brothers, where he was taught business and engineering design. He supplemented this training with evening classes at the Aberdeen Mechanics' Institute. In 1881 he was sent by Blaikie's to Kimberley's diamond fields in Africa. There he met Cecil Rhodes and rapidly established himself as a mining engineer. He married Margaret (died 1943), daughter of Alexander Bayne, on 12 July 1886, at Kimberley Presbyterian Church. They had one son, who predeceased his father, and two daughters. Williams returned to Scotland with his wife, but after a brief period in the family distillery he returned to Africa, and again worked with Rhodes; they formed the Zambesia Exploring Company in 1891, to locate and develop mineral deposits in Southern Rhodesia. In 1895 the prince of Wales asked Rhodes to give a concession to one of his mistresses, Frances Evelyn Greville ('Daisy'), countess of Warwick. Some 6000 square miles of Northern Rhodesia were allocated, but financial disagreement and the Jameson raid halted development. The countess resumed negotiations, in 1898, which led to the formation in 1899 of Tanganyika Concessions Ltd (Tanks), of which Williams was managing director. At Lake Tanganyika, Tanks had on the southern shore a 2000 acre concession (which in fact was never developed) and responsibility for floating a steamer on the lake; the SS 'Cecil Rhodes' was launched in October 1901. 
By then George Grey, younger brother of Sir Edward Grey and a personal friend of Rhodes, had completed exploratory work for Williams in the area of Northern Rhodesia along Katanga's south-western border. Grey had absolutely no training as a geologist or mining engineer, but he was by no means unique in colonial Africa in that he was a younger member of a noble family who wanted some kind of job. His cousin, Albert Grey, later Earl Grey, governor-general of Canada, considered him 'Just a fine, plucky young Englishman full of refreshing honesty'. Grey located the Kansanshi mine -- ultimately a better water well than a copper mine -- outside the limits of the area later known as the copperbelt. More significantly, Grey strayed into Katanga where he found the region's extensive copper deposits. Jules Cornet, a Belgian geologist, had considered development costs too high, but Williams's enthusiasm and willingness to shoulder the greater part of the initial financial burden overcame the reservations of King Leopold II and his colleagues. In 1906 the Union Miniere du Haut-Katanga was formed to develop the new fields, with Tanks holding a 40 per cent stake; the remainder was held by Katanga's administering chartered company, the Comite Special du Katanga. Williams was a vice-president of Union Miniere and on its board of directors until his death. 
To provide access to the coast, Williams, with Lady Warwick's help, secured a Portuguese concession to build a railway from Benguela, Angola, to the Katanga border in 1902, with the Portuguese government receiving a 10 per cent stake in the enterprise. The concession was taken over by the Companhia do Camino de Ferro de Benguela. Construction began in 1904 but was halted by the war in 1914 and only completed in 1931. A supposedly temporary expedient linked the mines to the existing, financially troubled Rhodesian rail network via the Chemin de fer du Katanga, and the Rhodesia-Katanga Junction Railway, to the port of Beira in Mozambique. After the war, though the most difficult section of the line to construct had been completed, Williams found it difficult to raise further finance. He tried to secure a secondary guarantee of interest payments on Benguela Railway Company debentures from the British government under the terms of the 1921 'Trade Facilities Act' intended to help alleviate unemployment in Britain. This met with strong opposition from General Smuts, South Africa's prime minister, who considered the Benguela railway a threat to the Rhodesian railway system at a time when he hoped to persuade that colony's white settlers to become part of the Union of South Africa. Construction could only proceed slowly until white settlers voted for responsible self-government in 1923, and Smuts was voted out of office in 1924, opening the way for government support, but only on the basis of a prior guarantee of debenture interest from Tanks. The line was completed to the border in 1928. In the same year the Chemin de fer du Bas-Congo au Katanga (BCK) reached its terminus and became the politically preferred line for Katanga traffic; it was subsidized to protect its position, even after the Benguela line was finally linked to the mines in 1931. 
Largely because the Benguela Railway never carried the large volume of Katanga traffic on which its profitability depended, Tanks was forced to provide considerable financial support. So great were the Benguela railway's demands that, as Union Miniere expanded, Tanks was unable to sustain its 40 per cent investment in the company, and the figure fell to 14.5 per cent. Although the completed Benguela route did not fulfil its original purpose, it did serve as an important supply line during the Second World War and as a basis for mineral and commercial development in Angola; this was never sufficient to compensate. Williams was considered, not without justification, something of a visionary or romantic idealist, seeing the Benguela railway as a spectacular means of opening and developing Africa's interior, with himself as a major figure in that development, the man on whose shoulders the 'mantle of Rhodes' had settled. His commitment to the railway bordered on the obsessive, and he seemed totally unable to appreciate either the political conflicts or the competing economic pressures which ensured that the BCK and Rhodesia Railways would continue to be the preferred access routes for Katanga. Tanks's corporate health would certainly have benefited if Williams had abandoned the Benguela line after 1918. His attitude towards Africans was paternalistic at best, not unlike many other Europeans linked to imperial expansion in Africa. 
Throughout his business career Williams, like most businessmen involved in exploiting Africa's human and mineral resources, spent the greater part of his time in Europe. He was a well-known figure in London's West End, where he entertained royally and frequented the theatre. Following the First World War he was able to fulfil a long-time ambition by acquiring Park House, a late-Georgian mansion on the River Dee at Drumoak in Aberdeenshire, with fishing rights and several hundred acres of farmland. As he grew older he spent an increasing proportion of his time there. His special philanthropic interest was Aberdeen's hospital. Williams was granted the freedom of the city of Aberdeen, and he was created a baronet in 1928. He also became a grand officer of the order of the Crown and commander of the royal order of the Lion of Belgium and a knight commander of the Portuguese order of Christ. The Angolan town of Caala was renamed Vila Robert Williams. 
Accompanied by his wife, Williams made a last tour of Africa in 1934. After two minor operations and gently declining health, he died at his Deeside home, Park House, Drumoak, on 25 April 1938 and was buried two days later at Drumoak parish church. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50250


Bridgeman, Selina Louisa, countess of Bradford (1819-1894), correspondent of Benjamin Disraeli, was the seventh and youngest child of Cecil, first Baron Forester (1767-1828), MP and landowner, and his wife, 'nee' Lady Katherine Manners (1779-1829), second daughter of the fourth duke of Rutland. On 10 April 1844 she married Orlando George Charles Bridgeman, Viscount Newport (1819-1898), sporting peer and Conservative MP for South Shropshire, 1842-65. Benjamin Disraeli described him in 1843 as 'very agreeable, a shrewd, tall, fair, unaffected, very young man' ('Disraeli Letters', 4.1307); he succeeded his father as third earl of Bradford in 1865, living at Weston Park, Weston under Lizard, in Staffordshire. They had four children, two sons and two daughters. 
Selina Bradford was a leader of society, 'not cultured in the usual sense, but with much mother-wit, a 'grande dame', yet a fine lady too' (Paget, 1.127). She first met Disraeli in the 1840s. 'Somehow [Disraeli] is a man I cannot respect', she wrote in 1849 (Bradford, 308). Not until nearly a quarter of a century later did they become intimate. In July 1873, at a dinner party given by Lady Augusta Sturt, Selina Bradford captivated the 68-year-old Conservative leader, whose elderly wife had died a few months earlier. Disraeli was soon besotted, beginning an epistolary romance not only with Selina Bradford but also with her sister Anne Stanhope, countess of Chesterfield. Within a few weeks 'Dear Lady Bradford' had become 'Dearest Lady Bradford'; such was his ardour that in September, staying at Weston, he broke the habit of a lifetime and rode to hounds (not a successful venture), and by November he was writing her passionate love letters. In 1874 when Disraeli became prime minister, he appointed Bradford master of the horse. 'Selina', he wrote, 'will ride in Royal Carriages, head the line even in an entree and gallop over all Her Majesty's lieges' ('Letters... to Lady Bradford', 1.54). As prime minister, his life revolved to an astonishing extent around the need to write to Selina or the chance of seeing her; he was plunged into deepest gloom by her silences and elated by a meeting. 'I live for Power and the affections', he declared, and he observed somewhat wistfully that 'there is no greater misfortune than to have a heart that will not grow old' ('Letters... to Lady Bradford', 1.57, 73). In May 1875 he proposed to Anne Chesterfield, who was a widow and available, in order to be closer to Selina, who was neither (wisely Anne Chesterfield refused). The thousand or so letters that Disraeli wrote to Selina Bradford leave no doubt as to the depth of his affection for her, though he perhaps used letter-writing as a vehicle for the fantasy which was so necessary to his existence. Selina Bradford, however, was outwardly cold and detached. None of her letters has survived, but Disraeli complained that her cold demeanour belied her letters, and hints survive that she reciprocated his feelings. 'Have confidence in me, believe in me, believe that I am true -- oh, how true', she wrote on one occasion (Bradford, 309), and she was evidently nervous lest her letters be seen by her family, which may explain why, unlike Disraeli's, they were destroyed. Selina Bradford died at Weston Park on 25 November 1894, after a lengthy illness. She was buried in Weston under Lizard. 


@@@@@


doc= 50251


Stanhope, Anne Elizabeth, countess of Chesterfield (1802-1885), political confidante, second child and eldest daughter of Cecil Forester (later Weld-Forester), first Baron Forester (1767-1828), and his wife, Lady Katherine Manners (1779-1829), second daughter of the fourth duke of Rutland, was born on 7 September 1802. Her father, who inherited Willey Park, Shropshire, from his uncle George Forester, hunted from Melton Mowbray; one of the boldest horsemen of his day and a jealous rider damned by Hugo Meynell for his 'splittercockation' pace, he behaved with an arrogance characteristic of the Meltonians of his day. Like her sisters, Anne Forester was a beauty; she refused offers of marriage from two prime ministers, Lord Derby (who proposed in 1830) and Disraeli. On 30 November 1830 she married George Stanhope, sixth earl of Chesterfield (1805-1866), a very wealthy sporting peer and owner of Bretby, Derbyshire. Greville, the diarist, met her with her sisters in 1831 and found them 'not remarkably amusing, as they are all more or less limited in point of intellect' ('Greville Memoirs', 2.154). A member of the 'ton', the aristocratic racing and hunting set, Anne Chesterfield was well known at Newmarket; she knew D'Orsay and Francis Grant, both of whom painted her. When a haggard-looking Lord George Bentinck appeared at Newmarket in 1848, Anne Chesterfield remarked: 'For Heaven's sake, George, cut politics and come back to the turf, or you will be dead in six months' ('Reminiscences of Lady Dorothy Nevill', 140). He was. 
Anne Chesterfield had two children: a son, George (1831-1871), and a much-loved daughter, Evelyn (1834-1875), who married the earl of Carnarvon. Her husband, who died in 1866, was fashionable, spoilt, and a wastrel. 'He lies in bed half the day,' reported Greville in 1846, and he confessed himself saddened by Bretby: 'a princely fortune dilapidated by sheer indolence, because the obstinate spoilt owner will neither look into his affairs nor let anybody else look into them' (GEC, 'Peerage'). 
Lady Chesterfield retained the 'erect figure and elastic gait' for which she was famed well into old age, and she was a well-preserved seventy when Disraeli began his romantic friendship with her and her younger sister Selina Bridgeman, countess of Bradford. Though Disraeli proposed marriage to Anne, he was really in love with Selina, and Anne lapsed gracefully into the role of confidante, receiving at least 500 letters from the septuagenarian prime minister, who was a frequent guest at Bretby. 'The secret of her charm,' wrote Disraeli, 'is the union of grace and energy; a union very rare but in her case most felicitous' ('Letters', 1.49). Her last years were sad. Her son died in 1871, her daughter in 1875. She continued to live at Bretby (which passed to the Carnarvon family), soothing her sorrow by playing the organ in the chapel, and died there on 27 July 1885. 


@@@@@


doc= 50252


Caird, Sir James Key, baronet (1837-1916), jute manufacturer and benefactor, was born on 7 January 1837, the eldest son of the five children of Edward Caird (1806-1889), linen manufacturer of Dundee, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Key ('c'.1806-1843). Edward Caird had founded the business of Caird and Renny, later Caird & Co., linen merchants and manufacturers, and in 1832 he established the Ashton Jute Works at Hawkshill, Dundee. James is first recorded in connection with this factory in 1864, at which time it was operating 208 power looms, and employed some 350 people. About 1868, Edward retired to Finnart, Dunbartonshire, leaving James in control of a flourishing business, at a time of rising prosperity in the linen and jute trades. The opening up of the colonies created enormous demand for coarse canvas for tents and temporary housing, and for bags and sacks to transport produce. The Ashton works was rebuilt in 1876, and extended in 1887, and again in 1906-8. In addition, Caird & Co. purchased Craigie Mill, Arbroath Road, Dundee, in 1905. While not the largest in the Dundee area, Caird's mills were said to be the best equipped, and he was acknowledged locally as a technical innovator and an effective and benevolent manager. By the time of his death Caird was employing 2000 workers. 
On 16 July 1873 Caird married Sophie (1844/5-1882), daughter of George Gray, a solicitor and banker of Bowerswell, Perthshire, and his wife, Sophia Margaret, 'nee' Jameson. Their one daughter died in early life, and Caird's wife died in 1882. He became a generous benefactor, his gifts totalling about $250,000, the greater part of this bestowed on the people of Dundee. His great interest in medical provision in the city was manifested in gifts to Dundee Royal Infirmary to found a women's and children's ward (1897) and an outpatient department (1909). In addition, he provided money for the foundation of a cancer hospital (1902) and the Springrove Home for Old Men (1911), and his donation of $5000 kept the Sidlaw Sanatorium open. He purchased Dens of Mains and adjacent land in 1912 and 1913 to be enjoyed as a public park, later named after him. He was created a baronet in the new year honours of 1913, and received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of St Andrews. He did not live to see the outcome of his largest donation, a gift of $100,000 in 1914 for the building of a new city hall in Dundee. George V laid the foundation stone in 1914, but construction was interrupted by war and it was opened by the prince of Wales on 11 December 1922. Sir James had a long-standing interest in science and was a life member of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) from 1861. When the BAAS met in Dundee in 1867 he spoke on 'an iron comb for power looms'. When the association again met at Dundee in 1912 he made an unconditional gift of $10,000, which was distributed by the council to various worthy scientific projects. In 1913 he gave a further $1000 to be devoted to the study of radioactivity. $1000 went to the Zoological Society of London, of which he was a member, for a new insect house, and the Royal Society received $5000 for physical research. As a known benefactor, he was approached in 1914 by Edward Shackleton, who was seeking support for his Antarctic expedition. Caird, who was a linguist and well-travelled, had no interest in polar exploration, but was impressed by Shackleton's determined search for financial backing. A few days after their meeting he sent a cheque for $24,000 with no conditions attached, expressing the hope that other wealthy backers would follow suit. The Caird coast, Weddell Sea, was named in his honour, as was the whaler in which Shackleton sailed from Elephant Island in Antarctica to South Georgia to obtain help for the stranded expedition. 
In later life Caird was a recluse, playing no part in civic or public life. A well-built man, he wore a moustache and beard, somewhat in the manner of King Edward VII. He died on 9 March 1916 at his home, Belmont Castle, Meigle, Perthshire, and was buried at Dean cemetery, Edinburgh. His only close surviving relative was an elder sister, Mary Ann Maryat, who continued his benevolent work. 


@@@@@


doc= 50253


Sir Norman Longley (1900-1994), was born on 14 October 1900 at Rathcote, Goffs Park Road, Crawley, and was educated at Clifton College. On 6 June 1925 he married Dorothy Lilian ('b'. 1903), the daughter of George Baker of Horley. They had two sons and one daughter. The company just managed to survive the depression, in which it carried out every type of building work. During the Second World War, however, it played a major role in the war effort, concentrating on invasion defences and radar stations, followed by airfield construction and repair. The joinery works made pontoons for Bailey bridges and balsa wood life-rafts. After the war the company was fortunate to be on the site of one of the first new towns, Crawley, and it also took advantage of the development of Gatwick airport, which started in 1953. In parallel with the local activities, the company specialized in department store building, first at Plymouth, and then eight stores for Debenhams. In the 1960s extensive work was carried out at Oxford, Sussex, and Surrey universities, and, following work at Eton College, other work at public schools. 
In 1968 the company changed its name to James Longley (Holdings) Ltd. Norman Longley was successively president locally, regionally, and nationally of the National Federation of Building Trades Employers, of which he also served as treasurer, and he was president of the International Federation of Building and Public Works Contractors from 1955 to 1957. Chairman of the Federated Employers Press, he was trustee of the industry pension scheme, a director of the industry's holiday-pay scheme, and a member of the joint contracts tribunal. His service to the industry culminated in his appointment as first chairman of the Construction Industry Training Board from 1964 to 1970. He retired as a director of the family firm in 1970. 
In local government Norman Longley served on Crawley parish council, Horsham rural district council, and West Sussex county council, retiring as an alderman in 1960. He served on the board of Crawley College, Chichester, and on Graylingwell Hospital committee and the Industrial Disputes Tribunal. He gave forty-three years' service to the special constabulary, retiring as commandant of West Sussex. Other appointments included secretary of Crawley and District community association for twenty years, chairman of Crawley disablement advisory committee, director of Redland Holdings Ltd, member of the Wilson committee on noise, and the building regulations advisory committee. He was appointed CBE in 1954, knighted in 1966, and made a deputy lieutenant of West Sussex in 1975. He died on 24 January 1994 at The Beeches, Crawley; he was cremated and his ashes were placed on his parents' grave at St John's Church. 
His younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 50256


Martival, Roger (c.1250-1330), bishop of Salisbury, was almost the last of a knightly family named from the Norman village of Martinvaast, near Cherbourg. On the death of his father, Sir Anketil de Martival, in 1274 he became lord of Noseley in Leicestershire. His father had endowed a chantry chapel in the manor house, which in the fourteenth century the son further endowed and converted into one of the earliest chantry colleges. 
Roger Martival was born 'c'.1250: he was a minor in December 1269 and in 1268 was presented, as an acolyte, to the rectory of Arnold, Nottinghamshire. He apparently used the rectory's income to support himself at Oxford University, where he studied under Gilbert Seagrave (died 1312). At the university in 1274 he was a party to the terms of peace agreed between the northern and southern scholars. The claim that he was a fellow of Merton College rests on inadequate evidence. In 1280, as a master of arts, he was granted protection on going overseas, evidently to the University of Paris, where he was studying in 1282. 
In 1286 or 1287 Oliver Sutton, bishop of Lincoln (died 1299), collated Martival to the archdeaconry of Huntingdon and to the prebend of Sleaford. He apparently continued to teach and study at Oxford: in 1293, as a doctor of theology, he became chancellor of the university. He resigned the chancellorship in 1295, shortly after being collated to the archdeaconry of Leicester, which in turn he resigned in 1310 on being elected dean of Lincoln. Meanwhile he had been collated to the prebend of Netheravon in Salisbury Cathedral in 1298 by Bishop Simon Ghent (died 1315), his predecessor both as chancellor of Oxford University and as bishop of Salisbury, and formerly a fellow archdeacon in Lincoln diocese. He was also prebendary of Flixton in Lichfield Cathedral from 1306, and, having resigned Arnold, was rector of Thurcaston, Leicestershire, until 1315. Lincoln chapter records show that after he had journeyed to the papal court in 1306-7, Martival was in residence at Lincoln for at least eight months in each year until 1315. As dean, he was in dispute with the chapter about the exercise of his jurisdiction; this was resolved in 1314, when Bishop John Dalderby (died 1320) confirmed that the dean should act in principal matters only with the chapter's consent. 
Martival was elected bishop of Salisbury on 11 June 1315. Although Thomas of Lancaster, his overlord at Noseley, was then powerful at court, the election was apparently made freely by the chapter of which he was a member, the last such election at Salisbury during the middle ages apart from that in 1417. A conscientious and effective diocesan, Martival played little part in national affairs, though he was appointed to the king's council in 1318 following the treaty of Leake between Edward II and Lancaster. In his fifteen years as bishop he appears to have been out of the diocese for a total of less than a hundred weeks, and nearly a third of that total was during 1318-19. He was active in consecrating churches, in attempting to persuade John XXII to moderate papal provisions, and in ordaining and augmenting vicarages. The novel arrangement of his registers reflects the efficiency of his diocesan administration and his pioneering activity in church court matters. His concern for the well-being of the cathedral was marked by his endowment of the choristers and the vicars-choral, and particularly by the formulation of his constitutions of 1319, fulfilling his predecessor's intention to ensure the observance of St Osmund's statutes. He died on 14 March 1330, and was buried in a tomb, which survives, on the north side of the cathedral presbytery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50257


Mancini, Domenico (b. before 1434, d. 1494x1514), scholar and chronicler, was born in Rome. Little is known about his life. His first recorded appearance was in Paris in 1482, when he described himself as 'old', a term that may indicate that he was at least fifty at the time. In that year he wrote a Latin verse recommendation to a commentary on the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard by the Augustinian hermit Gregorio da Rimini (died 1358). This edition marked a turning point in a philosophical controversy among Paris intellectuals, and Mancini must have been sufficiently well known to be asked to contribute by the printer or editor. His involvement suggests he was an Augustinian hermit himself; elsewhere he described himself as 'dedicated to the faith', and there is evidence that he wore a black habit. 
Mancini was a competent Latinist and poet. He wrote occasional verse with elegance and ease and his prose style has been said to have 'the merit of clarity'. Two of his verse works were printed: 'Libellus de quatuor virtutibus' (1484), a traditional rehearsal of the four cardinal virtues, and 'Tractatus de passione domini' (1480s), a reworking of the 'Bible' texts of Christ's passion. His accomplishments as author and moralist were appreciated by his contemporaries. One of them was the humanist Robert Gaguin, Mancini's neighbour in Paris, a student of classical historians and author of the 'Compendium' of the history of France (1495). In the 1480s and 1490s Gaguin was the leader of a circle of literary minded scholars and statesmen that included Angelo Cato, archbishop of Vienne, the French chancellor Guillaume de Rochefort, and Guillaume's brother. Their names can also be linked to those of Erasmus of Rotterdam, the Dutch chronicler Cornelius of Gouda, and Johann Tritheim, a scholar in the service of the emperor. All these men were interested in history and its political and didactic aspects; they visited, corresponded, and dedicated or recommended their writings to each other and used each other's work. 
Mancini's reputation in England rests on his eyewitness account of the dramatic events between the death of Edward IV and the coronation of Richard III, from April to July 1483. His only surviving prose composition, 'De occupatione regni Anglie per Ricardum tertium libellus' ('A little book about the taking of the realm of England by Richard III', usually translated as 'The usurpation of Richard III') survives in a unique, sixteenth-century copy in the Bibliotheque Municipale at Lille; its contents remained unknown to modern scholars until it was discovered by C. A. J. Armstrong, who edited it. 
It is not known why or for how long Mancini was in England, only that he left it shortly before Richard's coronation on 6 July 1483. He finished his account on 1 December 1483, claiming it was put on paper at the request of Angelo Cato, who had heard the story several times, found it interesting, and wished to present it to his patron, Federico, duke of Otranto. The book is carefully laid out, starting with a discussion of the situation at the time of Edward IV's death and the reasons why Richard of Gloucester decided to take the throne. The characters of some of the protagonists are discussed to explain their personal motives, but relatively little is said about Richard himself. In the description of the main events Mancini's account agrees with other sources, showing for example that rumours of the death of the 'princes in the Tower' started very early. The author appears to be free of personal prejudice, setting out to report the truth as he saw it; he wrote in the knowledge that Richard's coup had been successful, but without the animus of later commentators writing after Richard's downfall. Mancini probably knew no English, but there must have been many willing informants among the clergy and merchants of London, fluent in French, Italian, or Latin; the only one mentioned is John Argentine (died 1508), physician to the young Edward V. 
The value of Mancini's factual information is marred by ignorance of English customs and institutions, and a strong tendency to imitate classical authors both in images and language. His report must have been of interest to French readers like Cato and Gaguin, concerned about the minority of their own king, and to men eager to discuss the proper education of princes generally, such as Erasmus and Thomas More, but there is no positive evidence that 'De occupatione' became widely known. Mancini's own lack of prejudice left his story open to very different interpretations by modern commentators. 


@@@@@


doc= 50258


Monte, Piero da (1400x04-1457), scholar and papal diplomat, was born in Venice, where his father, Nicolo da Monte, was a citizen of substance. He pursued humanistic studies under Guarino da Verona and then law in Padua, under the famous jurists Prosdocimo de Conti and Giovan Francesco di Capodalista. His writings as a young man (speeches and letters survive) show all the conventional interests of early fifteenth-century humanists; he retained throughout his career a concern with such studies, for instance collecting books and arranging for copying. He corresponded later with Poggio Bracciolini, Ambrogio Traversari, Pietro Barbo, and Pier Candido Decembrio, among others. On 15 July 1433 he graduated as doctor of both civil and canon law. 
Da Monte then attended the Council of Basel as ambassador for Venice, where his defence of Pope Eugenius IV, 'De summi pontificis, generalis concilii et imperialis majestatis origine et potestate', a work much influenced by Cardinal Francesco Zabarella, won him considerable support from the Venetians round the pope. In it, as in all his polemics, he strongly supported a high doctrine of papal power, stressing in particular the papacy as a monarchy. He was thus made (21 April 1435) a protonotary apostolic and given the collectorship (of papal revenues) in England, which he exercised in person between 1435 and 1440. Da Monte's major task was not to collect money but to keep the English from siding with the Council of Basel, as it became increasingly hostile to the pope. Speeches by him on the subject remain. His main letter collection gives an incomparable picture of his work and of the ecclesiastical politics of the country, though he probably exaggerated his own importance to his employers. He commented several times on the country's wealth, and presented an admiring picture of the young Henry VI, describing him as pious, patient, continent, and hostile to obscenity, in all more like a monk than a secular prince; his second-hand account of the death in 1437 of James I, king of Scots, was much less flattering, the dead ruler being stigmatized as a cruel tyrant. He was inclined to report what the Roman curia wanted to hear, and this may have coloured his description of a council meeting in May 1438 at which a delegation from the Council of Basel was rebuked by Archbishop Chichele, Humphrey of Gloucester, and others, and also his picture of England as so devoted to the papacy that, as Chichele put it, a choir of angels would be unable to separate the realm from the Roman obedience. 
But da Monte was clear-sighted and truthful when he spelt out for Eugenius IV the king's overriding control of ecclesiastical appointments, and recommended that the pope accept the government's appointments. And he passed on English criticism of the curia's provision of unworthy nominees to benefices, and its misuse of dispensations to permit the holding of livings in plurality. He noted the hatred of the English for Italians in 1439, and later reported on such matters as the divisions among the monks of Westminster as they elected a new abbot, and a quarrel over precedence between the archbishops of Canterbury and York. Later he was accused of having pocketed some of the collected money, but this was almost certainly an invention of his enemies, of whom he had several, in Rome and England. He dedicated to Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, 'De virtutum et vitiorum inter se differentia' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Auct. F.5.26 is a copy), and introduced the duke to Italian scholars, including Tito Livio dei Frulovisi and Antonio Beccaria, whom Humphrey employed. Beccaria was da Monte's sub-collector and dedicated to him a translation of Plutarch's life of Pelopidas. 
On his return to Rome da Monte was made nuncio with some legatine powers for France (1442-4) and bishop of Brescia in 1442. His task in France was to use his experience to work for Anglo-French peace and to obtain the abrogation, in return for a concordat, of the 'Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges' (1438) -- legislation embodying 'the Gallican liberties', acceptance of certain reforms of Basel, and, in particular, a denial to the pope of a major part of his claims to appoint to benefices in France. Da Monte considered himself on good terms with Charles VII and discussed literature with him; he is also recorded presiding at the betrothal (on 24 May 1444, at Tours) of Margaret of Anjou to Henry VI. But, though an assembly of churchmen at Bourges in the summer of 1444 seemed favourable to the pope's revision of the concordat, the French government raised its demands and the plan failed. Da Monte returned to continue his career in Italy. He dedicated to Pope Nicholas V ('r'. 1447-55) his next important polemic, 'Contra impugnantes sedis apostolicae auctoritatem'. Between May 1451 and April 1453, while keeping Brescia, he was governor of Perugia, returning afterwards to Rome, where Calixtus III ('r'. 1455-8) made him a referendary. Between 1451 and 1453 he produced his most famous work, 'Repertorium utriusque iuris', also known as 'Brixiense', which exists in many manuscripts and printed editions before 1500. A legal dictionary or encyclopaedia, it contains interesting references to England and English practice. Da Monte was hoping to be promoted cardinal, but may have missed this because of rivalries in the curia. He died in Rome on 12 January 1457 and was buried there in the church of Santa Maria Maggiore. 


@@@@@


doc= 50259


Clifford, Sir Lewis (c.1330-1404), soldier and suspected heretic, 'far from being of the north-country baronial family was a cadet of the Cliffords of Devonshire, such small fry that their pedigree is difficult to trace' (McFarlane, 162). He was probably born in the early 1330s. His military career began inauspiciously as one of the Calais garrison captured at the battle of St Georges in June 1351. He had entered the service of Edward, the Black Prince, by 1360, first as a yeoman, but was an esquire by 1364. He was knighted in 1368, whereafter he received an annuity of 100 marks from the prince and by 1378 (when that was confirmed) a further $100 p.a. for life as keeper of Cardigan Castle, as well as gifts indicating a personal friendship. After the prince's death, on 8 June 1376, Clifford became a trusted servant of his widow, Joan of Kent (died 1385), mother of Richard II. In spring 1377 she employed him to reconcile John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (died 1399), with the Londoners, who disliked the latter's support of John Wyclif (died 1384) against their bishop and his attack on the city's liberties; in 1378, again ostensibly on behalf of the popular Joan but probably at Gaunt's request, he intervened to seek an end to Archbishop Sudbury's trial of Wyclif. Neither incident can of itself suggest Clifford's own religious sympathies. 
Between 1370 and 1372 Clifford married Eleanor, daughter of John (II) Mowbray, Lord Mowbray of Axholme, and Joan of Lancaster, and widow of Roger, Lord de la Warr (1326-1370), from whom she brought a large jointure as well as her own descent from Henry III. Before her early death in June 1387 Clifford had prudently renegotiated the settlement with her son, so as to give himself a life interest in a large estate in Ewyas Harold, Herefordshire. He acquired holdings in six other counties to add to valuable life tenancies received from the Black Prince and Joan, but curiously never established a perpetual estate, perhaps because his son, Lewis, predeceased him. 
In 1367 Clifford had fought in Spain under the Black Prince; in 1373-4 he took part in John of Gaunt's unsuccessful campaign in France, and in 1378 concluded his soldiering with Gaunt's expedition to Brittany. He was elected to the Garter in 1377 or 1378, doubtless -- as his services in the home crisis had also indicated in those years -- with the approval of both Gaunt and the young king's domestic circle, an unusual consensus. His personal service to Princess Joan evidently kept him out of the political mainstream in the early 1380s, and that was to prove fortunate. In June 1385 Clifford was commanded by the king to be in continual attendance on his failing mother; in August he was named as one of her executors; in September he received livery of mourning. Richard II naturally confirmed Clifford in everything he had held of Joan. 
Clifford visited France in 1385-6. Perhaps now, but certainly by 1396, Clifford was elected to the Passion, an international crusading order based in France. After the political crisis that overwhelmed Richard II's regime in 1386-8 Clifford became one of the most frequent attenders on the king's council between 1389 and 1393, a knight of the chamber, and a member of many commissions -- clearly a trusted and prestigious contributor to the king's determined restoration of his authority. Clifford's experience and his personal standing in France made him a natural choice for missions in February 1391 and 1393 preparing the way for peace talks, and in 1396 he helped negotiate the king's marriage to Princess Isabella. Despite his earlier links with Gaunt it is not surprising that Clifford enjoyed no favour from Henry IV after Richard's deposition; although originally ratified in his holdings, he was deprived of two major estates (Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire, and Mere, Wiltshire) on alleged legal grounds in 1404. 
When he was in France in 1385-6, Clifford met the poet Eustache Deschamps, who (like Froissart) admired him and called him 'l'amoreux'. He brought back one of Deschamps's works for Geoffrey Chaucer, to whose son Lewis he may have been godfather -- the 'Treatise on the Astrolabe' was written for either this boy or Clifford's own son. Chaucer also addressed a poem to Sir Philip la Vache, the second husband of Clifford's daughter, Elizabeth. (Sir Philip had, incidentally, received a gold goblet from Princess Joan as a wedding present.) Clifford and la Vache, always close associates, are found frequently in the public and private company of those household knights of the Black Prince and Richard II whom the chroniclers Knighton and Walsingham identified as supporters of, and even adherents to, Lollardy ['see 'Lollard knights]. Like Clifford, some were notably cultured, some especially interested in crusading. Clifford himself was said by Walsingham to have encouraged the audacious publication of the twelve conclusions of the sect in London in January 1395. Walsingham also claimed that in 1402 Clifford recanted (informally) and submitted a memorandum of seven radical beliefs held by his sectarian associates. Although prudence may have persuaded Clifford to forswear under the new, unsympathetic, regime, his sympathies remained. He had been an overseer to the highly idiosyncratic will of Sir Thomas Latimer (died 1401), a determined supporter of Wycliffite teaching, and repeated the key sentiments in his own will (like Latimer's and, unusually, in English) on 17 September 1404; he chose as executors Sir John Cheyne (died 1414), Sir John Oldcastle (died 1417), and the equally suspect Richard Colefax, a brazen selection when viewed with hindsight. The fact that probate of his will was granted on 12 December 1404 indicates that he had died soon after making it. 


@@@@@


doc= 50260


Latimer, Sir Thomas (1341-1401), soldier and alleged heretic, was the third son of Sir Warin Latimer of Braybrooke, Northamptonshire, and Katherine, daughter of John de la Warr, born between 10 and 17 September 1341. He is chiefly notable as the most conspicuous, if not the most fervent, member of a group of courtiers and soldiers disparaged by the chroniclers Thomas Walsingham and Henry Knighton for their heretical views, and known collectively as the 'Lollard knights'. 
Predeceased by his two older brothers Latimer proved his majority in November 1362, and thereupon inherited a sizeable estate in Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, and Somerset. Knighted by 1365 he probably began his career as a soldier in the service of Edward, the Black Prince, in whose Gascon and Spanish campaigns he fought from 1365 to 1370, and of whom he held his castle and manor of Braybrooke. He married Anne, the widow of Sir John Beysin, by April 1366. As a companion to Joan, princess of Wales, she had been present at the birth of the future Richard II in 1367, and she brought to her husband a life interest in a large estate in Staffordshire and Shropshire. Latimer also took part in the Spanish and Breton expeditions of 1373-4 and 1377-8, but in the retinue of the prince's younger brother, John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. It was probably his relationship with the latter that secured his election as a knight of the shire for Northamptonshire in the parliaments of January 1377 and October 1378, which were packed with Gaunt's supporters. He was also appointed to several oyer and terminer commissions there from 1378 to 1385, and sat on the peace commission from 1381 to 1385. 
On 12 June 1385 Latimer was ordered by Richard II to attend upon Joan, princess of Wales, along with other Lollard knights then in the king's service. His interest in the controversial preaching emanating from Oxford may have been nurtured in the household of the king's mother, who is known to have been sympathetic to John Wyclif (died 1384). After her death in 1385 Latimer retired from court altogether, ceasing to play a part in public affairs and turning his attention to religious matters. In May 1388 he was summoned to appear before the king's council 'with certain books and quires in his custody' (McFarlane, 193) said to contain erroneous doctrine contrary to the Catholic faith. No serious consequences appear to have resulted from this interview. 
By early 1389 it is evident that Latimer was protecting John Wodard, a Lollard chaplain from Knebworth, Hertfordshire, who preached sermons every Tuesday at Latimer's market at Chipping Warden, Northamptonshire. An emissary of John Buckingham, bishop of Lincoln (died 1399), made several unsuccessful attempts to serve Wodard with a summons to appear before the bishop, but this only provoked Latimer into suing the bishop's agent for loss of profits from his market. Buckingham responded by invoking the lay power, sending a certificate naming forty-one persons led into heresy by Wodard, some of whom were associates of Latimer. 
Latimer's relationship with the other Lollard knights, particularly Sir Lewis Clifford (died 1404), an overseer of his will, is also telling, as is his patronage of the notorious heretic Robert Hoke, whom either he or his wife presented to the rectory of Braybrooke. On 14 September 1401 Latimer died, and was buried in Braybrooke churchyard. Both he and Dame Anne, who died the following July, left wills in English similar to those of several of their fellow Lollards ['see 'Lollard women (act. c.1390-c.1520)]. They emphasized their unworthiness, forbade funeral pomp, and expressed contempt for their bodies and a biblical concern for the poor. The overseers and executors of Dame Anne's will included Robert Hoke, Sir Lewis Clifford, and two Wycliffite Oxford academics -- Robert Lechlade and the reformed Philip Repyndon. At their deaths the Latimer estate -- valued, doubtless conservatively, at $120 yearly on Sir Thomas's death -- passed to Thomas's younger brother Edward, but Braybrooke remained a centre of heresy for some years to come. In 1405, 1414, and 1425 Robert Hoke, still rector, appeared before church authorities on charges of heresy, abjuring twice, and it is clear that he enjoyed considerable local support. It was undoubtedly he who furnished two Czech scholars with a copy of Wyclif's 'De dominio divino' at Braybrooke in 1407. Not surprisingly, Braybrooke has been suggested as the location of the Lollard scriptorium that flourished in the east midlands in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 50261


Farne, John of (c.1320-1371), Benedictine monk and hermit, was the author of seven Latin meditations. The only surviving manuscript of his work (Durham Cath. CL, MS B.IV.34), written in a late fourteenth-century hand, ascribes them to 'a certain monk, formerly a solitary on Farneland'; it also contains theological works by other Durham monks. From his writings it is clear that the author was devout, well read in the 'Bible', the fathers, and the liturgy, and that his special patron saint was John the Evangelist. It also emerges that he had studied at Oxford (perhaps at Durham College) and that one of his meditations was written after an outbreak of plague. Only two Durham monks certainly lived at Farne in the late fourteenth century: John Abell (1357-8), later bursar, and John Whiterig, formerly novice-master (1363-71). It is extremely probable that the latter, who came either from Wheatridge, Northumberland, or from White Ridge, Cumberland, should be identified as the author of these meditations. 
From Durham records it seems that Whiterig became a monk 'c'.1346, and visited Farne in 1353 and 1356, when he became novice-master. He continued in this office until 1359 or even 1363, when he settled permanently on Farne. He died there after some twenty-five years as a monk, aged about fifty. Durham Priory had made Farne a regular cell from the early thirteenth century: it usually consisted of two monks. As long ago as the seventh century it had been chosen by Aedan and Cuthbert for more or less prolonged experience of the solitary life, and by Bartholomew of Farne (died 1193) for forty-two years. The island attracted a royal endowment of $9 3's'. 4died in the fourteenth century and monks remained there until the dissolution. John chose it as his home when (and perhaps because) Durham was at the height of its prosperity. It had been called 'a kind of purgatory on earth', whose inhabitants 'either cultivate sanctity or leave this holy place' (Farmer, 'Monk of Farne', 13). The wind and the sea were and are the principal agents of austerity. Nowadays it is inhabited only by birds and seals. 
John Farne's writings are both personal and traditional. His style resembles that of St Bernard, with frequent biblical citations and allusions. Other sources identified include Augustine's 'The City of God', Gregory's homilies on the gospels, Bernard's 'On the Song of Songs' and 'On Loving God', and Archbishop Pecham's poem on the nightingale ('Philomena'). Another important source was the monastic liturgy. In Farne's last, unfinished, meditation on Cuthbert, Durham's principal patron and Farne's own model, he quoted Bede's life of this saint as well as Reginald of Durham's account of his miracles. Like Cuthbert, he died on Farne, in 1371, possibly from an outbreak of the bubonic plague called the black death. His writings, which were presumably intended for a monastic readership, are an interesting and worthy product of late medieval monastic spirituality. His longest meditation, 'Christ Crucified', stresses that God's love for man can only be repaid by man's total love for him. Although seldom mentioning current events in church and state, he prayed to be delivered from 'famine, foe and plague', and to merit 'a crown and enter with his judge into everlasting joy' (Farmer, 'Monk of Farne', 110, 151). 


@@@@@


doc= 50262


Burghill, John (c.1330-1414), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was the son of Thomas Burghill and his wife, Sibylla; heraldry links his father with the Burghills of Burghill, in Herefordshire; his mother's arms were a version of Peverel of Leicestershire. His family background is otherwise obscure. His will mentions two brothers (William and Thomas) and also two nephews, presumably the sons of at least one sister. 
Burghill became a Dominican, being presumably a member of the Hereford house when ordained acolyte in March 1350 and priest in September 1354 by Bishop Trillek. These dates indicate that he was born in the early 1330s. His pre-episcopal career was tied to that of Thomas Rushook, warden of the Hereford Dominicans in the 1350s and later (having become confessor to Richard II) bishop of Llandaff, Chichester, and Kilmore. Burghill followed Rushook to the royal household, as his companion or chaplain. The early 1380s reveal him collecting corrodies, on the king's nomination, and receiving tithes from a forfeited alien priory. His Gloucester corrody caused litigation between 1388 and 1392, following an 'inadvertent' displacement which may have been a side-effect of political turmoil. In 1394 Burghill became king's confessor, and participated in Richard II's expedition to Ireland that year. On 12 April 1396 he was provided to the see of Llandaff, being consecrated at Rome. 
Burghill's provision to Coventry and Lichfield on 2 July 1398 was probably fortuitous. On Richard Scrope's translation to York earlier that year, his intended successor was John Buckingham, the bishop of Lincoln. (Whether his move was being orchestrated to allow Henry Beaufort to acquire Lincoln is unclear.) Buckingham left Lincoln but declined Lichfield, and died later that year. Burghill was then nominated, obviously because of his familiarity with the king (who lent 1000 marks to cover his dues to the papacy), but probably not as a political act. His enthronement on 8 September 1398 was attended by Richard II, several nobles, and three archbishops (of York, Canterbury, and Dublin). Initially Burghill was an absentee, spending much of his time in attendance on the king, whom he accompanied to Ireland in 1399. That expedition gave the opportunity for Henry Bolingbroke's invasion and Richard II's removal from the throne, a revolution to which Burghill was probably an eyewitness. 
Under Henry IV Burghill concentrated on his episcopal duties, rarely leaving his diocese. His principal residences were first Eccleshall and later Heywood, both in Staffordshire. This may have been a reaction to the events of 1399: Burghill remained loyal to Richard II's memory, being the sole bishop to attend his interment at Kings Langley on 14 March 1400. His own tomb became the new site for the chantry in Lichfield Cathedral that Richard Scrope had founded for himself and Richard II. However, his loyalty was pragmatic: he did not join any of the Ricardian plots of the early 1400s. From 1400 he had effectively retired from the national scene, possibly as a result of advancing age: he seems not to have attended any parliaments after 1399. 
As bishop, Burghill fostered both his cathedral churches. At Coventry he promoted the cult of St Osberga, whose relics lay in the priory. To acknowledge his support an annual commemoration was established for him in 1409. He also supported Lichfield, making gifts of vestments and aiding the vicars-choral. By August 1409 his tomb had been constructed near the high altar, and here he was eventually buried. Burghill died in 1414, a grant of the temporalities 'sede vacante' issuing on 20 May. His character is obscure, although Adam Usk calls him 'vir avarissimus'. His will, made on 21 June 1412, scattered bequests widely, much going to religious houses. His arms in stained glass were depicted at several points in Lichfield Cathedral, with representations of himself and family members over the south door; but these have all disappeared. 


@@@@@


doc= 50263


Wyche, Richard (d. 1440), Lollard heretic, was probably from the diocese of Hereford. He was presumably educated at Oxford, and at his first trial, before Bishop Skirlawe of Durham (died 1406), affirmed that he had been taught by men trained in law, although he also argued cogently on theological issues, including the eucharist. Nothing is known of his background before the trial, which probably took place in the winter of 1402-3. The ecclesiastical authorities clearly sought his submission rather than his condemnation, and tried to convince him by argument. Even after being sentenced to prison and degradation (a sentence which was evidently not carried out), he wrote an account of the trial to his friends. After a later recantation, between 1404 and 1406, Wyche temporarily disappears from sight. Later, in 1419, he stated that he had been brought south by a writ of 'corpus cum causa' and released in chancery. After his release he either developed or resumed contacts with Bohemia and with Jan Hus, to whom he wrote on 8 September 1410, describing him as his 'dearest brother in Christ'. He must have sent books to Bohemia, because Hus, in his reply of the following March, thanked Wyche for these. This may not have been the only letter, because Hus alluded to Wyche's troubles (not described in the surviving letter) in his reply. Before then Wyche had also become associated with Sir John Oldcastle (died 1417), who wrote on the same day to Woksa of Waldstein, one of Hus's Bohemian supporters. 
Wyche, however, avoided involvement in Oldcastle's rebellion of 1414, although he was arrested in 1417 and brought to Westminster to make disclosures about money that had belonged to Oldcastle. He was brought before the Canterbury convocation in 1419, but as he was not found guilty of relapse, heresy cannot have been proved against him. After imprisonment in the Fleet, he was released under sureties in the following year, under the description of Richard Wyche alias Godwote. The authorities evidently believed that he had abandoned his heresy, for he was appointed vicar of Deptford in 1423, and rector of Leaveland in Kent in 1434. In 1437 he was appointed vicar of Harmondsworth, Middlesex, and he was still there in 1439. Shortly after, however, he was again arrested and tried by Bishop Gilbert of London. He was found guilty of heresy, degraded at St Paul's, and burnt on 17 June 1440 at Tower Hill with his servant Roger Norman. Only one chronicle mentions any of his beliefs, hostility to clerical pluralism -- he declared that a layman was as entitled to have two wives as a priest two benefices. 
The burning is widely recorded in the London city chronicles, which relate that Wyche was highly regarded among the common people, some of whom held that he was a saint. Chronicle and record sources (from both chancery and civic documents) relate that his followers made pilgrimages to the place of his death, and, however inappropriate it might be for Lollards to do so, some at any rate may have tried to gather together his ashes as relics. Claims were also made that miracles had taken place at the site of his death, where his followers made offerings and set up a wooden cross in his memory. In order to counter these assertions the mayor sent a number of aldermen to the place of execution to hold back the crowd, and later the civic authorities deliberately polluted the ground and turned it into a dunghill. 
Wyche was probably respected by the London Lollards because he was a link with the early years of the movement; he was the last surviving academic heretic of the immediate post-Wyclif generation, and had had links with Oldcastle. The popular response to his death suggests that the Lollards still enjoyed a considerable measure of support in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50264


Boulers, Reginald (d. 1459), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, claimed, on the evidence of the heraldic devices on his seals, a connection with the Butler earls of Ormond and Wiltshire, but his family background is otherwise unknown. He was a doctor of theology (probably of Oxford) by 1437, a monk of the Benedictine abbey of St Peter, Gloucester, and may be the monk 'Reynolds of Gloucester' who is recorded as delivering a sermon at Oxford 'c'.1432. Royal assent to his election as abbot of Gloucester was granted on 29 October 1437. On 21 November 1440 Henry VI wrote to Pope Eugenius IV ('r'. 1431-47), recommending Boulers for the vacant see of Llandaff, but by 25 December Boulers had declined the offer, presumably in order to stay at the wealthier abbey of Gloucester, and Henry wrote again to the pope, proposing Nicholas Close (died 1452) instead. 
During the 1440s Boulers came to be regularly employed as both a diplomatic envoy and a member of the king's council. He was part of the embassy that attended the Reichstag held at Frankfurt am Main to discuss ecclesiastical affairs between March and July 1442, and reported back to the council on 21 August; he was commissioned to go as king's proctor to Rome in August 1444, but then ordered to stay in England; on 12 March 1445, together with Bishop Thomas Beckington of Bath and Wells (died 1465), he informed the papal nuncio of the English clergy's offer of a voluntary grant of 6000 ducats in place of taxation; and on 30 January 1448 he was appointed a member of the plenary embassy to negotiate with the French. He became a regular attender at the council from 1445, and was one of the most frequent witnesses to acts of state. 
In parliament in February 1449 Boulers presented, on behalf of Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset, the duke's 'credence' which raised the issue of the insecurity of the English position in France in the light of French preparations for a renewal of the war. He was further associated with the government's war effort as one of three commissioners appointed on 18 August 1449 to raise loans on security of certain royal jewels in order to supply Normandy. His close association with the failed Lancastrian policy in France, together perhaps with some underlying anti-clerical feeling and local disputes in Gloucester, left Boulers particularly exposed to attack during the period of popular unrest which beset England in the wake of a series of disastrous reverses in France. In 1449-50 people from Gloucester despoiled the abbey's manor of Wynyards, Gloucestershire, and denounced Boulers for his part in the disasters in France, and in 1450 he was clearly regarded by several groups of critics as a central figure in the reviled government. He was targeted for execution by rebels both in Kent and at Westminster in January 1450; identified as a traitor by discontented royal and magnate retainers in June; satirized in a contemporary ballad for his association with the murdered duke of Suffolk; possibly indicted to commissions of inquiry by supporters of Jack Cade, both in London in July and in Kent in August; and included in a petition submitted in the parliament of 1450-51 which requested that twenty-nine named persons should be debarred for life from coming within 12 miles of the king. At the height of his unpopularity, in September 1450, Boulers, together with John (VI) Sutton, Lord Dudley, fled to Ludlow to seek the protection of Richard, duke of York, whose support may at the time have seemed the best guarantee of survival. 
In the event, Boulers not only survived the crises of 1450 but saw his career prosper with no interruption during the next decade. Amid the turmoil he had actually been papally provided to the bishopric of Hereford on 14 August 1450; he received the temporalities on 23 December and was consecrated on 14 February 1451. He was translated to the see of Coventry and Lichfield on 7 February 1453. He was, with others, acquitted of any offence by the Lords in March 1451, and resumed his political role. On 9 January 1452 the duke of York invited Boulers and John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury (died 1453), his most distinguished neighbours, to Ludlow to hear his declaration of loyalty to Henry VI in advance of the duke's armed demonstration against his rival, the duke of Somerset, at Dartford, Kent. In the wake of this confrontation Boulers was a member of a panel commissioned on 13 March 1452 to arbitrate between the two dukes; nothing came of this. On 23 March 1454 he was included by the Lords in parliament in the carefully chosen delegation to visit Henry VI, then incapacitated by a severe mental collapse, at Windsor. When the delegation reported back two days later, its leader, William Waynflete, bishop of Winchester (died 1486), deferred to Boulers in reporting the outcome, because Boulers had actually undertaken the hopeless task of gaining a response from the king. 
Boulers may, like a number of other lords, have been somewhat wary of involving himself too closely with the duke of York's subsequent protectorate administration; he was equivocal about his membership of the council at a meeting held on 3 April 1454 and was chastised for his absence from a meeting of a great council on 1 July 1454, but it is by no means certain that he was definitively an opponent of the duke. Indeed Boulers was one of three mediators sent by Henry VI's council, probably in late April 1455, to meet with York and his Neville allies during the tense period that culminated in the first battle of St Albans (22 May 1455). He continued to attend the royal council even after the Yorkist victory and was appointed to the committee to consider the defence of Calais and Berwick in the parliament of 1455-6. 
Thereafter it became harder not to take sides, and Boulers went with the court. He certainly retained the confidence of the king, but much more significantly, that of Queen Margaret. On 28 January 1457 he was appointed to the council of Edward, prince of Wales. On 2 November 1457 he was named as a commissioner to investigate how the king might settle his debts. However, his episcopal register suggests that he may have withdrawn from his more active role in politics from 1456. He is never recorded thereafter as being in London, but indeed the court itself was rarely in the capital. More notably, after 7 June 1457 he is only ever found in his register at his episcopal manor of Beaudesert, Staffordshire. His rather brief will, which states that the bishop was too ill to particularize at greater length, was made at Beaudesert on 23 March 1459, and one of his bequests was of his five books of theology to his old abbey at Gloucester. He died shortly after the will was made, for it was proved on 10 April 1459. He had requested burial in the lady chapel of Lichfield Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 50265


Cheyne, Sir John (c.1390-1468), Lollard and rebel, was the elder son of Roger Cheyne (1362-1414) of Drayton Beauchamp, Buckinghamshire, one of the leaders of the Lollard movement in the early fifteenth century. Roger may well have adopted his heretical leanings through the influence of the prominent Lollard knight and diplomat Sir John Cheyne (died 1414) of Beckford, Gloucestershire, to whom he was related, and as an MP in the Coventry parliament of October 1404 he doubtless supported Sir John's proposals for the appropriation of the temporalities of the church. With Roger Cheyne's support and protection a priest called Thomas Drayton preached Lollard doctrines in the region near his home, and when Sir John Oldcastle (died 1417) escaped from the Tower of London and raised his fellow Lollards in rebellion against Henry V early in 1414, Roger, with his sons John and Thomas, joined him with a contingent from Buckinghamshire. Following their defeat at St Giles's Fields, nine of the Cheynes' followers were executed on 12 January, but John and his father were captured and handed over to the constable of the Tower six days later. Roger died in the Tower on 14 May, and John remained a prisoner until 2 November, when the king generously pardoned his treasons, felonies, and insurrections, and, within a week, allowed him to take possession of his paternal inheritance. This included, besides Drayton Beauchamp, the manors of Grove in Chesham in the same county, Cassington in Oxfordshire, and Rolleston in Leicestershire, as well as land in Hertfordshire and property in London, which together provided an annual income of at least $50. 
According to his epitaph, John Cheyne, a man of exceptional strength and animated by ardent faith, then travelled to the Holy Land, where he endured great hardships among the Saracens and slew a giant. By the time of his next appearance in the records, in 1420, he had been knighted. Following his return to England, Cheyne established useful political contacts with Henry Beaufort (died 1447), bishop of Winchester, and Sir Edward Stradling, the husband of Beaufort's bastard daughter. Towards the end of 1421 he was elected MP for Buckinghamshire on the first of seven occasions, and in the years 1422-6 he served successively as JP, sheriff, and escheator, all in his home county. During the parliament of 1425 (one of those he attended) he may well have promoted two petitions of a distinctly Lollard flavour: one complaining about absentee clergy and the holding of livings in plurality, and the other drawing attention to the plight of suspect heretics who had been kept in prison for long periods without trial (a matter that had touched him personally). The speaker of that parliament, Sir Thomas Waweton, subsequently, in 1429, made a false return as sheriff of Buckinghamshire in Cheyne's favour, overriding an election already held. A public outcry resulted in the appointment of a commission of inquiry on 24 September, two days after the opening of the parliament, but it was not until the justices of assize conducted hearings in the following March (after parliament had been dissolved) that Cheyne was declared illegally returned, and Waweton was censured and fined heavily. 
Four months later, in July 1430, a commission of oyer and terminer was set up to investigate widespread complaints of oppressions, extortions, assaults, and injuries committed by the two Cheyne brothers and their henchmen in Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire, allegations that included torture, beatings, and theft. In September the Cheynes were indicted for robbery, embracery, and perverting the course of justice. These alleged crimes all took place in and near the manor of 'Maudeleyns' in Northchurch, which bordered the Cheynes' property at Chesham, and point to a major dispute over title to the manor. Even so, the brothers were acquitted in the king's bench. This was not the end of their troubles, however, for in June 1431, a few weeks after 'Jack Sharp's' abortive Lollard rising in Berkshire, the Buckinghamshire authorities were ordered to arrest Sir John Cheyne, to seize his manors of Drayton and Grove, confiscate all books, rolls, schedules, bills, and any suspicious memoranda found there, and to certify the contents of his armoury and library to the king's council. Cheyne's brother was arrested at the same time, and both men were imprisoned in the Tower until the following 4 August, when they were allowed to go free. It seems that their complicity in the rising had not been proved. Cheyne had been omitted from all royal commissions since 1426, an indication that he was not trusted in official circles. Nevertheless, he was elected to the very next parliament summoned after his release from the Tower, in 1432, albeit apparently only after another contested election. 
Property dealings took up some of Cheyne's time in the 1440s, when he took advantage of the financial difficulties of his presumed kinsman, John Cheyne of Chenies, whose estates he now purchased. These increased his income by some $60 p.a. Although Sir John sat in the Commons again in 1445, it was not until the 1450s that he was considered acceptable once more for a role in local government; he secured appointment to the Hertfordshire bench in 1455 after an absence from such service of more than thirty years. Little is known about his political affiliations during the civil war years, and he is recorded in association with only one magnate: the irresponsible and untrustworthy Henry Holland, duke of Exeter (died 1475), a claimant to the protectorship during Henry VI's illness. Cheyne lived to an advanced age -- if not to the century ascribed to him by antiquarians. Aged about seventy-eight, he died on 15 August 1468 and was buried in the chancel of Drayton Beauchamp church. He left no surviving issue either from his first marriage, to Joan, said to be a daughter of Sir Robert Fitzmarmaduke, or from his second, to Agnes, daughter of William Lexham. By settlements agreed in 1466 the latter had secured as her jointure the valuable manors of Chenies and Cogenhoe. The heir to these, and to Cheyne's own patrimony, was his three-year-old great-great-nephew, John. Sir John's widow married Edmund Molyneux (died 1485) and died in 1494. Whether he had remained a Lollard to the very end is impossible to say, especially as his will has not survived. However, one of his bequests, an annuity of 50's'. to the house of Dominican friars at Kings Langley, seems orthodox enough. 


@@@@@


doc= 50266


Bell, Richard (b. c.1410, d. in or after 1495), bishop of Carlisle, was almost certainly a native of Durham, where he entered the religious life in 1426 or early 1427. Five years later Bell was sent to Durham College, Oxford, where he held office as one of the two college bursars between Michaelmas 1435 and Michaelmas 1440. Much more surprising was Bell's collation (on 13 February 1441) to the small alien priory of Holy Trinity, York, by Henry VI. This curious episode in Bell's early career would not have been possible without the backing of Henry Percy, second earl of Northumberland (died 1455), and other northern magnates. In the event the Benedictine monks of Holy Trinity, York, fought so vigorous a campaign against Bell's claims to be their prior that he was forced to withdraw and seek readmission to Durham Cathedral priory in December 1443. 
Immediately afterwards Bell rapidly rose to influential office within his community. Steward of the prior's hospice from 1443 to 1447, and monastic almoner from 1447 to 1450, he returned to Oxford as warden of Durham College between 1450 and 1453, a period during which he secured a bachelor's degree in theology. Although several manuscripts that once formed part of Richard Bell's personal library still survive, it was his administrative rather than scholastic talents that led to his recall to the Durham cloister in 1453, where he went on to hold the obediences of hostillar, terrar, and sub-prior before declaring himself a candidate for the prior's office on the resignation of William Ebchester in 1456. On 25 October, after an exceptionally divisive electoral contest, Bell was defeated by John Burnby, who received thirty-eight votes as opposed to his own twenty-five. From 1457 to 1464 Bell accordingly found himself in comparative and no doubt involuntary seclusion as prior of Durham's cell at Finchale. The sudden death of Prior Burnby on 17 October 1464 immediately transformed Bell's future prospects. Five weeks later he was elected prior of Durham, an office he held with considerable success for fourteen years. On the abundant evidence for his priorate, particularly his small register or letter-book, Bell was a highly vigorous superior of his house, and by 1478 seems to have restored his monastery to much greater prosperity than it had enjoyed when he became prior. His most ambitious initiative was to inaugurate a complete reconstruction of the central tower of Durham Cathedral. 
As prior of Durham between 1464 and 1478, Richard Bell owed much of his reputation to the skill with which he defended his house amid national political instability and the feuds of many of the northern magnates and gentry. By 1474, if not earlier, the prior had accordingly won the favour of Richard, duke of Gloucester (the future Richard III), with whose powerful support he finally succeeded in securing the bishopric for which he was already intriguing at the curia. On 11 February 1478 Bell's ambitions were at last rewarded by papal provision to the episcopate of Carlisle, although his extraordinary attempt to continue to hold the priorate of Durham 'in commendam' with his new and impoverished bishopric was successfully resisted by his former and now outraged community. He was the last member of the medieval community of St Cuthbert to become a bishop. Unfortunately the evidence for Bell's seventeen-year tenure of the see of Carlisle is much less abundant than that for most earlier stages of his career. Already aged about seventy when he was finally enthroned in Carlisle Cathedral in 1480, he played a progressively less significant role in northern political affairs after that date. However, the surviving accounts of his receivers-general give some impression of his severe financial problems, of his concern with diocesan administration, of his extensive building operations at his palace of Rose Castle, and even of his diet. It was no doubt due to extreme old age that Bell resigned his see (the only bishop of Carlisle to do so between 1246 and 1946) on 4 September 1495. The place and the date of his death remain obscure, unrecorded even in the inscription around his magnificent memorial brass on the floor of the cathedral choir at Carlisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 50267


Barrington, Sir Vincent Hunter Barrington Kennett- (1844-1903), humanitarian worker and businessman, was born on 3 September 1844 at Bagna di Lucca, Italy, the eldest son of Vincent Frederick Kennett ('b'. 1799), a retired captain of the East India Company army, and his wife, Arabella Henrietta Barrington 
(formerly Hughes-Lee; died 1884)
, daughter and coheir of Sir Jonah Barrington. Kennett added his mother's surname to his own on her death in 1884. Kennett was educated at Eton College and won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1863 to read mathematics. He graduated in 1867, took a law degree in 1868, moved to the inns of court, and was called to the bar in 1872. 
In 1867 Kennett became associated with the British league of the order of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem. This in turn led to his involvement with the Society for Aiding and Ameliorating the Condition of the Sick and Wounded in Time of War (known as the National Aid Society and, later, as the Red Cross). The British National Aid Society, which was established in 1868, offered humanitarian assistance to both sides during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71. Kennett became one of the convoy agents in charge of the distribution of funds and supplies and worked with the French republican armies in the Loire and later with the Prussians in Meaux. Following the armistice he became involved in further humanitarian work in eastern France. Kennett returned to England in April 1871, but went on to provide help during the Carlist War in Spain (1873-5), the Serbo-Turkish War (1876-7), and the Turko-Russian War (1877-8). On 12 January 1878 he made a financially advantageous marriage to Alicia Georgette Sandeman, daughter of George Glas Sandeman, and a member of the Sandeman family of wine growers. Alicia Barrington was the author of 'Bible History for Children' (1889). Kennett returned to Constantinople within a month of his wedding; the organizational role which he assumed during the conflict probably makes him one of the earliest instances of a 'professional', albeit unpaid, humanitarian administrator. After 1878 Kennett became involved in the St John Ambulance movement and served as an instructor. 
Kennett was also a freelance business agent, serving on the commissions of universal exhibitions in Brussels, Melbourne, and Paris between 1876 and 1898. In 1883 he was elected to the London chamber of commerce, becoming its deputy chairman in 1889, and travelled to India on behalf of Edison Electrical Company. From 1883 he served on the Metropolitan Asylums Board. He worked with the Aid Society once again during the Sudan expedition and the Serbo-Bulgarian War in 1885. In the latter conflict he held a semi-official role, combining his humanitarian role with a diplomatic one. Kennett-Barrington was knighted in May 1886. He was an alderman of London county council in 1890-91. Despite his work with the chamber of commerce and at the Metropolitan Asylums Board becoming more demanding over the years, Kennett-Barrington nevertheless helped while on business trips to establish Red Cross branches in Buenos Aires in 1892 and in Venezuela in 1895. 
Kennett-Barrington was an active man who participated in many sports, including fishing, shooting, and ballooning. He died at his home, 57 Albert Hall Mansions, Knightsbridge, on 13 July 1903 as the result of injuries received in a ballooning accident. He was survived by his wife. Kennett-Barrington is an example of the first generation of humanitarian administrators who undertook vital field work for the Red Cross. His letters provide an important record of an often poorly documented area of history. He won the silver and bronze medals of the Royal Humane Society (1873, 1885) and published 'River Pollution' (1883), 'Hospital and Ambulance Organisation of the Metropolitan Asylums Board' (1893), 'Floating Hospitals for Infectious Cases' (1883), and 'Ambulance Organisation of the Metropolis during Epidemics' (1884). 


@@@@@


doc= 50268


Brown, Isaac Baker (1811-1873), surgical gynaecologist, was born at Colne Engaine, Essex, the second son of Isaac Baker Brown ('b'. 1786), gentleman farmer, and Catherine, daughter of the Revd James Boyer, master of the Blue Coat School. Baker Brown was educated at Halstead in Essex and began his career as an apprentice to Mr Gibson, principal surgeon of the county. In 1831 he became a student at Guy's Hospital, London, distinguishing himself in midwifery and diseases of women. On 18 June 1833 he married Anne Rusher Barron at St Mary the Virgin (at the Walls), Colchester. In 1834 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and opened a general practice in Connaught Square, London. Subsequently he achieved a considerable reputation as an accoucheur and 'woman's surgeon', eventually limiting his practice to gynaecological disease. 
In 1848, after becoming a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons and a founding member of St Mary's Hospital, Baker Brown enthusiastically adopted the emerging surgical model for gynaecology. His faith in the ultimate efficacy of ovariotomy, for example, was so strong that he performed his fourth ovariotomy on his own sister in 1852, even though each of his first three patients died as a result of the surgery. Fortunately his sister recovered, encouraging his pursuit of dramatic new cures by surgical means. 
During the nineteenth century obstetrics and gynaecology were separate fields of medical practice. Given his training in obstetrics, why did Isaac Baker Brown choose to limit his practice to gynaecological disease? The answer is suggested by his relatively modest origins. Baker Brown's obituaries identify his father simply as a 'gentleman farmer', while his mother received only slightly more recognition as the daughter of a school headmaster. He was educated locally and served an apprenticeship with a county surgeon. Even though he distinguished himself during his hospital appointment, his background was provincial. He also lacked the key requirement for entry to the medical elite, a university degree. As an ambitious young man, therefore, Baker Brown needed other avenues to higher professional and social status. 
The new field of surgical gynaecology offered Baker Brown just such possibilities. There is always more scope for advancement in an emerging field than in an older one and by the 1840s obstetrics was well established, with its own hierarchy of practitioners. After the introduction of anaesthesia in 1847, surgical innovation and experimentation expanded. Along with a number of British and American surgeons in the 1850s, Baker Brown saw the possibilities in developing supposedly fast, painless, and complete surgical treatments for 'female complaints' as an alternative to lengthy, painful, and often ineffective medical therapies. 
Another British pioneer in gynaecological surgery, Thomas Spencer Wells, served as colleague, supporter, and role model for Baker Brown in the early years of his career. Baker Brown may have been even more inspired, however, by the entrepreneurial spirit of American gynaecologist J. Marion Sims. Sims spent considerable time in London during the American Civil War and demonstrated his operation for vesico-vaginal fistula to Baker Brown. Both men shared somewhat humble origins and a penchant for self-promotion in the non-medical press. 
Baker Brown achieved prominence as a pioneering surgical gynaecologist, establishing a reputation for surgical dexterity and daring. In 1854 he published 'On some Diseases of Women Admitting of Surgical Treatment' and four years later opened the London Surgical Home where he could devote himself to refining and expanding surgical procedures. He reached the zenith of his career in 1865 with his election as president of the Medical Society of London. His career ended in disgrace, however, when his promotion of clitoridectomy as a cure for numerous female 'nervous complaints' precipitated professional controversy and a public scandal. 
In his attempts to apply surgical therapeutics to every aspect of women's health Baker Brown singled out 'nervous disease' in women and treated many such patients at his London Surgical Home. In 1866 Baker Brown published his theories and the 'successful' results of their application in 'On the Curability of Certain Forms of Insanity, Epilepsy, Catalepsy, and Hysteria in Females'. Baker Brown identified the cause of these diseases as peripheral excitement of the pudic nerve centring on the clitoris, that is masturbation. The cure was simple. By removing the site of irritation, 'unnatural practices' stopped, and the woman regained her health. The extensive list of conditions he included required a greatly expanded estimate of female auto-eroticism. 
Baker Brown appealed directly to the lay public, especially women, through speeches and newspaper articles in order to popularize his 'special treatment'. Baker Brown carefully presented his new therapy in the most favourable light, neglecting to mention the more negative aspects of clitoridectomy. Reports surfaced that he frequently operated on women ignorant of the nature of the operation or even without their prior consent. Some colleagues welcomed this new cure-all operation, but the majority of the medical community castigated Baker Brown for his publicity seeking and the shocking nature of his claims. 
The gynaecological profession as a whole feared a backlash from female patients and their families. The most disturbing repercussion of clitoridectomy was the slur on a respectable woman's moral character. Many practitioners of the day believed in a link between masturbation and physical and mental disease but identified it as a male problem. If Baker Brown was right, thousands of Englishwomen stood accused of 'unnatural' vice. Eventually, gynaecologists worried, no respectable woman would consult them for fear of being branded immoral. Numerous physicians rushed to defend female honour and condemn Baker Brown for speaking openly on such a subject. 
The final blow to Baker Brown came when the London commissioners for lunacy discovered he had illegally performed clitoridectomy on institutionalized women without the specific consent of family members. At this point, to quell growing public furore, the Obstetrical Society of London decided to hold a hearing on the question of Baker Brown and clitoridectomy. The 'trial' of Isaac Baker Brown took place on 3 April 1867 and resulted in his expulsion from the society. 
Baker Brown's practice declined rapidly after his repudiation and he never regained his professional standing. His health failed and he was subject to what 'The Lancet' described as paralytic seizures, becoming a total invalid for the last year of his life. He died at 88 Albany Street, Regent's Park, London, on 3 February 1873. He was survived by his second wife, Catherine Read, whom he married on 21 May 1863 after the death of his first wife, and three young children. 


@@@@@


doc= 50269


Falk, Oswald Toynbee (1879-1972), stockbroker and economist, was born on 25 May 1879 at 23 Greenhays Road, Toxteth Park, West Derby, Liverpool, the son of Hermann John Falk, then a law student, and his wife, Rachel Russell Everard Toynbee. Falk's grandfather Herman Eugene Falk (1820-1898) had emigrated from Danzig in Poland about 1839 and become a leader in the important Cheshire salt trade, but left only a modest fortune of $17,000. His maternal grandfather was the distinguished aural surgeon Joseph Toynbee (1815-1866). 
Falk -- known to his friends as Foxy -- was educated at Rugby School and at Balliol College, Oxford, where his uncle, the social philosopher and economist Arnold Toynbee, had taught. After Oxford, in a decade he likened to the experience of a 'delicious novel by Henry James' (Skidelsky, 2.423), Falk worked as an actuary for the National Mutual Life Assurance Society and became a fellow of the Institute of Actuaries. He married Florence Ethel, daughter of John Michael Hanglar, on 29 March 1906; but nothing else is known about this relationship. In 1914, having left the actuarial profession, he was admitted a member of the London stock exchange; by 1918 he was a partner in the prominent stockbrokers Buckmaster and Moore. Falk soon developed a reputation for intellectual brilliance combined with an 'explosive personality' (Davenport, 44). 
Falk first made his mark in 1917 when J. M. Keynes invited him to join his division of the Treasury. He worked there with impressive intellectuals -- Geoffrey Fry and Dudley Ward among them -- and proved himself a gifted 'practical economist' interested in currency and exchange. In 1919 he joined the Treasury team, under Keynes's leadership, at the Paris peace conference, and in 1920 he was created CBE. By 1924 Falk was married to Diana Guendolen Edith Cecil, daughter of Captain Gerald Stracey; and they had two sons. 
At Buckmasters, Falk became senior partner. An early proponent of 'active investment', in 1923 he counselled investors to give advisers 'the widest possible discretion' and not 'to tie their hands by rules of investment which may have worked tolerably well in the comparative calm of the Victorian age but which are utterly useless in the typhoons of this generation' ('The Times', 15 March 1923). The consequence, according to a later commentator, was that 'the poor victim either made a killing in the market or was wiped out completely' (Davenport, 44). Falk's rules were specialization within portfolios on particular assets -- currency and commodities as well as securities -- and frequent if not daily switching between them as guided by the predictions of economic analysis. He achieved spectacular gains but also heavy losses, as in mid-1929 when he led his clients into US securities (having eschewed them a year before). His own losses forced him to sell his country home at Codford St Mary, Wiltshire. 
In February 1932 Falk resigned from Buckmasters and from the stock exchange, along with four of his partners, including Sir Maurice Bonham Carter, to form O. T. Falk & Partners, investment bankers, initially operating out of Buckmasters' offices. Here Falk employed bright young men such as the economist Thomas Balogh and the physicist Lancelot Law Whyte. The latter recognized the potential of Whittle's jet engine and the firm developed it via a special company, Power Jets Ltd, which was later compulsorily acquired by the wartime government. Despite his natural impatience, Falk had infinite forbearance with the young men he employed, encouraging them to think courageously and to act with intellectual integrity. His relationship with Bonham Carter and his wife, Violet ('nee' Asquith), was especially close; he was rumoured to have had an affair with Violet Bonham Carter, but the exact nature of their relationship is unclear. 
Falk was exceptionally close to Keynes, acting as his broker and co-speculator, introducing him to the City, active investment, and the 'psychology of businessmen' (Skidelsky, 694), and sharing with him a love of ballet and pictures. They worked together on the boards of businesses involved in investment, notably the National Mutual Life Assurance Society, and the Independent Investment Trust Ltd, which they promoted in 1924. Their pursuit of active investment had mixed results, most notably the losses incurred by the trust in 1929-30. Falk, who was always 'sharp in his personal relations' (Davenport, 45), had refused to speak to his friend Montagu Norman, governor of the Bank of England, after the return to the gold standard in 1925. Then in 1930 Keynes disagreed with Falk that British industry was finished and that investors should sell their shares and buy into American industry instead. These and other issues resulted in a 'flaming quarrel' (Davenport, 51) between them, after which their friendship waned. Falk was nevertheless the originator of many ideas developed by Keynes. The latter, who reckoned Falk one of 'nature's economists' (Harrod, 220), owed to him 'his superb understanding of the unruly financial mechanism of capitalism -- something which distinguishes his work from that of other economists of his age' (Skidelsky, 2.25). 
In 1917 Falk had first brought together practical economists interested in finance and currency issues, and in the 1920s he developed the group into the prestigious Tuesday Club, where influential politicians and economists debated over dinner at the Cafe Royal in an atmosphere of 'intellectual ferment' (Harrod, 220). There he attacked the Treasury view on debt, arguing that borrowing was 'the instrument of progress.... Better a decade of inflation than a cycle of decay' (Davenport, 193). 
Falk was 'tall... with a fine head, aquilous features and broad shoulders... prodigiously gifted intellectually, his faults were hauteur and impetuosity' (Skidelsky, 2.25). The financial journalist Nicholas Davenport thought him 'quick, rude and decisive' and referred to his 'intellectual violence' (Davenport, 44). He held extreme views, often on the right, and expressed them forcibly, for example dismissing the Beveridge report as 'the road to the moral ruin of the nation... it is the way tending to weaken still further the spirit of initiative and adventure, the stimulus of competition, courage and self reliance' ('The Times', 5 Dec 1941). 
Falk's unconventional brilliance won him many friends, and he was widely if not universally respected in the City of London. A champion golfer, he lamented the passing of the traditional game, which he regarded as the victim of the 'modern mechanical game with its battery of irons and extravagant expenditure' ('The Times', 1 Dec 1934). Fond of the arts, he was at ease in that circle and was rumoured to have been Pavlova's lover. He had a notable collection of post-Impressionist pictures and wrote about twentieth-century art with authority. 
In retirement Falk lived at Tall Trees, Boars Hill, near Oxford, and he died on 12 November 1972 at Wardington House Nursing Home, Wardington, Oxfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50270


Smith, Lancelot Grey Hugh (1870-1941), stockbroker, was born on 4 August 1870 at 71 Princes Gate, Kensington, London, one of the six sons of Hugh Colin Smith (1836-1910), merchant and banker, and his wife, Constance Maria Josepha Adeane. Both parents came of distinguished and large families; his father was a great-grandson of Abel Smith, who established the bank of Smith, Payne, and Smiths in London, as well as opening branches of the (Nottingham-based) Smiths Bank in Lincoln and Hull. H. C. Smith founded the Hays Wharf Company, an important firm of Thames wharfingers, owned by the family, and he became a director of the Bank of England in 1876 and was its governor in 1897-8. Smith's mother was the daughter of H. J. Adeane and his wife, Maud, daughter of John Thomas Stanley, first Baron Stanley of Alderley. 
Lancelot Smith was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, though he left Cambridge in 1889 without taking a degree. He spent some time in the family businesses, the Hays Wharf Company in London and Smiths Bank in Derby, before visiting the USA in 1897. On that visit he struck up a friendship with Jack Morgan, son of Pierpont Morgan, senior partner of J. P. Morgan & Co. in New York and J. S. Morgan & Co. (later Morgan Grenfell) in London. It was through this friendship that Lancelot's brother Vivian Hugh Smith (later Lord Bicester) joined J. S. Morgan & Co. in London in 1905. 
When he returned from America, Smith, against the wishes of his father, joined the then newly established stockbroking firm of Rowe and Pitman. Tradition has it that the two partners, George D. Rowe and Frederick Pitman, who were both keen oarsmen, needed a non-rowing person to look after the office during the Henley regatta. Lancelot, or Lancey as he became known in the City, fitted the bill in that respect, but of course he offered much more to a new stockbroking firm seeking business. Well known in the City of London and beyond, the ramifications of the Smith clan -- consisting not only of his brothers (who came to be strategically placed in Morgan Grenfell and Hambros Bank) but also of his numerous cousins -- gave Lancey useful connections in many institutions across the City. Indeed, it has been suggested that all the immense stock-exchange business of the Hugh Smith clan poured through Rowe and Pitman. Stockbroking, it turned out, suited Smith. Summing up his skills, the stockbroker Alfred Wagg noted: 'He certainly had not got the ability of several other members of his family. He had no patience with detail, but he had great flair. He seemed to possess the gift of being able to 'smell out' that a security was attractive before it even occurred to other people. (Kynaston, 312)' In 1910 Smith met the young Jean Rhys ['see 'Williams, Ella Gwendoline Rees (1890-1979)], then a chorus girl, and later a novelist. She became his mistress, but the liaison lasted only just over two years before Smith terminated it, and 'paid her off' with a small allowance. He was, according to her biographer, the love of her life, and in her novel, 'Voyage in the Dark' (1934), she wrote an affectionate portrait of him as Walter Jeffries. During the First World War Smith served for a time in 1914 as a lieutenant in the Westminster dragoons. He was sent in 1915 as the principal delegate in the British mission to Sweden, and in 1917 he was made a CBE. When he returned he was appointed chairman of the Tobacco Control Board. At the end of the war he returned to Rowe and Pitman. 
Smith's flair and his connections in the City continued to benefit the firm; he was a leading partner and ultimately its senior partner. Rowe and Pitman attracted a large number of well-connected and wealthy private clients: Smith's own clients included members of aristocratic and royal families, both British and European; and in the inter-war years he also built up the firm's corporate finance advisory work. Smith had many friends in the City and, Alfred Wagg remembered, also many enemies, offended by his supercilious manner, his tendency to pomposity, and his air of superiority. He never married, and his personal wealth enabled him to own and enjoy several grand houses in London, in Surrey, and in Norfolk. He was a director of the Australian Agricultural Company, and the National Mortgage and Agency Company of New Zealand. 
Lancelot Smith died on 23 March 1941 at his home, Old Hall, Garboldisham, Wayland, in Norfolk. In the week following his death a memorial service was held for him at the Savoy Chapel in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50272


Koch de Gooreynd, William Julien Maurice (1853-1919), stockbroker, was born on 14 October 1853, the second son of Franciscus Josephus Koch ('b'. 1815) and Josephine Emile de Laska of Belgium. He settled in Britain, probably at Brighton, some time prior to 1877. In that year he joined the London stockbrokers Panmure Gordon & Co. which had been formed a year earlier by Harry Panmure Gordon. Koch took British citizenship on 28 July 1883 and about 1913 added de Gooreynd to his surname by special permission of Leopold II who, it is said, would have ennobled Koch on account of his services to Belgium had he not already assumed British citizenship. Under Gordon's flamboyant leadership Panmure Gordon became well known, but Willy Koch made the key contribution; 'he was the brains of the firm', wrote the company promoter H. Osborne O'Hagan in 1929, 'although for many years Panmure Gordon was the dominating person and his partners did not much figure' (O'Hagan, 1.368). Koch was admitted a partner in 1889 and became senior partner in 1902, following the death of Gordon and the resignation of others. 
Koch built Panmure Gordon into London's leading broking house for foreign government loans in the two decades before the First World War, when issues boomed and fortunes were made. In 1906 the leading merchant bankers, Morgan Grenfell, were 'impressed with the way Panmure Gordon's do their business now... they are intelligent and their methods are more sound than in the days of old PG'; a year later they believed the firm to be 'probably the most important firm in London' (Kynaston, 'The City of London', 310). Panmures specialized in foreign loans for sovereign states. The firm was especially pre-eminent as brokers for Chinese and Japanese government bond issues and worked closely with leading houses such as the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and Barings; by 1914 twelve Chinese government and railway loans, worth $40 million, and thirteen Japanese government issues, exceeding $100 million, had been sponsored. The large and important Japanese issues negotiated with Baron Takahashi and marketed on continental and American bourses for the first time during the Russo-Japanese War were of particular note. 
Koch's firm acted as brokers to a wide range of issues -- from those of the city of Moscow to the Ottoman government, and from the state of Sao Paulo to the Union Pacific Railway. Industrial issues figured less, but Panmures' clients included many breweries, and weighty names such as Liptons Tea and Shell Transport and Trading. Apparently it had a weakness for foreign industrials, and anything outside the ordinary which it was 'quite unable to underwrite', according to the leading banker, Emile D'Erlanger (Kynaston, 'The City of London', 310). Notwithstanding, at the negotiating table Koch equalled the bankers -- thereby enjoying a prestige rarely given to his profession -- and offered a priceless combination of unrivalled placing power, coupled, when needed, with discretion. For example, he courted Lord Revelstoke, the imperious head of Barings, before the banker left to negotiate with the Russian government for an issue of imperial bonds in 1905. 'Should it be any 'comfort' to you to syndicate 5,000,000 before you go St Petersburg', he counselled the banker, 'I think that this could be done quietly, and privately so to speak, without much fear of indiscretion' (ING Baring archives, 200243). This was placing power indeed. 
Koch also figured in the affairs of the stock exchange, where he sat for a considerable time on the general purposes committee. His moment came in August 1914 when, with the markets on the threshold of collapse, he 'was one of the most indefatigable minds in saving the situation by getting the House closed and a moratorium established and later in assisting the Treasury and the City Financial Committee to formulate a scheme for the reopening' ('Financial Times', 2). 
Koch's lifestyle was opulent and, unusually for a broker, rivalled those of London's merchant bankers. His London home from about 1907 was 1 Belgrave Square, where footmen wore knee-breeches and black satin and where clients were lavishly entertained. 'Grand affair', wrote the banker Charles Addis after one such occasion in 1908; '12 guests and 6 serving men. Moet 93. Well done and less boring than usual' (Kynaston, 'The City of London', 331). Koch's Belgian links were also maintained. From at least 1910 he owned an estate at Gooreynd, near Antwerp, which he visited frequently, and during the First World War he worked for charities supporting Belgian refugees. Having a white beard, blue eyes, and a short, stocky build, he bore a striking resemblance to Edward VII, with whom he was frequently confused when taking the cure at Karlsbad. He had a passion for music and artists such as Jan Paderewski and Jelly D'Aranyi were regularly invited to play at his Belgrave Square home. 
On 10 September 1891 Koch married Manuela Joanna Joaquima Maria (died 1936), a Polish cousin and daughter and coheir of Alexandre de Laski of London and Paris and sometime governor of the Bank of Poland. They had three sons and two daughters. His eldest son, Alexander, changed his surname by deed poll to Worsthorne although in 1937 reverted to Koch de Gooreynd; a grandson was the newspaper editor and journalist Sir Peregrine Worsthorne. His second son, Gerald, succeeded him at Panmures and was a partner there from 1924 until his death in 1953. William Koch died at his London home on 6 February 1919, leaving an estate in Britain of $0.75 million. His funeral on the 10th, presided over by a bishop, took place at the Roman Catholic cathedral, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 50273


Murray, David (1842-1928), lawyer and antiquary, was born at Glasgow on 15 April 1842, the eldest son of David Murray, a writer to the signet in Glasgow, and Ann Hunter Guthrie. He attended Merchiston Castle School in Edinburgh, and the University of Glasgow from 1857. He graduated MA in 1863 and was apprenticed in a solicitor's office. When he qualified in 1863 he went into partnership with his father's surviving partner George Smith. Four years later he formed a new partnership with David T. Maclay and John A. Spens to form the firm of Maclay, Murray, and Spens -- known to generations of Glaswegians as 'Delay, Worry and Expense'. The new firm specialized in commercial and property work. In 1872 Murray married Frances Porter (died 1919), of Broadfield, Renfrewshire, daughter of Arthur Francis Stoddard, a carpet maker. They had a son and three daughters, the youngest of whom was the suffragist and author Eunice Guthrie Murray. 
Murray acted as solicitor to Lewis Potter (1807-1881), a prominent director of the City of Glasgow Bank. After the bank's collapse in 1878 he prepared Potter's defence against charges of fraud. This involved meticulous research in the bank's archives and the preparation of volumes of exhibits, work much to Murray's taste. The trial early in 1879 was widely reported and Potter was sent to prison for eighteen months. In the wake of the trial Murray, as solicitor to the company, became involved in the immensely complicated task of winding up the bank's affairs and the sequestration of Lewis Potter's own estate. His chief task was to help to reconstruct the New Zealand and Australian Land Co. Ltd Reduced, managed by Potter, and of which the City of Glasgow Bank held a large number of shares as collateral. The company, founded in 1866, was merged with the Canterbury and Otago Association Ltd to form a new New Zealand and Australian Land Company, controlling some 2 million acres in New Zealand and in Australia. The new firm immediately started selling land, disposing of nearly 1 million acres over the next ten years. Murray, as solicitor to the company, was responsible for the Scottish end of all the transactions, along with the management of the remaining properties. This strategy did not solve the company's financial problems and in 1888 Murray had to prepare a massive petition to the High Court in London to reduce the capital further. 
This expertise in company law won Murray many company clients, including the Paisley thread manufacturers J. and P. Coats, Sir William Arrol & Co. Ltd, the Dowanhill Estate Company (which became the longest liquidation case in Scottish history), and Wylie and Lochhead, the Glasgow cabinet-makers. As lawyer to J. and P. Coats he was engaged in the registration of patents and trademarks throughout the world, and their protection in the courts. He was the legal adviser when Coats amalgamated with its rival, Clarks of Paisley, in 1896. This commercial work also brought him many private clients, including members of the Coats family, Sir James T. Whitelaw (a Glasgow wine and spirit merchant), Frank Dubs, the Glasgow locomotive builder, and Sir William Arrol, the engineer. He was regularly called on to defend the property interests of his corporate and private clients against proposed legislation, for example the 'Glasgow and Suburban Railway Bill' in 1887 and the 'Glasgow Building Regulations Bill' in 1892. 
Murray was an expert on Scottish property and building contract law, writing two books on the subject and acting for the Glasgow and South Western Railway in an important contract case between 1908 and 1917 that went to the House of Lords three times. He served as dean of the faculty of procurators in Glasgow from 1895 to 1898. He wrote books on the history of his own profession in the west of Scotland and of accountancy more generally. He was also deeply interested in Scottish history, writing widely in the field and acting as president of the Glasgow Archaeological Society (1895-6 and 1904-7) and vice-president of the Society of Antiquaries in Scotland from 1900 to 1902. A committed member of the Church of Scotland, he served on many committees, particularly those concerned with the reform of church law. He started collecting books when he was eight, and by the end of his life had accumulated a huge library, largely relating to Glasgow and the west of Scotland, and law, mostly bequeathed to the University of Glasgow. He served on the university court from 1896 to 1899 and from 1903 to 1928, where his views were often cautious. He was made an honorary LLD by the university in 1888. In 1927 Murray published his 'Memories of the Old College of Glasgow', describing the institution before it abandoned its original site in the High Street. His son, Anthony Stoddard Murray, was killed in March 1918, and his wife died the following year. David Murray died at his home, Moore Park, Cardross, on 2 October 1928, and was buried at Cardross. 


@@@@@


doc= 50274


Reid, Sir Edward James, second baronet (1901-1972), merchant banker, was born on 20 April 1901, of Scottish descent, at 28 St James's Place, London, the eldest son of Sir James Reid, first baronet (died 1923), physician to Queen Victoria and later monarchs, and his wife, Susan, formerly maid of honour to Queen Victoria and daughter of the merchant banker Edward Baring, first Baron Revelstoke. Baptized in the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, on 7 May 1901, Reid's early life was spent in court circles; Edward VII suggested himself as Reid's godfather, and he was a page to George V. He won a scholarship to Eton College and was awarded a first-class degree in classics at King's College, Cambridge, where, three years running (1920-22), he was a Browne medallist for his renderings of epigrams in Greek. He succeeded his father as second baronet in 1923. 
A year earlier, Reid had joined Baring Brothers, the London merchant bank then led by his uncle, the second Baron Revelstoke, who in 1924 sent him to learn about cotton trade finance in Barings's Liverpool office. Shortly afterwards he worked with the firm of Kidder Peabody in New York and Boston. 
Reid's mastery of languages caused his uncle in 1925 to dispatch him to Barings's Hamburg correspondents, Berenberg Gossler, to watch over the rapidly expanding business they did on joint account with Barings. As a director in London from 1926, he expertly led Barings's banking activities. With rapidly increasing competition, he proved to be an adroit merchant banker, especially in the mid-1920s, when he organized what he reckoned to be 'the greatest coup in cotton financing that Barings Liverpool ever brought off' (Barings archives, DEP 22.xxiii, fol. 29). In December 1928 he was admitted to the partnership, which effectively controlled Baring Brothers. He married on 18 January 1930 Tatiana (died 1992), daughter of Colonel Alexander Fenoult, formerly of the imperial Russian guard, and they had a son and daughter. When Reid retired from Baring Brothers in 1966, in terms of the number of years' service, he was senior partner. He emerged as a distinguished banking technician and for twenty years served as chairman of the Accepting Houses Committee (1946-66), and was president of the Institute of Bankers (1962-4). 
The soundness of Reid's German contacts was proved when Baron von Berenberg Gossler gave him early warning of impending difficulties leading Barings to scale down its German business before Germany's economic collapse in 1931. Barings, therefore, escaped the damage inflicted upon its competitors and, with limited conflict of interest, Reid was well positioned to take a major role in the ensuing negotiations concerning German foreign indebtedness. They dominated much of his life for the next thirty years. 
While he was much concerned with the negotiation of the German 'standstill agreements', following the suspension of payments on short-term credits by German and other central European countries, Reid's role was subsidiary to that of others, especially Frank Tiarks of Schroders. It was more prominent when Germany defaulted on part of its long-term foreign debt in 1933, when Reid dealt with the Konversionskasse fur Deutsche Auslandsschulden on behalf of the London issuing houses of German securities (1933-9). In 1934 it fell to him to put into effect the mechanics of the Anglo-German payments agreement whereby British creditors received Konversionskasse funding bonds. 
From 1948 until 1962 Reid was chairman of the British bankers' committee for German affairs, in which role he petitioned the British government for full recognition of the banks' claims. He also served on the distribution committee formed under the 'Distribution of German Enemy Property Act', and played a key role representing the banks' claims against those of a wide range of creditors, especially holders of United States government bonds, at the 1952 international conference on Germany's pre-war debts. For his City work he was made a KBE in 1967. His close German connections made him especially useful to British intelligence pre-war, and from 1940 to 1945 he was a civil assistant attached to the general staff. 
Reid's interests outside banking were closely connected with Scotland. He was especially associated with the Royal Caledonian Schools, which 'took up most of my spare time' ('Scotland', August 1962). These schools cared for children whose parents could no longer look after them. He was a Church of Scotland elder, a governor of Guy's Hospital (1938-48), and treasurer of London's Infants' Hospital (1938-46). Honorary president of the Clan Donnachaidh Society, Reid was also a member of the council of the Scottish Craft Centre (1966-71). 
On retirement Reid returned to his much-loved Scotland about 1969, living in Edinburgh and at Ellon Castle, Aberdeenshire. He died of a 'Stokes Adam attack' at his home, 16 Buckingham Terrace, Edinburgh, on 24 February 1972. His funeral was held at Dean parish church, Edinburgh, followed by cremation. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50275


Morse, Sir Arthur (1892-1967), banker, was born on 25 April 1892 in Bohercrowe, co. Tipperary, Ireland, one of the seven children of Digby Scott Morse, a cashier with the Bank of Ireland, and Lizzie Jane Holmes. Educated at Foyle College, Londonderry, Arthur Morse joined the London office of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation in 1912. 
Morse's early career was unexceptional. He went to the East with the Hongkong Bank in 1915 and served routinely in Hong Kong, Tientsin (Tianjin), and Shanghai, returning in 1929 to the Hong Kong head office. Morse married Margery May (1893/4-1966), probably in 1923 or 1924; they had no children. From 1929 to 1940 Morse served under the irascible Sir Vandaleur Grayburn, who detected his potential. Indeed, Morse underwent an extraordinary physical and personality metamorphosis; early photographs show a slim, even emaciated figure, but, by the end of the 1930s, he had become a larger man in every sense. 'Latterly he used to roar like a bull', his hearty laugh marking 'the Arthur Morse we all knew so well' (King, 'Hongkong Bank', 4.36). 
Grayburn determined that any further promotion for Morse in the East was unlikely and in 1940 sent him to London as a supernumerary manager. However, within months one manager died and the second retired. In consequence, just thirty-seven days before Pearl Harbor, Morse became manager and, 'ex officio', chairman of the bank's London consultative committee. Before Hong Kong surrendered on 25 December 1941, the bank had secured promise of an order in council making London the head office and the consultative committee the effective board of directors. Authorized to act on this promise, Morse was now in virtually total control. 
Despite the loss of the East, the Hongkong Bank was in a surprisingly sound position. Morse was able to build on the bank's sterling reserves, even while meeting the extraordinary expenses of wartime. He had been treasurer of the University of Hong Kong, and he cared for escaped bank and Hong Kong University staff and for families with members in internment; he reconstituted the books with smuggled documents and kept contact with Free China through the establishment of the Chongqing office. For his management of the Far Eastern Relief Fund and related problems he was created a CBE in 1944. 
As for the future, Morse acted on his conviction, not universally shared, that the Hongkong Bank's head office would return to a British Hong Kong. He promised that any rational request for finance for Hong Kong would be forthcoming; he guaranteed funds for heavy equipment, on occasion committing a company whose senior officials were interned. Such decisions placed the colony at the head of the queue during post-war shortages. Although impatient with officialdom, Morse put $5 million at the disposal of the Hong Kong planning unit without government guarantee. Japan surrendered unexpectedly; consequently destruction was not as disastrous as anticipated, and Morse rushed his officers east to finance the reconstruction, while he himself remained in London; there were war-created problems to resolve, including the reception and rehabilitation of interned staff. 
Morse returned to Hong Kong in 1946 and served on the colony's executive council. He was the leader in some twenty-two organizations covering a broad range of economic, sporting, and charitable affairs. Morse exuded confidence and was a 'presence'; but he was also shrewd and secretive. He had the instincts of an accountant, the inspiration of a statesman. Tough negotiations relative to legislation designed to regularize his bank's 'duress note issue', that is, banknotes issued during the Japanese occupation without appropriate backing, for example, led the Treasury's Norman Young to insist the governor be 'peremptorily' ordered to 'tell [Morse] where he got off' (King, 'Hongkong Bank', 4.240). In the event, cooler counsels prevailed. As a senior colleague noted, 'Morse knew little about technical banking, but banking is both an art and a science, and in the former he excelled' (ibid., 37). 
Morse's knighthood in 1949 was interim recognition. His decisive actions had re-established his bank as the colony's 'de facto' central bank and, through loans to established customers and innovative accounts and other payment devices, had facilitated the restoration of Hong Kong as a trading entrepot. Confidence would be restored following the conclusion of China's civil war, and by the end of 1952 the bank's total assets of HK $3.5 million were approximately three times the total at the end of 1940. In 1953 Morse retired triumphantly from the East. 
In London, Morse became, as had a predecessor, Sir Thomas Jackson (1841-1915), 'permanent' chairman of a reorganized consultative committee. He maintained a correspondence with Sir Michael Turner, the new chief executive in Hong Kong, and was a key negotiator in the 1959-60 acquisitions of the Mercantile Bank (of India) and of the British Bank of the Middle East, on whose boards he subsequently served until 1965. He was chairman of Bowmakers, 1954-62, and in 1958 served as president of the Finance Houses Association. Concurrently, as the unsalaried chairman of the British Travel and Holiday Association, 1954-60, Morse made two promotional tours of North America. Not only did he prove a successful advocate of Britain as a tourist destination, he was also active in encouraging the very necessary improvement of tourist facilities. He was created KBE in 1961. 
With the change of the Hongkong Bank's chief executive in 1962 and the death in 1966 of his wife, who was acknowledged to have been a major supportive influence in his life, Morse's active career faded. He retired to his garden flat at 26 St James's Place, overlooking Green Park, London. Morse died there on 13 May 1967. 
As chief executive and chairman of the Hongkong Bank from 1941 to 1953, Morse was one of the two principal architects (with the governor, Sir Alexander Grantham) of Hong Kong's post-war recovery. After his return to London in 1953 he was instrumental in effecting the rationalization of British overseas banking and the promotion of British tourism. 


@@@@@


doc= 50276


Parkes, Edmund Samuel (1834-1887), banker, was born on 11 July 1834 in Devonport, Devon, the youngest son of Edward Parkes, and his wife, Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Robert and Elizabeth Tozer. On the death of his mother in 1836 Parkes was adopted by Captain James Considine, 22nd light dragoons and lieutenant-governor of Pendennis Castle, Falmouth, Cornwall, where Parkes spent his boyhood. He was educated at Hyde Side House, a boarding-school at Edmonton, Middlesex, where he was a prizewinner in 1847. He began work with a hop merchant, and then with a firm of London shipbrokers. 
On 16 December 1852 Parkes was appointed as a teller with the important London and Westminster Bank, becoming assistant chief clerk in 1859. He resigned in 1862 to join the newly formed Alliance Bank of London and Liverpool Limited as manager at Southwark, subsequently becoming joint manager of that bank's head office. In 1867 the Alliance Bank, which rapidly emerged as one of England's largest joint-stock banks, was in difficulties, and in July the chairman reported to shareholders that Parkes had resigned to save the cost of his salary. While in London Parkes met and married Nancy Penrose Lawry (1831-1886), twin daughter of John Lawry, farmer, of Cornwall, and Mary Penrose. Parkes was recruited to the Bank of Australasia in 1867, and he, Nancy, six children, mother-in-law, and two sisters-in-law arrived in Melbourne on board the 'Damascus' on 17 November 1867. A further four children were born in Australia. 
The appointment of Parkes was not popular with the colonial staff of the bank, who resented the entry of an outsider. As chief inspector, the bank's second most senior official, Parkes was brought into the bank to strengthen the colonial administration, and was seen as the man to introduce 'best practice' technique and procedure learned in British branch banking. Appointed initially for five years, his contract was renewed until, in 1876, he was appointed superintendent of the bank in Australasia. Following years of indecisive management by his predecessor, Parkes was seen as a 'severe martinet dealing with the whole service as a chess player does with his pieces' (Turner, 191). A strict disciplinarian with high standards, he was intelligent and capable, with great force of character. He was well educated and widely read, with a large private library, and his extensive knowledge of banking law and practice was applied unstintingly both in the bank and as an adviser on banking generally. He emerged as a major figure in Australian banking, playing a key role in the Associated Banks (Victoria). Yet he never formally held the chair of that organization, becoming acting chairman only, for five months in 1884-5. 
Parkes's time as head of his bank coincided with the development of a boom in the Australian economy. His concern over the dangers implicit in the boom did not, however, inhibit cautious expansion; seventy-nine new branches were opened, deposits and advances more than doubled, and his bank's deposit position improved relative to other Australian banks, raising it, by the time of his death, to the second largest in Australia and one of the largest British-controlled overseas banks. A constant search for efficiency led him to introduce electricity to the bank's Melbourne head office. He also installed typewriters and appointed Australia's first woman bank employee. 
In private life Parkes was genial and hospitable and a keen and skilful tennis player, who enjoyed riding a tricycle in the morning between six and seven when nobody was about. Outside the bank he was a member of the influential Melbourne Club and a staunch member and vestry man of Holy Trinity Church of England, Balaclava, Victoria. He was also a member of the council of the Melbourne Church of England grammar school, where four of his sons were educated. 
In 1881 Parkes and his Melbourne manager were involved in a railway accident in which they came close to death. The death of his wife in 1886 was a severe blow, and he often expressed a wish to follow her to the afterlife. Ironically, his own death came less than a year later, when he was critically injured in a second railway accident. He died at his home, Irona, Carlisle Street, Balaclava, Victoria, on 11 May 1887, from complications following surgery to amputate his legs, and was buried on the 13th in the St Kilda cemetery, Victoria. 


@@@@@


doc= 50277


Cudworth, Cyril Leonard Elwell (1908-1977), music librarian and musicologist, was born on 30 October 1908 at 115 Sedgwick Street, Cambridge, the son of David Charles Cudworth, policeman, and his wife, Alice Caroline Camps. He was one of at least two sons; his given name was Cyril but he was always known as Charles. Educated locally, he did not go on to secondary school, but took a job as an assistant in a Cambridge bookshop, spending his one free afternoon a week copying eighteenth-century symphonies and concertos into keyboard scores in Cambridge libraries or the British Museum reading room. He was encouraged in his musical studies by Edward J. Dent, professor of music at Cambridge, and during the 1930s he had jobs in several university libraries and departments. He became assistant librarian of the music section of the Cambridge University Library in 1943. 
In 1946 Cudworth was appointed librarian of the Pendlebury Library at the university music school in Cambridge, and in 1957 he became curator, a post he held until his retirement in 1973. During these years he built up the international reputation of the library, increasing its collection; he also had an extensive knowledge of the musical holdings of other libraries in Cambridge, especially that of the Fitzwilliam Museum. He contributed the article 'Libraries and collections' to the fifth edition of Grove's 'Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1954). As librarian he helped generations of undergraduates and scholars, and in 1958 he was awarded an honorary MA degree by the University of Cambridge. A founder member of the International Association of Music Libraries in 1953, he was a member of the executive committee of the UK branch until 1970, and helped to organize the international conference held in Cambridge in 1959. 
Cudworth's musicological interests were concentrated mainly on English eighteenth-century music. He wrote many influential articles and he became recognized as an authority on the English symphony and the English keyboard concerto through articles such as 'The English symphonists of the eighteenth century' ('Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association', 1951-2), 'A thematic index of English eighteenth century overtures and symphonies' ('Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association', 1953), and 'The English organ concerto' ('The Score', 1953). He drew attention to various misattributions, most notably in articles in 'Music' and the 'Musical Times' in 1952-3 which established that the trumpet voluntary popularized by Sir Henry Wood was not by Henry Purcell but by Jeremiah Clarke and had been first printed in 1700 as 'The Prince of Denmark's March' in 'A Choice Collection of Ayres for the Harpsichord'. In 'Ye Olde Spuriosity Shoppe' ('Notes', 12, 1954-5) he collected all the misattributions, forgeries, and hoaxes he had discovered, including the mistaken attribution to Pergolesi of a number of instrumental works. Another important article was 'Baroque, rococo, galant, classic' ('Monthly Musical Record', 1953), in which he attempted to define the use of these terms. One of his last publications, in 1972, was a volume on Handel in the series 'Concertgoers' Companions', a short biography with a survey of books, editions, and recordings. He contributed many articles on eighteenth-century British and European composers to the 1970 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and was a contributor to the 'New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians' (1980). 
Cudworth also wrote plays, including 'Mr Bach of London' (1942, mainly written during fire-watching duty during the Second World War), which were performed by local dramatic societies, short stories about life in the fens, poems, and a novel, 'The Silken Chord', about a seventeenth-century musician; all were unpublished. For his close friend Patrick Hadley, professor of music at Cambridge from 1946 to 1952, he wrote the words for the ballads 'The Suffolk Lady' (1948) and 'The Gate Hangs High' (1960), and the librettos for the cantatas 'Fen and Flood' (1955, following the severe flooding of the fens and the Netherlands in January 1953), 'Connemara' (1958), and 'Cantata for Lent' (1962). He broadcast often, and was a frequent contributor to the Saturday morning BBC radio programme 'Record Review'. He was also interested in local history and architecture, and wrote and broadcast on Dutch influence in East Anglia, his articles including 'The Dutch influence in East Anglia' ('Proceedings of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society', 37, 1935-6 and 'Dutch gables in East Anglia' ('Architectural Review', 85, 1939). Charles Cudworth died on 26 December 1977 in the Chesterton Hospital, Cambridge. He left a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 50282


Tanner, Frederick Arthur (1904-1988), etcher and educationist, was born on 17 April 1904 at 5 Ryde Road, Knowle, Bristol, the third son of six children of Sydney Albert Tanner, journeyman carpenter, and Emily Annie, formerly Baker, a housemaid from Kington Langley, Wiltshire. On leaving Chippenham grammar school (1915-21) Robin Tanner, as he was known, became a student primary school teacher at Ivy Lane School, Chippenham, and then moved to London to study teaching at Goldsmiths' College (1922-4). Subsequently he taught at Blackheath Road Boys' School, Greenwich, London, attending evening classes in life drawing and etching at Goldsmiths' School of Art under Clive Gardiner and Stanley Anderson. 
Inspired by exhibitions of work by F. L. Griggs and Samuel Palmer, Tanner produced his first etching, 'A Tithe Barn', in 1926, followed by 'Alington in Wiltshire' (1927). Devoting himself to etching full time, he produced prints firmly rooted in the Wiltshire countryside, including 'Martin's Hovel' (1928) and 'Christmas' (1929). That year he returned to teach at Ivy Lane School as the overseas market for English prints began to fail. However, despite being appointed an inspector of schools in 1935, necessitating a move to Leeds (1935-7), this decade saw some of his most enduring images, including 'Harvest Festival' (1930), 'Autumn' (1933), and 'Wren and Primroses' (1935). In 1937 he was made an inspector of schools for Gloucestershire and subsequently for Oxfordshire (1956-64). Owing to these commitments, 'June' (1946) was the last print he was to do until he resumed etching in retirement and produced 'Meadow Stile' (1970), the first of an abundant second flowering. 
Elected an associate of the Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers in 1936, Tanner was made a senior fellow in 1973. He was also elected a member of the Royal West of England Academy in 1952. Of his work he wrote: 'My etched world is also an ideal world -- a world of pastoral beauty that could be ours if we did but desire it passionately enough' (Tanner, 'Etcher's Craft', 18). 
On 4 April 1931 Tanner married his childhood sweetheart Heather Muriel Spackman (1903-1993), a teacher, at Corsham church, Wiltshire. She was the second of three daughters of Herbert Spackman and Daisy Goold who owned grocery and drapery stores in Corsham. The Tanners enjoyed a long and happy marriage living in Old Chapel Field, the characterful home they built and made together in Kington Langley, Wiltshire. Designed in the style of Voysey, the house was largely furnished with pieces by many of the best contemporary craftspeople and surrounded by a burgeoning garden. The couple were childless but in 1938 they gave asylum to Dietrich Anselm Hanff (1920-1992), a Jewish boy fleeing Nazi Germany; he lived with them for the rest of his life. 
Robin and Heather shared many interests and were always generous hosts to their numerous friends. Both were committed Quakers and pacifists and staunch supporters of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Their love and understanding of the English countryside, its customs and traditions, is reflected in their joint publications such as 'Wiltshire Village' (1939), 'A Country Alphabet' (1984), and 'A Country Book of Days' (1986). 'Woodland Plants' (1981) reveals both the depth of their botanical knowledge and their strong preoccupation with ecology and conservation. Another joint concern was to establish the Crafts Study Centre in 1970, and, together with friends and colleagues, they succeeded in creating a unique collection and archive of leading British craftspeople of the twentieth century. It first opened to the public within the Holburne of Menstrie Museum, Bath, in 1977 and subsequently moved to the Surrey Institute of Art and Design, University College, Farnham, in 2000. In 1987 Robin Tanner's autobiography was published. The following year he died at Old Chapel Field, on 19 May 1988, and was cremated five days later at Haycombe cemetery and crematorium, Bath. Sets of his etchings may be seen at the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50285


Henn, Thomas Rice (1901-1974), literary scholar and writer, was born on 10 November 1901 at the family home, Paradise, Ennis, co. Clare, Ireland, the fifth and youngest child of Francis Blackburne Henn (1845-1915), barrister, and resident magistrate at Bellina and later at Sligo, and his wife, Helen (1857-1936), daughter of Colonel Gore, master of foxhounds, of Woodlawn, co. Clare. He was named after his grandfather Thomas Rice Henn (1849-1880), a lieutenant of the Royal Engineers. Henn had an absorbing boyhood: a member of an old Anglo-Irish family, which had lived in the district since the seventeenth century, he was much occupied with field sports. Coached by his father, he was an excellent shot by the age of eight. None of this was done solely for sport, but also to provide food: everything he or his father brought down was either used by the household or given away. He enjoyed shooting throughout his life, but later became a noted angler. One of his lifelong interests, fly-tying, arose from this; he wrote a manual, 'Practical Fly-Tying' (1950), which emphasised the aesthetic appeal of the craft. Among other sports, rowing and sailing especially claimed his interest. 
Much of Henn's youth was overshadowed by the 'troubles', which originated long before the Easter rising of 1916. Yet he bore no enmity towards his republican neighbours, and recalled that as a boy he went snipe-shooting with one who was a known murderer. This did not exempt the Henn family from unwelcome attentions and death threats, and there were also rick- and stack-burnings, and the destruction of trees and plantations, and of Anglo-Irish buildings. Henn, aged fourteen at the time of the rising, remembered a potentially ugly incident from his boyhood. An execution squad arrived early one morning, having heard that he possessed a bomb. The 'bomb' turned out to be the sound-box of a gramophone in a box. When he played part of a record with it, all ended happily, with the republicans entertained to breakfast, followed by a snapshot by Henn of the firing party with rifles at the ready. Indeed the Irish countryside was menacing. There were seventeen raids on Paradise, by republicans and the British, both of whom looted anything that took their fancy. To all of this, however, Henn endeavoured to maintain a tolerant attitude. Well-read in Irish history, he was fully aware of the deep divisions of Irish life. 
Francis Henn died on 10 November 1915 (Henn's fourteenth birthday), leaving his wife and family almost penniless: none of his tenants had paid rent for years, and his pension terminated with his death. Consequently Helen Henn was unable to support her son in his ambition to follow the same career as his father at the Irish bar. He was, however, fortunate enough to win at his Fermoy preparatory school a mathematical scholarship for Aldenham School, Hertfordshire, where his sporting proficiency led him in time to the school captaincy. He worked well in class, and in due course obtained a scholarship to read modern languages at St Catharine's College, Cambridge. In itself this was insufficient to support him, so Aldenham added an exhibition for three years. There still remained a formidable shortfall, but the bishop of Burnley, Henn's uncle, made up most of this, and he was able to become an undergraduate in 1919. 
Among Cambridge dons who strongly influenced Henn was Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch ('Q'). Even greater was the influence of E. M. W. Tillyard, lecturer in English from 1926 to 1950, and later master of Jesus College, who was Henn's supervisor and director of studies for his first two years, and eventually became a close friend. Cambridge had many first-class humanistic dons in the 1920s and 1930s, among whom were the medievalist G. G. Coulton, the literary historian Sir Herbert Grierson, the author and scholar F. L. Lucas, the eccentric Mansfield Forbes, creator of Finella, an art deco house in Queen's Road, and S. C. Roberts, Johnsonian, Shakespearian, and wit. It was a rich background, and Henn made the most of it, accumulating much scholarly benefit and friendship. He also made good use of the sport provided at Cambridge, above all becoming an enthusiastic oarsman during his undergraduate years. In rowing he enjoyed and appreciated above all the intermittently attainable perfection of rhythm. 
Henn left Cambridge in 1923, after one extra term, having in 1922 obtained a first in modern languages, and various prizes. After some disappointments he accepted a job as an assistant in the Burmah Oil Company at Calcutta. Apart from some rowing and shooting, and despite becoming fluent in Urdu and learning much about big business, he was bored and unhappy, suffered intermittent attacks of dengue and malaria, and lost weight. Also the company rules forbade marriage until after three years of service. Thus, when he was given an opportunity to return home, he accepted immediately, not least because during his last months in Cambridge he had met his future wife, (Mary) Enid Roberts ('b'. 1900/01), daughter of Edward Augustus Roberts MD of London, who was at Newnham College, reading modern languages, literature, and history. They married on 25 September 1926, some seventeen months after his return. 
Having come back to St Catharine's in April 1925, Henn at once began to teach and examine, and to coach oarsmen. He also became director of studies for several other colleges. On Monday evenings his attic rooms at St Catharine's became a centre where his pupils and others met for discussion, argument, coffee, and tobacco. These gatherings became so popular that it became necessary to restrict them to members of colleges where Henn had an official position. In 1926 he became a fellow of St Catharine's, was prelector in 1927-35, tutor in 1934, and senior tutor in 1946-56. Former undergraduates claimed that Henn never taught in a conventional manner, but used their enthusiasm to guide them along suitable academic paths, while quoting freely from his capacious memory line after line of pertinent poetry and prose. Above all he encouraged his pupils to think creatively, and not to allow mere facts to dominate their thought. At times brusque and formidable, he invariably returned quickly to half-shy calm. 
In 1936 Henn visited the south of France to recuperate from surgery for the removal of a fibroma, caused by an earlier appendectomy. Here the sight of peasant children driving the herds and flocks to the hills to graze, and to rest later beside the waters, gave him the feeling that for the first time he was seeing the true background of pastoral poetry. Henn's output as a poet was never extensive, but from this time it began to mature. 
During the 1930s Henn suffered from outbreaks of almost suicidal depression. He was helped through these by the noted psychiatrist Leonard Foster Browne. In one of his early consultations he broke down, weeping uncontrollably. He had never come to terms with his father's death, the ensuing poverty at Paradise, the rebellion, and his own unsuccessful attempts to do his duty to his mother and to the family estate. All this had preyed on his mind for nine years, finally reducing him to neurosis. With Browne's guidance, and by reading widely in the most important works in psychiatry and psychology, especially Jung's, he recovered. These experiences, disturbing though they were, enabled him to identify and help and advise undergraduates similarly afflicted. 
In 1939, at the outbreak of war, Henn continued with his lectures, but felt dissatisfied with doing nothing (as he thought) towards the prosecution of the war, and tried, at first unsuccessfully, to join the armed forces. His call finally came at the time of Dunkirk, when the War Office commissioned him as a subaltern in the intelligence corps. After several short postings, he was sent to southern command, which provided him with a room (he was then its only intelligence officer who knew German) at Wilton House, near Salisbury. He was instructed to learn and note all he could about the German army. It was thought that a German invasion was imminent, probably not later than September or October 1940, and the Henns decided that they ought to take advantage of an offer made by Yale University to take in children of Oxford and Cambridge dons, and to assume responsibility for them for the duration of the war, and for their education if their fathers were killed. So Enid and their two children, Rosalind ('b'. 1927) and Desmond (1929-1964) were shipped off to America, Henn remaining to perform his military duties. Enid later returned to join the WAAF; like her husband, she was fluent in German, and was sent to Bletchley Park, where she later took charge of intelligence concerning German night-fighters. 
After various postings Henn was sent in August 1944 on a mission to Italy, where he was appointed deputy assistant chief of staff at allied forces headquarters. He was later promoted to brigadier, working under Lieutenant-General Sir Brian Robertson and General Sir John Harding: as such he had to deal with refugees and displaced persons, and to investigate Nazi atrocities. In some of his activities he found use for his classical knowledge, as when he sought to ease the way for a Yugoslav prelate to visit the pope, by writing a note in Latin to the Holy See. With the ending of hostilities things became more arduous: he had to supervise distribution of food and other supplies, to investigate partisans paying off old scores, and to deal with the lines of refugees, and with Nazi loot found in caves. Amid such mounting problems he was not sorry when in August 1945 he left Italy, and after demobilization was able to return to St Catharine's as senior tutor. He had been twice mentioned in dispatches, and was appointed CBE and the US Legion of Merit. 
At St Catharine's, Henn worked with characteristic application, modernizing his section of the college administration and expanding the annual undergraduate intake. He was also appointed to the faculty board of English, later becoming its chairman. Soon after his return to Cambridge he began to study the life and work of W. B. Yeats, at that time neglected and even denigrated by Dublin society. Spurred by this, Henn decided to take action to reverse the trend. He was probably the only man in England who knew intimately the Yeats country in Sligo and Clare, and as a beginning made a point in 1948 of revisiting Sligo, which he had not seen since 1913. At the same time he visited Yeats's widow in Dublin. He found Sligo little changed, but was sad to find Paradise neglected, almost in ruins; even the soil was being ruined by the invasion of the sea through a breached sea wall, leaving everywhere dead trees and grey mud. Much encouraged by his former supervisor, Tillyard, Henn wrote his magisterial book on Yeats's work, 'The Lonely Tower' (1950; rev. edn, 1965), which contributed more than any other single study to the revival of Yeats's reputation. 
A Yeats Society had been founded in Sligo, out of which grew the Yeats International Summer School, which met for two weeks each August. Henn became its director until his retirement in 1969; even after that he occasionally lectured. Scholars from all over the world travelled there to lecture and take seminars, and there was large student attendance, indicating the growing international interest in Yeats, an interest largely attributable to Henn's indefatigable scholarship and enthusiasm. 
On 29 December 1964 Henn's only son committed suicide. In many ways a brilliant young man, Desmond nevertheless found difficulty in having meaningful relationships with others. He was homosexual and Tom detested homosexuality. If he suspected it in any student he would pass him over without comment to an assistant supervisor. The discovery that his son was so inclined must have been traumatic. Soon another blow fell: the destruction by fire of Paradise on 6 October 1970. The official explanation of the cause of the fire was a fault in the central-heating system installed by its new German owner, but suspicions remain that it was the work of republicans. Whatever its cause, the fire marked the end of a family era as surely as had the death of Desmond. 
Henn retired from his Cambridge appointments in 1969, when he became an emeritus fellow of St Catharine's. He had been president (deputy head of house) of St Catharine's in 1959-62, and university reader in Anglo-Irish literature in 1968-69, and had undertaken much work elsewhere, including a brief visiting professorship at Trinity College, Dublin. His wide-ranging scholarship is reflected in his books, especially, as author, 'The Lonely Tower', 'The Harvest of Tragedy' (1956), 'The Bible as Literature' (1970), 'Last Essays' (1963), and, as editor, 'The Plays and Poems of J. M. Synge' (1963). He had the gift of communicating enthusiasm to his readers, although his writing was not without imperfections: he sometimes quoted other writers inaccurately, and sometimes used tabulations and diagrams instead of relying on his excellent prose, which exemplified the best English usage. He tried especially to persuade scientific writers to express themselves in good, clear, jargon-free prose. For such writers he wrote 'The Apple and the Spectroscope' (1951), and 'Science in Writing' (1960). 
Apart from quoting it here and there in his other writings, and despite its undoubted quality, Henn published little poetry. There are two small collections: 'Shooting a Bat' (1962), and 'Philoctetes and other Poems', published posthumously as a section in his autobiography, 'Five Arches' (1980). Despite its sometimes pessimistic note, Henn's poetry confirms his deep religious mysticism, which is present even in his threnody on the death of Desmond: '29 December 1964'. 
Henn was a heavily built yet athletic man, but in his later years had poor health. An arthritic hip, legacy of a rough landing in an aircraft during the war, limited his mobility. Some time before he died he suffered a major stroke, during which his heart stopped. After regaining partial health, he expressed disappointment that in his experience there was only oblivion, nothing of what he called 'the grandeur of death'. He died at 12 Barrow Road, Cambridge, from coronary thrombosis on 10 December 1974, and his funeral was held on the 16th at St Mark's Church, Barton Road, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 50286


Lewis, Samuel (1838-1901), moneylender and philanthropist, was born on 14 May 1838 at 1 Lower Hurst Street, Birmingham, the elder of the two children of Frederick Lewis ('b'. 'c'.1801), a dealer, and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1805-1872). They lived in impoverished slum conditions, and in 1841 his father was imprisoned for debt. On this, and on many other occasions, the family were rescued by benefits provided by the Birmingham Hebrew Philanthropic Society. 
By 1851 Lewis's father had left his mother; Sam, as he was commonly known, became, at the age of thirteen, her sole support. Promising to send her $1 a week, he travelled around the Birmingham area as a pedlar, with a tray round his neck and a stock of cheap jewellery and steel pen nibs. After early struggles, he was well established as a travelling jeweller by 1867. In that year, on 14 August, he married Ada Davis (1844-1906) of Dublin, the third daughter (of ten children) of an Orthodox Jewish middle-class family, and the couple went to London, where Lewis hoped to advance his career as a jeweller. The marriage, which endured until Lewis's death, was happy but childless. 
In 1869 Lewis changed his occupation: taking premises at 17 Cork Street, Mayfair, he became a moneylender. It was a propitious time to start, as the usury laws had been repealed in 1854 and were not restored until 1900. During the intervening years moneylenders had an almost free rein. Lewis sought the landed aristocracy as his clientele. The agricultural recession in the last quarter of the nineteenth century led to diminishing incomes from land, and the increasing cost of hunting, shooting, fishing, and servants, and particularly of the London season, combined to create a high demand for loans. 
Lewis was intelligent, witty, and shrewd, a humorous raconteur, and, though short of stature, an imposing and engaging personality. He was a good judge of character, his mind having been well honed from his days on the road. He kept himself abreast of the latest political and social gossip, was a well-known figure in racing circles, and thoroughly researched the background of his potential clients. When they entered his office he knew almost as much about them and their finances as they did themselves, and was able accurately to gauge the risk of a loan. 
From granting unsecured loans to prodigal sons at high rates of interest, Lewis rapidly progressed to entering into large transactions, on security, at rates competitive with the banks and insurance companies. With the unexpected backing of the Bank of England, he soon became recognized as the leading moneylender to the aristocracy of England. He took speedy decisions, was prepared to make higher advances on the security offered than banks would, was discreet, and his word was his bond. His terms were clearly stated, and he gained the respect, and even the friendship, of his clients, most of whom would have been astonished had they known his origins. He was fair with defaulters. 'I have never', he claimed, 'foreclosed upon an honest man' (R. D. Blumenfeld, 'R. D. B.'s Diary 1887-1914', 1930). But those able to pay, who sought to avoid payment, were pursued through the courts, and Lewis was involved in several colourful cases, both civil and criminal. 
Lewis's clients included the eighth duke of Beaufort; several members of the exclusive Jockey Club; the second Viscount Esher, a power behind the throne and government and adviser to royalty and prime ministers, but none the less a frequent visitor to Cork Street; the fifth earl of Lonsdale, one of England's wealthiest men, but often short of cash; the fourth marquess of Ailesbury, whose financial depredations almost brought his family to ruins; and England's premier earl, the twentieth earl of Shrewsbury, who found it cheaper to borrow $367,000 from Lewis than from banks and insurance companies. 
Moneylenders have rarely been popular; in the 1880s and 1890s they were increasingly reviled and attacked -- in the courts, in the press, and in a select committee of the House of Commons which sat in 1897. As England's best-known moneylender, Lewis was a prime target. He attracted the relentless enmity -- not reciprocated by him -- of Sir George Lewis (1833-1911), England's foremost society solicitor, who believed that borrowing from moneylenders at high interest led to crime and disgrace, and who campaigned for the revival of the usury laws. He harried Sam Lewis relentlessly, but unsuccessfully, throughout the whole of the latter's career. In a letter to 'The Times' of 22 March 1898 he branded him 'a curse to society and a danger to the community', and invited a writ for libel, an invitation Lewis declined. Sam Lewis not only survived, unscathed, all the attacks upon him, but, if anything, emerged with his reputation enhanced. 
Society imposed boundaries beyond which a Jewish moneylender could not infiltrate, but, despite Sir George's efforts, Sam and Ada Lewis, with homes in Grosvenor Square, by Boulter's Lock in Maidenhead, and on the front at Brighton, mixed freely with their many high-placed friends, entertained generously, and were part of the daily parade in Hyde Park. 
Within a few months of his retirement, Sam Lewis died, on 13 January 1901 at 23 Grosvenor Square. He was buried on 16 January 1901 at Golders Green Jewish cemetery. He left an estate of $2.6 million. Ada Lewis (who in 1904 married as her second husband an army officer more than thirty years her junior) left an estate of $1.1 million at her death in 1906. Between them, the Lewises bequeathed more than $3.4 million to fifty-one charities, mainly for cheap housing for the working classes, to voluntary hospitals in London, Brighton, and Maidenhead, and to trust funds established for the poor of Dublin and of the City of London. Asked what he would choose as a motto, Lewis, a latter-day Robin Hood, replied, 'I lend to the Lords; I give to the poor' ('Daily Telegraph', 14 Jan 1901). 


@@@@@


doc= 50289


Abel, Robert (1857-1936), cricketer, was born at 18 Commercial Street, Rotherhithe, London, on 30 November 1857, the son of Thomas Abel ('b'. 'c'.1815), a lamplighter, and his wife, Elizabeth Highland ('b'. 1816). After attending school in Southwark and playing cricket for Southwark Park, he began his illustrious career as a professional cricketer at the Oval. He played 514 matches for Surrey, but it was a slow beginning. He was twenty-three before making his debut in 1881, and it was 1886 before he was firmly established in the Surrey side. Thereafter he became one of England's most productive batsmen. An opening bat of phlegmatic certainty, his compact efficiency was such that in eight successive summers (1895-1902) he exceeded 2000 runs, including the then first-class record of 3309 in 1901. This dauntless consistency eventually earned him the grand total of 33,124 first-class runs, at an average of 35.46 and with seventy-four centuries. His best innings was 357 not out, for Surrey against Somerset at the Oval in 1899, at that time the second highest score in county championship cricket. In the same year he shared a stand of 447 with Tom Hayward for Surrey against Yorkshire at the Oval, which stood as a world fourth-wicket record until 1943-4. Rightly regarded as a most adept slip fielder, he took no fewer than 586 catches. 
Abel played thirteen times for England between 1888 and 1902, and, along with four other professionals, he was involved in the abortive claim for extra money for the Oval test of 1896. However, in an era of mercurial amateur 'cracks', he never became an international star. Rather was it his pleasant fate to be the most popular Surrey 'pro' when that county played successfully to crowded houses. His sobriquets -- the 'Cock Sparrow', the 'Mighty Atom', the 'Little 'Un', and, indisputably the most quoted, the 'Guv'nor' -- bear testimony to that renown. Bobby Abel was the classic case of the little man triumphing over larger foes and thereby deserving the plaudits of the ordinary onlooker. He waddled with duck-like gait to open the innings, a curiously gnomic figure who could not have been more unlike, in stature and style, the magnificent ones of that golden age. Less than 5 feet 8 inches in height, 'he has', wrote C. B. Fry, 'a curious manner of standing at the wicket (wrapping, as it were, his left leg round the front of his right)' (Lemmon, 76-7), from which strange position he then carefully demonstrated what H. S. Altham called 'that inexhaustible talent for run-making' (Altham, 174). It seems somehow fitting that, down the road from the Oval in 1889, when Bobby Abel was reaching his peak, Charlie Chaplin, personification of the sorely tried little fellow and masterly exponent of the ten-to-three shuffle, was born. 
An eye infection which, in 1893, had briefly threatened to end Abel's career, recurred in the early 1900s, and, although glasses helped a little, he had to give up the game. He played his last first-class match in 1904, and, like many professional cricketers, became involved in sports shops and in coaching. Married to Sarah Reffell (1861-1923) at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 31 January 1881, Abel was as prodigious in domestic as in professional life, fathering no fewer than eleven children. Two, Thomas Ernest and William John, played first-class cricket. Abel died at his home, 43 Handforth Road, Stockwell, London, on 10 December 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 50290


Anstey, Rhoda (1865-1936), promoter of women's physical education, was born at Jurishayes Farm near Tiverton, Devon, on 15 April 1865, the seventh of nine children and second daughter of John Walters Anstey, a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Susanna Elizabeth, 'nee' Manley. She was a natural countrywoman with a great love of the county of her birth; in 1891 she was managing the dairy on the family farm. Little else is known of her early life before she attended Madame Bergman Osterberg's Hampstead Physical Training College, where she was a student from 1893 to 1895. The curriculum at Hampstead was based on Ling's Swedish system of gymnastics. 'The fundamental principle of Ling's System is the harmonious development of mind and body, the mind to be dominant, the body obedient', Anstey wrote in 1912 (Webb, 'Women's physical education', 129 n. 7). She was a keen and sensitive student, with an intense interest in the subject, rising early to practise cricket on Hampstead Heath before breakfast. During her training she saw that the development of professional teaching careers opened great possibilities for the future of physical education, especially for women and girls. 
Anstey's initial interest was in remedial gymnastics and in 1895 she opened a health centre, the Hygienic Home for Ladies, at New Cross Farm, South Petherton. With $100 as her capital, she moved her centre in 1897 to The Leasowes, Halesowen, Worcestershire, the former home of the poet William Shenstone. Healing came through her fingers, which aroused the antagonism of the local medical profession, among whom she was known as the Heretic. A vegetarian and keen theosophist with an interest in astrology, she found great value in meditation. Her attire was unconventional: a supporter of dress reform, she went corsetless, and wore a djibbah and sandals. She had an upright, dignified carriage and walked with a light, swift, decisive step -- almost a run. 
Anstey soon realized that with educational as well as remedial training her students would be better qualified to take up teaching posts. She therefore founded in the premises of her clinic at Halesowen, in 1897, the Anstey Physical Training College, a private institution which was, after Hampstead, the second specialist college of physical training for women students who wanted to qualify as teachers of physical education in Great Britain. A chance meeting at the college in 1898 led to the formation of the Ling Association, whose ideas she actively promoted. 
The first students at the Anstey Physical Training College assisted with the treatments for patients as well as qualifying for the new profession of trained gymnastics teachers. They were admitted between the ages of eighteen and twenty-eight years and had to hold either a certificate from a recognized examining board or produce other evidence of a good general education. Between 1897 and 1919 they followed a two-year course covering practical and theoretical work, teaching practice, and clinics. Students visited Birmingham University for anatomy and dissections, travelling the six miles from Halesowen by pony and open wagonette. From 1919 the course was lengthened to three years with extended teaching practices and medical gymnastics. Anstey, as a physical culturalist, aimed to 'send out women trained in mind and character as well as in body, to spread a knowledge of physiology and the laws of health; to work in schools for the advancement of physical education and for the prevention of deformity and imperfect bodily development, which often arises out of the conditions of school life, as well as to cure ailments and deformities where they exist.(1904; Crunden, 14)' In 1907 Anstey purchased Yew Tree House, Chester Road, Erdington, and moved the college there, so that students at the college would have easier access to schools, particularly girls' secondary schools, for teaching practice. Gradually she extended the professional and residential accommodation. Anstey was committed to service to the community and from the earliest days students took classes with factory girls' teams and clubs in Birmingham. Gymnastics and dance displays were regular features for both the students and the girls' clubs. Her belief in mottoes took physical form around the college. Displayed on the gates was the college motto, 'Vis atque gratia harmoniaque' ('Strength, grace, and harmony'). The gymnasium and common room walls were adorned with sayings such as 'In quietness and confidence shall be your strength', 'strength together with grace and harmony', 'God was goodness and goodness was God', and 'The body is the instrument of the mind and the habitation of the spirit'. 
Anstey was a strong supporter of the women's suffrage movement, hosting campaign meetings at her college and providing special lectures for the students. She was one of the original members of the Gymnastic Teachers' Suffrage Society, formed in January 1909. The initial objective of the society was 'to ascertain the numerical strength of suffragists in the profession and to protect the profession from restrictive legislation' (cited in Webb, 'Women's physical education', 306). She led her staff and students in the great suffrage demonstrations in London in 1910 and 1911 where they marched strictly in time and step, wearing short blue skirts, college blouses, and badges, under the Gymnastic Teachers' banner, and carried the Swedish colours. 
In 1915 Anstey purchased an additional plot of land at the rear of the college which was developed for games practices. She also had Lavender Cottage built where she lived with the three girls whom she informally adopted in 1919, when they were aged six, four, and two respectively. They were formally adopted on 13 May 1927. After being taken seriously ill in 1918, she went into semi-retirement and lived for a time in Cheltenham, but resumed her involvement with the college in 1920 as joint principal, her colleague Ida Bridgman taking day-to-day control until they both retired in 1927. 
In 1929 Anstey was seriously ill with pneumonia. She died of heart failure and thyrotoxicosis on 27 February 1936 at the Duchess Nursing Home, 2 Beaumont Street, Marylebone, London, after an operation from which she never recovered consciousness. She was buried at Cheltenham on 2 March. A visionary, with an independent and original turn of mind, she held a deep religious conviction and was utterly fearless in carrying out any project she believed in, undeterred by adverse opinion or circumstance. 


@@@@@


doc= 50291


Beauclerk, Lord Frederick de Vere (1773-1850), cricketer, was born on 8 May 1773 in the parish of St George, Hanover Square, London. He was the fourth child and youngest son of the seven children of Aubrey Beauclerk, fifth duke of St Albans (1740-1802), and Lady Catherine Ponsonby (1749-1789), daughter of William Ponsonby, second earl of Bessborough (1704-1793), and he was a direct descendant of Charles II and Nell Gwyn. After being privately tutored, in 1790 he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he obtained his MA in 1792 and his DD in 1824. He was ordained deacon in 1795 and priest in 1797, and he was vicar of Kimpton, Hertfordshire, from 1797 to 1827 and then vicar of both Redbourn, Hertfordshire, and of St Michael's, St Albans from 1827 to 1850. Like many youngest sons, though, he entered the church reluctantly, and often forsook his clerical duties in favour of sport: 'he ne'er preaches once a twelvemonth' was one biting judgement. He was married on 3 July 1813 to Charlotte (died 1866), the third daughter of Charles Dillon, twelfth Viscount Dillon, and of Henrietta Maria, only daughter of the first Baron Mulgrave. The couple had two sons and two daughters. Lord Frederick also later became lord of the manor of Winchfield, Hampshire, which he inherited from his brother, Lord Amelius Beauclerk, in 1846. 
Lord Frederick devoted much of his life to cricket, which was then becoming fashionable and achieving metropolitan recognition, partly because it served the Regency taste, avidly shared by Lord Frederick, for excessive gambling. He claimed to earn 600 guineas a year in this way, roughly the same as from his two clerical livings. As a player he was a quick, bustling figure, usually clad in striped trousers, scarlet sash and white beaver hat, 5 feet 9 inches tall and weighing 12 stone. He was described as a very fast runner, an excellent slip fielder, and a 'wonderfully accurate' underarm bowler; as a batsman he was slow to begin but, once set, capable of attacking offside hitting. He succeeded Silver Billy Beldham as England's finest batsman, and was for several years the most effective 'amateur' single-wicket player in the land. Lord Frederick's career stretched over thirty-five years. In the ninety-nine important matches in which he played, he scored 4555 runs (averaging 27), including four centuries, and took 251 wickets -- exceptional figures for the time. In all forms of cricket, his highest score was 170 for Homerton against Montpelier in 1806. 
Lord Frederick was the protege of Thomas Lord's patron, the earl of Winchilsea, and took part in the first recorded match on the present Lord's ground in 1814; he often played for the Gentlemen against the Players between 1806 and 1824. He became a frequent visitor to the ground (accompanied by his dog), and was president of the MCC in 1826. He was not popular, however, being widely regarded into his disgruntled old age as the autocratic arbiter of the game. He had a petulant and unbridled temper, and stories about his fierce disposition abound: David Dawson, an infamous horse poisoner, once refused him entry to his coach because of his 'fluent and expressive language'. Lord Frederick died at his London home, 68 Grosvenor Street, on 22 April 1850, just before his seventy-seventh birthday, and was buried at Winchfield Manor, his country residence. He left properties at Winchfield and Odiham to his son Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 50292


Hillyard, Blanche (1863-1946), tennis player, was born on 3 November 1863 at Stanhope Lodge, Greenford, Middlesex, the daughter of Charles Bentley Bingley, 'gentleman', formerly proprietor of a tailoring business in Great Marlborough Street, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Harrison. In Greenford, on 13 July 1887, she married Commander George Whiteside Hillyard RN (1864-1943), with whom she had a son, Jack, and a daughter, Marjorie. 
Blanche Hillyard's remarkable career in competitive tennis spanned three decades. In 1884, aged twenty, as Blanche Bingley, she burst upon the tennis scene when she was among the field of thirteen in the first ladies' singles championship at Wimbledon. After winning two matches, she lost to the eventual champion, Maud Watson, in the semi-final. In 1912, aged forty-eight, after twenty-eight years of first-class tennis playing and six singles titles, she was again a semi-finalist at Wimbledon but lost to Edith Larcombe, who went on to win the title. Her twenty-fourth and last Wimbledon followed the next year, when she went out early on to Ethel Hannam (Little and Tingay, 9). She first won the Wimbledon championship in 1886, when she defeated Maud Watson, who had repeated as champion in 1885. She won again in 1889 against Helene Rice, in 1894 against Lucy Austin, and in 1897, 1899, and 1900 against Charlotte Cooper. Her only superior in the early days was Lottie Dod, five-time champion and the greatest sportswoman of the age. Between 1885 and 1901, except on the four occasions when she did not compete, she was either Wimbledon champion or runner-up. The fourteen-year span between her first and last Wimbledon titles is the longest in history, while her last title at the age of thirty-six distinguished her as the second oldest women's singles champion up to 1996. 
In addition to her Wimbledon successes, Hillyard won an amazing number of other singles, doubles, and mixed doubles championships, including the Irish, Welsh, north of England, south of England (eleven times between 1885 and 1905), London, Cheltenham, Middlesex, Buxton, Exmouth, English covered court, 'All England' doubles, mixed doubles, and married couples, Wimbledon non-championship doubles, German, south of France, and Monte Carlo titles. A tireless tennis enthusiast, she continued to play in public long after her skills had waned, rather than allowing protection of her reputation to interfere with a pastime that gave her immense pleasure. 
Blanche Hillyard was the first woman player whose standard of performance could be described as formidable. Her style was not particularly varied and like most of her contemporaries, she played a baseline rather than a volleying game; her backhand was defensive and relatively weak, and her overhand serve, although an unusual stroke for women in her day, was not especially strong. What gave her play distinction was a remarkable natural forehand that had topspin and was much more powerful and accurate than those of her contemporaries, her follow-through going so far that the impact of her right hand and wrist badly bruised the upper part of her left arm and shoulder (Hillyard, 131). Excellent footwork and great agility and speed, along with clever tactics, good judgement, and intense concentration were also major assets, as were her fierce competitiveness, tremendous determination, dogged persistence, and unfailing self-control. Hillyard never knew when she was beaten or what it was to be too tired to play on. By her own description, her most memorable match was the 1889 Wimbledon final against Helene Rice. Rice won the first set 6 games to 4 and led in the second set 5 games to 3 and 40-15 in the ninth game, before Hillyard staged an extraordinary rally to take the set 8 games to 6 and went on to win a well-fought third set 6 to 4 (Chambers, 113-15). 
Unlike many sportswomen, Hillyard did not give up serious competition with marriage and motherhood, although she never allowed her love of tennis to interfere with domestic duties and her championship record is marked by breaks that coincided with periods of family building. To a large extent her social life revolved around tennis. Her courtship with George Hillyard was frequently conducted on the tennis court, and both played competitive tennis on their honeymoon. Commander Hillyard, a fine cricketer and tennis player (especially at doubles), also competed at Wimbledon, although with less success than his wife. More than that, he was one of the founders of the Lawn Tennis Association (1888), and from 1907 to 1924, as secretary of the All England Lawn Tennis Club, he was a great power in the tennis world. The Hillyards' estate at Thorpe Satchville, near Melton Mowbray in Leicestershire, included a private golf course and tennis court and exuded an uninhibited sporting atmosphere. The Hillyards adored dogs and allowed their pack of pocket beagles and other terriers to wander in and out of the house at will. Hunting and tennis parties, including most of the leading tennis players of the day, were common. Indeed, according to Dame Mabel Brookes, the wife of Norman Brookes, the first Australian to win Wimbledon, Thorpe Satchville was 'an institution rather than a house' (Brookes, 72). 
Blanche Hillyard was a tall, plain, athletic-looking woman with a bold, clear signature that reflected her definite, businesslike manner on and off the court. A sports all-rounder who was an excellent horse- and huntswoman (she hunted with the Quorn for thirty years) as well as tennis player, she was known for her exceptional sportsmanship and pleasantness to opponents weak and strong: the frowns that characterized her tennis play resulted from concentration rather than annoyance. She was known also for a minor sartorial eccentricity in that she always played in soft white leather gloves, evidently to assure a firm grip on the racket. 
As one of the pre-eminent woman tennis players of her age, Hillyard was asked to contribute articles on tennis to various journals and books, including H. W. W. Wilberforce's 'Lawn Tennis' (1890) and Lady Greville's edition of 'The Gentlewoman's Book of Sports' (1892). These reveal that, although far from advocating 'women's rights', she believed in dress reform in sport and that participation in sport advanced the position of women. 'In tennis', she wrote, 'our sex can compete with a certain amount of equality with the 'lords of creation'', for playing 'promotes... that coolness of head and judgment which we are so often taunted with lacking' (Mrs G. Hillyard, 'Lawn tennis', 'Young Woman', 2, 1893-4, 370). 
Blanche Hillyard's full life and 'direct approach kept her bravely active, until at a great age and crippled with arthritis, she cried 'enough' and passed on' (Brookes, 73) at her home, Greenford, Mare Hill, Pulborough, Sussex, on 6 August 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 50293


Clarke, William (1798-1856), cricketer, was born on 24 December 1798 at Bunker's Hill, Nottingham, the son of William Clarke, a bricklayer. Clarke too became a bricklayer, but by the 1830s he had become landlord of The Bell inn, Nottingham. In December 1837, three months after the death of his first wife, Jane, he married Mrs Chapman, who ran the Trent Bridge inn. The following year Clarke opened the Trent Bridge cricket ground, subsequently the home of Nottinghamshire cricket and a notable test match venue. Clarke shocked the public by enclosing the ground, charging a 6died entrance fee, and offering handsome financial rewards to attract the best opposition. In 1845 he wagered $200 to encourage an 'England' side to play a fourteen-man team from Nottinghamshire. 
As a batsman Clarke was never in the front rank, being handicapped by the loss of an eye as the result of an accident while playing fives. However, as an underarm lob bowler he excelled. He was, moreover, a man of foresight and business acumen. He recognized in the late 1840s that cricket's local and fragmented popularity could be enhanced nationally through a professional touring eleven. His greatest contribution came with his creation on 31 August 1846 of the All England eleven. This peripatetic professional team comprised the day's best players and was inundated with requests for fixtures. By the early 1850s it was travelling the country playing more than thirty games each season, usually on unequal terms against teams of eighteen or twenty-two local players bolstered by outside professional bowlers. These games often attracted large, festive, and fashionable crowds. 
In his own time Clarke was usually called 'our general'. Felix (Nicholas Wanostrocht) in his 'The doings of the eleven' described him as 'painstaking' and 'waggish', but to others he appeared autocratic, and this led to the establishment of rival teams. William Caffyn in 'Seventy-one not out' agreed Clarke was 'a bit of a despot' but added he remained 'a great sportsman'. In June 1856 the now stout Clarke took a wicket with the last ball he bowled for the All England eleven. Aged fifty-seven, he had been playing cricket for forty-one seasons. On 25 August 1856, after six weeks in bed, he died of paraplegia at his home, Priory Lodge, Wandsworth Road, London. He was buried in Norwood cemetery. The importance of his role in establishing cricket as a major sport was acknowledged in 1892, when the weekly 'Cricket' described him as a 'missionary' for the game. 


@@@@@


doc= 50294


Gould, Arthur Joseph (1864-1919), rugby player, was born on 10 October 1864 at 4 Bridge Street, Newport, Monmouthshire, the fourth of the twelve children of Joseph Gould (1833-1892), brass-founder, of Oxford, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Richards, of Newport. He was born into an athletic family. Six of the boys played rugby for Newport, three of them for Wales: Robert (Bob) won eleven international caps (1882-7), George Herbert (Bert) won three (1892-3), and Arthur captained both club and country. 
Nicknamed Monkey because of his agility as a boy in climbing trees, Arthur Gould captained the Newport junior side at fourteen, and played his first game for the senior team two years later, on 20 October 1882 against Weston-super-Mare. Having been selected at full-back, he ignored instructions to kick for safety and twice ran through the entire opposition to score. He was elusive and fast, and by 1890 he had scooped $1000 in prize money at athletics' meetings; he was the midland counties Amateur Athletic Association sprint and hurdles champion in 1893. His employment as a public works contractor took him to various parts of the country, and he played rugby for Southampton Trojans, London Welsh, Richmond, Hampshire, and Middlesex, as well as Newport. 
Gould's playing career was interrupted in 1890, when work took him to the West Indies. On his return, appearing regularly now at centre, he became Newport's highest scorer in their invincible season of 1891-2, and between 1893 and 1895 under his captaincy the team lost only four games out of fifty-five. He was also a successful captain at international level, leading Wales to its first triple crown in 1893 by adopting the 'Welsh' formation of four three-quarters. This style of play, pioneered by the Cardiff club, had not been a success in international rugby and Gould was not initially enamoured of it, but he recognized its potential for the kind of attacking game he favoured. Capped twenty-seven times for Wales between 1885 and 1897, Gould was one of the outstanding sportsmen of the late Victorian era. His brilliant all-round play was crucial to Wales's emergence as a force in international rugby, while his striking good looks -- penetrating eyes, dark curly hair, and a lithe 5 foot 11 inch frame -- earned him widespread adulation. Yet his admirers' determination to reward his achievements plunged British rugby into crisis from 1896 to 1898. 
In 1896 a public subscription was opened in Gould's honour, and this received the blessing of the Welsh Rugby Union (WRU) and drew contributions from as far afield as Australia and America. However, since Gould was still playing, the other home unions, contrary to the wishes of their own member clubs and hostile to any notion of rewarding players, broke off fixtures with Wales and demanded that the WRU declare the testimonial illegal. The Welsh union, however, asserted its right to manage its own affairs by participating fully in a gala occasion at the Drill Hall, Newport, on Easter Monday 1897. Here the president of the WRU, Sir J. T. D. Llewelyn, in the presence of 250 guests including civic and national dignitaries, presented Gould with the deeds of the house in which he lived, purchased with money raised by the subscription. The other unions were horrified. Seeking to defuse the situation, in January 1898 Gould announced his retirement and Wales was readmitted to the international fold, although it was not until 1899 that Scotland agreed to resume fixtures. Gould became a referee and a Welsh team selector, and kept his house. 
In 1900 Gould married Lilian Augusta Smith, daughter of Samuel Smith, corn merchant, of Newport, and they had four children: Arthur Jack, Mary, Josephine, and Gwen. After his rugby career came to an end, he worked as a brewery clerk. He died of a haemorrhage on 2 January 1919 at home, Thornbury, 6 Llanthewy Road, Clytha Park, Newport, the house which had once caused such controversy. His funeral took place on 6 January at St John's Baptist Church, Newport, where he was a sidesman. 


@@@@@


doc= 50295


Hornby, Albert Neilson (1847-1925), cricketer, was born on 19 February 1847 at Blackburn, Lancashire, the sixth son of the seven sons and four daughters of William Henry Hornby (1805-1884), a cotton spinner and MP for Blackburn (1857-69), and his wife, Margaret Susannah (died 1898), daughter of Edward Birley of Kirkham, Lancashire. He was educated at Harrow School, at which time the Little Wonder, as he was called, weighed less than 6 stone, 'bat and all'. His wiry and agile physique, and perhaps rather simian features, led to his also being nicknamed Monkey. After a brief encounter with Oxford University in 1865, he joined the prosperous family cotton business. A rich man, he was able to devote his life to cricket, and he completed the family transition from milling folk to country gentry. The Hornbys moved in 1861 to rural Nantwich in Cheshire, where Hornby lived for the rest of his life. In 1876 he married Ada Sarah, the wealthy daughter and eldest surviving child of Herbert Ingram of Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, founder of the 'Illustrated London News'. They had four sons, of whom the eldest, Albert Henry, (1877-1952) played cricket for Lancashire and captained the team from 1908 to 1914. 
Hornby was a dashing, impetuous front-foot batsman, and earned a reputation as the maestro of the short single. He played in 437 first-class matches, including three test matches, making 16,109 first-class runs at an average of 24. In 1881, his finest year, he became the first Lancashire batsman to make 1000 runs (1534, average 40) in a season. He formed a typical amateur-professional, one might even say cavalier-roundhead, opening partnership with the prudent stonewaller Richard Barlow, an association affectionately commemorated in verse by Francis Thompson in his poem 'At Lord's' ('My Hornby and my Barlow long ago'). 
Having captained the MCC at Lord's in 1878, when the Australians famously won, Hornby led England in the famed 'Ashes' test at the Oval in 1882. He captained Lancashire from 1880 to 1893 and in 1897-8, and introduced a more modern concept of team-building, with an Australian-style emphasis on fielding: Hornby himself was an adept cover point and took 313 catches in the course of his career. Under his strict discipline, Lancashire flourished, winning the county championship in 1881, 1882 (jointly), 1889, and 1897. 
Hornby was president of Lancashire from 1894 to 1916 and was unyielding in his autocratic influence, becoming easily the club's most powerful figure. His appearance was austere, with his dark hair closely cropped and severely parted, and with a neatly kept moustache. In character loyal, irascible, and valiant, he once made a perilous citizen's arrest during a Sydney crowd disturbance in 1879. W. G. Grace claimed that Hornby's energetic chases among spectators led to the formal acknowledgement of boundaries, and he certainly grasped the requirements of a modern spectator sport, and attempted to create entertaining and successful teams. 
Hornby also played football for Blackburn Rovers; he was nine times an England rugby union international; he boxed, he shot, and he was an enthusiastic huntsman. As well as having a cricket field beside his stately home, he kept a sprightly stud of hunters. The 'Squire of Lancashire' was injured hunting, and it is thought that the internal injuries he sustained on that occasion eventually contributed to his death. He died after a period of illness, on 17 December 1925, at his home, Parkfield, Wellington Road, Nantwich; he was buried nearby in Acton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 50296


Jackson, Nicholas Lane (1849-1937), sports administrator, was born on 1 November 1849 at 14 Southgate Road, De Beauvoir Town, Middlesex, the son of Nicholas Lane Jackson, a cheesemonger, and his wife, Mary Prior. His family had a long association with the west country. He grew up in London, and was interested in a wide range of sporting activities from an early age. Educated privately, he had intended to join the army, but a change in his family's financial circumstances led to his becoming a journalist instead. He married on 20 January 1869 Mary Ann, the daughter of Frank Williams, licensed victualler; by 1881 they had three sons and a daughter. At various times in the late 1860s and early 1870s he was a member of the London rifle brigade, played cricket for Devon, made a balloon ascent, fished, walked long distances, beagled, ran with the Thames hare and hounds and the London athletic club, and played association football for Upton Park. In addition, like many middle-class sportsmen of the period, he had a strong interest in amateur dramatics. 
As well as competing, Jackson was involved in organizing and administering several different sports. In December 1866 he founded the Mutual Improvement Society in Edmonton, then a rapidly developing north London suburb. In the early 1870s, following his marriage, he lived in Finchley, where he founded an association football club, a cross-country running club, and a boxing club, and revived the local cricket club. In 1879 he was the organizer of the Finchley athletic sports. In the late 1860s and early 1870s, as he later recalled, Saturday afternoons off had yet to become customary -- so permission was sought from the local vicar to play games on Sunday afternoons instead. 
It was through his involvement with association football that Jackson became best known to the sporting public. In 1879 he was elected to the committee of the Football Association (FA), and he served as its assistant honorary secretary in 1881. He founded the London FA in 1882, became a member of the FA council in 1883, and in 1884 served on the FA subcommittee that recommended the removal of the bar on professionalism -- a proposal adopted in 1885. In 1886 he was elected to the FA's international board, which gave him responsibility for the selection of international teams, a role he performed concurrently for the Lawn Tennis Association. He was a respected and influential writer on both sports. 
In 1882, following a run of defeats for England in association football internationals against Scotland, Jackson founded the Corinthian Football Club, with the intention of providing an opportunity for leading amateurs to play together outside international matches. Membership was formally limited to the fifty leading amateurs of the day; but from the beginning the club was also socially exclusive, and members were invariably former public school or university players. After professionalism in the sport was legalized, the Corinthians quickly became the symbolic leaders of the amateur game, and their clashes with leading professional teams were eagerly anticipated by the sporting public. Jackson was the club's honorary secretary for seventeen years. As the Corinthian Casuals (following amalgamation with the Casuals in 1939) they remain, in the early twenty-first century, England's most famous amateur club. 
In addition to the Corinthians, Jackson had long been associated with the organization of 'scratch' teams of amateur players, brought together for exhibition matches, often played against professional sides, with the gate money being given to good causes. Jackson helped to raise considerable sums for the Poplar Hospital, of which Rowland Hill, a rugby football administrator and writer, was also a patron. On one trip with a scratch team composed of Cambridge University players he was nicknamed Pa by the younger generation, and he was widely known as such thereafter. In 1894, by which time Jackson was a vice-president of the FA, the FA committee, in response to allegations of improper payments to amateurs, ruled that such scratch teams could not be formed without prior official permission. Jackson viewed this as unnecessarily restrictive, and resigned from the FA in protest; thereafter he gradually withdrew from involvement with the professional game. 
Instead, Jackson directed his sporting enthusiasm elsewhere, and became involved with a variety of commercial sporting ventures. He had already founded the journals 'Pastime' (in 1883) and the 'Cricket Field' (1892), and in 1893 he became managing director of the Sports Club -- a London club founded by a group of aristocratic sportsmen which included Sir John Astley. Jackson was regarded as a leading authority on many sports, and was visited by Baron Pierre de Coubertin when he visited Britain in 1894 as part of his campaign to revive the Olympic games. Jackson was involved with the design of several golf courses in Britain and France, including the development of Le Touquet as a leisure resort, a scheme which included among its financial supporters de Coubertin and Grand Duke Michael of Russia. Following the success of Le Touquet, Jackson attempted to introduce the concept of the country club to Britain, and chose a site at Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire. Initially the project was successful; Edward VII visited in 1910, and by July 1914 the club had 900 full and 200 day members. But the war intervened, and Jackson's interests were diverted elsewhere: he became assistant director of the food production department. After 1918 the club was left in a precarious financial position, and Jackson eventually sold his interest in 1928. 
Jackson continued his involvement with a variety of sports into his eighties: judging athletic competitions, serving on local and national golfing associations, driving motor cars, and playing golf. He continued to write books and articles until his death from pneumonia on 24 October 1937 at Avondale, Hermosa Road, Teignmouth, Devon. In his autobiography, 'Sporting Days and Sporting Ways', published five years earlier, he had written that he had enjoyed a 'longish life which thanks largely to sport has been a healthy one and a happy one'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50297


Kinnaird, Arthur Fitzgerald, eleventh Lord Kinnaird of Inchture and third Baron Kinnaird of Rossie (1847-1923), footballer and philanthropist, was born in London on 16 February 1847, the only son of Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird, tenth Lord Kinnaird of Inchture and second Baron Kinnaird of Rossie (1814-1887), and his wife, Mary Jane, nee Hoare, Lady Kinnaird (1816-1888). Emily Kinnaird ['see under 'Kinnaird, Mary Jane] was the youngest of his six sisters. After preparatory school at Cheam, Kinnaird went to Eton College in October 1861, precisely when football was first being developed as an organized sport in the leading schools. He clearly had an aptitude for several sports -- he was a fine runner, swimmer, and cricketer, and later represented Cambridge University at tennis -- but it was on the football field that he truly excelled. By the time he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1865 he had acquired a zeal both to play and to spread the game. Before he graduated in 1869 he had already been elected as the Old Etonians' representative on the Football Association (FA) committee. 
On going down from Cambridge in 1869, Kinnaird began his banking career, becoming a partner in the West End firm Ransom, Bouverie & Co., in which the Kinnaird family had been involved since the eighteenth century. He remained a partner when the bank became part of Barclay, Bevan, Tritton & Co. in 1888. When further amalgamations led to the establishment of Barclays Bank Ltd in 1896, Kinnaird became a director, as well as principal director of the local head office in Pall Mall, which was later named in his honour. He retained these banking appointments until his death. 
While in London Kinnaird began his work for voluntary associations, inspired by the example of his parents and of his father's friend Lord Shaftesbury. He taught in ragged schools in the poorer parts of London and visited India, principally to see the hospitals and missions that his mother, a founder of the Foreign Evangelisation Society, had helped to establish. He was a founder of the Boys' Brigade in 1870 and in the same year, with his Etonian friend Quintin Hogg, he established Homes for Working Boys. His work for Christian youth organizations continued a family concern: in 1887 he succeeded his father as president of the YWCA, founded by his mother, and in the same year joined the council of the YMCA, of which he became president in succession to George Williams in 1905. The YMCA's object, he proclaimed in 1908, was 'to win young men for Christ' (Yapp, 27). It was estimated that in total he held some twenty presidencies of voluntary organizations and over forty vice-presidencies and thirty treasurerships. Among the associations enjoying his support were the Church Missionary Society, the London City Mission, the National Rifle Association, the Boy Scouts, and the London Lock Hospital. 
On 19 August 1875 Kinnaird married Mary Alma Victoria, daughter of Sir Andrew Agnew, eighth baronet, a Scottish landowner, Liberal MP for Wigtownshire, and a promoter of sabbatarianism. In 1887 Kinnaird succeeded his father to the barony and to the family seat at Rossie Priory, Inchture, Perthshire, with estates amounting to over 17,000 acres. As a Scottish peer of Liberal inclinations and strong evangelical convictions, Kinnaird occasionally spoke in the House of Lords on religious questions, complaining in 1899 of the failure of bishops to halt the spread of ritualism. In 1907 he was appointed by the Liberal government as lord high commissioner to the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. 
Kinnaird is best remembered, however, for his key role in the development of association football. As one of the most brilliant of the first generation of public-school footballers, he made his debut for Scotland in 1873 and captained Wanderers to victory over Oxford University in the second FA cup final, scoring 'a very well-obtained goal' after 'a splendid run, outpacing the opposite backs'. His record of FA cup final appearances will probably never be equalled: he played in a total of eleven finals (if two replayed matches are included) and captained the Old Etonians five times and the Wanderers twice. He gained five winners' medals. Known for his skill, stamina, kicking, tackling, and speed, Kinnaird was an easily recognizable and popular figure on the pitch, with his white breeches, quartered cricket cap, and long red beard. He was a noted exponent of 'hacking' -- the deliberate kicking of an opponent's shins -- which was extolled by Kinnaird and some others as crucial to the 'manly' character of football. But it was not for the faint-hearted. His mother once told the FA secretary, C. W. Alcock, of her fear that Arthur would one day return with a broken leg. 'If he does, it won't be his own', Alcock replied (Gibson and Pickford, 3.131). 
In the early 1880s Kinnaird played a historic role as player and official (he was elected FA treasurer in 1878) in the transition of the game from a public-school, amateur sport into a popular, professional one. In February 1882 he backed a tough resolution against professionalism. The following month he captained the Old Etonians to FA cup victory over a quasi-professional, northern working-class team, Blackburn Rovers. Kinnaird celebrated by doing a headstand in front of the Kennington Oval pavilion. But in 1883 another Blackburn team finally overcame the Old Etonians, despite another valiant performance by Kinnaird. The age of the public-school team in first-class football was over. With his old Harrovian friend Alcock, Kinnaird was quick to recognize that professionalism could not be wiped out by FA resolutions, and the two men persuaded the FA in 1885 'under stringent conditions' to legalize professionalism. They thus gave English football that distinctive character of professionalism under amateur control which lasted until the 1960s. They also saved football from the social and ethical rupture that rugby was to suffer in 1895. 
In 1890 Kinnaird became president of the FA, in succession to Sir Francis Marindin. Although real power on the FA council had shifted towards more bourgeois types, Kinnaird's position as a nobleman, his presence, and his personality helped to develop the game's ties both with the leaders of the political parties and with the monarchy. Lord Rosebery, A. J. Balfour, and the king himself were all guests of honour with Kinnaird at cup finals before the First World War. Such connections did much to protect the game when it came under attack for continuing during the first year of the war. He was justly celebrated for keeping together the aristocratic traditions, and the popular basis, of the national game. 
However, the war brought great personal suffering to Kinnaird. His eldest son, Douglas Arthur, was killed in action in the third month of the conflict and another of his sons was killed in 1917. Then, on 20 January 1923, his wife died. She had been guest of honour at the 1895 cup final (whether from personal interest or conjugal duty is not known), and her own active involvement in voluntary concerns shared with her husband suggests that here was a practical as well as emotional partnership. For Kinnaird there was little in life without her: he died at their London home, 10 St James's Square, on 30 January 1923, ten days later. 
For Kinnaird, apart from being sheer fun, football had great moral and physical benefits: 'I believe that all right-minded people have good reason to thank God for the great progress of this popular national game', he said late in life (Young, 155-6). It was simply of a piece with his overall mission in life, his devotion to evangelizing Christianity, to youth, to physical fitness and ideals of manliness and sportsmanship, to the poor, and to his country. His funeral on 2 February 1923 at the Kinnaird family burial-ground at Rossie Priory was attended by bankers, old football colleagues, and representatives of the legion voluntary organizations that owed so much to him. They were perhaps surprised at how much they had in common. 


@@@@@


doc= 50298


MacLaren, Archibald (1819?-1884), teacher of physical education and author, was born at Alloa, Clackmannanshire, Scotland. The details of his early life are obscure. He was brought up a Presbyterian. At about the age of sixteen he went to Paris and studied fencing, gymnastics, and medicine but became most interested in physical training. He settled in Oxford as a fencing master some time after 1840, and on 2 July 1844 he married Charlotte Wheeler (died 'c'.1847), daughter of David Alphonso Talboys, the bookseller. He came to know both William Morris and Edward Burne Jones, who as undergraduates visited MacLaren's home in Summertown and shared his wider cultural interests. Burne Jones drew a set of illustrations for MacLaren's 'The fairy family: a series of ballads and metrical tales illustrating the fairy mythology of Europe', published in 1857, albeit without those illustrations. In 1858 he erected the 'university gymnasium' at the corner of Bear Lane. 
In 1860 MacLaren was asked to develop a new system of physical training for the army and in 1861 twelve NCOs were selected to attend a six-month course under him at Oxford. An army training school was established at Aldershot and a gymnasium modelled on that at Oxford was completed there before the end of 1861. To enable MacLaren's methods to be more widely practised Her Majesty's Stationery Office produced 'A Military System of Gymnastic Exercises for the Use of Instructors' in 1862. A general order had been issued in February 1862 that MacLaren's system, 'having been approved by the General Commanding in Chief', was to be adopted in all suitable military gymnasia. Dumb-bells, bar-bells, climbing ropes, horizontal bars, vaulting horses, and climbing walls, as well as running and free-standing exercises were brought into general use. 
MacLaren was a far-sighted teacher. In an article entitled 'National systems of bodily exercise' he compared ancient and modern systems of gymnastics. None of them satisfied him. He was particularly critical of the Swedish system which was being introduced to Britain at this time. He thought that it was suitable for invalids only. 'Chicken broth may yield ample nutriment to the invalid' he wrote, 'but the soldier would make but a poor day's march upon it; you must give 'him' the chicken too' ('Macmillan's Magazine', 7, 1863, 280). He analysed also the Prussian and French systems of bodily exercise and condemned them in nationalistic terms, although MacLaren's own view of the fundamental aim of gymnastics was not very different from those which he criticized. He believed that by exercises suitably devised and arranged the body could be prepared for any task. In 'Training in Theory and Practice' (1866) he applied his principles in detail to a single sport, rowing. This he judged to be 'an art of considerable intricacy... involving the possession... of both muscular and respiratory power, to promote which is the object of all training' (p. 2). 
MacLaren's best-known work was 'A System of Physical Education, Theoretical and Practical' (1869). In it he wrote 'all exercise may be classed under two distinct heads, Recreative and Educational'. This dichotomy within physical education was fundamental to its development in Britain and reappeared in many subsequent government documents and other treatises on education. In ten appendices to the book MacLaren showed how anthropometry should be used in physical education. He had himself carefully taken measurements of his military trainees before, during, and at the end of their course. A second edition of the book was published in 1885. 
In 1851 MacLaren married a second time, to Gertrude Isabel Frances Talboys (1833-1896), sister of his deceased first wife. A good classical scholar, in 1864 she founded Summer Fields in Summertown, north Oxford, which became a well-known preparatory school. They had a family of three daughters and two sons, the second of whom, Wallace, produced a revised edition of 'A System of Physical Education' in 1895. After suffering from diabetes for many years MacLaren died at Summer Fields, on 19 February 1884. He was buried in Summertown churchyard three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 50300


Prest, William (1830-1885), football administrator and wine merchant, was born in York, probably on 1 April 1830, one of five sons of John Prest, a successful merchant in the city, and his wife, Arabella. He attended private schools in York from 'c'.1840 to 1848. His father bought William's older brother John Beevor Prest into a partnership with a Sheffield wine merchant as Prest and Porter in 1850, and William Prest succeeded Porter in 1855. The business, which flourished, was continued by William after his brother's death, in partnership with E. C. Viner from London. 
Prest was a keen cricketer -- a good batsman and a speedy fielder -- and attended in 1854 the meeting at which Bramall Lane was established as a venue for cricket. He played in the inaugural match the following year, but failed to score on that occasion. He also played for Yorkshire County Cricket Club. A talented athlete, he managed during an annual Sheffield sports day to carry off eleven prizes, one of which bore the inscription 'Toujours Prest'. 
During his lifetime Prest was best-known for his interest in the local rifle volunteers. In 1859 he helped to establish the Hallamshire volunteer rifle corps, joining as an ensign and second in command to his friend Nathaniel Creswick (1831-1917). Before long he was promoted to the rank of major, and it was as Major Prest that he was generally known. In 1884, shortly before his death, he was promoted lieutenant-colonel. 
Prest came to be more widely remembered, however, for his part in the founding of Sheffield Football Club, later recognized as the first association football club of the modern era. According to Creswick's recollections, it was while he and Prest were taking a summer walk that the idea of a football club was discussed as a winter sport to complement cricket. They wrote to Cambridge University and those public schools known to play versions of football, asking for copies of their rules. These were used in drawing up their own code, which was confirmed at the inaugural meeting of Sheffield Football Club in October 1857 (the most widely accepted date of the club's formation). Creswick was duly elected honorary treasurer and secretary and Prest was also elected to a committee dominated by fellow businessmen and men from the professions. Opponents in the early years were thin on the ground before the formation of Hallam Football Club two years later; Prest played in one of the early matches between the two clubs in 1861. 
In later years Prest's interest in football gave way to his business, the rifle volunteers, and politics. He was a member of the executive and finance committee of the Sheffield conservative and constitutional association, but according to an obituarist 'he was never accused of being an offensive politician' since his views 'were always put temperately and with much good humour'. Perhaps for this reason he made 'but a slight stir on the public affairs of the borough'. 
An Anglican -- his brother Edward Prest (1824-1882) was archdeacon of Durham -- Prest never married. He died in Market Place, Sheffield, on 10 February 1885 at the age of fifty-four, his four brothers having predeceased him. Thanks to the range of his interests he was said to have had a wide circle of friends and, although a disciplinarian with the rifle volunteers, he was liked for his good humour and kindness. Perhaps his relaxed, tory, gentlemanly approach quickly became incompatible with the serious, often rigid puritanism of those who came to dominate Sheffield football in the late Victorian period; his business activities would not have endeared him to temperance militants in the local football world such as Charles Clegg. It would be an exaggeration to say that without Prest the history of the world's biggest sport would have been markedly different, but in his typical Victorian, voluntarist way Prest earned his place in the history of the game. 


@@@@@


doc= 50301


Pullin, Alfred William (1860-1934), sporting journalist, was born at Abergwili, Carmarthenshire, on 30 July 1860, the son of Alfred Trask Pullin, schoolmaster, and his wife, Adelaide Evans. His father was ordained in 1875, and held curacies in Yorkshire, where Pullin began his journalistic career in 1880 as Castleford district reporter for the 'Wakefield Express', before joining the 'Yorkshire Post' as Bradford reporter. In the early 1880s he played rugby football for Cleckheaton, and he subsequently became a referee for the Yorkshire union. During the early 1890s, when newspapers were developing sports pages, he became cricket and football correspondent for both the 'Yorkshire Post' and the 'Yorkshire Evening Post'. He covered Yorkshire and England at his two sports, and for forty years wrote a daily column under the pseudonym Old Ebor. 
Pullin's greatest achievement was to define the role of the journalist in sport as the critic, popularizer, and interpreter of a particular team to its public. His career coincided with the rise of Yorkshire county cricket. He followed the club round the country, becoming, in the words of the captain, Lord Hawke, 'the non-playing member of the county team' ('Wisden', 272). He wrote the 'History of Yorkshire County Cricket, 1903-23' (1924). The biographer of Alfred Shaw (1902), Pullin was a sound judge of cricketers and his criticisms were valued. His close and sympathetic relationship with the players underlay his best-known book, 'Talks with Old English Cricketers' (1900). A pioneering work, 'Old English Cricketers' (as it is often referred to) was based on interviews and helped to establish the idea that life after a career in professional sport could often be unhappy. 
Pullin, who retired in 1931, had a wife, Alice, daughter of C. W. Ramsden of Wakefield, and three sons. He died, as he had wished, 'with his boots on': he collapsed on a bus in Upper Street, Islington, on 23 June 1934, while on his way to a test match at Lord's, and was found dead on arrival at the Royal Free Hospital, Gray's Inn Road, London. He was buried five days later at Wakefield cemetery after a service at Holy Trinity Church. In the 1920s recognition was paid to his position by his inclusion as one of the game's immortals in 'Wisden Cricketer's Almanack', but the florid prose of Neville Cardus and other later writers on cricket has perhaps put Old Ebor unduly in the shade. 


@@@@@


doc= 50302


Rees, Walter Enoch (1863-1949), rugby administrator, was born at 6 East Side of London Road, Neath, Glamorgan, on 13 April 1863, the second of the six children of Joseph Cook Rees (1833-1883), builder and contractor, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Howell (1837-1930). After schooling in Neath and Barnstaple he entered the family business in Neath and on 18 September 1898 married Elizabeth Leith Peters (1872-1944), the youngest daughter of George Peters of Aberdeen. Their only child, Walter Douglas Rees, was born on 28 June 1901. 
Rees served on the Welsh Rugby Union (WRU) for fifty-nine years. A freemason, a Conservative, and an Anglican, he was hardly typical of most of the players who came under his jurisdiction. His career in rugby administration began in 1888, when he became secretary and treasurer of Neath rugby club and promptly improved both its fixture list and its finances. He served in this dual capacity for only two years, since in 1889 he was elected on the match (that is, general) committee of the WRU. Unlike most sports administrators of that era he was not a former player himself, but his astuteness and attention to detail caught the eye. He was first proposed for the secretaryship of the union in 1891 and secured it in 1896. He went on to become the longest-serving secretary of any of the rugby unions, holding his post almost until his death. 
When Rees took office the WRU numbered thirty-seven member clubs and international match receipts totalled $1000; by the time he resigned in 1948 the corresponding figures were 104 clubs and $9000. The first salaried official of the WRU, he brought a new professionalism to the running of its affairs and turned its lack of any proper office accommodation (a defect rectified only in 1956) to his own advantage. He ran Welsh rugby virtually single-handedly from his house, Norwood, Victoria Gardens, Neath, and became a national figure through being associated with the golden era of Welsh rugby, between 1900 and 1911, when the Welsh fifteen won six triple crowns and achieved a historic victory (in 1905) over the otherwise undefeated New Zealand All Blacks. He represented Wales on the International Rugby Board from 1896 to 1900, and in 1910 accompanied the British Isles rugby touring team to South Africa as assistant manager. Widely regarded, in the inter-war period in particular, as high-handed and dictatorial, for instance in his strict insistence on the letter of the law in reimbursing the travel expenses of working-class players while allowing 'varsity' men much greater latitude, his ritual pre-match perambulation of the touchline with the chief constable on international days was the occasion for much banter from the crowd, not all of it friendly. He acquired a reputation for being a law unto himself in the execution of WRU business, and the little black pocket-book in which he noted the names of those he privileged with international match tickets acquired wide notoriety. 
Rees was elected to Neath town council in 1900, became the town's mayor in 1905, and a JP in 1918. He continued on the local authority until 1919, serving on all the major committees. He was never narrowly sectarian in his sporting interests: in September 1893 he chaired the founding meeting of Neath association football club. But it was his renown in rugby affairs, coupled with his experience of local government, that led to his appointment in 1916 as recruiting officer for Neath and district. In recognition of his services the War Office conferred on him the rank of captain, which further confirmed his autocratic tendencies. 
Captain Rees, as he liked to be known, clung tenaciously to the secretaryship of the WRU into the post-1945 era, but in a new bureaucratic and democratic world the former doyen of rugby administrators increasingly appeared to be an outmoded survivor from a bygone era. On 19 March 1948 he at last tendered his resignation, with effect from 30 June. He died on 6 June 1949 in Bridgend and District Hospital and was interred three days later in Llantwit Major in the Vale of Glamorgan. 


@@@@@


doc= 50304


Haldane, James Robert Alexander Chinnery- (1842-1906), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Argyll and the Isles, was born on 14 August 1842 at Hatcham, Deptford, London, the only son among the six children of Alexander Haldane (1800-1882), barrister and newspaper proprietor, and his wife, Emma Corsbie, 'nee' Hardcastle (1800-1867). His father was an Anglican evangelical and had founded 'The Record', while his grandfather James Alexander Haldane had been a dissenting minister and controversialist. Initially tutored at home, Haldane attended Bury St Edmunds grammar school before going on to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1861: he graduated LLB in 1865. At university he relished outdoor pursuits, particularly rowing, and was an interested yet unexceptional scholar. On 23 August 1864 he married Anna Elizabeth Frances Margaretta (died 1907), heir of the Revd Sir Nicholas Chinnery, bt, of Flintfield, co. Cork. He added his name to hers as Haldane-Chinnery but in 1878 changed it to Chinnery-Haldane. They had three children, Agnes Elizabeth, who died shortly after birth in 1866, James Broderick, and Patrick Vernon. 
Soon after his marriage Haldane-Chinnery returned to Cambridge in preparation for ordination. In 1866 he was ordained deacon (priest in 1867) by Bishop W. K. Hamilton of Salisbury, as curate to the Tractarian John Duncan, vicar of Calne, Wiltshire. The choice of curacy was an indication that Haldane-Chinnery had exchanged his filial evangelicalism for an increasing Anglo-Catholicism. He combined the fervent Christo-centric preaching of evangelicalism with Catholic practice in the sacraments and the liturgy, although a natural scrupulousness in religious matters was prevented from becoming religiosity by his urbane cheerfulness. The death of his in-laws in a railway accident in 1868 caused him to consider ministry in his ancestral country. 
The Haldane-Chinnerys moved that year to Edinburgh, where Alexander (as he was known) became curate of All Saints, Edinburgh, in the Scottish Episcopal church. During his highland summer holidays Haldane-Chinnery volunteered for pastoral duties to episcopal congregations. He became incumbent of St Bride's, Nether Lochaber, in 1876, and in 1878 moved into the district. In 1879 he was elected incumbent of St John's, Ballachulish, the remaining centre of traditional highland episcopalianism. He was made dean of the diocese of Argyll and the Isles in 1881, and was elected bishop in 1883, being consecrated on 24 August. In 1884 he was granted an LLM from Cambridge University, and in 1888 a DD. 
The most extreme Anglo-Catholic yet to be ordained a bishop of the Scottish Episcopal church, Chinnery-Haldane continued for a while his membership of the Society of the Holy Cross and remained a lifelong member of the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament. He had a number of good friends among leading English ritualists, including Alexander Heriot Mackonochie of St Alban the Martyr, Holborn, London. He developed a reputation as an assiduous pastor in his 23-year episcopate, and attempted to learn Gaelic. He used a bicycle to travel around his large diocese: according to family tradition, he was 'physically very strong and could stand a great amount of fatigue' (Haldane, 262). His only publications were a collection of his diocesan charges and a manual of eucharistic devotions for lay communicants. Chinnery-Haldane died on 16 February 1906, possibly from lung cancer, at Alltshellach House, North Ballachulish, Inverness-shire, which he had purchased in 1876. The funeral was held at St Bride's, Nether Lochaber, in which cemetery he was buried on 21 February. The family history recalled him as 'an orthodox Evangelical of the old school', and added that 'there was little of the Puritan about him; he enjoyed a good play, liked to take a hand at cards, and frowned on no amusement that could in any sense be called innocent' (ibid., 263-4). 


@@@@@


doc= 50305


Scott, Lady Margaret Rachel (1874-1938), golfer, was born on 5 April 1874, the second daughter in the family of five sons and two daughters of John Scott, third earl of Eldon (1845-1926), and his wife, Henrietta Minna (died 1921), eldest daughter of Captain Henry Turnor. 
Lady Margaret grew up playing golf with her father and brothers on a private nine-hole course on the family estate, Stowell Park, in Gloucestershire. She became famous for winning the first three Ladies' Golf Union (LGU) championships, 1893-5, with a consummate ease that secured her reputation as the best woman player of her day. Within her family, however, she had to share golfing honours with her brother Michael, who in 1933, as a 55-year-old grandfather, became British amateur champion. 
Women's golf was its infancy in Lady Margaret's day. The first women's clubs in Britain were founded in the 1860s, but the game made slow progress in the face of a litany of objections by men that typified male attitudes towards attempts by women to act independently. According to Mabel Stringer, the first female sports journalist, it was 'amazing women learned to play at all considering what they had to contend with and the little inducement there was for them to persevere and practise' (Stringer, 'Golfing Reminiscences', 14), and also considering the cumbersome clothing in which the dictates of fashion compelled them to play. 
A watershed in the history of women's golf occurred in the spring of 1893 with the foundation of the LGU and the inauguration of the first annual championship. The competition was held at the Lytham and St Anne's club in Lancashire, 13-15 June; registration was open to members of any golf club, and play was by match over eighteen holes on a relatively short and easy nine-hole ladies' course. There were thirty-eight entrants from England, Ireland, and France, most unmarried and of limited skill. Lady Margaret was expected to win, and she did not disappoint, averaging 42 for nine holes, winning the majority of matches comfortably, and defeating Issette Pearson, the honorary secretary of the LGU, in the final round by 7 and 5. Her victory was a revelation to spectators to 'what pitch of perfection a lady golfer might rise' (Slaughter, 313). At the award presentation ceremony Lady Margaret's acceptance speech was delivered by her father, in keeping with the prohibitions of the day against ladies speaking in public. That the champion was beautiful, charming, and the daughter of a peer, and that her dress, demeanour, and style of play epitomized grace and femininity, helped to quash criticism about competitive golf being unbecoming for ladies and added a touch of glamour that contributed to making the game fashionable and respectable. 
The following year in the second championship, 29 May-1 June, Lady Margaret took on a stronger field of more than sixty at the Littlestone club in Kent. Play was from shortened tees on the men's eighteen-hole course 'that fairly bristled in sand bunkers, canals, rabbit holes, and endless traps' (Slaughter, 314). In the final Scott again defeated Issette Pearson 'without appearing to exert her powers to any extent' (Mackern and Boys, 25), confirming her reputation as 'a gowfer braw' (Stringer, 'Golfing Reminiscences', 40). 
Lady Margaret earned her third consecutive title in May 1895, when she bested a field of eighty-four at the Royal Portrush club in Ireland over the rough and difficult men's course, which was only slightly altered for the occasion. This time she was harder pressed, being forced for once to play the final two holes in a close first-round match against Miss M. E. Phillips. In the semi-final against Mrs Ryder-Richardson she had to 'pull up wonderfully' (Hezlet, 111) after being four down at the turn, in order to move on to the final and victory over Miss E. Lythgoe. With her remarkable unbeaten record intact, Lady Margaret then resigned her golf club memberships and retired. Although she participated occasionally in club matches thereafter, she never played in public again. 
By the unanimous consent of her contemporaries, Lady Margaret was in a class by herself among those who competed in the early ladies' championships. Photographs reveal a beautiful, fashionably dressed young woman with a full, easy, confident swing (overswing by later standards). Descriptions of her game as excellent, strong, and finished, and her style as perfect, supple, and powerful yet graceful abound. Neither an exceptional driver nor putter, her greatest strengths as a player were marvellous concentration, coolness, and self-possession, along with a strong, determined grip and easy use of clubs in any kind of lie and outstanding play through the green that was characterized by long, straight drives and crisp, deadly approach shots. Horace Hutchinson, the amateur champion and an eminent writer on golf, was amazed by her ability to 'pick the ball off an indifferent, unsympathetic lie with a brassy... and send it flying straight to the mark... better than any other lady' (Hutchinson, 'Book of Golf', 202; Hutchinson, 'Fifty Years of Golf', 163). The fine quality of Lady Margaret's play helped to alter the conception of the ladies' golf game among sceptical men and set a high standard for other women to emulate. 
On 27 April 1897 Lady Margaret married the Hon. Frederick Gustavus Hamilton-Russell (died 1941), third son of the eighth Viscount Boyne. There were no children. Lady Margaret died at their London home, 3 Cambridge Gate, Regent's Park, on 27 January 1938. 


@@@@@


doc= 50306


Mylne, Andrew (1776-1856), schoolmaster and Church of Scotland minister, born at Haddington, East Lothian, Scotland, was the son of Andrew M. Mylne, fuller, and his wife, Jean Harkis. Educated at the local grammar school, Mylne (pronounced Mill) later ran an English school in Edinburgh, at the same time composing textbooks and contributing articles to David Brewster's 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia'. He also tutored the children of the Edinburgh lawyer and Clackmannanshire landowner, Craufurd Tait, then in dispute with the minister of the tiny parish of Dollar in Clackmannanshire over a legacy for a poor school left in 1802 by a London shipowner, Captain John McNabb. Tait and other parishioners preferred a free day school for the parish to the session's plan for an elementary charity boarding-school. Tait bought the advowson of the living of Dollar in 1805 and commenced to block the kirk session's plan. 
In 1807, probably with Tait's assistance, Mylne attended Edinburgh University, graduating MA in 1810, and thereafter commencing to study for the ministry, becoming a probationer in the Church of Scotland in 1812. On the death of the incumbent minister of Dollar in 1815, Tait immediately appointed Mylne in his place. Mylne, as chief trustee, transferred control over the disputed bequest, amounting to the then vast sum of $92,345, from chancery to the Scottish Court of Session. He proceeded to set up a school, commissioning the architect, William Playfair, to design a splendid building, and appointing staff, including a surgeon and midwife for the poor. A man of great erudition and energy, Mylne was set on creating what he called 'a Great Academy or Seminary of Education', in which the poor would receive free education as a 'right', while the richer pupils would have the 'privilege' of sharing it by paying fees on a sliding scale. A boarding element was also to be included to 'improve the manners and effect a new stimulus to exertion'. 
Pupils attended only the subjects of their choice from an extensive curriculum offering: English grammar, writing, arithmetic, bookkeeping, history, mathematics, astronomy, navigation, science, geography, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Persic, French, Italian, German, drawing (artistic and technical), sewing, and botany. The grounds were planned as 'Oeconomic and Botanic Gardens' to train a small number of garden apprentices, eventually producing head gardeners for Windsor, Kew, and Canada. Later, an infant school for three- to five-year-olds and evening classes for adults were instituted. This remarkable concept of a school for both rich and poor, which was, in modern terms, both co-educational and comprehensive, soon proved successful and its blend of parish children and boarders lasted, with the later co-operation of the county council, until local government reform in 1975. 
Mylne was awarded a DD by Glasgow University in 1821 and was elected to the Royal Physical Society and the Society of Scottish Antiquaries. As minister he was also responsible for the erection of a new parish church in 1841 (designed by William Tite, architect of the London Royal Exchange) and for the learned parish entry in the second statistical account of 1841. In 1844, aged sixty-eight and in failing health, Mylne married Barbara (died 1879), daughter of Captain Macaulay, RM. He retired as principal of Dollar Academy in 1849 and died at his home, St Columba's Manse, Dollar, on 27 October 1856. He was buried in Dollar cemetery, on the site of his pulpit within the ruin of the old parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 50307


Primmer, Jacob (1842-1914), Church of Scotland minister and religious controversialist, was born on 6 October 1842 at 9 Broad Wynd, Leith, the second of the four children of John Primmer (1815-1846), merchant seaman, and his wife, Louisa (1810-1891), daughter of Commodore Jacob White RN. Primmer was educated at St John's Free Church Infant School ('c'.1848-1850), where he also attended a Sunday school held in the same building, and Kay's Commercial School ('c'.1850-1855). Here, in recollection at least, Primmer's enthusiam was confined to scripture lessons and devotional exercises; by his own account his most formative religious experience as a child was gloating over the illustrations to Foxe's book of martyrs. After leaving school he was apprenticed as a compositor, but continued to educate himself by independent study and attendance at Christian Fellowship meetings, and, significantly, at the anti-popery classes instituted by John Hope. He studied divinity at the University of Edinburgh from 1865 and, by 1872, the year of his graduation, Primmer's views were fully formed. He believed in total abstinence and sabbatarianism, and was committed to defending the principles, and often the forms and practices, of the original protestant reformers. 
Primmer's first charge, which he took up in 1872, was at Gardenstown Mission, Banff. At Gardenstown he met Jessie Munro (1848-1912), the village schoolmistress, who became his wife on 12 July 1876; they had two sons. In the year of his marriage he was given charge of Townhill Mission, in a mining village near the town of Dunfermline, Fife; in 1903 he moved to Kingseathill in Dunfermline. Immediately on his arrival at Townhill he courted controversy. In defiance of the presbytery of Dunfermline he administered unfermented wine to communicants in his church and successfully took his case to the general assembly in 1879. This experience gave him a taste for litigation and many of his causes were pursued through civil and church courts. He relished direct confrontation and, in his campaign against ritual and vestments, visited other churches and denounced offending ministers as they preached in their own pulpits. In Primmer's own estimation, his major achievement was the series of open-air meetings, or 'historic conventicles', held throughout Scotland between 1888 and 1908. These were impressive, rowdy occasions, where Primmer's simple, pugnacious preaching style and bearded, prophet-like appearance were used to powerful and provocative effect. 
Primmer wrote at least fifty pamphlets and was a tireless correspondent, both in the press and with public figures. In 1897 the curious 'Jacob Primmer in Rome', a comprehensive tourist account of the Italian capital, as seen through the eyes of a primitive protestant zealot, was published. Ultimately, though contemporaries testified to his sincerity and energy, his antics were an irrelevant and eccentric sideshow in the religious life of Scotland. Primmer died from a stroke on 14 August 1914 at the manse, Kingseathill, Dunfermline, and was buried four days later at Warriston cemetery in Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 50310


Smith, Gilbert Oswald (1872-1943), footballer and schoolmaster, was born at Chesham House, Warham Road, Croydon, Surrey, on 25 November 1872, the third son of Robert Smith, a merchant, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Bannerman. He was educated from 1886 to 1892 at Charterhouse, one of the homes of association football, where he developed the skills which later took him to four appearances and the captaincy for Oxford against Cambridge. He matriculated on 15 October 1892 at Keble College, Oxford, where he obtained second-class honours in classical moderations (1894) and third-class honours in modern history (1896). As well as representing his university at soccer, he scored a match-winning fourth-innings 132 against Cambridge in the university cricket match of 1896. Sir Pelham Warner later commented: 'As long as there is a history of Oxford and Cambridge cricket the name of G. O. Smith will be emblazoned on its rolls' ('Lord's, 1787-1945', 1946, 114). Smith also played three matches for Surrey in the 1896 season. 
Three months before his innings at Lord's, Smith had, as captain, led England's football attack against Scotland at Glasgow; he subsequently came to be regarded as one of the greatest centre-forwards in the history of the game. During his zenith at the end of the nineteenth century, he shared with W. G. Grace the celebrity of being known by his initials only, with G. O. often rendered as Jo. Between 1893 and 1901, a period when only three international matches were played each season between England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, he played twenty-one times for England, often as amateur captain alongside and in competition with professional players from the leading professional clubs of his era. In a period of great change during football's development from a recreation to a great international entertainment, he transformed the role of the centre-forward from that of an individual striker into a unifier of the whole forward line, and indeed the whole team. Unlike later centre-forwards, he rarely headed the ball but instead relied on his remarkable balance and ability to trap and control the ball. He led from the front as captain of school, university, club, and country, scoring over a hundred goals for the Corinthian club, of which he was honorary secretary from 1898 to 1902 jointly with his closest friend, William John Oakley (1873-1934), an Oxford blue and schoolmaster. Both men contributed to the volume on 'Football' (1899) published in the celebrated 'Badminton Library of Sports and Pastimes'. 
Smith's last appearance for England was against Germany, then an emerging football nation, in the first international game between the two countries in 1901. After graduation Smith had become a schoolmaster, and in 1902 he retired from international football at the age of thirty to become joint headmaster with A. T. B. Dunn, an old Etonian and an earlier international centre-forward, at the preparatory school for Eton at Ludgrove, Barnet. From 1918 he was a master at Sunningdale preparatory school. 
Smith grew up in a period when social distinctions at all levels in British society were highlighted on the playing fields. The distinction between Gentlemen and Players epitomized the dichotomy between amateurs and professionals, although economic freedom or the absence of other domestic or social demands allowed many amateur sportsmen to display their talents on equal terms with professional contemporaries. Many, like Smith, were schoolmasters, who, along with representatives of the church, the army, and the law, formed the nucleus of the public school-Oxbridge Corinthian football club. Smith died, unmarried, at his home, Yaldhurst, Lymington, Hampshire, on 6 December 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 50312


Macfarlane, Donald (1834-1926), Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland minister, was born at Vallay, North Uist, the fourth of the six children of Donald Macfarlane, a manager of farms on the estate of Colonel Gordon of Cluny, Aberdeenshire, the proprietor of South Uist and Barra. His mother was Elizabeth Macdonald, daughter of Alexander Macdonald, Trotternish, Skye. 
Macfarlane's early education was at parish schools in South Uist. In 1850 he attended a school at Uiskeva, Benbecula, which had been set up through the efforts of the Ladies' Society for the Religious Improvement of the Remote Highlands and Islands. Its first teacher was Donald Macdonald, afterwards Free Church minister of Shieldaig, who became a lifelong friend of Macfarlane's. In October 1856 a change occurred which altered the whole course of Macfarlane's life, when he was called to the Christian ministry through the preaching of Alexander MacColl of Duirinish, Skye, and afterwards of Lochalsh. 
In order to raise sufficient funds to start a university course Macfarlane taught for the next seven years in three Hebridean schools. He began his college course at Glasgow University in 1863, and completed his divinity course in 1873. He studied under two distinguished professors, William Ramsay and Edmund Law Lushington. Under Lushington he made a special study of Greek. His theology course was at Glasgow Free Church College, where the principal was Patrick Fairbairn. 
The spiritual and theological decline of the Free Church in the fifty years after the Disruption accelerated during the ten-year union controversy that coincided with Macfarlane's period in Glasgow. The controversy was stirred by the attempts at effecting a union between the Free Church and the United Presbyterian church. The United Presbyterians were voluntaries and were willing to tolerate an Amyraldian view of the atonement -- essentially, that Christ died for all. The negotiations polarized the Free Church into two parties and divided every presbytery. Macfarlane supported the anti-unionists, led by James Begg, and his acquaintance with theological compromise during these years left its impress on the rest of his career. 
The presbytery of Skye and Uist licensed Macfarlane on 24 June 1874 at Snizort. While still a probationer at Dunoon he met John Kennedy of Dingwall, who recommended the elders of the congregation of Strathconan, Ross-shire, to call him as their minister. He was ordained and inducted at Strathconan on 20 January 1876. Three years later he received a call to Moy, Inverness-shire. While there he married Mary Morrison (died 1928), the eldest daughter of Alexander Morrison, Sollas, North Uist. Horatius Bonar conducted the ceremony on 14 April 1880 at the Windsor Hotel, Princes Street, Edinburgh. They had no children. In 1888 Macfarlane accepted a call to Kilmallie in the Free Church Presbytery of Abertarff. 
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century worldwide Presbyterianism was loosening its attachment to Calvinism and to the Westminster confession of faith. The United Presbyterian church passed a declaratory act in 1879, whose purpose was to declare or explain the confession, a dilution of the church's commitment to Calvinism. Presbyterian churches throughout the world soon followed the United Presbyterians' lead. The Free Church of Scotland set up a committee in 1889 to report on ways of 'providing relief' for those who could not give unqualified subscription to the Westminster confession. Two years later a declaratory act was approved by the general assembly, which became church law in 1892. 
Before the declaratory act was passed, opposition to it had been organized by the constitutional party in the Free Church -- a grouping with which Macfarlane was associated. In January 1893 Macfarlane's presbytery of Abertarff engrossed in its records a protest against the general assembly's action in approving the 'declaratory act'. A week later, on 25 January 1893, Macfarlane's own kirk session placed a similar protest in its minutes. During the resulting turmoil Macfarlane was translated from Kilmallie to Raasay. The induction was on 25 April 1893 and he took office under a protest against the declaratory act. 
The general assembly of the Free Church of Scotland of 1893 was the jubilee of the Disruption. Most major Presbyterian churches in the world sent delegates to the gathering. On 25 May the commissioners dealt with the overtures for the repeal of the 'declaratory act'. When, through the influence of Principal Robert Rainy, the assembly refused to repeal the act, Macfarlane advanced to the clerk's table and laid on it a protest. This action led to the formation of the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Macfarlane was joined by his friend Donald Macdonald (the only minister to stand with him), a group of students led by Neil Cameron, and a large number of elders and lay people, mainly in the Scottish highlands. The new church's first presbytery met on 28 July 1893, and on 14 August 1893 the presbytery adopted a deed of separation from the Free Church. 
Macfarlane became the first Free Presbyterian minister of Raasay. Initially the landowner refused to grant a site for either a church or a manse. For five years Macfarlane lived in a rented house in Broadford on Skye and crossed to Raasay by boat every weekend. In 1903 he was translated to Dingwall, where he continued his ministry for a further twenty-three years. Macfarlane, together with Neil Cameron, guided the Free Presbyterian church for the first thirty years of its existence. Both vigorously opposed attempts, in 1905 and 1918, to unite the Free Presbyterian church with the section of the Free Church that refused to enter the 1900 union of the majority Free Church with the United Presbyterian church. 
Donald Macfarlane believed the 'Bible' to be the inerrant word of God. His sermons were noted for their remarkable clearness and simplicity. His published works include 'Memoir and Remains of the Rev. Donald Macdonald: Shieldaig' (1903), 'Sermons on the Love of God and Cognate Themes' (1918), and several pamphlets. He died at Dingwall on 4 November 1926 and was buried in the cemetery there on 9 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 50313


Wingfield, Walter Clopton (1833-1912), inventor of lawn tennis, was born on 16 October 1833, the eldest son of Clopton Lewis Wingfield (1800-1846) of Rhysnant Hall, Montgomeryshire, a major in the 66th regiment, and his wife, Jane Eliza, daughter of General Sir John Michell. He served in the 1st dragoon guards, where he reached the rank of captain before retiring to his estate in Montgomeryshire, where he was a JP for the county and a major in the yeomanry cavalry. As one of the royal bodyguard of gentlemen-at-arms, he was made a member of the Victorian order in 1902. On 1 November 1858 he married Alice, youngest daughter of General Wheeler Cleveland, with whom he had three sons, all of whom predeceased him, and a daughter. 
Looking to the commercial possibilities of exploiting the growing demand for genteel outdoor leisure to be enjoyed on the lawns of middle-class England, Wingfield devised the game of sphairistike. He took the name from the Greek for gymnastic ball games, but, on the advice of friends, added 'or lawn tennis' to its title. Tradition has it that he first showed off the game at a Welsh country house Christmas party at Nantclwyd in 1873, before patenting it in February 1874. However, this must have been the final version, for he had demonstrated it to Lord Lansdowne in the summer of 1869. Certainly others, including Major Harry Gem, played their own versions of lawn tennis before Wingfield's patent or even before his demonstration to Lord Lansdowne. Nevertheless, it is acknowledged that it was Wingfield who first publicized and popularized the game. 
Sphairistike was a hybrid of real tennis and rackets but took them outdoors. The original court was hour-glass in design, though with straight sides and a lozenge-shaped service area within the court, which was itself marked out with tapes. Wingfield wrote an eight-page instruction book, 'The Game of Sphairistike', to accompany the sets of equipment, 1050 of which were sold within a year at 5 guineas through French & Co. By the third edition the Greek nomenclature, abbreviated to 'sticky' by its detractors, had gone. 
Although Wingfield first devised and named lawn tennis, within a few years the game had changed considerably to become almost unrecognizable from the original. In 1875 the Marylebone Cricket Club revised Wingfield's rules and adopted an oblong court, with players retreating to the baseline to serve. Such a rectangular court was also preferred for the first national championships in 1877, when the All England croquet club added lawn tennis to its title. A committee of the club then settled the size of the court, lowered the net, allowed the server one fault without penalty, and determined a scoring system based on real tennis. All that remained of Wingfield's rules was the option to choose rackets' scoring, but by 1883 this too had disappeared. These changes undermined any protection that his patent had given Wingfield, and sports manufacturers such as Slazenger began to undercut his price with mass-produced equipment. Even Wingfield's entrepreneurial flair could not compete with the economies of production and marketing achieved by these specialists. 
Wingfield died on 18 April 1912 at his London home, 33 St George's Square, Belgravia, of emphysema and bronchitis, from which he had suffered for many years. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He was remembered by a statue in the foyer of the Lawn Tennis Association denoting him as the 'Inventor of Lawn Tennis'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50314


Bolitho, (Henry) Hector (1897-1974), writer, was born at Britannia Boarding-House, Vincent Street, Auckland, New Zealand, on 28 May 1897, the elder of the two sons (there were no daughters) of Henry Bolitho (1868-1945), hairdresser, born in Ballarat, whose father emigrated from Cornwall to Australia during the gold rush, and his wife, Etheldred Frances Bushe (1875-1958), the daughter of a New Zealand schoolmaster, Michael Francis (Frank) Bushe. 
Hector Bolitho often told friends he believed himself to be of partly Maori descent. He wrote that his maternal grandmother Catherine Bushe, 'nee' Bregman, 'had been under fire when the Maoris stormed the Waiuku stockade and, in some earlier battle, she had seen the head of a white man impaled on a native spear'. Later she became an interpreter between the English and native leaders. She spoke their language perfectly and translated the 'Psalms' into Maori. 
In 1898 Bolitho's father designed and printed the world's first airmail stamps, for a pigeon-carrier letter service operating between Auckland and the Great Barrier Island. As a sensitive boy of ten, on his great-uncle's farm at Waiau Pa, Hector Bolitho was horrified by the sight of a shepherd castrating lambs with his teeth. His autocratic Methodist mother wanted him to become a doctor, but at Seddon Memorial College, Auckland, his teacher, Ronald Algie, later New Zealand's minister of education, inspired in him a love of English literature. Without his parents' permission, he left school at fifteen to join the staff of the 'New Zealand Herald', moving in 1915 to the 'Auckland Star' as shipping reporter. In 1916 he became a corporal in the New Zealand army, in which he served for the last two years of the First World War. When the war ended, he went to stay on a small island in Auckland's outer harbour which became the subject of his first book, 'The Island of Kawau' (1919), which he sold to a New Zealand publisher for $20. With the proceeds, he sailed to the south seas, where he wrote a book about Fiji, Samoa, and Tonga, 'The Islands of Wonder' (1920), for which he received $30. In April 1920 the prince of Wales, later Edward VIII, arrived in New Zealand on an official visit. Bolitho was invited to travel on the royal train to report the tour. This provided material for a third book, 'With the Prince in New Zealand' (1920). 
Homosexual, but obliged to conceal his true nature, Bolitho was never at ease in the then homophobic atmosphere of New Zealand society. In May 1920 his boyhood mentor Charles Ewing Mackay (1875-1929), mayor of Wanganui, was arrested and imprisoned for seriously wounding a man to whom he had made homosexual advances. Shaken by this scandal, in 1921 Bolitho left New Zealand for Australia, where he became editor of the 'Shakespearean Quarterly' and literary editor and drama critic of the Sydney 'Evening News'. 
In 1923 Bolitho arrived in London, where he began work as a freelance journalist, writing articles for 'The Spectator', the 'Daily Mail', and the 'Financial Times'. In 1925 he went to Johannesburg to edit the 'South African Pictorial', but resigned after only seven months because of his refusal to accept South African racialism. After his return to England, he published two novels, 'Solemn Boy' (1927) and 'Judith Silver' (1929), both with manifestly autobiographical New Zealand backgrounds. His prose style was graceful, but neither book was commercially successful. With his third novel, 'The Flame on Ethirdova' (1930), Bolitho 'went through the strange and unprofitable sensation of being 'remaindered''. 
Already in 1926, however, the course of Bolitho's career had been decisively influenced when the dean of Windsor, Albert Victor Baillie, invited him to go to live in the cloisters of Windsor Castle, where he remained for eight years, helping the dean to edit two volumes of 'Letters of Lady Augusta Stanley' (1927-9), Queen Victoria's lady-in-waiting. Bolitho was almost expelled from Windsor by George V for contracting German measles while the royal family was in residence. 
Bolitho's unrestricted access to the Royal Archives, and his discovery, in Coburg, of unpublished letters written by Prince Albert, consort of Queen Victoria, led to his first international bestseller, 'Albert the Good' (1932), widely regarded as the most important royal biography since (Giles) Lytton Strachey's 'Queen Victoria'. 
In 1934 Bolitho worked with Terence Rattigan on the play 'Grey Farm', but their collaboration ended in acrimony, and when it was staged in New York six years later, the play ran for only thirty-five performances. Bolitho's volume of sinister supernatural short stories, 'The House in Half Moon Street' (1935), showed vivid stylistic flair. In 1936 he was chosen as the official biographer of Rudyard Kipling, but found the conditions imposed by Kipling's daughter unacceptable. Instead he wrote 'King Edward VIII: his Life and Reign' (1937). Published three months after the abdication, it was severely critical of the former monarch and provoked scathing condemnation of the author by Winston Leonard Spencer-Churchill and (Edward Montague) Compton Mackenzie. 
In 1938 the British Broadcasting Corporation produced Bolitho's radio play 'Victoria and Disraeli', with the role of the queen-empress played by the celebrated actress Marie Tempest, whose tyrannical character Bolitho had amusingly portrayed in an unintentionally revealing biography, 'Marie Tempest' (1936). Bolitho made a major contribution to historical scholarship as the editor of 'Further Letters of Queen Victoria' (1938). 
Bolitho became a life fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1937, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1940. On the outbreak of the Second World War, he joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve as an intelligence officer with the rank of squadron leader, editing the 'Royal Air Force Weekly Bulletin', which in 1941 became the 'Royal Air Force Journal'. In 1942 he was appointed editor of the 'Coastal Command Intelligence Review'. 
In 1946 Bolitho wrote a second anthology of short stories, 'No Humour in my Love'. His deep, resonant voice and commanding presence launched him on a highly successful tour of the United States in 1947, during which he delivered more than 130 lectures. 
In 1949 Bolitho began the most important relationship of his life when he met a former public schoolboy and army officer, Captain Derek Wilmot Douglas Peel, born on 25 February 1924, who had been educated at Wellington College and wounded while serving in no. 9 commando. They collaborated on a book, 'Without the City Wall' (1952), and lived together for the rest of Bolitho's life. 

'Jinnah, Creator of Pakistan' (1954), Bolitho's biography of Mohamed Ali Jinnah, provoked intense controversy in Pakistan over the propriety of the book's being written by a non-Muslim. Bolitho almost abandoned the project, but persevered. On publication the biography received international acclaim. 
At the age of sixty-five Bolitho made an avuncular chairman to a panel of teenagers in the television series, 'The Young Elizabethans' (1962), but was not at ease in the medium. He raised substantial sums of money for polio research as chairman of the Committee for Writing and Reading Aids for the Paralysed. His autobiography, 'My Restless Years' (1962), revealed a not entirely happy personality. In 1963 he wrote to a friend: 'I am weary, weary, weary. Weary of the written word. I would not write another if it weren't that I like my good food and must pay for it. Like my escapes on long voyages, and must pay for them.' In 1964 Bolitho's biography of Prince Albert was revised and reissued as 'Albert, Prince Consort', with interesting comparisons with the role, as consort, of Prince Philip, duke of Edinburgh. A member of the Athenaeum, Bolitho liked to sit in its drawing-room, looking at Charles Meryon's etchings of his native New Zealand. Though sixteen of his fifty-nine books were devoted to the subject of monarchy, Bolitho always considered himself 'left wing' and a rebel at heart. He enjoyed debunking his somewhat portentous public image. In private, his favourite pastime was playing 'Home Sweet Home' on the piano with his nose. 
In 1965 Bolitho suffered the first of several strokes. His last book, 'The Drummonds of Charing Cross' (1967), was completed in collaboration with Derek Peel, who did most of the research and writing. Through the onset of arteriosclerosis, Bolitho's health rapidly declined, and Peel wrote all the articles and book reviews that appeared under Bolitho's name in the 'Washington Star' and other publications during the last years of his life. Hector Bolitho died on 12 September 1974 at Lee House Nursing Home, 61 Dyke Road, Brighton, the town in which he and Peel had lived since 1956. He was cremated on 18 September at Downs crematorium, Bear Road, Brighton, at a private service attended only by Derek Peel and their housekeeper. After Bolitho's death, Derek Peel succumbed to alcoholism and was found dead on 28 April 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 50315


Ellis, William Webb (1806-1872), Church of England clergyman and supposed originator of rugby, was born in Salford, Lancashire, on 24 November 1806, the younger of two sons of James Ellis (died 1812), soldier, who had married Ann Webb at St Peter's, Exeter, in 1804. He was baptized at Holy Trinity, Salford, on 2 Jan 1807. His father, an ensign in the 1st dragoon guards, served in Ireland in 1807, moved to the regimental depot in Manchester in 1808, then proceeded to the Peninsular War in 1809. On 14 September 1809 he bought a commission in the 3rd dragoon guards for $735. He died in Albuera on 1 July 1812. 
William Webb Ellis himself would probably have been forgotten were it not for the claim that, in 1823, 'with a fine disregard for the rules of football as played in his time [he] first took the ball in his arms and ran with it'. A stone, which was set in a wall at Rugby School in February 1900, thus commemorates this act. It is because of this supposed action that any details of Ellis's life are known. 
Ellis was at Rugby School from 1816 to 1825. All the indications are that, if not unpopular, he was at least an 'outsider'. He was a 'town-boy' and a foundationer and, as such, received free education at Rugby, his mother having been left 'totally unprovided for' by his father's death. She applied for a pension and was granted $10 for each child. His father did not attain any great rank and was of limited means. The purchase of his commission probably used up most of his capital. The fathers of most of the boys at Rugby in Ellis's time were members of the clergy, gentry, and aristocracy. It seems highly improbable that they would have been influenced by the actions of a social inferior, either on the football field or elsewhere. 
On leaving school, aged eighteen, Ellis was admitted at Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1825, his expenses being partly met by scholarships and, from 1828, a Hulme exhibition. He won a cricket 'blue' -- although this term was not used then -- in 1827, batting number 3 against Cambridge and scoring 12 runs. He also, 'in the best traditions of Rugby football', wrote a poem on beer ('Brasenose Ale', 1828), although no copies of this appear to have survived. He graduated BA in 1829 and proceeded MA in 1831. After leaving Oxford, he entered the church, and was minister of St George's, Albemarle Street, London, from 1836 until 1855. From 1843 to 1855 he was also rector of St Clement Danes, where the Royal Air Force Rugby Football Union later erected a tablet to his memory. During the last seventeen years of his life he was rector of Laver Magdalen (now Magdalen Laver) in Essex. He never married. 
The only known portrait of Ellis is a daguerreotype published in the 'Illustrated London News' (24, 1854, 400) following a sermon he preached during the Crimean War. He had established something of a reputation for himself in London as an evangelical clergyman, bolstered by such publications as 'A Concise View of Prophecy which Relates to the Messiah' (1832), 'Sermons at St. George's' (1838), and 'Dangerous Errors of Romanism' (1853), and he was classified in 1844 as one of the low-church clergy in London who 'abhor[red] the Tractarian heresy' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add C.290, fol. 17). This reputation probably explains the interest taken in his Crimean War sermon. 
Ellis apparently lived a comfortable life and on his death at Menton, Alpes Maritimes, France, on 24 January 1872, left $9000, subsequently divided among a variety of charitable causes, including the Society for the Rescue of Young Women and Children. The residue went to the widow of his brother Thomas. Little was known about his death until October 1959, when his grave was traced to a cemetery in Menton. The French rugby union, apparently delighted that the 'founder' of the game was buried in France, renovated the grave, at le cimetiere du vieux chateau at Menton, which was visited by their president, the French captain, and a brass band. 
Many people argue that the story of Ellis's act in 1823 is a myth, although Macrory, in 1991, remained convinced that Ellis picked up the ball and ran with it. However, it hardly matters whether he did or not, for this practice was not immediately adopted in 1823 but was gradually institutionalized over the following thirty years. Furthermore, it was also in the second quarter of the nineteenth century that rugby acquired such distinctive features as an oval ball, H-shaped goals, scoring above the cross bar, and points for 'tries' as well as 'goals'. Thus, in focusing solely on the development of carrying, the Ellis story fails to explain all aspects of the emerging uniqueness of the game. 
Significantly, Ellis was never interviewed about his claimed role in the development of rugby football and died in 1872 apparently unaware of his 'fame'. The story was first advanced in 1876 by the antiquarian Matthew Holbeche Bloxam, who was responding to a series of letters in the London 'Standard' newspaper by Old Rugbeians reminiscing about their game, which was gaining in popularity at the time. One correspondent had suggested that the Rugby game was simply a refinement of the ancient game of English football, seemingly implying -- correctly -- that the transition from traditional folk-football had been a gradual development over the years and not the reaction to a particular revolutionary event. Bloxam objected to this version of events, claiming that the distinctive Rugby game was not played at the school when he was there from 1813 to 1821. Shortly afterwards, in a letter to the Rugby School magazine, 'Meteor' (10 Oct 1876, 528), Bloxam 'ascertained' that 'in the second half of 1824' Ellis had caught the ball and run with it. In 1880 Bloxam, again writing in 'Meteor' (22 Dec 1880, 155-6), but this time responding to a recent leader in 'The Times' about differences between the rules of the rugby union and association football games, changed this date to 1823 and provided further biographical information about Ellis which helped consolidate the story. Nevertheless, the supposed contribution of William Webb Ellis to rugby football remained little known outside Rugby School and indeed a history of football, co-written by J. E. Vincent and Montague Shearman in 1885, made no mention of him, and nor did Shearman's book in the popular 'Badminton Library' series 'Athletics and Football' (1889) or Frank Marshall's book 'Football: the Rugby Union Game' (1892). 
Bloxam's account would probably have faded into obscurity but for circumstances affecting the game's development in the 1890s. By then, rugby union had spread to northern England and begun to emerge as a commercial spectacle, with players and spectators drawn principally from the working class. This process was conducive to conflict and led, in 1895, to a split between the Rugby Football Union and the Northern Union, which later became the Rugby League. The year 1895 also saw the appointment of a subcommittee of the Old Rugbeian Society to inquire into the origins of the game. It published its report in 1897 and accredited the emergence of a distinctive game to William Webb Ellis, resurrecting Bloxam's account as supporting 'evidence'. Revealingly, the commemorative stone was ordered from a local stonemason before all the evidence had been gathered in or the report completed. By giving pride of place in their report to the Ellis story, which correctly located the beginnings of rugby football in their school, the Old Rugbeians were attempting, it has been suggested, to reassert their proprietorship of the rugby game at a time when it was escaping their control and changing in ways of which they disapproved. As Baker put it: 'The mythological explanation of the origins of Rugby football provides historians with a valuable clue to the mind and spirit of late-Victorian England, not to the early nineteenth century beginnings of the game. The two should not be confused' (Baker, 130). 


@@@@@


doc= 50318


Burn, Amos (1848-1925), chess player, was born on 31 December 1848 at 28 Bourne Street, Kingston upon Hull. He was the third surviving son (there were also three daughters) of Amos Burn (1810-1877), a timber merchant and commission agent of Scottish descent, and his wife, Mary Webster ('b'. 1813). Burn was educated at local schools in Hull, and joined his father's mercantile business as a teenager. About 1862 he moved to Liverpool as an apprentice to a firm of shipowners and merchants. Burn was to make his home chiefly in Liverpool for many decades and is regarded as probably the strongest chess player to have lived there. He learned the moves of chess at the age of sixteen -- unusually late for a world-class player -- and joined the Liverpool chess club in 1867. He immediately made his mark by winning the club's annual tournament for 1867-8 ahead of twenty-five seasoned players. 
Burn was unusual among first-rate players in remaining an amateur rather than a full-time player who earned a living -- or attempted to earn one -- as a professional chess player. Throughout his life Burn was in business as a merchant, first as a cotton broker and then as a sugar broker, chiefly, it seems, in Liverpool's trade with America. Burn's amateur status cut both ways: his business commitments forced him to abandon chess tournaments for years on end, a factor that unquestionably affected his performances for the worse. On the other hand, he also managed to avoid the hand-to-mouth existence of the professional chess player of his time, often involving penury and near starvation, and was able to pick and choose the tournaments he wished to enter. 
In 1870 Burn spent nine months in London, where he became a pupil and friend of Wilhelm Steinitz, regarded as the unofficial world chess champion (and officially holding the title from 1886 to 1894), the Prague-born master player and chess theorist, who was then living in England. Burn is often known as a disciple of Steinitz, exhibiting a similar style which emphasized sound development and vigorous defence. He is thus commonly known as a defensive rather than an attacking player, a description which is somewhat inaccurate in that he also demonstrated very great attacking and tactical ability. Business commitments, including several lengthy trips to America, meant that he played only in local tournaments until the mid-1880s, while his participation in major tournaments tended to come in a series of bursts when he was able to put his business life to one side. In 1886 Burn played a match with Henry Edward Bird (1830-1908), an accomplished veteran player, which ended in a 9-9 tie. In the same year he also drew a match with another strong British player, George Henry Mackenzie (1837-1891). Also in 1886 Burn played in his first major tournament, the second British Chess Association championship in London. Remarkably, Burn finished in a tie for first with J. H. Blackburne, England's leading player, although he lost the two tie-breaking games to Blackburne 1.5-0.5, finishing second in the tournament. During the next four years Burn was an active player, usually winning those tournaments he entered, or coming close, and participating in international events for the first time. His most significant results of this period were equal first with Isidor Gunsberg (1854-1930) at the London tournament of 1887, and his result at the international tournament at Breslau, Germany, where he finished second to Siegbert Tarrasch, but ahead of a string of well-known grandmasters. 
Burn then withdrew from serious chess play for five years, re-entering top-class chess to participate in the great Hastings tournament of 1895, in which virtually every leading player in the world took part. Here he finished only twelfth (out of twenty-two participants), probably the major disappointment of his career, although a result not discreditable given his long absence from active play. Over the next few years, however, he was again a fervent participant in international chess, producing an extremely impressive series of results at many international tournaments. The peak of his success was reached at the very strong tournament at Cologne in 1898, where he finished ahead of Steinitz and of three men who played or were to play for the world championship, Michael Chigorin, Carl Schlechter, and David Janowsky. The victory of a 49-year-old amateur over a recent world champion and three challengers for the throne has few parallels in chess history, and is evidence of what Burn might have achieved in an uninterrupted career. It was also probably the last major international tournament won by a British player until the 1970s. During the years 1897-1900 he also achieved good results at major tournaments at Berlin in 1897 (fifth out of twenty competitors), at Vienna in 1898 (joint sixth out of twenty), at Paris in 1900 (fifth out of seventeen), and at Munich in 1900 (fourth of sixteen), ahead of many well-known grandmasters. During this period he was certainly among the best ten players in the world, possibly among the top five. 
From 1901 Burn again withdrew from international chess, possibly because of a separation from his wife, Martha Ann ('b'. 1848/9), daughter of a sugar refiner, George Jager, whom Burn married in December 1879 at Trinity Presbyterian Church, Birkenhead. With her he had two daughters; his wife predeceased him. Also in 1901, apparent business setbacks in Liverpool took him on another extended stay to the United States, chiefly in Georgia. 
Burn re-entered international play yet again between 1905 and 1912, often finishing among the leaders despite his advanced age. From 1912 he retired from both business life and competitive chess, although he became the editor of a chess column in 'The Field' magazine from 1912 until his death. His only book on chess was revision in 1915 of James Mason's 'Principles of Chess in Theory and Practice', originally published in 1894. In the last decades of his life Burn lived in London, dying of a stroke at his home at 19 Luxemburg Gardens, Hammersmith, on 25 November 1925. 
In appearance Burn was a thin, ascetic-looking man with a trim white beard who looked like a stage classics master or professor. He said little, and was sometimes described as morose, although he was both vocal and helpful to younger players. While he was always well known to chess historians, interest in his career was low until the 1980s, since when a number of works have restored his reputation. In particular, a magisterial biography by the Swiss historian of chess Richard Forster has received considerable attention. Forster's work contains all of Burn's 900 known games, many of which are forgotten masterpieces. The Dutch historian of chess Tim Krabbe described Burn's offer of a queen in an offhand game against E. A. MacDonald in 1910 as one of the ten greatest moves ever made in chess history. 


@@@@@


doc= 50320


Dufour, (Elizabeth) Camilla (d. 1846), singer and writer, made her debut in a concert at the King's Theatre, Haymarket, on 11 February 1796 and that season sang at the Pantheon and in Johann Peter Salomon's Hanover Square concerts. Her father arranged that Michael Kelly and Anna Maria Crouch should give her lessons in singing and acting in return for a percentage of her salary. She was to have been introduced at Kelly's benefit in May 1797 and then have a summer season at the Haymarket, with a specially written prologue for the debut there of 'this little native of Britannia's Isle' (Young, 277). However, her parents broke with Kelly and negotiated a lucrative contract with Richard Brinsley Sheridan at Drury Lane, where she made her first stage appearance in the soprano role of Adela in Stephen Storace's 'The Haunted Tower' on 19 October 1797. She sang well but lacked the acting skills to compensate for her short, plump figure, and during that season made only four appearances as Adela and four more as Amphitrite in 'The Tempest'. 
Miss Dufour was a soloist in the Covent Garden oratorios in Lent 1798 and sang again at Drury Lane only as one of the priestesses in Sheridan's 'Pizarro' in May and June 1799. She turned to writing, producing stories for periodicals and, in 1803, 'Aurora, or, The Mysterious Beauty', a translation of J. J. M. Duperche's French novel based on F. J. H. von Soden's play 'Aurora, oder, Das Kind der Holle'. Jacob Henry Sarratt ['see below'], the future 'professor of chess', was writing for the same publisher and they married at St Leonard, Shoreditch, on 30 December 1804. Mary Julia Young, in her 'Memoirs of Mrs. Crouch' (1806), wrote: 'it would be difficult to find a more accomplished, a more amiable, or a happier couple, than Mr. and Mrs. Sarrat' (Young, 312). Mrs Sarratt was for a time the leading singer in John Philip Conway Astley's company, which performed at Astley's Amphitheatre, Wesminster Bridge, in summer and at the Royalty Theatre, Wellclose Square, in winter. In 1809 she played Polly to Robert Elliston's Macheath in his burletta version of 'The Beggar's Opera' at the Royal Circus. Her last stage appearance seems to have been at the Royal Circus on 30 October 1809. Sarratt died, after a long illness, in 1819. By 1843 his widow had been living in Paris for some years, giving chess lessons to numerous pupils, including members of the aristocracy. Over the next three years a subscription was raised for her, to which King Louis-Philippe and many French and English chess amateurs contributed. In December 1846 the chess magazine 'Le Palamede', which had been active in her support, reported that she had died in Paris after a short illness, aged eighty-five, although she was probably about fifteen years younger than that. 
Mrs Sarratt's husband, Jacob Henry Sarratt (1772/3-1819), was remembered as 'the famous Sarratt, the great chess teacher, whose fee was a guinea a lesson' (Tuckwell, 65). His early life is obscure. He married his first wife, Marie Bruzard (died 1802x4), at St Saviour, Jersey, on 3 July 1790, and they were settled in London by late 1799. They had at least two children, Mary Ann Louisa, born on 11 December 1799, and Susan Catherine, born on 1 February 1802. He worked as a schoolmaster, and wrote 'The History of Man... Adapted to the Capacities of Youth', two translations of Gothic novels, 'The Three Monks!!!' and 'Koenigsmark the Robber, or, The Terror of Bohemia', and a useful pocket guide, 'A View of London', all published between 1802 and 1804. As 'Lieut. Sarratt, of the Royal York Mary-le-bone Volunteers', he published his 'Life of Buonaparte' (1803), a rousing attack on 'the tyrant who swears eternal hatred to Britons' (p. 285). Sarratt had become interested in chess before the death of the French master Francois-Andre Danican Philidor in 1795 and learned much from Verdoni, Philidor's successor as professional at the English Chess Club. With Hippolyte de Bourblanc he enjoyed 'an uninterrupted friendship of fifteen years' duration' (J. H. Sarratt, 'A New Treatise on the Game of Chess' 1821, 29), until Bourblanc's death in 1813. They frequently played chess together without a board 'while strolling in the pleasant meadows then skirting the north of London' (Walker, 117). After Verdoni's death in 1804 Sarratt became London's leading chess professional. Under his influence the London Chess Club (founded in 1807) adopted the continental rule that a game ending in stalemate was a draw, not a win for the player stalemated, as hitherto in England. 'A Treatise on the Game of Chess' by 'J. H. Sarratt 'Professor of Chess'' came out in 1808, and he later published 'The Works of Damiano, Ruy-Lopez, and Salvio' (1813) and 'The Works of Gianutio, and Gustavus Selenus' (1817), translations which made the writings of earlier masters accessible to English players. William Hazlitt came to know 'old S[arratt], tall and gaunt' as a fellow habitue of the Salopian Coffee House. Hazlitt's 'On Coffee-House Politicians' includes a portrait of this extraordinary man, who had once been a prize-fighter and was still proud of his strength, a great reader who could recite Ossian by heart but whose memory 'tyrannised over and destroyed all power of selection' ('Complete Works', 195-6). Sarratt's health was apparently in decline by autumn 1817, and he died on 6 November 1819, when he was said to be in his forty-seventh year. His last work, 'A New Treatise on the Game of Chess', which included a beginners' section in question-and-answer form, was published in 1821. William Lewis, his most distinguished pupil, oversaw a revised version of Sarratt's 1808 'Treatise' in 1822. In the same year Lewis, in his preface to his own translation of Pietro Carrera, described Sarratt as 'the finest and most finished player' he had ever seen, 'alike excellent in attack and defence'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50321


Lowe, Elias Avery (1879-1969), palaeographer, was born on 15 October 1879 in Moscow, Russia, the son of Charles Loew, a silk and embroidery merchant, and his wife, Sarah Ragoler. In 1892 he emigrated with his parents to New York city, where he became a United States citizen in 1900. He was educated at the College of the City of New York (1894-7), Cornell University (1899-1902, BA), the University of Halle (1902-3), and the University of Munich (1903-7, PhD). On 10 February 1911 he married Helen Tracy Porter (a writer and later a translator of Thomas Mann under the name H. T. Lowe-Porter). They had three daughters: Prudence Holcombe (1912-1967), Frances Beatrice 
(Lady Fawcett; 'b'. 1913)
, and Patricia Tracy ('b'. 1917). He changed the spelling of his name to Lowe in 1918. 
Lowe's formal teaching of palaeography was all done, with negligible exceptions, at Oxford, where he first lectured in 1913 and was given a regular appointment as lecturer in 1914 and as reader in 1927. As an American and a Jew he represented a rare, if not unique, species at the time of his original appointment. After 1936, when he became one of the first professors at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, to which he would be attached for the rest of his life and where no teaching was required, he continued to lecture at Oxford during Trinity terms, except for the war years, until 1948. 
Preceding or concurrently with his Oxford and Princeton careers Lowe was a fellow of the American School of Classical Studies in Rome (1907-8, 1909-11), a research associate in palaeography of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (1911-53), and a consultant in palaeography for the Library of Congress. Corpus Christi College, Oxford, made him an honorary fellow in 1954. The Medieval Academy of America, of which he was a fellow, awarded him its Haskins medal (1957) and the Bibliographical Society gave him its gold medal (1959). He was a corresponding fellow of the British Academy and received similar recognition from academies or institutes in Boston, Dublin, Madrid, Munich, Paris, and Rome. Honorary doctoral degrees were conferred on him by Oxford (1936), North Carolina (1946), and the National University of Ireland (1964). 
Lowe always maintained that he became a palaeographer -- with the motto he devised, 'He is concerned with trifles' -- by a series of accidents, the most crucial being his encounter in 1903 with Ludwig Traube, a charismatic professor of medieval Latin philology in Munich who made the study of manuscripts somehow come alive. But he would not have met Traube if he had not gone to study classical philology with Georg Wissowa in Halle in 1902, and he would not have gone to Halle if Charles Bennett, his Latin professor at Cornell, had not incidentally mentioned to him that Halle abounded in 'fresh running water', which to Lowe meant the promise of trout fishing, his favourite form of recreation. Traube's suggested dissertation topic -- Monte Cassino as a centre for the transmission of the Latin classics -- deflected Lowe from Latin philology to palaeography, since he decided, in order to deal with this topic adequately, that he first needed to study the script used at Monte Cassino, the mother house of Benedictine monasticism. Ironically, he undoubtedly made more contributions to philology indirectly through palaeography than he would have made directly as a philologist. 
Lowe's dissertation, 'Die altesten Kalendarien aus Monte Cassino' (1908), and his next major work, 'Studia palaeographica: a contribution to the history of early Latin minuscule and to the dating of Visigothic manuscripts' (1910), did not deal formally with the script of Monte Cassino. His long investigations into this subject came to fruition only in 1914 with the publication of 'The Beneventan Script'. This rigorously systematic study of the main script used for the copying of books not only at Monte Cassino but in much of southern Italy from the eighth to the fourteenth century became a landmark in Latin palaeography. It set new standards for treating the history of a script and so overwhelmed the palaeographical world that it had the unintended effect of discouraging further serious research on the Beneventan script for more than a generation. Meant to be published with 'The Beneventan Script' but delayed until 1929 by the First World War and then by other projects were two folio-size volumes entitled 'Scriptura Beneventana' and containing facsimiles with transcriptions and descriptions of the main monuments in this script. 
Lowe next turned his attention to uncial, a script that had originated probably in the third century, if not the second, and became the most popular medium for the copying of books until well into the eighth century. What particularly excited his interest in this script was the discovery in 1915 of a fragment of the 'Letters' of Pliny the younger in uncial that was clearly at least several centuries older than any previously known copy of this text. Lowe's attempt to date and localize this fragment more precisely, published as part of 'A Sixth-Century Fragment of the 'Letters' of Pliny the Younger' (1922), forced him to enucleate objective criteria by which uncial manuscripts can be dated and placed. This work of enucleating criteria for dating and placing and of further clarifying the methodological assumptions underlying the interpretation of palaeographical evidence continued in his 'Codices Lugdunenses antiquissimi' (1924), dealing with the oldest manuscripts in Lyons, and in his 'Regula S. Benedicti' (1929), a study of the oldest extant manuscript of St Benedict's rule, now preserved in Oxford. During this period he also made his lone attempt at a comprehensive overview of Latin scripts in a chapter on handwriting in 'The Legacy of the Middle Ages' (1926; an expanded edition, 'Handwriting: our Medieval Legacy', was published separately in 1969). This essay forced him to deal with Caroline minuscule, the medieval script to which modern printing is most indebted. 
Unquestionably the greatest of Lowe's contributions to palaeography and perhaps unequalled in value by any other palaeographical publication of the twentieth century is his 'Codices Latini antiquiores (CLA)'. This work is a palaeographical guide in eleven folio-size volumes plus a supplement (1934-71; 2nd edn of vol. 2, 1972) to all the Latin literary manuscripts that survive in scripts antedating the ninth century. It contains detailed descriptions of 1811 manuscripts now preserved in libraries in twenty-one different countries and it provides one or more facsimiles of each manuscript. On the basis of the information in these descriptions Lowe was able to supply each manuscript with an exact or approximate place and date of origin, thus enabling the history of early Latin scripts to be put on a much sounder footing, and he himself began the needed work of synthesis in extensive introductions to several of the volumes. The project, which officially began in 1929 with a substantial grant from the Rockefeller Foundation and the promise of further financial or moral support from numerous other organizations including the Clarendon Press, occupied the remaining forty years of Lowe's life, with the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton eventually becoming its main source of funding. In the first volumes he was greatly aided by William J. Anderson and from volume 2 onwards especially by Bernhard Bischoff of the University of Munich. While working on 'CLA' Lowe managed to publish many other important contributions to palaeography well into his eighties. 
Lowe was wide-ranging in both his personal and his literary interests and they added a humanizing dimension to his scholarship. He was a persuasive speaker, a gifted conversationalist, and a genial host, capable of great friendships. Although physically small in stature, there was nothing small about his spirit, which could resolutely both face and overcome adversity. His eyesight so deteriorated from cataracts in his late sixties that he needed others to read for him; after successful surgery he wore glasses with thick lenses. From his mid-sixties onwards he was afflicted with angina pectoris and frequently had to resort to nitroglycerin. With his health so precarious, only an indomitable will to live enabled him to bring 'CLA' to a successful conclusion. Here he was strengthened by a religious disposition, which convinced him that Providence, and perhaps more particularly the intercessory power of St Benedict, whom he had done his best to honour, would see the project through. He never abandoned his solidarity with the Jewish people, but he did not practise Judaism and in later life told a daughter that if he were to adhere to any religion it would be the Roman Catholic. He died in Bad Nauheim, Germany, on 8 August 1969, shortly after seeing the proof sheets of the last volume of 'CLA'. His ashes were interred at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 50322


Gospatric, first earl of Lothian (d. 1138), baron, was apparently the youngest son of Gospatric, earl of Northumbria, who fled to Scotland 'c'.1072 and was given lands in Lothian by Malcolm III ('r'. 1058-93). Of the events of his life there is little record. His earliest mention in a Scottish writ comes 'c'.1120, and while he attested a number of Scottish charters between 'c'.1120 and 1134, he is very seldom styled earl. Rather, he is consistently referred to as 'Gospatric the brother of Dolfin', and his seal even bore this inscription. In one of his own charters, dated between 1124 and 1138, Gospatric did style himself 'Earl Gospatric, brother of Dolfin', while in a charter of David I, dated about June 1138, he appeared as 'Earl Gospatric'. The absence of the title of earl in most of these documents is puzzling. Indeed, it has sometimes led to the supposition that he could not have been earl of Lothian, this position being held instead by his brother Dolfin. Such a conclusion is not, however, generally accepted, and it may be that Gospatric received Lothian 'c'.1134, which would help to explain why he is referred to as earl only in charters dated between about 1134 and 1138. 
Gospatric's status in Northumbria is somewhat better attested. In early 1136, immediately after Henry I's death, Stephen confirmed his predecessor's grant to Gospatric of Beanley and other lands in Northumbria, amounting to at least fourteen manors. The service was not specified, but a document of 1212 stated that the barony had been held from the time of King Henry for 'inborh and utborh', suggesting that the earls of Lothian (later Dunbar) were required to regulate border disputes, and that his grants represented an attempt by Henry to bring the border region under better control. There can be no doubt that his status as lord of Beanley and earl of Lothian placed Gospatric in the topmost ranks of cross-border landholders. He clearly enjoyed prominence at the Scottish court, as evidenced by his appearances in the witness lists to royal acts, and also found favour with Henry I. His status in the north is significant in two further contexts. The first is the re-emergence of native Englishmen in positions of authority in the north in the period between 1100 and 1135, a notable feature of the reign of Henry I; the second is the fact that, from the perspective of the southern side of the border, at least, Gospatric should be regarded as one of Henry's 'new men' in the north. 
Gospatric's benefactions to the church suggest a conventional piety, although perhaps somewhat less than commensurate with his position as a great landholder in two realms. His only benefaction to an English monastery was a grant of the church of Edlingham to St Albans, although he did grant Edrom and Nesbit to Coldingham Priory, a dependency of Durham. In Scotland, Gospatric was a benefactor of the church of St Nicholas of Home in Berwickshire. With an unknown wife Gospatric had four sons -- Gospatric, who succeeded his father as earl of Lothian, and Adam, Edward, and Edgar, who were generously supported with English lands -- and one daughter, Juliana. Prominent local families descended from two of his sons, while his daughter married Ranulf de Merlay, lord of Morpeth, and the couple later, in 1138 or 1139, founded the Cistercian monastery of Newminster. 
Gospatric is believed to have died at the battle of the Standard, fought at Cowton Moor, north of Northallerton, on 22 August 1138, Henry of Huntingdon recording in his chronicle that the 'chief leader of the men of Lothian' was struck by an arrow and fell in battle at the head of a contingent of troops (Anderson, 203). He was certainly dead by 16 August 1139, when King David confirmed one of his grants to Coldingham, giving the monks the lands as Gospatric had held them from 'the day he was living and dead' (Lawrie, no. 121). The place of his burial is not known. 




@@@@@


doc= 50323


Dolfin (fl. 1092), the brother of Gospatric, is also a significant figure in northern history. Since the order of the three sons of Gospatric, earl of Northumbria, is usually given by medieval authors as Dolfin, Waldeve, and Gospatric, it is generally assumed that Dolfin was the eldest of the brothers. He has been identified with Dolfin of Carlisle, who was driven out by William Rufus in 1092. Some historians have proposed a different identification for Dolfin of Carlisle, however, suggesting that he was a descendant of that Dolfin, a Cumbrian noble, who was killed during Siward's invasion of Scotland in 1054. There is little evidence to sustain such an interpretation. It seems more likely that Dolfin was indeed the son of Gospatric, and was given governorship of Cumberland at the same time as extensive lands in Lothian were bestowed upon his father. His status as ruler of Cumbria may be reflected in the fact that his two younger brothers, Waldeve and Gospatric, styled themselves 'brother of Dolfin'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50324


Gospatric, second earl of Lothian (d. 1166), baron, was the son of Gospatric, first earl of Lothian and lord of Beanley, who was probably killed at the battle of the Standard in 1138. There is little record of his life. He was the eldest son, and appears as a witness to one of his father's grants to Coldingham some time before 1138. On his father's demise, Gospatric, who was old enough to be the father of a son handed over as a hostage to King Stephen in 1139, succeeded to both the earldom of Lothian and the serjeanty of Beanley, making him, like his father, a cross-border landholder of considerable note. His seal styles him 'earl of Lothian', although he is simply referred to as 'Earl Gospatric' in charters which he granted or attested. 
Gospatric's activities in Northumberland are poorly documented. In 1161 he rendered 12 marks for six knights' fees to the English exchequer, suggesting that the service of 'inborh and utborh', which his father had owed for the serjeanty of Beanley, had been commuted, at least in part, to knights' fees. Unlike his father, who was active in both Northumberland and Scotland, Gospatric's chief interests appear to have lain north of the border -- or this is the impression left by the surviving documentation, for Gospatric was a frequent witness to the acts of King Malcolm IV. This northern focus may have been the result of his father's generous support for Gospatric's younger brothers. 
In his role as a benefactor of the church, Gospatric also contrasts with his father. Not only was he a patron of the abbeys of Melrose and Kelso and the priory of Coldingham, but he also jointly founded, along with his wife, a Cistercian nunnery at Coldstream, probably in the later years of his life. He may also have founded the nunnery at Eccles, although the evidence for his involvement is uncertain. The chronicler Reginald of Durham relates an anecdote which reflects favourably upon the character of Gospatric. He records how one of Gospatric's tenants at Dunbar was a poor man afflicted with an incurable and agonizing disease. Reginald then describes how, out of his own goodwill and respect for the good works of this man, Gospatric allowed him to live on his lands free of any burdens for the remainder of his life. 
Gospatric married a woman named Derder (Deirdre), whose name was Gaelic, although nothing further is known of her ancestry. Their children were Waltheof (or Waldeve) and Patrick. The 'Chronicle of Melrose' records under the year 1166 the death of Earl Gospatric and the succession of his son Waltheof. One of the greatest difficulties surrounding Gospatric remains the place of his burial. In 1821 a covering stone for a sarcophagus, bearing the inscription, in Latin, 'Earl Gospatric' was discovered at Durham. Although this slab is usually said to be that of the earl of Northumbria who was driven out in 1072, it is almost certain that he was buried at Norham. On stylistic grounds, moreover, the slab belongs to the latter half of the twelfth century rather than the late eleventh, and is therefore more likely to mark the resting place of the Gospatric who died in 1166. That Gospatric may have ended his days at Durham is further suggested both by the favourable attitude of Reginald of Durham towards him, and by an obituary in the Durham 'Liber vitae', which records the name of 'Gospatrick, earl and monk' ('Liber vitae', 147). The identification of Durham as the burial place of Gospatric cannot be regarded as certain, however, for an alternative tradition records that, along with his wife, he was buried in the nunnery at Eccles which they may have founded. 


@@@@@


doc= 50325


Waltheof, third earl of Lothian (d. 1182), magnate, was the eldest son of Gospatric, second earl of Lothian (d. 1166), and his wife, Derder (Deirdre). His first appearance on the political scene took place within a year of the death of his grandfather Gospatric, probably at the battle of the Standard in 1138. Richard of Hexham recorded that among the Scottish hostages given to King Stephen to ensure the loyalty and good behaviour of David I was 'the son of earl Gospatrick' (Anderson, 'Scottish Annals', 214). This is generally taken to be a reference to Waltheof, who must have been only a youth at this time. 
Under the year 1166, the chronicle of Melrose tersely records the death of Earl Gospatric and the succession of his son. The sequence of events surrounding Waltheof's succession is complicated by the possibility that he witnessed a charter of 1165 as earl, so that he may have received the earldom before his father's death. This would accord well with evidence that Gospatric had retired as a monk to Durham late in life. Whatever the case may have been, Waltheof inherited both the earldom of Lothian in Scotland and the lordship of Beanley in Northumbria, making him a third generation cross-border landholder. Despite this, little is known of his activities in Northumbria, although some evidence survives for litigation over his English lands. 
Waltheof's involvement in one of the crucial episodes of the reign of King William the Lion illustrates both his primarily Scottish allegiance and his prominent position among the Scottish nobility. In 1173 William, angered by his failure to receive the earldom of Northumbria from Henry II of England, decided to make war on the English king. Jordan Fantosme describes how Waltheof and Duncan of Fife strove, unsuccessfully, to restrain the Scottish king from going to war. After William's ensuing capture at Alnwick in 1174, Waltheof acted as one of the hostages for the king under the terms of the treaty of Falaise of 1174. The hostages swore that if the king of Scots broke the agreement, they would side with the English king in order to force him to comply with the terms of the agreement. That Waltheof enjoyed a prominent place among the nobility of Scotland is attested not only by his role in the events of the 1170s, but also by his presence in the king's court when important disputes were settled, for instance that between Melrose Abbey and Richard de Moreville in 1180, and by his frequent attestations of King William's charters, suggesting that he was often in close attendance upon the king. This evidence makes it difficult to agree with those historians who argue that he preferred to remain aloof from political matters. 
Unlike his father, Waltheof does not appear to have been a particularly active benefactor of the church. He did, however, confirm some of the grants made by his ancestors, as well as bestow several grants upon the abbeys of Kelso and Melrose. These included a gift of some neifs (serfs) to Kelso and a common pasture to Melrose. Waltheof married a woman named Alina, of whom nothing more is known except that she predeceased her husband, dying in 1179. Waltheof and Alina had two sons and one daughter: Patrick, who succeeded Waltheof as earl; Constantine; and Alice or Helen. On his death, in 1182, Waltheof was called by the chronicle of Melrose 'earl of Dunbar', while the same source referred to Alina as 'countess of Dunbar' on her death (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.306, 301). These are the first occasions when the earldom was referred to as being of 'Dunbar' rather than 'Lothian', but in both his charters and on his seal Waltheof always referred to himself simply as 'Earl Waltheof'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50326


Patrick, fourth earl of Dunbar (d. 1232), magnate, was the son of Waltheof, earl of Lothian (d. 1182), and his wife, Alina (died 1179). The best documented of the early Dunbar earls, he makes his first appearance on the record about 1178, when he witnessed a royal charter as 'the son of Earl Waltheof'. When he succeeded, upon the death of his father, Patrick was the first to take the title 'earl of Dunbar', his predecessors having been styled 'of Lothian'. He also succeeded to the lordship of Beanley and other lands in Northumberland, which a document of 1212 reveals were held for the service of 'inborh and utborh', that is, the earls of Dunbar apparently had to regulate border disputes. These English lands engendered much litigation: in 1187 Patrick deprived a vassal of his lands of Dercester (modern Darnchester), in Berwickshire, and in 1226-7 he was involved in a dispute over tallage from the Middeltons. 
Earl Patrick was among the most prominent of the Scottish magnates and was a frequent witness to the acts of William the Lion between 'c'.1178 and 'c'.1210. When King William fell ill in 1195 and attempted to settle the succession upon Otto of Saxony, the proposed husband of the king's daughter Margaret, Patrick was in the forefront of the opposition to the scheme; but the king's recovery negated the need for immediate action. Earl Patrick was among those nobles from both England and Scotland present in November of 1200 when King William performed homage to King John at Lincoln. In 1221 he again accompanied a Scottish king to England: this time the monarch was Alexander II, and Patrick was present at York for his marriage to Joan (Joanna), the sister of Henry III. The fact that at the end of John's reign he temporarily forfeited his lands in Northumberland suggests that Patrick had previously associated himself with Alexander's claims upon the northern counties of England. Roger of Howden, who described Earl Patrick's role in rebuilding the bridge at Berwick following its destruction in 1199, called him 'warden ['custos'] of Berwick and... chief Justiciar of the whole kingdom of the Scots' (Anderson, 'Scottish Annals', 322). Three royal charters, dating from 1195 to 1205 or 1206, style him 'Justicia', but since Earl Duncan (II) of Fife was chief justice at that time, Patrick was probably justice of Lothian, an office in existence by the late twelfth century. The reference to Patrick as 'custos' of Berwick suggests that he held a prominent place in the community of the burgh and a position of responsibility on the Anglo-Scottish border. Like his ancestors, he endowed several monastic houses. He confirmed earlier grants and patronized the monks of Coldingham and Melrose as well as the canons of Dryburgh. But his relationship with the monasteries was often tempestuous, and led to a number of disputes. The best-known of these commenced in 1207, when Patrick had a falling-out with Melrose Abbey over a pasture on the Leader Water which was only resolved in 1208 with papal intervention. 
In 1184 Patrick married Ada, the daughter of King William the Lion, providing a good indication of his high social status. Ada predeceased her husband in 1200, but the couple had several sons -- Patrick, who succeeded as earl, William, Robert, and Fergus -- and more than one daughter, for documents refer to all his sons and daughters. Some time after the death of his first wife, Patrick married Christina, the widow of William de Brus (died 1211/12), but they are not known to have had any children. The chronicle of Melrose offers a touching portrayal of Patrick's death in 1232. It relates how, after celebrating Christmas with his children and kinsmen, Patrick was afflicted by a serious illness. He then: 'summoned Adam, the abbot of Melrose, his friend and kinsman; and he received from him the last unction, and the habit of religion. And bidding a last farewell to all, he closed his last day on the day of St Silvester [31 December], in the fiftieth year of his earldom. (Anderson, 'Early Sources', 2.486)' Patrick was buried in the Cistercian nunnery at Eccles and was succeeded by his son, Patrick, who had probably controlled the earldom for some years before his ageing father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 50328


Macduff family, earls of Fife (per. c.1095-1371), magnates, were the premier mormaers or (as they came to be known) earls in medieval Scotland. Closely associated with the Canmore dynasty, they were important in promoting acceptance of Anglo-Norman feudal practices in Scotland in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 
The earls of Fife before Duncan (I) (died 1154) are poorly documented and remain shadowy figures. AEthelred, the third or fourth son of Malcolm III and Margaret (both died 1093), has been described as the first earl on record. In a later memorandum of his grant of lands in Fife to the Culdees of Loch Leven he is styled 'a man of venerable memory, abbot of Dunkeld and moreover earl of Fife' (Lawrie, no. 14). However, this is the only evidence to name AEthelred as earl of Fife, and there are many problems with accepting it at face value, or, indeed, with regarding AEthelred as having had any connection with the earldom of Fife. If Fife is not here an error for another name (unlikely in this context) the scribe may have attributed the title to him when he was in fact only the temporary recipient of the revenues of Fife, before the accession or restoration of 


@@@@@


doc= 50329


Hopkins, Charles Plomer (1861-1922), founder of missions to seamen and trade unionist, was born on 7 March 1861 in Brewster, Massachusetts, USA, the son of an American master mariner employed for many years as a river pilot in Burma, and an English mother, Elizabeth. As a young child he and two sisters were brought to England to stay with maternal Cornish relatives, before being taken to Burma in 1867. In 1869 Hopkins travelled back to England to continue his education. He later recalled the effect on his future ministry of seeing officers' cruelty to the sailors who had befriended him on this voyage. 
The dates of his attendance at Falmouth grammar school, then at Trinity College, London, after a spell in Heidelberg, are uncertain. He returned in 1882 to Rangoon as assistant organist at the Anglican pro-cathedral. Hopkins gave as the reason for his refusal of promotion as organist at Madras and of his interest in seamen an encounter with drunken midshipmen on his way to evening prayer. His discovery of their great neglect and his natural rapport with them prompted the bishop of Rangoon to appoint him to the vacant Rangoon seamen's chaplaincy, initially as a layman reading for holy orders. He was ordained deacon in 1884, and priest in 1885. Hopkins soon filled the seamen's church but his championing of seafarers' rights, especially after an incident where an overloaded ship sank, set him at odds with the shipping worthies on the chaplaincy committee. Things came to a head during the short Third Anglo-Burmese War in 1886; the bishop sent Hopkins to the seasonal chaplaincy at Akyab for six months to allow tempers to cool. 
In what proved to be two years at Akyab Hopkins ran the parish, and opened a seamen's club. During this period he came to the conclusion that work among seamen could best be achieved by a band of men under religious vows. In 1888 malaria forced him to England for convalescence. He stayed briefly with the Revd Osborne Jay's parochial brotherhood, the ephemeral Society of St Paul (SSP) in Shoreditch. Within months he had taken vows and sailed to Calcutta as port chaplain and prior-provincial of the SSP, soon transmuted into his own Order of St Paul (OSP), recruited from the maritime community it sought to serve. Hopkins opened several seamen's clubs, and also established the Seamen's Friendly Society of St Paul, which grew rapidly, offering seamen-members legal protection as well as a religious rule. His bishop was in no doubt that it was a trade union. Hopkins's litigiousness (some thirty cases in five years) on behalf of seamen incensed local shipowners, some of whom, when other pressure failed, tried to get a young boy to make public accusations against him. This backfired against the instigators, and was dismissed in court, but dogged Hopkins as rumour for the rest of his life. 
Hopkins returned to Britain in 1894 to strengthen his community: he opened priories at Barry in south Wales, and Greenwich, and built Alton Abbey in Hampshire as a mother house. By 1900 the Indian priories had been closed. The 'Colonial Clergy Act' (1874) prevented his functioning publicly as a priest in England, rumour probably encouraging the archbishop of Canterbury to withhold his licence. Instead, Hopkins became increasingly involved with the National Seamen's and Firemen's Union (NSFU), meeting its president, Havelock Wilson, in 1900. In 1910 he became secretary to the international committee of seamen's unions, and in this role he announced the start of the first international strike of seamen in June 1911. He kept Hermann Jochade of the International Transport Federation informed. Hopkins toured the country as a major NSFU speaker, and was key NSFU negotiator at its resolution. After the strike was over he was appointed a trustee of the NSFU, serving until 1922 as its troubleshooter and research specialist. His close involvement with merchant navy crewing issues during the First World War was rewarded with a CBE. Two publications by Hopkins, 'Altering Plimsoll's Mark' (1913) and 'The National Service of British Seamen, 1914-18' (1920), offered detailed statistics and horrific examples to support the campaign to improve safety and conditions at sea. These were concerns he attempted to bring to the attention of seamen themselves with 'The Seafarer's Annual' (1921). 
Hopkins died at St Mawes, Cornwall, on 24 March 1922, after years of increasingly bad health, and was buried at Alton Abbey. At his death the OSP had dwindled to two brothers and one sister from a peak of around twenty members. It survived as a Benedictine community (and was depicted in fiction as the Order of St George in Compton MacKenzie's 'The Altar Steps'). Although largely forgotten by the Church of England, his work influenced the formation of the Roman Catholic OEuvre de Mer (1893), a French organization for work among fishermen, and also of the Apostleship of the Sea (1895). 


@@@@@


doc= 50331


Allen, William Edward David (1901-1973), historian and businessman, was born on 6 January 1901 at 12 Sussex Place, Regent's Park, London, the eldest of the three sons of William Edward Allen (1860-1919), printer and theatre owner, and his wife, Sarah Collett (1863-1944), daughter of Thomas Phinn QC, who had some success on the stage as Cissie Grahame. His father was born in Belfast, the third son of David Allen, who had founded the printing business of David Allen & Sons, which under William senior's guidance moved its headquarters to London, where it became the nerve centre of theatrical advertising in Britain and a major force in bill-posting. His remarkable mother later went into theatrical management and became, after her husband's death, both chairman and majority shareholder of the Allen business. W. E. D. (Bill) Allen was baptized into the Church of England (despite his family's Presbyterian origins), was educated in Mr Goodhart's house at Eton College (1914-18), and published his first book, 'The Turks in Europe' (1919), when he was eighteen. 
Instead of going to Oxford after his father's death, Allen briefly studied commerce and accounting, joined the family firm as a 'canvasser' in 1920 and was made a director in 1922. He became chairman in 1927, retaining that position until 1970. His 'David Allens: the History of a Family Firm, 1857-1957' (1957) gives a vivid account of family tensions, the move out of printing and theatrical advertising, and the unsuccessful attempts to make the firm an advertising agency in its own right and to become a force in radio advertising from a base in Andorra. The business was highly sensitive to changes in national prosperity, and suffered considerably from restrictions imposed in each of the world wars, but it recovered rapidly after 1945. 
The business gave Bill Allen financial independence, but never wholly absorbed him. In the 1920s he travelled extensively and acted as a special correspondent for the 'Morning Post' during the Riff and Graeco-Turkish wars. He published a sober study of the Caucasus in the 'Nations of Today' series (1923), and a mannered book called 'Beled-es-Siba' (1925): mainly about Morocco, it also includes an affectionate and brilliant essay on the Orangemen of west Tyrone which has much historical value. On visits to Constantinople and the countries of the Black Sea he made a remarkable collection of icons, dispersed from former Greek churches in Turkey, and from the Soviet Union. Twenty-four of the icons were later acquired by the National Gallery of Ireland. 
On 6 December 1922 Allen married Lady Phyllis Edith King (1897-1947), daughter of the third earl of Lovelace, and their daughter was born in 1925. The marriage was not a success and ended in divorce in 1932. Until about 1935 Cissie Allen financed her son's personal enterprises. She also provided a home at Commonwood House, Chipperfield, Hertfordshire, where he and his brothers could bring their guests at weekends: in Bill's case, he wrote later, these would include 'bizarre intellectuals, Caucasian philologists and exiled national leaders from the remoter parts of Central Asia' (Allen, 262). 
In 1929 Allen's career took a controversial turn. He had always identified with the Ulster origins of his family, and although there was a strong family tradition against mixing business and politics, he became Ulster Unionist MP for West Belfast. He used his time in parliament to raise topics from China to Central America, but he was less good as a speaker than as a writer. He became one of Sir Oswald Mosley's closest associates, and, alone among those taking the Conservative whip, joined Mosley's New Party. Although Allen ceased to be an MP in 1931 he wrote the 'Letters of Lucifer' for 'The Blackshirt', attacking tory plutocracy, and in 1934 published a full-scale defence of British fascism, 'BUF: Oswald Mosley and British Fascism', under the pseudonym James Drennan. In it he argued for a collectivist 'Elizabethan' model of society, instead of the liberal bourgeois system which he considered to have failed, and that parliament needed streamlining if the drastic action required to cure the evils of the depression was to be taken. The book presented Mosley's career in heroic terms, and contrasted it with the cowardice of the MPs who might have joined him. It was British fascism's most systematic defence. Later Allen withdrew from Mosley in disillusionment. 
In 1932 Allen had published his lively and respected 'History of the Georgian People' and that July married Paula Alexandra Gellibrand (1893-1981), formerly wife of the marques de Casa Maury. She was a society beauty, much photographed by Cecil Beaton, and may have been the model for the heroine of Enid Bagnold's 'Serena Blandish'. They lived partly at Mullagh Cottage, near Killyleagh, co. Down, and jointly wrote 'Strange Coast' (1936), a novel of romance and adventure set in a fictionalized Georgia of the 1920s, which appeared under the pseudonym Liam Pawle. The marriage was dissolved in 1939. 
Between 1939 and 1949, Allen was mainly in Africa and the Middle East. He wrote a valuable history of Ukraine, prepared with the collaboration of several Russian and Ukrainian scholars, which appeared in 1940, dedicated to N. M., 'half Ukrainian, half Angel' -- Nataliya (Natasha) Maksimovna ('c'.1900-1966), daughter of Maksim Kossovsky, late of the imperial Moscow bar. She became his third wife on 6 March 1943. During the Second World War, Allen first served with the Household Cavalry. In 1941 he was a captain with Orde Wingate's military mission to Abyssinia where, as transport officer, he successfully took Sudanese camels over mountain terrain. He was invalided out of the army and held a series of civilian posts as press attache and information officer, and became information counsellor at Ankara during the critical period between 1947 and 1949. He was appointed OBE in 1948. Penguin published his book 'Guerrilla War in Abyssinia' (1943) and his accounts, with Pavel Muratov, 'The Russian Campaigns of 1941-43' (1944) and 'The Russian Campaigns of 1944-1945' (1946). The book on Abyssinia is autobiographical and has inimitable period atmosphere. It is also a classic study of the conditions for successful guerrilla war. 
In 1946 Allen acquired Whitechurch House, Cappagh, co. Waterford, and from 1949 Natasha Allen's talents turned the derelict mansion and gardens into a home which welcomed a constant stream of guests. Allen now divided his working time between the affairs of David Allens, the estate at Whitechurch, and the two major books which he completed during the 1950s. 'Caucasian Battlefields' (1953), written with Pavel Muratov, remains a classic study. 'David Allens' (1957) is a fine piece of business history and a stylish collective biography of the Allen family. He also wrote a short study, 'The Poet and the Spae Wife' (1960), which linked his interest in the history of the Maghrib with his affection for Ireland, and in 1963 published a powerful essay, 'Problems of Turkish Power in the Sixteenth Century'. He continued to travel widely, to Iran, to Alaska, and to Yucatan, accompanied by Natasha, though her health had begun to fail. She died in 1966 after a lengthy illness. In 1969 he married (Gertrude) Anne Pentland, a nurse. A son was born in 1972. 
Allen's final historical study, prepared with Anthony Mango as translator, was an edition of the records of the Russian embassies to the Georgian kings between 1589 and 1605, which was published by the Hakluyt Society in 1970. He died on 18 September 1973 at 96 Lower Leeson Street, Dublin, and was buried at Chipperfield parish church, Hertfordshire. 
Allen was a man of many talents: a gentleman, a businessman, a philosopher, an adventurer, but continuously and most powerfully an energetic historian and linguist. He made his library, later held by the University of Indiana, the finest private collection of books on Georgia and the Caucasus in the Western world. Throughout his life he travelled extensively in remote places and may be the only person to have walked the entire length of the Turkish-Russian frontier. Personally he was exceedingly loyal and generous. His history of David Allens brings out the depth of his affection for his family and its Ulster origins, and for those who had worked for the enterprise. 


@@@@@


doc= 50333


Bradley, Humphrey (fl. 1584-1625), designer of land drainage systems, was possibly the son of John Bradley ('fl'. 1561-1568), concierge of the English trading house at Bergen op Zoom, Brabant, who was married to Anna van der Delft. He first appears in England in 1584, when he submitted to secretary Walsingham a lengthy and able 'advys' on the cost of improvements to Dover harbour, though he was not employed on the scheme. 
In 1589 Bradley was involved in various local drainage schemes: on the River Ouse in Cambridgeshire, the Nene near Wisbech, and the Witham in Lincolnshire. He was the first to see the need of and to plan for a single comprehensive drainage scheme for the whole of the fens, and on 3 December 1589 he presented a treatise on the topic to Lord Burghley. Access to Burghley was probably assisted by Bradley's marriage on 27 June 1589, in London, to Anna Sermantens from Delft, whose uncle, Joachim Ortell, was one of the Dutch diplomatic representatives in London. Bradley proposed that, since all the fenlands were above sea level, a simple gravitational drainage system would be sufficient, obviating the need for mills and machinery; this anticipated the system of straight new cuts later employed by Vermuyden. Bradley suggested that 'the greatest impediments to all good drainage projects live in the minds and the imaginations of men' (Darby, 264) and that privy council inaction over his scheme owed much to the selfish interests of individual landowners and counties. 
In a letter of 3 March 1592 Bradley claimed to have leased from Lord Lumley all the coal on his manor at Hartlepool, but it is unclear if he ever developed the enterprise. Two further submissions to Burghley in March and April 1593 contained a comprehensive survey of the fenland economy and topography, and sensibly suggested that the variety of tenures demanded an act of parliament and crown finance to compel agreement. Although in the Netherlands he was reputed to be a skilled dyker, it is unlikely that Bradley had any experience of very large-scale drainage (as opposed to land reclamation by embankment). His suggested drainage methods seem woefully inadequate, and his assessment that the work could be completed by 700-800 men in six months for $5000 was hopelessly optimistic, given Vermuyden's later experiences. Yet the reason for Burghley's rejection of the scheme was probably not its technical defects but Bradley's failure to win financial patronage when well-placed groups of prospective English undertakers had a rival interest in fen drainage. 
Bradley finally left England in 1594. Two years later he was sent to France by the states general of the United Provinces to aid Henri IV in land reclamation and drainage for strategic military purposes. On the establishment of peace, he was appointed on 1 January 1599 'maitre des digues du royaume', which conferred a practical monopoly of land drainage throughout France. Initial difficulties were remedied by a royal edict (1607), which established a new body, the Association pour le Dessechement des Marais et Lacs de France, whose members secured the necessary capital and shared in land allocation on completion of the work. Backed by Sully, the king's chief minister, and with strong connections at court, Bradley presided over extensive drainage works in the Auvergne, Languedoc, and Saintonge. He was unable to persuade Sully to have Rouen joined to Marseilles by connecting Joigny on the River Seine to Dijon on the Saone, but overall his work in France seems to have been successful. 
Bradley was alive in France in 1625 and probably dead by 1639. His private life is glimpsed only in his letters to and from his wife, and in the baptism of two children, Joachim (1592) and Sara (1594), at the Dutch church at Austin Friars, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50335


Goodyear, Hugh (bap. 1588, d. 1661), Reformed minister in the Netherlands, was born at Manchester and baptized there on 28 May 1588, the son of Thomas Goodyear (died 1599), a wealthy cloth merchant, and his first wife, Ellen Proudlove (died 1592). Admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1608, he graduated BA in 1613 and proceeded MA in 1616. After Cambridge he left for the Netherlands, travelling on a privy council pass issued on 26 October 1616. He settled at Leiden, a crossroads for travel through the Low Countries, where he lodged with Thomas Brewer, the puritan separatist book publisher. On 14 January 1617 Goodyear enrolled as a theology student at Leiden University. 
Preaching opportunities abounded for Goodyear at Leiden because of the death in 1616 of Robert Durie, the pastor of the English -- Scottish church. The church turned to him to be the new preacher, and on 16 November 1617 the city magistrates approved him and provided an annual salary of 400 guilders -- he held the position for the rest of his life. Not being previously ordained in England, and distrusting episcopal ordinations, Goodyear arranged for a quick ordination from the French Calvinist preacher of Leiden. His English-speaking congregation of more than 200 families was a state-supported Reformed church in communion with the Dutch Reformed church, and as such was distinct from the other, rival, English church of the city, John Robinson's separatist church, which was entirely self-supporting and independent. Goodyear's church attracted many visitors, and in 1627 he appealed successfully to the city magistrates for a rise in salary because of the heavy entertaining he had to do because 'foreign preachers and church members ordinarily come addressed to him from other kingdoms' (reg. kerk. zaken., no. 2150, fol. 114'v', gemeente archiev, Leiden). On 11 June 1627 he married his first wife, Sara Jansdochter van Wassenberch (died 1642). 
Goodyear's theological position was Calvinistic. In Dutch affairs he supported the contra-remonstrants and opposed the Arminians; in all matters pertaining to English religion, he sided with puritans. His friends included both presbyterians like John Paget and Robert Paget, and Independents such as William Ames and Hugh Peter, but he always condemned separatism. In his own congregation he emphasized preaching, discipline, strict sabbath observance, and simplicity of worship. Ceremonialism and the English prayer book were abhorrent to him; he never allowed them in his church. Many of the surrounding Dutch Reformed pastors considered him too strict in church discipline, especially on sabbath practice. For many years he stayed aloof from the Dutch Reformed classis, but, feeling isolated and in need of fellowship after the deaths of many of his English friends, he eventually compromised and took membership in 1655. Two years earlier his second wife, Cornelia Aertsdochter Schoor, whom he had married in 1648, had also died. There were no children from either marriage. 
Although Goodyear had connections with various publishers, which he exploited to facilitate other people's publications, he did not publish any books himself. Nevertheless he achieved considerable standing in puritan circles for his scholarship and sturdy defence of orthodox doctrine and he corresponded widely with church leaders of his puritan persuasion in Europe, England, and America. His manuscript collection contains sermon notes, economic records, and letters from John Cotton, Hugh Peter, John Paget, and many others. At his death his library of 1063 titles had to be sold; the sellers printed an auction catalogue (1662) of thirty-six pages, listing each book, which is of great interest for examination of Reformed, puritan tastes in books. Goodyear died on 8 November 1661 and was buried in the Pieterskerk at Leiden on 11 November. His will directed that one-third of his property should go to the poor of his church and the remainder to relatives who lived in England and America. 


@@@@@


doc= 50336


Culpeper, Sir Cheney (bap. 1601, d. 1663), advocate of political reform and technological innovation, was born into a respectable family whose seat was at Greenway Court, Hollingbourne, Kent, and baptized at All Saints, Hollingbourne, on 15 April 1601. He was the elder son of Sir Thomas Culpeper (1577/8-1662) and Elizabeth Cheney (1582-1638). He followed his father to Hart Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated on 6 November 1618 and graduated BA on 7 February 1620, and thereafter, a year later, to the Middle Temple. He left chambers on 10 February 1625 and was knighted by Charles I at Farnham on 8 September 1628. The following year he was sent to Elizabeth of Bohemia at The Hague with the official letter of condolence on the death of her eldest son. He probably remained there until 1631 when he became a gentleman in her service. He may well have been among the young men at the Middle Temple a decade earlier who, to James I's annoyance, swore an oath to live and die in the service of the winter queen when Habsburg forces invaded the Palatinate. 
On 24 October 1632 Culpeper married Elizabeth Stede, the granddaughter of William Stede of Harrietsham, Kent, half-brother to his uncle; the couple had five children. At the time of the marriage his father settled the recently purchased house and estate at Leeds Castle on the couple. Cheney's own estimate that he was worth about $500 per annum at about this time is entirely plausible, but from 1641 onwards unexpected events radically reshaped his life. At some point that year he became gravely ill and was not expected to live, and he assigned the control of his estates to his father. He recovered from his illness, but, in the winter of 1641-2, just as his father's royalism was reinforced by the appointment of his son-in-law and distant kinsman, Sir John Colepeper, as Charles I's chancellor of the exchequer and privy councillor, Sir Cheney's support for the Long Parliament became more pronounced and so Sir Thomas refused to relinquish the estates to his son. Thereafter Culpeper tried to recover his property, sequestered because of his father's royalism. He had to fend off family creditors and sue for relief from parliamentary forced loans, levied from him on the basis of estates which he did not possess and whose revenues he did not enjoy. After the civil war he mortgaged his way out of his immediate difficulties, but his financial stability was compromised and his insecure legal title to his properties was exploited by his brother-in-law. Culpeper eventually surrendered his claims to the Leeds Castle estate and died intestate with debts in London; he was buried at the entrance to the north aisle of the Middle Temple Church on 2 April 1663. His widow was still alive in 1674, when her will was drawn up. 
The year 1641 was also fundamental in another respect. Culpeper read by chance the published text of John Gawden's fast sermon, preached before the Long Parliament on Sunday 29 November 1640 on 'Zechariah' 8: 19 ('I will turn your fasts into feasts; therefore love the truth and peace'). It contained an enthusiastic endorsement of the singular promoter of educational change, scientific advancement, and social welfare, Samuel Hartlib, and commended the endeavours of the Moravian educationist Jan Amos Comenius (Komensky). According to Hartlib's diary he met Culpeper for the first time on 3 April 1641, the latter contributing the first of many regular payments to support him. Culpeper's surviving correspondence among Hartlib's papers documents his reactions to, and engagement with, Hartlib's diverse plans for a fundamental reformation of state and society ('Letters', ed. Braddick). 
Culpeper emerges from this correspondence as an intriguing virtuoso with a fascination for technical change. During the civil war he experimented with leathern guns and supported the development of Edmund Felton's 'engine' (a form of tank). He was interested in pump technology and new mechanica and used convertible husbandry on his Romney Marsh estate, introduced clover, and concentrated on improved methods of sowing corn by means of a mechanical seed drill as well as exploring the possibilities for a mechanical thresher. He described himself as one of those 'whose spirit God hathe raysed out of this mudde of custom' and who must deploy his 'talents towards others' ('Letters', ed. Braddick, 287). He had carefully considered notions for reforming the patents system to allow the wider distribution of innovations and served as one of the fifteen commissioners for the advancing and regulating of trade established by the Rump in August 1650. As his comments on a proposed 'bank of lands', published by Samuel Hartlib as 'An Essay upon Master W. Potters Designe' (1653), indicate, Culpeper was well informed on the example for economic prosperity afforded by the Netherlands. 
Culpeper had an abiding interest in chemistry, attempted a translation of the first part of Rudolf Glauber's 'Furni novi', and adopted the notions of the natural world of Nuysement and Vigenere. The purpose of natural philosophy was to discover the 'hidden and inwarde motion' represented by the growing forces encouraged by the sun but forever constrained by the grossness in nature. The art of the chemist was to release the latter from the former, without brutalizing nature. He applied these notions in turn to political events, where he emerges as a committed parliamentarian with a radical political agenda. Political instability ('motion'), like chemical change, involved releasing human energies from the 'gross matter' of 'custome' and the 'dark corners of prescription'. Ecclesiastical monopoly, the aristocratic interest, even the tyranny of kings must eventually be cast down in order to release the light of human reason, the way of public good, and the 'slow motion towards the happines of a nation whether in religion or liberty'. Culpeper's letters reveal his eschatological excitement in the later 1640s. In March 1647, for example, he wrote: 'I have still a super confidence that God will finally breake those linsy woolsy packinges up of thinges, which our ecclesiasticall & civill Aristocracies must make for their owne defence, & that the stone (now in full motion) will not ly still till it come to the bottome of the hill. ('Letters', ed. Braddick, 292-3)' Of Culpeper's reactions at the close of the Commonwealth and protectorate very little is known, but it is not surprising to find him among the supporters for Harrington's 'Proposition in Order to the Proposing of a Commonwealth or Democracie'. Perhaps anticipating the age of Elias Artista (predicted by Paracelsus as occurring in 1658), Culpeper's Good Old Cause was one to be worked for and waited for with patience, and whose time was only just nigh. 


@@@@@


doc= 50338


Athelwold (d. 1156/7), bishop of Carlisle, was probably born in Yorkshire, the son of unknown English parents. Nothing is known of his early life, but at some point he attracted the attention of Henry I, whose confessor he became. The lands in the Yorkshire soke of Pocklington which he came to hold were presumably given to him by this king. By 1122, moreover, he had become prior of the Augustinian house of Nostell, recently founded by Henry I to replace a community of hermits and the recipient of a papal bull of confirmation in 1120. Athelwold built the crypt of the new monastic church, and under his direction Nostell flourished, supported by local magnates, Thurstan, archbishop of York, and Henry I. Indeed he remained active in court circles, and the election of William de Corbeil to be archbishop of Canterbury in 1123 is said to have been partly due to Athelwold's advice. In 1131 he was one of the English churchmen who represented Henry I at the papal council held at Rheims. But he was also at work in the north of England. Not only was he prior of Nostell, but it was also the unanimous tradition at Carlisle that upon the foundation of the Augustinian priory there in 1122 or 1123, Athelwold was its first prior. Such a promotion might seem improbable, but given the likelihood that the foundation of Carlisle Priory was from the first intended to lead to the creation of a bishopric in English Cumbria, it may be that his priorate was intended to be only a temporary office, and lasted longer because the establishment of the new see was delayed for a decade. It is certain, however, that as prior of Nostell Athelwold was involved in the foundation of houses of Augustinian canons in Scotland, a programme supported by Alexander I and David I. Scone was a daughter house of Nostell, and the first prior of St Andrews after its refoundation as a house of Augustinian canons had been a Nostell canon under Athelwold, who was present at his consecration at York in 1127. 
In 1133 a new diocese of Carlisle was created, and Athelwold was appointed its bishop, being consecrated on 6 August. Since one of the purposes of the new see was to exclude the claims of the bishop of Glasgow in a region taken under English rule only in 1092, it may have been hoped that Athelwold's Scottish connections would make the creation of his diocese, which was bound to appear provocative north of the recently created border, acceptable to David I. But only two years later David annexed the northern counties of England. Whether Athelwold had been active as bishop between 1133 and 1135 is impossible to say. He certainly continued to attend Henry I, but a letter of Osbert of Clare, praising the industry of this new light on the church's candlestick, could be construed as showing that Athelwold had also been busy in his diocese. But following David I's seizure of that diocese, he seems to have stayed at Stephen's court, accompanying Stephen to Normandy in 1137, and several times attesting his charters. However, in 1138, following the battle of the Standard, the papal legate, Alberic, secured Athelwold's return to Carlisle and his reconciliation with King David. The bishop did not finally sever links with Stephen until 1143, but was increasingly likely to be found in his diocese, and at the Scottish court, witnessing charters for David I, and for David's son and grandson, at Edinburgh and Bamburgh, as well as at Carlisle. He secured for Nostell a grant of 40's'. yearly from the Scottish king's revenues at Bedford, and when those were lost, had it replaced by an equivalent grant from the Carlisle silver mines. 
In Cumbria Athelwold attended to the organization of his diocese. The archdeaconry which served it was his creation. Charters for Wetheral Priory refer to synodal and archidiaconal dues, and express concern that vicars be properly maintained. An attempt to affiliate Carlisle Priory to the austere observance of the Augustinian abbey of Arrouaise seems to have failed, but local tradition ascribed to Athelwold the foundation of the hospital of St Nicholas outside Carlisle, and he may well have also founded the city's grammar school. In a wider ecclesiastical context he supported William de Ste Barbe against the attempts of William Cumin to intrude himself into the see of Durham between 1141 and 1144, and later showed his sympathies with the cause of ecclesiastical reform by aligning himself with Henry Murdac against William Fitzherbert in their struggle for the archbishopric of York. Athelwold was numbered among Murdac's supporters in 1147, and when Murdac was driven from York in the following year, Athelwold received him with appropriate respect at Carlisle. But although Murdac's cause owed much of its strength to the fervour of the Cistercians, Athelwold clearly continued to show favour to traditional Benedictine monasticism, confirming grants to Whitby, Wetheral, and St Mary's of York. 
By the early 1150s Athelwold's health and strength were probably beginning to fail. A prior of Carlisle appears for the first time in 1150, indicating that if Athelwold had indeed held that office, he was now relinquishing it. A significant proportion of his income must have come from the revenues of Carlisle Priory, since the bishopric had never been adequately endowed. But now he confirmed the cathedral canons in their own possessions. In 1153 he resigned as prior of Nostell, pleading bodily weakness (though it is also possible that he was anxious to avoid having anything to do with William Fitzherbert, by then reinstated as archbishop of York). He was able to attend the coronation of Henry II in Westminster Abbey on 19 December 1154, and he subscribed a charter of the new king's at York in the following year, but he died on either 25 May 1156 or (more probably) 10 May 1157. Athelwold was later believed to have been buried at Carlisle Priory. The diocese of which he was the first bishop was by that time so firmly established that after his death it was able to survive an episcopal vacancy of nearly fifty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 50339


Brewer, William (d. 1244), bishop of Exeter, was a nephew and protege of the baron William Brewer, an important royal servant with considerable territorial interests and frequent employment in Devon; nothing is known of either his parentage or his education. Through his namesake's influence Brewer obtained, in the vacancy after Bishop Henry Marshal's death in 1206, the episcopal church of Braunton (1208) and the cathedral precentorship; and in the vacancy after Bishop Simon's death (September 1223), when the baron was royal custodian of the bishopric, Brewer was quickly elected to the see and was consecrated on 21 April 1224. No one thought him learned, but his promotion was not considered scandalous. 
Brewer assumed office towards the close of Henry III's turbulent minority and was caught up in the new spirit of liberty in English society sparked off in 1215 by 'Magna Carta'. His cathedral chapter, dissatisfied with its archaic constitution and lack of an elective head, had probably made reform a precondition of his election, and within two years he agreed to the creation of the offices of an elective dean and a chancellor, endowed the deanery, and increased the revenues of the other dignitaries, the vicars-choral, and the common fund, all at the expense of the episcopal estate. He sanctioned the building of a chapter house and started to erect a new palace. He agreed not to confirm or alienate in perpetuity any churches or lands without the consent of the dean and chapter. And he issued in a synod the first comprehensive set of statutes for his diocese. These owed much to those promulgated at Salisbury. He also granted charters of liberties to the boroughs he founded at Crediton and Penryn. 
Hardly had Brewer been consecrated than Henry III ordered him to take custody of the rebel Falkes de Breaute's castle at Plympton; and he would have taken it by storm had not his troops demurred. His creation of a semi-independent capitular government at Exeter increased his own freedom. In the summer of 1227, making use of the 4000 marks of silver bequeathed to him in 1226 by his uncle, the baron, he sailed from Brindisi with his friend Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester, for the Holy Land, where the two played an important part in its affairs both before and after the arrival of the emperor Frederick II on his belated crusade. In March 1228 Brewer visited Jerusalem, liberated by the emperor, and, since his presence is not noted at Exeter before April 1231, he probably then accompanied des Roches on his leisurely return through Italy and France, engaged in diplomatic business. Back in England, he carried out some diplomatic missions for Henry III: in 1234, again with des Roches, treating for peace with Louis IX of France; in 1235 conducting Henry's sister, Isabella, to her marriage with the emperor at Worms in July; and early in 1236 again negotiating in France. In January 1241 he crossed the channel with the departing papal legate, Otto, bound for Gregory IX's (abortive) general council at Rome. He reached Pontigny by 24 March. Before October 1231 he was constructing with the king's help a deer park at Faringdon, parcel of his chapelry of Bosham, and royal gifts of deer, venison, and timber were regular until August 1237. 
The man of action was also pious. Brewer was devoted to the Virgin Mary and founded at Crediton a hermitage dedicated to her. He was generous to religious houses and interested in indulgences. He fostered the religious services in his cathedral, and was remembered as the greatest donor of vestments and ornaments to the cathedral treasury; his anniversary service was awarded the exceptional use of eight candles. Brewer requested permission to resign, and on 15 December 1244 Pope Innocent IV ordered the new bishop of Winchester to receive his resignation; but he had already died, on 24 November. The chronicler Matthew Paris noted that he was remarkable for his good character, noble birth, and ability, perhaps an understatement of his virtues. 


@@@@@


doc= 50340


Bohun, Jocelin de (1105x1110?-1184), bishop of Salisbury, was born into the Sussex branch of the Bohun family, probably between about 1105 and 1110. His uncle ('patruus') was Engelger de Bohun (died 1175), and he was a close relative, perhaps first cousin once removed, of Savaric Fitzgeldewin, bishop of Bath (died 1205). He was somehow related to the earls of Gloucester, Earl William (died 1183) calling him his kinsman ('cognatus'). His brother, Richard, became bishop of Coutances, and his illegitimate son, Reginald fitz Jocelin (d. 1191), was successively bishop of Bath and archbishop-elect of Canterbury. Bohun's early life and education are obscure, but, since Pope Alexander III ('r'. 1159-81) later claimed him as an old friend, and his son was known as the Lombard, it is likely that he studied in north Italy, where his son was born, possibly of a Lombard mother. The first certain context for him is the household of Henry de Blois, bishop of Winchester (died 1171), who appointed him archdeacon of Winchester before 1139. His election as bishop of Salisbury in 1141 or 1142 was the unforeseen outcome of a dispute over the filling of the see between King Stephen and Henry de Blois, who was by then papal legate. After the preferred candidates of both sides had been mutually rejected, and following Stephen's capture in February 1141, Henry supported Bohun's nomination, although his election by the chapter was not unanimous, being opposed particularly by Dean Azo. He was consecrated by Archbishop Theobald (died 1161) in 1142. He attended Henry II's coronation at Westminster on 19 December 1154, and assisted at Archbishop Thomas Becket's consecration at Canterbury on 3 June 1162. 
Bohun played a significant part in the ensuing conflict between Becket and the king, but one dictated more by circumstance than by conviction or principle. When the quarrel began he was out of favour with Henry, possibly owing to differences between them over his reluctant quitclaim of Devizes Castle in 1157, and moreover he had recently followed the archbishop's advice on the treatment of criminous clerks. At the Council of Clarendon in January 1164 it was partly Henry's enmity towards Bohun and William Turbe, bishop of Norwich (died 1174), that induced Becket reluctantly to accept Henry's demands. When Becket and the bishops eventually swore to observe the realm's ancient customs, Bohun hesitated and sought guidance from the archbishop, who told him to swear with the others. During Becket's trial at Northampton in October 1164 Bohun was one of two bishops who attempted to console him, while also joining other bishops later in advising him to resign. 
Bohun was turned into an enemy of Becket by an episode subsidiary to the main dispute. In May 1165 John of Oxford (died 1200) was one of the king's emissaries in discussions with the antipope Paschal III's party at the imperial diet of Wurzburg. As a reward Henry put pressure on Bohun to have John elected to the vacant deanery of Salisbury. Bohun, mindful no doubt of his recent troubles with the king, and despite prohibitions from Alexander III and Becket, complied. He was accordingly suspended by the archbishop in 1166. He appealed against his sentence to the pope and wrote to Becket justifying his action, asserting that the new dean had been canonically elected by a unanimous chapter. Nevertheless, although John of Salisbury and others interceded on Bohun's behalf, Becket insisted on the quashing of John of Oxford's appointment before the suspension could be lifted. This Bohun would not accept. He was driven to seek support from Gilbert Foliot, bishop of London (died 1187), one of Becket's bitterest opponents, with whom he was closely associated thereafter, becoming increasingly identified with the king's party. In November 1167 he was among the bishops who met the papal legates at Argentan, where he joined Foliot in appealing to the pope on behalf of the English bishops against Becket. In 1168 Alexander III conditionally lifted Bohun's suspension but, after Foliot's fresh appeal to Rome in 1169, both bishops were excommunicated by Becket on Palm Sunday. They were absolved by the pope early in 1170 but, after assisting Archbishop Roger of York at the coronation of Henry the Young King at Westminster on 14 June 1170, their excommunication and suspension were renewed in September by papal letters dispatched to Becket for use at his discretion. From Wissant, Becket sent the letters across the channel to the three prelates waiting at Dover to cross to the king in Normandy. It was their bitter complaints to Henry that set in train the events that culminated in the archbishop's assassination on 29 December. In the aftermath of the murder the pope, evidently anxious not to prolong Bohun's and Foliot's excommunication, conditionally absolved them in April 1171, but their suspension was maintained until March 1172. 
Bohun was probably more at home in the administration of his diocese than in the great quarrel which engulfed him. He ruled for forty-two years, the longest pontificate of any twelfth-century English bishop. His surviving charters (numbering over 100) reveal him as a conscientious diocesan. He exerted his authority within the diocese, being active in the appointment of parochial clergy and in settling disputes over churches and tithes. Despite problems at Cerne and Sherborne abbeys in the 1140s and clashes with Malmesbury over its claim to exemption, he appears on the whole to have maintained amicable relations with religious houses, issuing general confirmations to a number of individual monasteries and helping to promote the cult of St James's hand at Reading. At the cathedral of Old Sarum he consolidated and enlarged the prebendal system, developed the full complement of dignities, and built up the common fund. He was occasionally employed as a papal judge-delegate in the first half of his pontificate, most notably in the important settlement of 1157 between York Minster and Gloucester Abbey over certain Gloucestershire manors. Despite the doubts voiced by David Knowles about Bohun's legal learning, Archbishop Theobald clearly felt his opinion worth having; he was, for example, one of the bishops whose advice Theobald followed in handling the difficult case of Osbert the archdeacon in 1155. His son Reginald became archdeacon of Wiltshire and his kinsman Savaric treasurer of the cathedral, but Bohun did not otherwise promote his family at Salisbury. He attended Archbishop Richard's provincial council at Westminster in May 1175, and a royal council at Woodstock in July. In 1184 he resigned his bishopric to become a monk at the Cistercian abbey of Forde, where he died on 18 November. He was buried at Old Sarum, whence his remains were moved on 14 June 1226 to the new cathedral at Salisbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 50341


Lewes, Robert of (d. 1166), bishop of Bath, was of Flemish descent, though born in England apparently of noble parents. He had been a monk of the Cluniac priory of Lewes when he attracted the attention of Henry de Blois (died 1171), who was to be his patron for the rest of his life. Of his pre-episcopal career little is known. Contemporaries comment that Henry de Blois secured for him first an administrative post at Glastonbury and then, at Easter 1136, promotion to the bishopric of Bath. It is possible that Robert had spent a brief period as prior of Winchester, but the evidence for this rests entirely on the appearance of a Robert, prior of Winchester, in the 1130 pipe roll and the comment of a fifteenth-century Wells historian. 
Within his diocese, Bishop Robert's importance lies in his organizational work and above all in his establishment at Wells of a secular chapter. His period in office saw the appearance of three territorial archdeaconries, and it is evident from the frequency with which the archdeacons witnessed the bishop's charters that they were his closest companions and assistants. Of the six men who served in this capacity, three at some point used the title 'magister', revealing a new necessity for and emphasis on administrative competence. The greatly increased number of surviving 'acta' from Robert's episcopate, as compared with those of his immediate predecessors, and the appearance for the first time in the diocese of an episcopal seal, similarly suggest a more bureaucratic approach towards his diocesan duties. 
Closely related to this was Bishop Robert's work of rebuilding and reorganization at Wells, which enabled him to provide canonries for his clerical staff. Following the moving of the bishop's see to Bath under John of Tours (died 1122), the canons of Wells had suffered the alienation of much of their revenue. In a document drawn up under the guidance of Henry de Blois, and almost certainly issued at Stephen's Easter court in 1136 (the occasion on which Robert was confirmed in the temporalities of his see), the bishop reorganized their existing estates and himself gave a number more. These were divided into prebends to endow a dean, precentor, subdean, and, initially, fifteen canons. A common fund was established to provide bread for those clergy attending the early morning office, and revenue was also set aside to maintain the fabric and ornaments of the church of Wells. The partially rebuilt church was dedicated within the period 1142-8. 
As a Cluniac monk, Robert of Lewes's dealings with the religious houses of his diocese are clearly of some interest. He appears to have had entirely cordial relations with the cathedral priory at Bath, where he continued the rebuilding of the church begun by his predecessor, John of Tours, and gave generous gifts but nevertheless did not fully restore the priory's alienated properties. He showed no especial favour towards Montacute Priory, the one Cluniac house in the diocese, but does seem to have been keen to promote the Augustinian cause (as was Henry de Blois in the diocese of Winchester). Among his surviving 'acta' the largest single beneficiary is the Augustinian house at Bruton. Robert was also involved with the economic development of the town of Wells, granting it borough status and conferring privileges on traders visiting for three annual fairs. 
Beginning in 1962 R. H. C. Davis made a good case for Bishop Robert as the author of the 'Gesta Stephani'. The issue is not one on which certainty is possible, but if the identification is correct, it shows the bishop to have been a scholar of some stature, adept at employing both biblical and, as one might expect of a Cluniac, classical idioms. Pastoral concerns are apparent in the humanity with which the suffering inflicted by the civil war is treated. The work also reveals a very high conception of the episcopal office, appropriate for one who was both a protege of Henry de Blois and a supporter of priests, regular and secular, within his diocese. In political terms the author can be seen initially to have been an enthusiastic partisan of Stephen's, though subsequently a supporter of Duke Henry. From other sources the bishop is known to have been with the king at the siege of Bedford in 1138, present with his patron at the reception of the empress in Winchester in March 1141, and witness to a deed of Duke Henry's in April 1153. An elderly man when Stephen's reign ended in 1154, Bishop Robert was recorded as being ill in May 1163, and he died on 31 August 1166. He was buried before the high altar at Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 50342


Walter (d. 1182), bishop of Rochester, was the son of Norman parents who had settled near Le Bec-Hellouin, and the brother of Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1161). He joined Theobald's household and was shortly appointed archdeacon of Canterbury. Walter seems to have been an active administrator. He appears as addressee or witness to more than a dozen archiepiscopal charters, and he was responsible for imposing a tax called 'second aids' on the churches of the diocese. This supplement, however, was later thought to have been excessive and was abolished by Theobald. 
Bishop Ascelin of Rochester died on 24 January 1148, and Walter was elected 'ex more' by the cathedral priory monks in the chapter house at Canterbury three days later. He owed his position to his brother, and Theobald later named him an executor of his will. Once elected Walter did homage and fealty to Theobald and swore to defend the rights of Canterbury in the diocese of Rochester. On 14 March 1148 he was consecrated bishop of Rochester by Theobald, and made his profession of obedience. In his household can be found the usual chaplains and chamberlains, clerks, and stewards, as well as a group of men educated in the schools. From 1148 to 1176 he assisted with the consecration of twelve bishops and archbishops, and in April 1161, when the primate was ill, Walter himself consecrated Richard Peche to Coventry. After Theobald's death in the same year, Walter took charge of the spiritual affairs at Canterbury and consecrated Bartholomew to Exeter. His name appears fairly often among the witnesses to Theobald's charters, and he also confirmed grants to a number of religious houses, and acted with the archbishop in the settlement of judicial cases. A dispute with his own archdeacon, Paris, over the share of income from ecclesiastical pleas, was decided in favour of the bishop. A quarrel with his monks over a church that Walter had given to Roger, his kinsman ('nepos'), involved appeals to Rome by both sides before a satisfactory agreement was reached. In the end the bishop increased his donations to the poor and obit payments to the convent, and presented the monks with a gold cup and cloth, and a silk pall. 
Throughout his career Walter appears to have been a faithful royal servant. In obedience to Stephen he did not attend the papal council at Rheims in 1148 and was suspended by Eugenius III. In 1153 he was among the bishops who witnessed the treaty between Stephen and Duke Henry, and he was present at the latter's coronation in December 1154. He was again in London in October 1163 for the translation of Edward the Confessor, and he can be found at several other royal councils, including Henry II's settlement of the Castile-Navarre controversy in 1177. In the Becket conflict Walter had only a modest role. He has been described in this context as 'a colourless personality' (Knowles, 'Thomas Becket', 66), an assessment that may reveal ignorance of his character rather than facts about it, though it probably reflects his caution with regard to the king. In June 1162 Walter, who had been acting as 'vicarius' of Canterbury since Theobald's death, ordained Becket to the priesthood. The right of consecration, however, he was forced to cede to Henry of Winchester. Gervase obscures the reasons, but emphasizes Walter's noble character and piety. 
Previously Walter had befriended Becket on two occasions when he was briefly forced out of Theobald's household; he acted on his behalf to demand a safe conduct after the Council of Northampton; he excused himself from the London council in 1169 called by Henry to resist the archbishop; and he was ready to welcome him to Rochester upon his return to England in 1170. On the other hand, Gilbert Foliot, in his defence of the bishops at Clarendon, says that Walter did not join them to oppose the king. Perhaps fearful of the consequences of Foliot's excommunication, Walter remained away from Rochester in the spring of 1169. In the greater crisis of June 1170, against a papal injunction, Walter joined his colleagues at the coronation of the Young King, Henry, and was suspended by Alexander III. John of Salisbury had earlier written to reproach Walter for failing to act decisively on Becket's behalf and scolded him for personal extravagance but public parsimony. Rather later Peter of Blois chided him for his love of hunting, which did not suit a bishop, especially one who was eighty years old. He was accused of neglecting his pastoral duties and a complaint had been made in Rome. Walter, it seems, like most bishops, carried the burden of the ecclesiastical order without complaint, but aspired neither to reform nor to sainthood. He died on 26 July 1182. 


@@@@@


doc= 50343


St Martin, Laurence de (d. 1274), bishop of Rochester, is first recorded in the early 1240s, when he is already styled 'magister' and described as a royal clerk. Of his family origins and background little can be said, except that he was probably connected with the Wiltshire St Martins; and two of his brothers are found in association with him, Abel as his proctor in 1245 and William as archdeacon of Rochester from 1253. 
St Martin probably began his career in the household of William de Valence, Henry III's half-brother, but in 1244 he became one of the king's chief advisers in ecclesiastical affairs, and as such was a member of the English delegation at the Council of Lyons in 1245. In his absence the king provided him with a prebend in Chichester Cathedral and collated him to the archdeaconry of Coventry during the vacancies of those sees; a prebend at Salisbury soon followed when that see, too, came into the king's hands in 1246. Then, on 19 October 1250, while St Martin was engaged on a diplomatic mission at the papal court, he was elected bishop of Rochester in succession to Richard Wendene. According to Matthew Paris, the king's influence was brought to bear upon the monastic chapter, but the monks' choice was probably also affected by the fact that the prior, Alexander de Glanville, was a close friend of St Martin, 'quem idem Alexander unice diligebat', in the words of the 'Annales ecclesiae Roffensis' ('Flores historiarum', 2.369). Archiepiscopal confirmation took place at Lyons on 9 February 1251, after the bishop-elect had there voiced his reluctance to give his homage to Canterbury, on the grounds that it might be construed as a slight upon the royal prerogative. His hesitation having been overcome by a statement issued by Archbishop Boniface that guaranteed the safeguarding of the king's rights, he made his profession and was consecrated by the archbishop at Lyons on Palm Sunday, 9 April 1251. 
Two controversies for a time marred the new bishop's relations with his cathedral chapter and brought him into conflict with the see of Canterbury and with the crown. The monks protested against what they judged to be his interference in appointments to offices within the priory, and his claim to some of their manorial properties, which had the result, so the annalist reports, that the disillusioned prior fell ill and died. Disagreement with the archbishop and, indirectly, with the king arose when Henry III demanded payment of a feudal aid on the occasion of the knighting of his eldest son. St Martin's unease in this instance was based on the fact that his temporalities were held not of the king but of the archbishop as confirmed by King John's charter, which the bishop understood to have been a gift in free alms exempt from all secular dues and services. After lengthy discussions in the king's council and in parliament, and an appeal to the pope launched against the king's wishes, a settlement was agreed on 1 August 1259. This defined the rights and obligations of each to the other: the bishop was henceforth to have the return of all royal writs and pleas within his church and see, and the archbishop an annual payment of 12 marks for this concession. 
St Martin's elevation to the episcopate did not bring an end to his employment in the royal service; he continued to make journeys to Rome and elsewhere as an envoy for both church and crown. In 1256, for example, he procured the canonization of an unfortunate Scot, William of Perth, murdered near Rochester on his way to the Holy Land; the offerings at the shrine of this new saint enabled the grateful monks to rebuild the choir of their cathedral church. He played no active part in the civil wars of the 1260s, but continued to be associated with the king; the sack of Rochester in 1264 was said to have been an act of revenge by the barons against the bishop. In 1268 St Martin was once more a royal envoy to Italy, dealing with Henry's remaining family interests in Sicily. He may have attended the opening session of the second Council of Lyons in May 1274, but he died about 3 June, and was buried in his cathedral on the north side of the high altar, in a tomb of Purbeck marble which boasts a fine effigy and canopy above. 
As diocesan St Martin was greatly concerned to augment his own revenues, claiming that his see was the poorest in England. In 1251 he secured the pope's consent to his retaining for three years the benefices that he had held before he became bishop, and he also obtained papal licence to take for five years a fifth of the revenues of all the benefices in his diocese. To the same end he appropriated three churches to the bishop's endowment. In 1252 he conducted an inquest into the finances of Rochester Cathedral priory. But he achieved little. The priory's affairs remained in disorder, while the bishop's executor John de St Dionisius, archdeacon of Rochester by 1278, was at that date still pursuing the bishop's many debtors. St Martin's concern for administrative efficiency may also be apparent in his having kept an episcopal register. It was still available for consultation in 1347, but ultimately did not survive. However, two volumes of the writings of St Augustine and a 'Flores historii', all given by him to the Rochester monks, have survived in the British Library as Royal MSS 2 F. xi, 5 A. xv, and 5 B. vi. 


@@@@@


doc= 50344


Briouze, Giles de (c.1170-1215), bishop of Hereford, was one of the oldest among the sixteen children born to William (III) de Briouze (d. 1211), and his wife, Matilda de St Valery (died 1210). Loretta de Briouze was his sister. William held numerous lordships in Normandy, England, and Wales, notably in Brecon and Upper Gwent in the southern Welsh marches. It is likely that William and Matilda married before 1170 and that Giles was born in or around that year. It is not known how or where he was educated, though it is conceivable that he received some of his schooling from one of his father's clerks, Master Hugh de Mapenore, whom he later made dean of Hereford. 
The bishopric of Hereford fell vacant on the death of William de Vere on Christmas eve 1198, and an attempt by Hereford Cathedral chapter to elect Walter Map (died 1209/10) as his successor in 1199 was thwarted by the death of Richard I. At the start of John's reign William de Briouze was high in the king's favour; in addition to other benefits, John bestowed the bishopric of Hereford early in 1200 on William's son Giles to increase the family's standing in the Welsh marches yet further. Giles was consecrated on 24 September 1200 in St Catherine's Chapel at Westminster, and during his first four years as bishop he continued to receive signs of John's favour, including the grant of an annual fair at Lydbury North in 1201 and the right to take sixteen deer in the forest of Malvern in 1204. 
Briouze was an active and efficient diocesan. Nearly fifty of his episcopal 'acta' survive, and although most of these, as would be expected, are charters requested by beneficiaries, many of them show knowledge of and interest in canon law. To support him in his administration Briouze employed at any one time about four clerks with the title 'magister', in addition to chaplains and junior clerks. One of the 'magistri' was Walter Map's nephew Philip. In addition to his duties as diocesan, Briouze was fairly often appointed to act as papal judge-delegate. The cases included the dispute between the priories of Llanthony Prima (Llanthony in Wales) and Llanthony Secunda (Lanthony by Gloucester) over the division between the two houses of their widely scattered properties and of their rights and their muniments. Briouze, acting with two fellow bishops, Mauger of Worcester (died 1212) and Eustace of Ely (died 1215), attempted to settle this dispute in 1205. 
As bishop of Hereford, however, Briouze was also a marcher lord, and through this and his family connections was drawn into Welsh border politics. He was involved in the dispute between his family and Gwenwynwyn of Powys (died 1216?), settled by King John in August 1204. Then, late in 1206, King John began to take action against the hitherto loyal William de Briouze, and in 1208 he appointed his mercenary captain, Girard d'Athee, sheriff of Herefordshire, the better to threaten William's lordship in Brecon and Giles's own position as bishop of Hereford. In late April and early May 1208 Briouze seems to have been forced to travel with John, presumably as surety for his father's good conduct. Later in May he fled to France, where he formed part of a group of English exiles seeking the support of King Philip Augustus against John. It is likely that Briouze, whose feelings against John must have been further embittered by his treatment of his mother and eldest brother, who were starved to death in Windsor Castle in 1210, assisted Llywelyn ab Iorwerth (died 1240) to make his treaty of alliance with Philip Augustus in 1212. In order to support himself in France, Briouze seems to have offered his services to French bishops as a substitute: in May 1210 he dedicated a chapel at St Riquier at the request of Bishop Richard of Amiens. 
After John had made terms with the papacy in May 1213 Briouze, with the other exiled bishops, returned to England. John visited Hereford late in 1213 and granted him seisin of the manor of Tetbury, and when John left Hereford, Briouze accompanied him to Guildford. Early in 1214, however, John ordered Briouze and three other bishops to keep the peace. Briouze's main grievance was that his family's lands were being withheld from his young nephews, the sons of his eldest brother, William. Negotiations between the two parties broke down in May, after which John gave Briouze's Gloucestershire lands to Henry fitz Count (died 1222). During the summer Briouze joined the baronial opposition to John, and he and Llywelyn ab Iorwerth won the support of all the inhabitants of the marches except Hugh de Mortimer, whose castle of Cwm Aran in Maelienydd they razed. Peace was made in October by the papal legate Nicolo of Tusculum, at a council held at Wigmore. 
Once more Briouze returned to John's entourage, accompanying his ruler to Worcester in December and to London in January. However, his sympathies must certainly have been with the other side, the more so because by 5 March the fine he was required to pay for his paternal inheritance had been set by the king at the very high figure of $6000. Briouze clearly protested, for on 10 May his fine was one of two which John offered to submit to the judgment of his court. The bishop, no doubt regarding that court as unlikely to be impartial, continued in his support for the barons, and it was probably his influence that led to the inclusion of a clause condemning Girard d'Athee in 'Magna Carta'. Following Llywelyn's capture of Shrewsbury on 17 May 1215, Briouze rose in rebellion and he and his brother Reginald took possession of their family's castles in Brecon, Giles himself capturing Brecon, Hay, Radnor, Builth, and Blaenllyfni. He was not uncompromising in his enmity to King John, however, but continued to negotiate with him, until on 21 October a lower fine was agreed upon (the amount is unrecorded) for the restoration of his lands, castles, and the custody of his nephews. But before the necessary arrangements could be made Briouze died at Gloucester on 17 November 1215. He was buried in Hereford Cathedral, where his tomb was marked by an effigy in the late thirteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 50345


Blois, William de (d. 1236), bishop of Worcester, is of unknown parentage, though it is probable that he was related to William de Blois, bishop of Lincoln (1203-6), under whom he served as archdeacon of Buckingham; this position he retained until his own election to the see of Worcester. He seems to have gained little else in the way of ecclesiastical preferment during this period, holding only the prebend of Sutton by virtue of his position as archdeacon, and the church of Swallow, Norfolk, at the presentation of Sir Thomas de Lascelle. By 1218 he had obtained a university degree, although it is not clear whether he studied at Paris, where the elder William de Blois had taught, or at Oxford. 
William's election in 1218 was not welcomed by the chapter of Worcester Cathedral priory, who declared that he had been forced upon them by the papal legate, Guala; and he was accepted only after the intervention of Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury. On 28 October he was enthroned, and began an episcopate distinguished by his dedication to reform and by conflict with the monastic chapter. The years up to 1224 were marked by violent quarrels with the cathedral priory. In 1220 the bishop tried, unsuccessfully, to depose the prior, and throughout the following year there were complaints of numerous injuries inflicted upon the monks. The priory's claim to have papal letters stating that the prior could not be removed except through papal judges-delegate led to a hearing at Rome, and the suspension of Prior Simon, whom the bishop replaced with William Norman. Although Simon's suspension was lifted through the offices of the archbishop of Canterbury, William Norman remained as prior, and opposition to him grew. Hence, in 1224, an agreement was made between the bishop and the priory, and a new system for the appointment of the prior was established -- one which was to last into the fifteenth century. The cathedral monks were to nominate seven candidates from among their own number, from whom the bishop would choose one. All eventualities, including the bishop's absence from the country, were provided for. This settlement marked the end of active antagonism between the two parties. 
As bishop, William de Blois himself was absent from England only twice: once in 1222, when he is said to have journeyed to Rome, for the hearing caused by his attempted deposition of Prior Simon, and again when he attended the Cistercian general chapter in 1228. He seems to have had little interest in politics, dedicating himself to his episcopal duties. The rebuilding of the east end of Worcester Cathedral was begun during his episcopate, and although it is unclear how far he was involved in this personally, he was certainly responsible for the building of the chapel to St Thomas, a free-standing structure to the north of the cathedral. He demonstrated an enthusiasm for church reform: at least four diocesan synods were held during his episcopate, in 1219, 1220, 1229, and 1232, and on at least two of these occasions he issued diocesan statutes, laying down guidelines for the effective administration of the see. He also proved himself a determined monastic visitor. It is certain that he visited three monasteries -- Worcester Priory itself, St Augustine's Abbey, Bristol, and Great Malvern. In the last instance he demonstrated his resolution by gaining admittance in 1233 despite the monks' opposition, and by returning the following year. William died on 17 August 1236, at the episcopal manor of Alvechurch, Worcestershire. A tomb monument, said to be his, remains in the lady chapel of Worcester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 50346


Clare, Bogo de (1248-1294), ecclesiastic and figure of scandal, was born on 21 July 1248, the third son of Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester and Hertford (1222-1262), and his second wife, Maud (died 1288/9), daughter of John de Lacy, earl of Lincoln. As a younger son he was intended for the church from a very early age. His father secured a dispensation for him to hold two livings, and also presented him to the church of Callan, Kilkenny, in May 1255, when Bogo was not yet seven; he became a papal chaplain in the same year. By 1257 he was studying in Oxford, and stayed there until at least November 1259, living in some style, thanks to royal gifts of venison and firewood. The pattern of his early years, of advancement through family patronage, along paths that were further smoothed by links with the court, was to be maintained for the rest of his life, above all in his ecclesiastical career, as he built up the collection of benefices for which he became notorious. 
In 1283 Archbishop Wickwane (died 1285) of York demanded that Bogo de Clare be ordained priest. There is no evidence that he complied, but he continued to add to his assemblage of churches and offices, acquiring his twentieth living during that year. It is not easy to tell exactly how many benefices Bogo held during his career, since he resigned some and exchanged others, but the most reliable estimate suggests that the rectorships of thirty-one churches, or parts of churches, came into his hands between 1255 and 1294, giving him a stake in all but four of the dioceses of England. He also held prebends in the cathedrals of Exeter, Wells, Lichfield, Chichester (where he was precentor), Llandaff (where he was chancellor), and York, where in 1285 he became treasurer. Claims on other livings could not be substantiated, notwithstanding a taste for litigation which in 1282 earned him a rebuke from Archbishop John Pecham -- a dispute over the Yorkshire church of Adlingfleet, to which he was presented by his mother in 1268, lasted for nearly twenty years, and ended in Bogo's defeat. An absentee pluralist on a grand scale, he farmed out his livings, usually for much more than their nominal value, and supervised them through agents. His cathedral offices he usually exercised through deputies, who seem to have been under no supervision at all. In 1283 or 1284 the dean and chapter of York complained to him about the behaviour of the men he had deputed to perform the functions of treasurer there, of their negligence, violence, and misuse of minster furnishings, but their employer took no notice, and seldom if ever visited York in person. 
Bogo de Clare was clearly 'persona grata' at court, able to extract favours from both Henry III and Edward I, and apparently a friend of Eleanor of Castile; in 1291, shortly after her death, Edward I pardoned Bogo 200 marks of queen's gold 'in consideration of the good affection that the queen bore towards him' ('CClR, 1288-1296', 158). But his closest links were with his own family, for which he was even prepared to risk offending the king. When his sister Margaret fell out with her husband, the king's cousin Edmund, earl of Cornwall, Bogo tried to negotiate a reconciliation, and, when that failed, had a writ served on Edmund as he made his way to a meeting of the king's council, citing him to appear in the archbishop of Canterbury's court. Edward I was furious, and Bogo was remanded to the Tower of London, but bought his way out with a fine of 2000 marks to the king (later reduced to 1000 marks), and $100 to the earl. He used his position as chancellor of Llandaff, too, to his family's advantage, between 1287 and 1294 consistently thwarting efforts to install a bishop in that see where his brother, the earl of Gloucester, wanted no episcopal rival. 
But it is hard to feel that Bogo de Clare often thought of anybody save himself. Neglecting his churches, he spent much time in London, probably in a house near Holy Trinity, Aldgate, or moving around the home counties. His wardrobe accounts show that he lived well, regularly outspending his income in the process. He bought wine and cloth from Gascon and Italian merchants, purchased considerable quantities of meat, fish, and spices, and entertained lavishly. His guests included members of the court and aristocracy, and also several justices and exchequer clerks, who might be given gold rings or silver goblets. Consistently stingy with alms, which he doled out in sums much smaller than the 12died that he regularly paid for washing his head, he maintained a substantial household, on some days paying wages to twenty-seven grooms and three pages, and employing several clerks. His servants were capable of showing a violent loyalty to him -- on a notorious occasion in 1290 they compelled one of the archbishop of Canterbury's clerks to eat the summons he had attempted to serve on their lord -- but Bogo did not always respond in kind; his steward Walter de Reygni was harried for two years in the exchequer of pleas for money and jewels for which he had already accounted. Bogo de Clare died suddenly in October 1294. His passing was noticed by several chroniclers, always unfavourably. The Worcester annalist commented that 'God only knows if his life was worthy of praise, but no-one thought it worthy of imitation' ('Ann. mon.', 4.517); his verdict, on a singularly unedifying representative of the medieval English church, is one that posterity has never looked likely to reverse. 


@@@@@


doc= 50347


Bayeux, Osbert de (fl. 1120-1184), ecclesiastic and suspected murderer, was a nephew of Archbishop Thurstan of York (d. 1140). An archdeacon named Osbert occurs in the 1120s; if this was Osbert de Bayeux then he must have been promoted as archdeacon, presumably by his uncle, at an early age. As Osbert the archdeacon, nephew of Thurstan, he was mentioned in a charter of 1137-40, his archdeaconry probably being that of Richmond. In 1140-41, after Thurstan's death, along with Archdeacon Walter of London he opposed the election of William Fitzherbert, treasurer of York, as archbishop. In the years which followed, between 1142 and 1154, he witnessed several charters issued by lay persons, and after 1147 he attested 'acta' of Fitzherbert's successful rival, Archbishop Henry Murdac. But in 1153 he secured first the deposition of Abbot Germanus of Selby, whose appointment had been obtained by Murdac, and then the reinstallation of Abbot Elias Paynel, who had resigned at Murdac's command. Shortly afterwards, however, Elias Paynel was deposed again, this time by Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury (died 1161); Germanus was restored and Osbert was rebuked by the archbishop. The motives for his intervention at Selby are obscure, but they indicate that, despite his opposition to William Fitzherbert, Osbert did not feel any loyalty towards Murdac's candidate. 
After the death of Henry Murdac, Osbert tried, unsuccessfully, to prevent Archbishop Fitzherbert's return, and, when the archbishop died after only a week in the city of York there were rumours of a poisoned chalice, and Osbert was accused of his murder. Charges were brought against the archdeacon by a chaplain of Archbishop Fitzherbert's named Symphorian, at a council presided over by King Stephen, probably at Michaelmas 1154. Osbert maintained that he was innocent and demanded trial by an ecclesiastical court. The death of Stephen prevented any immediate action, and after the accession of Henry II, Archbishop Theobald struggled to withdraw the case from royal into ecclesiastical jurisdiction. When the trial began in 1156 Symphorian failed to produce witnesses, but Osbert was not able to prove his innocence, and so the case was referred to the papal court. Osbert evidently appeared before both Adrian IV and Alexander III, but there is no record of any formal judgment. By 1158, however, Osbert had been replaced as archdeacon, and this suggests that in 1157 he was degraded and removed from office. In late 1154 Osbert had supported the election of Archbishop Roger de Pont l'Eveque (died 1181), and evidence from a papal decretal of about 1175-80 suggests that Pont l'Eveque had offered to grant the revenues of the precentorship of York to Osbert's son; this was a promise which, Osbert later claimed, the archbishop failed to fulfil. 
After 1158 Osbert continued to style himself archdeacon, though now a minor secular lord. In 1166, as Osbert de Bayeux, archdeacon, he held half a knight's fee of the honour of Lacy, and lands by knight service of the honour of Skipton. Some time between 1159 and 1170 he was acting as steward of Hugh de Tilly, and over the years after his retirement he was a benefactor of various religious houses, Drax, Pontefract, and Guisborough, as well as of the knights templar and hospitaller. He may have married, and he had two sons who appear in the written records: William de Bayeux, son of Osbert the archdeacon, is located in Yorkshire in 1191 as one owing $15 to Aaron the Jew of Lincoln; and Turstin de Baius, son of Osbert the archdeacon, attested a charter of Fountains Abbey dating from between about 1160 and 1180, which raises the possibility that he was born when Osbert still held the office of archdeacon. Osbert was still alive in 1184 when he witnessed a final concord at York. He is mentioned on an escheat roll of 1194, when Hugh Bardolf answered for 42's'. 8died from the farm of Osbert the archdeacon in Bingley, but whether he was then still living is not clear. Osbert belonged in one sense to the world of the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, to the era of the married, worldly cleric, and he contrasts sharply with a number of his colleagues in the York chapter who were drawn to and influenced by the wave of spirituality ushered in by the great age of the new monasticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 50348


Ottobuono (c.1205-1276), papal official and pope, was born into the Genoese family of the counts of Lavagna. Trained as a theologian and canonist, he acquired distinguished Savoyard connections through his sister, the second wife of Count Thomas (II), but more valuable to his career was the fact that his uncle, Sinibaldo Fieschi, became pope as Innocent IV in June 1243. In November that year Ottobuono was made a papal chaplain, and he subsequently held archdeaconries at Rheims and Parma, before he became cardinal-deacon of San Adriano in 1252. Following his uncle's death in 1254 he remained an important figure at the curia, where his part in the negotiations with Henry III over the throne of Sicily, and his support for Henry's brother Richard and second son, Edmund, doubtless helped to secure his appointment by Clement IV on 4 May 1265 as papal legate to England. 
Ottobuono's commission was threefold: to bring about peace and reconciliation following the barons' war; to reform the clergy and the working of the church; and to preach crusade. He left Rome after 19 July 1265, and by 30 August had reached Paris, where he learned of Simon de Montfort's death at Evesham on 4 August. He arrived in England on 29 October. He lodged in the Tower of London for safety, and met Henry III in Canterbury on 1 November, on that day summoning a council for the clergy. 
At his first legatine council, held at either Westminster or London on 1 December 1265, Ottobuono made public his commissions, together with the powers he had from the pope to resolve 'urgent and arduous matters'. Crusade and reform needed peace between the 'disinherited' rebels and Henry III's advisers. The council was to initiate the peace. Ottobuono denounced and suspended four bishops as baronial supporters, issuing a general excommunication of all the king's enemies. However, these actions confirmed the suspicions of the rebels about his Savoyard connections and made his task more difficult. 
There was very widespread unrest in the months after Evesham, intensified by royalist vindictiveness against former Montfortians. The king's lengthy siege of Kenilworth Castle gave Ottobuono the opportunity to demand, at a parliament held at Kenilworth in August 1266, that negotiations be entered into with the rebels, and he then helped to establish a committee of bishops and barons to decide what was needed to restore peace in the realm. The legate himself was to be one of two arbiters when differences arose within the committee. The result was the dictum of Kenilworth, announced on 31 October, and then proclaimed by Ottobuono to a church council in Coventry the following day. But the dictum was widely rejected at first, in spite of Ottobuono's efforts to promote it at a parliament held at Bury St Edmunds in February 1267, until in April the earl of Gloucester occupied London in order to force the government to give better terms to its adversaries. The legate, who was in the capital at the time, did not resist the earl, though he retreated to the Tower for safety. While there he was entrusted with the Westminster and crown jewels, used by the king as pledges for loans. He later moved to the Cistercian monastery of Stratford Langthorne in Essex, where he was joined by the king in May. Urgent negotiations, in which the legate was closely involved, finally led to a settlement and to the acceptance of the dictum, helped by a tax on the clergy which Ottobuono arranged in order to assist those disinherited in the civil war to redeem their lands. A letter from Ottobuono to Clement IV, probably of June 1267, spoke of 'varying degrees of discord lasting from the beginning of Lent until 20 June, after which came reconciliation from the hand of God' (Graham, 'Letters of Cardinal Ottoboni', 118-19). 
Ottobuono then proceeded to reconcile Llywelyn of Wales with the king. After four days of negotiations the treaty of Montgomery was agreed on 29 September 1267. Although his commission also covered Scotland and Ireland, Ottobuono visited neither country personally, operating instead through envoys. Alexander III, king of Scots, received one papal envoy, refused a second, a certain Master Maurice, entry to his court, and threatened a third with violence. Scottish bishops did attend the councils but, as regards Ireland, Ottobuono was more concerned to ensure that the crusade was preached there, arranging this through the bishop of Lismore. His commission for peace was concluded on 18 November 1267 by the 'Statute of Marlborough', which stressed a return to the rule of law and marked the success of his political work. 
The resulting stability allowed Ottobuono to proceed with his commission on church reform. The exile of Boniface of Savoy, archbishop of Canterbury, enabled the legate to establish his authority over the English clergy. No election to a bishopric or abbacy could take place without his mandate. In April 1268 he convened a three-day council in London at St Paul's, at which all clergy were summoned to attend in person or by proctor. Having absolved excommunicate Montfortians, Ottobuono issued a set of fifty-three canons, based upon, and often specifically referring to, but none the less considerably amplifying, those issued in 1237 by the legate Otto. Surviving in some seventy versions, they remained fundamental to the law of the church in England until the sixteenth century -- they were first printed in 1504. 
Ottobuono's constitutions deal with a wide range of issues of conduct and jurisdiction, affecting both the secular and regular clergy. For instance, the former were forbidden to exercise secular jurisdiction, or to take part in lawsuits in which judgments of blood might be given. Simony was condemned, as were concubinage and the bearing of arms, and severe restrictions were placed upon pluralism. Ottobuono sought to improve the position of vicars, and also to ensure that vicars resided in their livings. Archbishops and bishops, too, were expected to reside among their flocks, and restrictions were placed upon demands for procurations and other exactions liable to abuse. Orders were given for the maintenance of church buildings, and rights of sanctuary were upheld. The last thirteen canons deal with the regulars. Ottobuono was clearly knowledgeable in matters monastic. This emerges with particular clarity from the constitutions he issued to individual monasteries following visitations by his commissaries. One such was Westminster Abbey, to which he directed constitutions on 17 April, a few days before the council. But the canons directed in general terms to monks and nuns, though they doubtless gained in force from the legate's knowledge of conditions in particular houses, are largely devoted to commonplace matters of discipline and organization. They are concerned, for instance, to maintain traditional bans or restrictions on the eating of meat, on the holding of private property, and on engagement in trade, and to ensure that monks and nuns care properly for their sick, and make confession and celebrate the eucharist with becoming frequency. The complete set of canons was to be made public by being recited word for word by bishops at their annual diocesan synods. 
Ottobuono's third commission, to preach the crusade, was not neglected. Clement had specified that if English crusaders did not go to the Holy Land, funds so far collected -- sufficient for 500 knights -- would be used elsewhere. This followed an extension of crusade preaching to deal with the rebels in England and also the planned invasion from France in September 1266 by the younger Simon de Montfort. This invasion did not materialize, and the pope continued to complain about the general lack of support for the crusade. In October 1266 he urged Ottobuono to preach with even more vigour. 
At first there were difficulties. When Ottobuono called for a crusade at the Bury parliament, the magnates expressed misgivings about the likely effects of denuding the country of its defenders. But the legate persevered, preaching in London and again in Lincoln (where he used interpreters), and at Northampton in June or July 1268 he finally had the satisfaction of seeing the Lord Edward and many barons take the cross. When his legation to England ended in July 1268, Ottobuono returned to Italy having largely achieved what he set out to do. He attended the Second Council of Lyons in 1274, and on 11 July 1276, with the support of Charles of Anjou, he was elected pope, as Adrian V. But he died in Viterbo on 16 August without having being ordained priest, consecrated, or crowned, and was buried there in the church of San Francesco. His final bequests included prayers for Henry III and his family, and a hospital, dedicated to St Thomas of Canterbury in his native Liguria, where English pilgrims were to be specially received. Among his personal effects was found a precious jewel belonging to the English crown. 


@@@@@


doc= 50349


Guala (c.1150-1227), papal official, was a native of Vercelli in Lombardy. First recorded in 1187, he appears to have been trained in theology and law, possibly in France as well as Italy. Made cardinal-deacon of Santa Maria in Portico by Innocent III in 1205, Guala was papal legate successively in north Italy (1206-7) and France (1208-9), and was promoted to be cardinal-priest of San Martino in Montibus in 1211. Following the Fourth Lateran Council, at a date after 14 January 1216, he was appointed papal legate to England, possibly at the request of King John himself. Guala's experience particularly suited him to hold this legation, and his reconstructed 'acta' help to throw light on the last year of John's reign and the early years of Henry III's. The importance of Guala's role was enhanced by the absence from England of the exiled Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury, between September 1215 and May 1218. The new legate's involvement in English affairs extended back to the Evesham Abbey case of 1206. From 1213 he was enjoying an annual pension of 20 marks from England, and he is known to have been well informed on the activities of Nicolo of Tusculum, his predecessor there as papal legate (1213-14). The terms of Guala's commission from Innocent III are not recorded but, judging by their confirmation by Honorius III, they included the power to reform and to excommunicate, the preaching of the crusade, and the forging of a peace, or at least a truce, between England and France. 
Soon after 24 February 1216 Guala set out from Rome for England. He took with him a commission from Innocent III to be presented at the Council of Melun (24-25 April 1216), instructing Philip Augustus and Prince Louis that the latter should not accept the rebels' offer of the English crown. On pain of excommunication the legate forbade in the strongest terms, either Louis to invade England in pursuit of his claim, or Philip to support such an invasion. None the less, on 21 May, Louis and his men landed in England. Guala was delayed by French denial of safe passage across the channel, but his first action on eventually reaching England via Germany was to implement his threat by convening a clerical council at Winchester on 29 May 1216. There he issued a solemn sentence of excommunication against Louis. 
The importance in political terms of Guala's legation was greatly increased not only by Langton's absence but also by the death on 19 October 1216 of King John. He had entrusted his young son, Henry III, to Guala, who was one of the executors of his will, as the representative of the Holy See. As the boy was a papal vassal and ward, the legate acted as his protector and supervised his coronation on 28 October at Gloucester. This was an essential first step in overcoming those rebels who had called on Louis of France. 
Although the principal English rebels had been excommunicated before his arrival, Guala was instrumental in offering plenary indulgence to all those who fought in the king's cause, thus elevating the venture to the status of a crusade. Honorius III, in letters of 17 January 1217, allowed Guala to dispense crusaders from their vows to the Holy Land if they were fighting for the king and against the rebels. So it was that at the battle of Lincoln, on 20 May 1217, the king's supporters wore white crosses over their armour. After the French fleet was destroyed in a naval battle off Sandwich on 24 August 1217, Louis was believed to have been brought to abandon the struggle by his fear that Guala would win over the city of London, the last stronghold of the rebels. The treaty of Kingston (or Lambeth) was negotiated between 11 and 20 September 1217. Guala administered absolution, imposed penance, and bound Louis and the French to the payment of a subsidy for the recovery of the Holy Land. The treaty excluded the clergy of both countries. The French clergy who had accompanied Louis into England were to perform penance while the English clergy who supported Louis were to be deprived of benefices and subjected to punishment. Several were forced to go to Rome to seek absolution. 
His position as legate made Guala nominally the king's leading counsellor. His involvement in secular government, and the restoration of order in England, was by no means limited; thus he set his seal to reissues of 'Magna Carta' and the charter of the forest in 1216 and 1217, negotiated with Llywelyn of Wales and Alexander II, king of Scots, sanctioned the measure of February 1218 to call in arrears of scutage, and was the first witness to regulations issued in November 1218 for the use of Henry III's new seal. But in such matters he acted with William (I) Marshal and others, and contemporaries were probably more impressed by his measures against rebel clerics and infringers of the interdict. He may, indeed, have been unduly zealous, depriving some one hundred clerks of their benefices, and purging the chapter of St Paul's, London. Pandulf, who succeeded him as legate, released thirteen ecclesiastics from the imprisonment to which Guala had condemned them, and may have restored some of those he had deprived. Among those who benefited from the vacancies so created were a number of Italians, some of them Guala's kinsmen or members of his household. He was himself alleged, perhaps correctly, to have profited financially from his legation, and he certainly took advantage of his position to secure the advowson of Chesterton, Cambridgeshire, for the Augustinian priory he was in process of founding at Vercelli. Yet the grant was justified by reference to Guala's having 'laboured long and hard for the king's peace and the peace of the realm' (Vincent, 15), and his labours, which also included introducing and implementing the decrees of the Fourth Lateran Council, and the preaching of the fifth crusade, had indeed been considerable. They were still remembered nearly fifty years later, in 1264, when another papal legate, Guy Foulquois, was trying to end another English civil war. 
Guala's legation was terminated by papal letters of 12 September 1218. He appears to have relinquished his office at Reading in mid-November, and to have left England shortly afterwards. On his way back to Rome, in February and March 1219, he had the satisfaction of seeing the foundation of the priory of San Andrea in Vercelli. Guala's remaining years in the curia were active ones, and he retained his contacts with England, continuing to receive his pension until 1222. In 1225 he was appointed as one of two legates to southern Italy, negotiating the treaty of San Germano by which Frederick II agreed to undertake a crusade. Guala outlived Honorius III by two months. He made his will on 29 May 1227, and died in Rome on 31 May; he was probably buried in the church of St John Lateran there. 


@@@@@


doc= 50350


Honorius (d. c.1213), canonist, was of unknown origins. He may have been rector of Willesborough, Kent, from 1184 or 1185, but was more certainly first a clerk (from 'c'.1191) and then official (from 1195) of Archbishop Geoffrey (died 1212) of York. He acted as administrator of the see during Geoffrey's absences between 1195 and 1198, and became archdeacon of Richmond on 8 March 1198. His York career was marred by the bitter three-sided disputes between Archbishop Geoffrey, the kings (Richard I and John), and the dean and chapter of York. His appointment as archdeacon was revoked by King Richard in favour of Roger of St Edmund in 1198, and he was subsequently excommunicated by the dean (Simon of Apulia) and forced to defend his rights not only against Roger and King John, but also against his own archbishop, and to plead his case in person before Pope Innocent III ('r'. 1198-1216), who confirmed Honorius's institution as archdeacon in June 1202. But he had had to offer 300 marks to King John for letters of protection and permission to pursue his case against Roger, a debt not cleared until 1208; an additional debt of a palfrey occurs from 1206 to 1210 when it, too, was cleared. 
From 'c'.1201 to 1205 Honorius was a member of the household of Archbishop Hubert Walter (died 1205) at Canterbury, where he joined the company of Richard de Morins 
(Ricardus Anglicus; died 1242)
, and other leading canonists; but his change of allegiance from York to Canterbury was already under way between 1198 and 1200, when, as 'clericus noster', he received the Kent churches of Tarring and Patching from Hubert Walter, in a document witnessed by his former Oxford colleagues, Simon of Sywell and John of Tynemouth, both distinguished canonists; and his own professional skill was attested by his successful presentation of Hubert Walter's case against Robert, former abbot of Thorney, in Innocent III's presence in 1202. 
Honorius's Canterbury career was undermined by Hubert Walter's death. He appears briefly in the circle of Bishop John de Gray of Norwich (King John's candidate for the vacant archbishopric) in late 1205, but although in 1206 he represented the king in the opening phase of the Canterbury election dispute, he was despoiled and imprisoned at Gloucester in 1208, perhaps in consequence of the general interdict. The last years of his life are obscure, but he was acquitted of his debt to the king at the exchequer in 1210, and may have served Bishop Bernard of Carlisle. His death date of 'c'.1213 has been deduced from the appearance of Master Richard Marsh (died 1226) as archdeacon of Richmond from before 4 July 1213. 
Honorius's scholarly career embraced two phases: from 1185 to 'c'.1191 or 1192 he studied and perhaps taught canon law at Paris; from 1191 or 1192 to 1195 he taught and practised law in Oxford (with Simon of Sywell and John of Tynemouth), where Thomas of Marlborough (died 1236) was one of his pupils. His two canonical commentaries, written between 'c'.1185 and 1190, date from his Parisian phase, and place him among the most distinguished English canonists of the time. Although only one manuscript of 'De iure canonico tractaturus' (1188-90) has survived (Laon, Bibliotheque de la ville MS 371, fols. 83-170'v'), copies of the important 'Summa decretalium quaestionum' (1185-6) are now found in six continental libraries (Bamberg, Douai, Laon, Leipzig, Paris, and Zwettl), while a seventh copy (from Konigsberg) has been lost. Divided into three distinctions (on rescripts, orders and offices, and marriage), this 'most successful piece of English canonistic writing of the twelfth century' (Kuttner and Rathbone, 296) combined elements of the systematic 'summa' with the dialectical technique of the 'quaestiones': proposing, discussing, and solving disputed questions, in a manner similar to that employed by Gratian in his 'dicta', although it departed from Gratian's order. Derived from teaching (it was the fruit of a series of Friday lectures), the 'Summa' constituted a new type of canonical treatise, whose method stimulated the literary treatment of cases and problems by Bolognese masters and others. The vicissitudes of Master Honorius's career exemplify the vulnerability of legal professionals to the impact of political factors. 


@@@@@


doc= 50351


Coltman, Constance Mary (1889-1969), Congregational minister and the first woman to be ordained to the Christian ministry in Britain, was born in Putney, London, on 23 May 1889, the oldest of the four children of George Todd (1844-1912), headmaster and educational administrator, and Emily Ellerman, one of the first generation of women to study medicine and a member of the wealthy shipping family. She was educated at St Felix School, Southwold, from where she won an exhibition to read history at Somerville College, Oxford (1908-11). The family's love of travel helped to inculcate an early and strong international outlook. 
The Todd family were members of the Presbyterian Church of England, and it was to that church that Constance Todd first turned when she became convinced of a vocation to ordained ministry. When that door was closed she visited the principal of Mansfield College, Oxford, W. B. Selbie, and convinced him that her vocation was genuine. She was admitted to Mansfield for preparation for the Congregational ministry in 1913 and completed the course with some distinction within three years. During these years she acquired her deep interest in Hebrew, took an active part in college life, and met and became engaged to a fellow student, Claud Marshall Coltman (1889-1971). She described herself as a 'suffragist', but took no active part in the suffrage movement. Her lifelong abhorrence of violence led her to take a pacifist stance and to active membership of the Fellowship of Reconciliation. 
Drawn to the preaching of the Presbyterian pacifist William Edwin Orchard, she became a member of his (Congregational) church, the King's Weigh House, London, in 1917. In the summer of that year she and her fiance received a call to take charge of the Weigh House's mission in the East End of London. On 17 September they were both 'solemnly ordained to the Holy Ministry by the laying on of hands and invocation of the Holy Ghost' (King's Weigh House Church meeting minute book). Orchard (who eighteen years later became a Roman Catholic priest) was the presiding minister, assisted by three Congregational ministers. The following day the two were married. Constance Coltman's ordination was officially recognized by the Congregational Union Council two months later, and her name subsequently appeared in the lists of accredited ministers of the Congregational Union of England and Wales. Other women began to follow her example, though very slowly at first. 
After three years at Darby Street, east London, the Coltmans had a series of joint ministries at Kilburn; Cowley Road, Oxford; Wolverton, Buckinghamshire; and Haverhill, Suffolk, before a return to the Weigh House in 1946. They shared the ministerial work according to the particular needs and wishes of the church. They also brought up their family of two daughters and a son. 
Constance Coltman believed that women had a distinctive contribution to bring to the interpretation and commendation of Christian theology, and to the practice of Christian ministry, especially through the experience of motherhood. She was an active member of the Society of Free Catholics, an ecumenical society founded by J. M. Lloyd Thomas, and contributed to its journal. 
In 1927 Coltman was elected president of the new Fellowship of Women Ministers, which arose out of a conference in the previous year, and three years later helped to found the interdenominational Society for the Ministry of Women, of which she was a vice-president, and in which she was active for many years. She offered valuable support to younger women who felt called to ministry not only in Britain but elsewhere in Europe. She was a close friend of the Anglican preacher Maude Royden, with whom she collaborated in writing 'The Church and Woman' (1924). 
Throughout her active life Coltman was involved in peace movements. She was a vice-president of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom and one of the founders of the Christian Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. She retired from active ministry in 1949, and after her husband's retirement in 1957 moved to Bexhill for her remaining years. She died on 26 March 1969. A memorial service was held on 26 April at Whitefield Memorial Church in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50352


Shimmin, Hugh (1819-1879), journalist and journal editor, was born on 6 September 1819, in Castletown, Isle of Man. His father was a stonemason but very little is known about his parents. 
Shimmin's life might be rendered as a Smilesian story of triumphant self-help and character, pulling the protagonist up from humble origins in defiance of all temptations. Of Manx extraction, he spent his early years in Whitehaven, migrating to Liverpool in his teens with his mother to join his father, a stonemason with a drink problem. The evidence is not entirely conclusive, but he seems to have been brought up in poverty and sent to work at eight years old. His father died in the fifth year of his apprenticeship to a bookbinder. Shimmin then supported his family by collecting rents for his landlord, while impressing his employer sufficiently to take charge of the bookbindery after completing his apprenticeship, incurring the hostility of colleagues who resented his opposition to drinking customs. With this abstemiousness went the pursuit of self-improvement through education, as Shimmin joined the Mental Improvement Society at the Liverpool Institute and then the mechanics' institution in his mid-twenties, coming into contact with Unitarian and Methodist social reformers. He was an active Wesleyan at this stage. At some time, probably in the 1840s, he made a prudent (though childless) marriage: the savings of his wife, Jane (of whose origins nothing has been discovered), were exactly sufficient to buy the bookbinding business. 
By his mid-thirties Shimmin was established as a modestly successful businessman. From the mid-1850s his writing gave him a public face and local fame. He began with occasional articles on various subjects in the Liverpool press, but during 1855-6 he wrote a series of exposes of Liverpool's drinking dens, cheap music-halls, dog-fighting taverns, and other haunts of iniquity and vice, which disturbed and titillated readers of the 'Liverpool Mercury'. These were later published in book form as 'Liverpool Life' (1857) and 'Liverpool Sketches' (1863). His brutally frank 'Pen-and-Ink Portraits of Liverpool Town Councillors' (1866) had originally appeared in 1857. From this journalistic success Shimmin moved on to be editor and joint proprietor of the new satirical weekly, 'The Porcupine', which appeared in 1860 and which outlived him, surviving until 1913. Its scarifying denunciations of sanitary conditions and moral failings, and deflations of municipal pomposity, found a ready audience. Shimmin's blunt and moralistic rhetoric made him enemies as well as friends. In 1870 he was imprisoned for libel after accusing maritime interests of insurance frauds, despite the sympathetic intervention of many leading citizens, including Charles Booth. In later life he retreated from radical liberalism and became a fervent Anglican. But he remained active in educational and other charities, and his funeral attracted an immense crowd. 
Shimmin said little about working conditions and practices, or about ethnic and sectarian divisions. He resisted the contemporary temptation to blame the Irish for social problems. He ascribed social ills to individual failings, although not solely to working-class ones. He disliked misplaced and maladministered charity, blaming drink for many social problems while remaining hostile to the temperance movement. These attitudes, like his emphasis on female virtue and steadiness and on frugal domestic management, flowed from his own experience. His pertinacity and powers of observation gave him enough material to make him an important commentator on Victorian urban provincial life. 
Shimmin was a lively and combative journalist under whose editorship 'The Porcupine' became famous for campaigns against the evils which were pungently described in its pages, and for unsparing commentaries on local politics and politicians. His writings offer insights into popular enjoyments, working-class domestic life, and the problems of charitable and municipal initiatives for social improvement during the mid-Victorian years in Liverpool, then Britain's second city, which was famous not only as the focal point of the Atlantic economy, but also for appalling living conditions, death-rates, immorality, and vice. He described these conditions, and the problems of policing a great seaport, in graphic detail, but failed to explain their roots or propose ways of ameliorating them. Nevertheless, his work stands comparison with better-known commentators such as Henry Mayhew. Shimmin died of 'apoplexy' at his home, 5 Radstock Road, Liverpool, on 12 January 1879 and was buried on 15 January at Anfield cemetery. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50354


Evens, George Bramwell (1884-1943), broadcaster, was born on 15 February 1884 at 3 Argyle Street, Anlaby Road, Kingston upon Hull, the only child of George Matthew Evens (1860-1920), a Salvation Army officer, and his wife, Matilda (1862?-1945), daughter of Cornelius Smith and his wife, Polly. His father was of Huguenot descent and his mother of Gypsy stock, hence his later assumption of the pseudonym Romany when he commenced the natural history radio broadcasts for children in 1931 which established his reputation as one of the most popular children's broadcasters of the era. He was also the nephew of the celebrated evangelist and preacher Gypsy Rodney Smith (1860-1947). 
Evens's early years to the age of seven were very unsettled after his father left the Salvation Army to become an itinerant evangelist in 1885. Although he sang on public platforms at prayer meetings from the age of four, his early education was disrupted. Indeed, he only attended elementary school regularly from 1891 when his father became a Wesleyan home missioner in Liverpool, subsequently transferring to higher grade school in Aspeen Grove, Lodge Lane, Liverpool. His interest in wildlife was nurtured even in the predominantly urban environment of Liverpool. Visiting the docks with his father, he became fascinated by the rats leaving the holds of ships along the mooring ropes, and he took regular country walks with his dog Floss around Aigburth. He reared mice, rabbits, and pigeons, and when he was sent to Epworth College at Rhyl at the age of thirteen, he always took a pigeon with him to release on arrival to let his parents know he had reached his destination safely. He spent four years at Epworth College, emerging as a good athlete, captaining both the school soccer and cricket teams, and an accomplished pianist. Recognizing an increasingly compelling vocation for the ministry, he proceeded to Queen's College, Taunton, as a divinity student in 1902, where he also contributed his first articles on ornithology to the school magazine. He was accepted as a candidate for the Wesleyan ministry and entered the Wesleyan Theological College at Handsworth, near Birmingham, in 1905. 
After leaving college Evens was stationed at Dalston in the East End of London, where he married on 1 August 1911 Eunice (1887-1976), the daughter of Owen Thomas, a Congregational minister. They had a son and a daughter. They soon moved north, where Evens was to spend the remaining years of his ministry in the urban centres of Goole, Carlisle, Huddersfield, and Halifax. His longest pastorates were for twelve years at Carlisle (1914-26), where he began lecturing on natural history and writing articles for the 'Cumberland News' and the 'Methodist Recorder' under the pseudonym The Tramp and for ten years at Halifax (1929-39), where he reached the height of his fame as an author and broadcaster. He seized every opportunity to explore the surrounding countryside in these urban appointments, taking his fishing rod with him to Methodist synods in rural locations and purchasing an authentic horse-drawn vardo from Gypsies at a Cumbrian fair in 1921 to provide him with a well-equipped rural retreat. 
Evens's longing for the outdoors and his artistic temperament produced a distinct lack of enthusiasm for chapel and circuit administration, much of which devolved upon his wife. Her organizational skills enabled him to combine a growing programme of speaking and broadcasting engagements with his demanding pastoral ministry. However, he possessed both a great affinity for people, especially young people, and an ability to move congregations in his preaching and conduct of worship. His sermons were eloquent in their simplicity and imbued with optimism and thankfulness. He was no scholar, and did not attempt to explain many of the great mysteries of the Christian faith. Modest and good-humoured, he was of striking appearance. Over 6 feet tall, with unusually broad shoulders, he had long raven-black hair, swept back to reveal a broad forehead, heavy eyebrows, piercing dark hazel eyes, swarthy cheeks, and a strong nose and chin. In his younger days he sported a dark moustache, invariably smoked a pipe, and never wore a hat. 
For technological reasons Evens's pioneering 'Out with Romany' radio broadcasts between 1931 and 1943 were confined to the studio, with all the sound effects of the natural world created synthetically. They took the form of imaginary descriptive rambles accompanied by his cocker spaniel Raq and his young friends Muriel Levy and Doris Gambell; it later emerged that Levy was an experienced children's writer, married with a child of her own, and that Gambell was an accomplished concert singer. The broadcasts appeared so realistic that few doubted their authenticity, and there was widespread amazement and disappointment, not least from the performers themselves, when the 'Radio Times' unexpectedly revealed in 1942 that they were studio reconstructions. Their spontaneity derived from Evens's confident improvisation from a skeletal script, his ability to communicate with listeners personally, and his technique of seeming unaware that the microphone was present. 'Just as he had no special voice reserved for pulpit utterances', his wife later observed, 'so before the microphone he talked and laughed as naturally as he did at home' (Evens, 141). 
Evens's detailed and unusual knowledge of the countryside, acquired more by observation than by scientific study, was impressive. There was, however, some initial reluctance within the BBC to transmit the broadcasts of an enthusiastic amateur nationwide until calculations of audience figures underlined their immense popularity. The programme consistently headed listener request polls, and it was estimated that at their peak some 13 million listeners tuned into his broadcasts, of whom 9 million were adults. The programme became compulsive listening during the wartime blackout and was even parodied by the comedy programme 'ITMA'. The drama critic Herbert Farjeon in June 1942 pronounced it 'the BBC's best creation' (Evens, 113), while the broadcaster Terry Waite later recalled that 'Romany introduced thousands of children of my generation to the wonders of the countryside' (Loveridge, 'Romany Returns', foreword). The programme also stimulated such a demand for Evens to give public lectures that he acquired an agent in 1932, and travelled extensively throughout the north of England and the midlands. He also wrote no fewer than ten books, published between 1929 and 1944, many of them illustrated with his own photographs of wildlife. He received daily a heavy mailbag, with correspondents often enclosing specimens for him to identify, including dead birds and beetles, some in an advanced state of decay. The impact of his unrivalled influence as a naturalist was to raise awareness of the dangers that the countryside faced, and of the growing need to maintain a balance between agriculture and the world of nature. 
Evens was never robust in health. A congenital heart murmur had rendered him unfit for military service in both world wars, and almost prevented him from entering the Wesleyan ministry. In later life he was plagued with duodenal ulcers, and following surgery he retired prematurely from the Methodist ministry in 1939. After suffering a coronary thrombosis while gardening, he died suddenly at his home, 35 Parkway, Wilmslow, Cheshire, on 20 November 1943. His death was announced in national news bulletins and was followed by fulsome tributes on 'Children's Hour' and in the 'Radio Times', which mourned him as 'one of the great personalities of radio, a man who made millions of friends by his genius for being just himself' (Evens, 248). He was cremated at Manchester crematorium on 24 November and his ashes were scattered near Penrith, on the Cumberland fells, where a memorial birdbath was later erected. 


@@@@@


doc= 50355


Pipe, Hannah Elizabeth (1831-1906), headmistress, was born at 8 Market Street, Manchester, on 27 November 1831. She was the only child of William Pipe (died 1841), a Wesleyan local preacher and owner of a cutlery shop, and his wife, Susanna Spencer (died 1871). Soon after Hannah's birth the family moved to the Greenhays district, which was later to become the site of Manchester University. She had a happy childhood until she was nine, when her father died, leaving the family with very little money. Her mother, Susanna, a woman of great character, kept up family standards by reopening and working in their shop. She was determined to get Hannah the best possible education and sent her, first, to a school run by the Society of Friends under the supervision of Charles Cumber and an able teacher, Miss Fessant, who was the lady superintendent. Then, when Hannah was sixteen, she was sent to become a pupil of Dr William Ballantyne Hodgson, the new principal of Chorlton high school. Hodgson thought highly of her abilities. He encouraged her to take up teaching and mapped out a programme of study for her. 
In 1848 Hannah Pipe opened a small private day school at 46 Wright Street, Manchester, which was so successful that her mother was able to stop working in their shop. She joined Hannah in the work at the school, and in 1852 they moved to a larger house at 27 Acomb Street. There they took in boarders as well as day girls. Hannah had now found her vocation, as an exceptionally gifted teacher of young girls. Her pupils were mainly the daughters of nonconformist manufacturers and businessmen. She aimed to try to raise the new generation to higher standards in the art of living and to give them as good an education as their brothers received. Her ambition was 'to get hold of these girls with money and without refinement from their earlier years, and to open their eyes to all that is best in this life and in that which is to come' (Stoddart, 62). This work, which had been started as a way of earning her living, became to her both mission and vocation -- her whole life and being were devoted to it. But, even in Manchester, she had difficulty in finding teachers who could follow her methods. Friends urged her to move to London, and after making sure that her pupils' parents agreed she and her mother took the great step in 1856, and rented Latham Lodge, in Clapham Park, where she took in fifteen boarders, mainly from Wesleyan Methodist families. She had earlier been captivated by Stanley's life of Dr Arnold, and renamed the house after his school at Laleham 'where he first used his power of guiding character' (Stoddart, 57). She now determined 'to expect the same attainment in the lives of girls as he reached in the lives of boys' (ibid.). She considered 'private schools in England for girls of the upper-middle class were, for the most part miserably bad... and worse still, there was no demand for anything better. The majority of parents thought almost any teaching was good enough for girls' (ibid., 419). Her school was so successful that in 1860 they moved Laleham Lodge to a larger house in Clarence Road, where they took in twenty-five boarders at the high annual fee of 100 guineas each. The school, which was run like a household, remained there until 1908. 
Laleham had a distinguished staff of teachers; Miss Pipe decided that only the best were good enough for her girls. William Sterndale Bennett taught music, George Macdonald lectured on literature, and William Huggins on science. Two exiles from the 1848 revolutions, Dr Grottfried Kinkel and Adolf Sonnenschein, taught physical geography and arithmetic, the latter a subject poorly taught in girls' schools and even thought by some to be bad for their health. The curriculum was notably wide-ranging and enlightened, despite the objections of some more conservative Methodist parents. Her girls not only read Shakespeare aloud but acted out his plays. Many of them came from prosperous families and were not expected to have to earn their own living. She saw no point in preparing them for external examinations, and doubted the benefit of Emily Davies's campaign to admit girls to the examinations run by the universities, believing examinations to be equally damaging to boys and girls. She did, however, acknowledge their usefulness as tests of competence for professional purposes. Although she took no part in the efforts to open universities to women, she did not discourage girls who wanted to join the new women's colleges at Cambridge. One pupil, Amy Bulley, a younger sister of Ella Armitage, studied at both Girton and Newnham colleges (Miss Pipe preferred Newnham, which did not follow Emily Davies's rigid policy at Girton of subjecting women students to the same curriculum as men). Ten Laleham pupils went on to Newnham between 1873 and 1893, including the historian Alice Gardner. 
In 1871 Hannah Pipe's mother died and she greatly missed her support in running the school. Even so, she expanded her activities and opened a preparatory department, Laleham Lea, to prepare younger girls for the high standards she expected from her seniors. She became increasingly interested in philanthropic work, forming a link between Laleham and an orphanage at Streatham, which the girls helped to run, where she encouraged in them ideals of voluntary social service. The causes which she supported included Octavia Hill's campaign for healthy housing and 'humane landlordism', temperance, missions, and 'justice to other nations', emphasized by her strong opposition to the opium trade. She avoided party political involvement and 'was splendidly indifferent to the latter-day cry for women's franchise' (Stoddart, 283). The broad-church teachings of Arnold and Maurice were strong influences on her, though she remained a lifelong Methodist. At Laleham her religious teaching avoided proselytizing, and she was careful to guard against anything which would open her to charges, sometimes levelled at pious women teachers, of playing on the emotions of her pupils. 
Going by photographs of her at this time, Hannah Pipe was not strikingly beautiful, but had a fine head of hair and dressed with care and dignity. She had many offers of marriage but turned them all down, being, as she said, 'wedded to her work' (Stoddart, 257). The strain, without her mother's help, began to take its toll, and she suffered from severe headaches and asthma. She regularly took good holidays and would, occasionally, travel from London to Brighton to hire a horse and gallop over the Downs until she felt revived, but finally she had to take her doctor's advice to go for a health cure. She chose Dr Rikli's at Veldes am See. She visited that spa from 1883 until 1896 and there could be completely relaxed, but each year, not long after her return to Clapham, her illnesses would recur. In 1900 she retired to Hookwood Cottage, Limpsfield, Surrey, and handed her school over to the Misses Swindells, who had been responsible for the preparatory school. She attended the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of Laleham Lodge in June 1906, when more than 300 pupils were there to greet her. Hannah Pipe died on 29 December 1906 at her home in Limpsfield, mourned by everyone who knew her. Her obituary in 'The Times' refers to 'the gentle radiance of mind and spirit so conspicuous in this beautiful character'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50362


Thorne, Sir (Augustus Francis) Andrew Nicol (1885-1970), army officer, was born on 20 September 1885 at Dornhurst, Sevenoaks, Kent, son of Augustus Thorne (1825-1901), businessman and farmer, and his second wife, Mary Nicol (1857-1924). Having been educated at Mulgrave Castle School, Whitby (1894-9), Eton College (1899-1902), and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst (1903-4), he was commissioned in the Grenadier Guards in 1904. He married Margaret Douglas-Pennant (1886-1967), tenth daughter of the second Baron Penrhyn, on 29 July 1909. It was a strong and happy marriage and they had five children. 
Thorne, a staff captain with 1st guards brigade, who was nicknamed Bulgy, landed in France in August 1914. The brigade was heavily involved in the first battle of Ypres in October-November 1914, particularly around the village of Gheluvelt where Thorne had his horse shot from under him. After twelve months on the staff he was appointed second in command of the 1st battalion Grenadier Guards in March 1916. He commanded the 3rd battalion from September 1916 through the Somme, Passchendaele, Cambrai, and the retreat in the wake of Ludendorff's offensive of 1918. A leader with great energy and courage, he inspired his men with confidence which may in part have been due to his apparent invulnerability. Thorne's most serious injury of the war was sustained while playing football. He was made DSO three times and was mentioned in dispatches on seven occasions. In October 1918 Thorne assumed command of 184th infantry brigade with the temporary rank of brigadier-general. 
Thorne was unsure whether he wanted to remain in the post-war army and chose to become a CMG in 1919 rather than accept a brevet. He went to Washington as assistant military attache, where he decided to stay in the service. He attended Staff College, Camberley, from 1921 to 1922, and after returning a year later became an instructor there (1923-5). Following a brief period as military assistant to the chief of the Imperial General Staff (CIGS), Lord Cavan, he returned with some relief to regimental soldiering to command the 3rd battalion Grenadier Guards. He attended the Imperial Defence College in 1931. As military attache in Berlin from 1932 to 1935 Thorne, on several occasions, met Hitler, who always discussed the fighting around Gheluvelt in 1914 where Hitler too had served. Indeed a translation of Thorne's 1932 article in the 'Household Brigade Magazine' about Gheluvelt was found in the wreckage of Hitler's bunker in 1945. Thorne returned to Britain to command the 1st guards brigade in 1935 and saw active service in Palestine in 1936. He was made major-general and general officer commanding London district, in 1938. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War Thorne received command of the 48th (south midland) territorial division, which arrived in France in January 1940. The standard of equipment and training of the British expeditionary force's (BEF) territorial divisions was low. Thorne's efforts to rectify the situation before the Germans attacked in May 1940 were rewarded as his division performed creditably in the retreat from the Dyle and their desperate defence of the western perimeter of Dunkirk was vital to the safe withdrawal of the BEF. Back in England, Thorne took command of 12th corps in June 1940 with responsibility for the defence of the vital Sussex-Kent coastline, the likely site of a German invasion attempt. Thorne put his customary energy into his preparations and the training of his men. On 7 May 1941 Thorne was promoted lieutenant-general and made general officer commanding-in-chief, Scottish command. This was the turning point of Thorne's career. Scotland, though an army command, was peripheral to the war, whereas 12th corps had been in the front line. The decision to move Thorne was made by General Alan Brooke, then commander-in-chief, home forces, who appears to have regarded it as an advancement. Yet it left Thorne sidelined, ensuring he was never again seriously considered for active command. He was made KCB in 1942. 
None the less Thorne approached Scottish command's work with his usual vigour. Scotland was the obvious springboard for any operations launched against German-occupied Norway. While no such operations were undertaken, Thorne was responsible for the large scale deception scheme, Fortitude North, which ensured that the twelve German divisions in Norway stayed there throughout the Normandy landings. He was promoted full general in February 1945. Following careful planning for the liberation it says much for his abilities that as commander-in-chief, allied land forces, Norway, Thorne was able to take the surrender of 400,000 Germans in May 1945 and smoothly hand power back to the Norwegian authorities. 
Thorne retired in May 1946. In 1950 the Norwegian government asked the War Office to help restructure the Norwegian army. Thorne accepted this task with alacrity. The Norwegians implemented the majority of his recommendations. With justice Thorne can be considered the father of the modern Norwegian army. In his retirement Sir Andrew Thorne enjoyed family life, maintained close links with Norway, and worked on his golf. He died in Spynie Hospital, Elgin, on 25 September 1970, following a heart attack. He was buried in Sonning-on-Thames, Berkshire, on 1 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 50363


Maw, William Henry (1838-1924), engineer and technical journalist, was born on 6 December 1838 in Scarborough, the only child of William Mintoft Maw, a merchant clipper captain, and his wife, Minna Josephine Teresa, 'nee' Maxey. Maw's childhood was dogged by poor health, but he attended Sykes's School in Scarborough for several years. He was particularly interested in scientific facts, experiments, model making, and astronomy. His father died in 1853 and William and his mother moved to London where she died the following year. 
In March 1855 Maw was apprenticed to John Gooch, engineer to the Eastern Counties Railway, at Stratford in east London. Starting in the smith's shop of the carriage and wagon department he then transferred to the locomotive and engineering department. He also took drawing classes at the London Mechanics' Institution and assisted in the department's drawing office, where his impressive talent earned him, in December 1859, the post of chief draughtsman. In effect, though, he was personal assistant to the company's engineer-in-chief, Robert Sinclair, and responsible for designing rolling stock and for much standardizing work. He continued his studies through the Department of Science and Art in South Kensington, and made contact with such important figures as Henry Bessemer and Zerah Colburn. 
In 1859 Maw and other young engineers founded the Civil and Mechanical Engineers' Society; he was president from 1863 to 1866. Colburn sought Maw as co-editor of his new journal, 'Engineering'. He took the job in January 1866 but with Colburn's suicide in April 1870, he and James Dredge were left as co-editors and, with Alexander Hollingsworth, as co-directors. Maw's capacity for work was enormous: he set up a practice as consulting engineer with his co-directors as partners; he often acted as an expert witness and as an arbitrator, thanks to his diverse knowledge and experience. 'Engineering' owed its literary excellence and technical accuracy to Maw's untiring efforts as editor and author; its range and depth of coverage quickly cemented its reputation. He soon became one of the most significant figures in nineteenth-century technical journalism and maintained personal friendships with many engineering contemporaries. 
Maw married Emily Chappell (died 11 Sept 1924) in August 1867. Of eleven children, two died in infancy, and eight survived him. The family home from 1881 was at 18 Addison Road, Kensington, where he was a fine host, often indulging in dances, billiard parties, and lantern shows. Devoted to his gardens, he was especially keen on glass-house cultivation. His country residence at Outwood in Surrey was bought in 1894 and he spent long weekends there. Maw designed observatories for his astronomical work at his houses in Kensington in 1887 and in Outwood in 1896. His lengthy study of double stars was important; his observations were published in five volumes of the Royal Astronomical Society's 'Memoirs'. With astronomy, as with engineering, he built up a large, worldwide correspondence. He helped found the British Astronomical Association in 1890 and was president from 1899 to 1901 and treasurer for twenty-three years. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1888 and was president from 1905 to 1907, serving on its council for thirty-one years. 
Maw was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers from 1901 to 1902 and a council member for thirty-four years; he was president of the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1922-3 and a council member for thirteen years. The awards he received were numerous and he was connected with many other learned institutions and societies. During the First World War he served on many technical committees appointed by the government, particularly those connected with the Ministry of Munitions. He died at his home, 18 Addison Road, Kensington, on 19 March 1924, and was buried at Kensington Hanwell cemetery, Ealing, three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 50365


Cooper, John Astley (bap. 1858, d. 1930), propagandist for athleticism, was born in Adelaide, South Australia, and baptized on 21 April 1858, the eldest of the six children of the Revd Astley Cooper (1832/3-1915), the English-born vicar of St Mary's Church, Adelaide, Australia, and his wife, Fanny, 'nee' Williams. The family returned to England in 1870 and Cooper matriculated as a non-collegiate student at the University of Oxford in 1878 but did not take a degree. Little is known about his professional or private life, although in 1891 he was living in Richmond, Surrey, and described his occupation as author. He also claimed to be a company director and travelled to Africa on business at least once. 
Cooper was an enthusiastic imperialist who first gave public expression to his views in July 1891, when he anonymously published an article entitled 'Many lands -- one people' in 'Greater Britain'. Later that year he put forward his proposals for an Anglo-Saxon Olympiad the aim of which was to provide a new bond for an empire threatened (as he saw it) by both internal divisions and foreign rivals. He advocated the strengthening of a 'great network of a common literature, fine arts, academic studies and athletic exercises', of which the latter was the most important. His views were crudely Darwinistic, and presented the English-speaking race as having a God-given responsibility for the extension of civilization; in this work the United States was envisaged as very much a junior partner to the British empire. When J. A. Froude supported him in 'The Times' in 1892, Cooper's ideas received a much wider airing; and the British national and provincial press was matched in its enthusiasm by that of the empire. 
Despite this, and despite the refining of his views in such journals as the 'Nineteenth Century', Cooper's proposals foundered because of apprehension about the likely costs and because of widespread apathy. He was also pushed out of the limelight by the growing acceptance of Pierre de Coubertin's proposals for an international Olympiad, which would serve as a peacemaker between imperial rivalries. Cooper returned to obscurity until 1908, when the Olympics were held in London and he was able to claim them as a triumph of his ideas. He also claimed to have invented Empire day, more usually ascribed to Reginald Brabazon, twelfth earl of Meath. 
Cooper subsequently found another outlet for his views in the Royal Colonial Institute and its journal 'United Empire'. He reiterated his views, if anything more crudely, in its pages in 1910, at a time of growing international uncertainty. His last known contribution came after the outbreak of the First World War, when his jingoism and assumptions about the automatic superiority of the British were presented again in 'United Empire' (vol. 7, 1916), in his lecture 'The British imperial spirit of sport and the war'. This rambling panegyric to militant athleticism appeared just before the battle of the Somme revealed how tenuous such claims were. 
Cooper hit a popular vein of assumed superiority which events called into question. Although he disappeared from the public press after 1916 many of his ideas survived the war and came to fruition with the establishment of the British empire games, first held at Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, in August 1930. Cooper died on 4 February 1930, aged seventy-three, at 2 Beach Houses, Beach Road, Westgate-on-Sea, Kent, survived by his wife, Agnes. 


@@@@@


doc= 50368


Alexander, Alexander (1849-1928), promoter of physical education, was born in Liverpool on 14 May 1849, the second son of W. C. Alexander, a chief carpenter in the Royal Navy who had settled in Liverpool at the end of his period of service. Following an education at Liverpool College and the Liverpool Institute, he was apprenticed to the well-known gymnast John Hulley, the first director of the Liverpool Gymnasium. After completing his training he became a demonstrator of physical training there. The Liverpool Gymnasium at that time was one of the acknowledged centres of sporting life in Britain, attracting pupils from all over Britain, and from as far afield as America. Representatives of the local medical profession co-operated in directing the classes on a sound theoretical basis. The gymnasium was also made available to all the leading artistes who visited the city, and it was from these performers that Alexander acquired many of his skills. He became a highly skilled performer in all the branches of his art, a quality he possessed in common with that other great pioneer of gymnastics Per Henryk Ling. His speciality was what later became known as agility exercises; these were not in fashion in the gymnasiums at the time because they were not thought to be essential to general health. Alexander, on the other hand, maintained that they were useful because they developed such qualities as pluck, skill, endurance, and the art of co-ordinating mind and muscle. After the temporary closure of the gymnasium in 1870, Alexander travelled around Britain and Ireland giving demonstrations of his physical prowess and offering his services teaching fencing and gymnastics skills to public schools and military establishments. For a period his services were employed at various institutions in Ireland, including Trinity College, Dublin (1875). While in Ireland he met his eventual wife, Emily Adelaide, daughter of John and Mary Smith of Dublin. 
In 1880 Alexander returned to his native Liverpool to take over directorship of the ailing Liverpool Gymnasium, which had been purchased by the philanthropist Samuel Smith and was run by the Young Men's Christian Association. With considerable energy and enthusiasm he taught classes in health and fitness, staged numerous public displays, and prepared teams to compete and exhibit their skills around Britain and occasionally abroad. He led a team visit to Stockholm in 1896 at the invitation of King Oscar of Sweden, and at the invitation of Quintin Hogg mounted a display to celebrate the opening of the gymnasium at Regent Street Polytechnic in London. 
Alexander, who was Britain's answer to the renowned German strongman Eugen Sandow, achieved notoriety for feats of strength such as crushing an apple with one hand, bending pokers and bars of iron, and raising his entire body weight by means of one finger only, and by performing a variety of somersaults and tumbling tricks on the ground and on the rafters of the Liverpool Gymnasium. It was claimed that he could out-perform any of his contemporaries in these feats. Other regular stunts included placing an apple on the back of an assistant's neck and then slicing it in two with a single blow of a sword while his assistant remained unharmed. Notables impressed by these feats were often invited to feel his muscles. Accidents resulting from acquiring, rehearsing, and performing these tricks eventually took their toll, however, and are thought to have been responsible for his eventual blindness in later life. 
Alexander championed what he termed a British system of physical training, and published at least sixteen books describing its methods. The system consisted of free movements and breathing exercises, military and musical drill, gymnastics, outdoor games, and swimming. He advocated that the system should be taught in elementary schools and gave evidence to the royal commission on teacher education in 1887. His ideas, which became popular at the time of the Edwardian movement for national efficiency, were later aired before the royal commission on physical training (Scotland) in 1902. With his wife, who was also a physical training instructor, he opened the physical training college for women at Southport in 1891 to produce teachers scientifically trained in its techniques; they jointly wrote 'British Physical Education for Girls' (1910). In 1886 he helped to found the National Physical Recreation Society, of which Herbert Gladstone was president and Arthur Kinnaird the secretary, with the object of promoting physical recreation among the working classes. He also claimed to have invented bent handlebars for racing bicycles. Alexander (or Alick) Alexander died at his home, Innisfallen, 8 York Road, Birkdale, Southport, Lancashire, on 23 May 1928, and was buried on 29 May in Birkdale cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


