@@@@@


doc= 50369


Baker, Richard Edward St Barbe (1889-1982), conservationist, was born on 9 October 1889 at West End, near Southampton, the eldest of five children of John Richard St Barbe Baker, horticulturist, and his wife, Charlotte, 'nee' Purrott. His father grew trees for a living on his own land and from his earliest days Baker was surrounded by and dedicated to woods and trees. After early schooling locally, at the age of thirteen he was sent to Dean Close School, Cheltenham. Four years later, on discovering that his father was having to sell off land to pay for his education, Baker resolved to leave school and fulfil an early ambition of going to Canada. There, at Saskatoon, he became one of the early students of Saskatchewan University, where he read arts and sciences. In the three and a half years he spent in Canada he gained much experience of working in the forests and it was from this that he decided he should qualify as a forester. He also held deep religious beliefs and on returning to England in 1913 he went to Cambridge to study divinity. At the outbreak of the First World War he volunteered for service overseas and was commissioned in the Royal Horse and Field Artillery. Severely wounded three times in the course of his war service (and awarded the Military Cross), he was finally invalided out in April 1918. After a period of convalescence he returned to Cambridge, to Gonville and Caius College, and took a diploma in forestry. His first application to become assistant conservator of forests in Kenya was turned down on medical grounds as he was still recuperating from the injuries he had suffered, but the post was granted in November 1920 and a public career that was to lead to world renown began. 
In Kenya, Baker saw at once the pressing need for widespread reafforestation to stem the erosion and desiccation of the land caused by unremitting felling of the forests. No funding was available for this, but with the collaboration of Chief Josiah Njonjo a team of volunteers -- 'Watu wa Miti' (Men of the Trees) -- was formed, a dedicated group of fifty warriors being sworn in on 22 July 1922 at the first dance of the trees. Over the years millions of trees were planted. On his return to England in 1924 Baker founded the Men of the Trees Society (renamed the International Tree Foundation in 1992), the activities of which led within his lifetime to the planting of billions of trees throughout the world. Between 1924 and 1929 he was conservator of forests in Nigeria and from then until the Second World War he travelled throughout the world to establish tree planting and conservation programmes. Of special concern to him was the saving of the giant redwoods of California, and he returned there year after year to pursue this. A discussion with Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 resulted in the formation of the Civilian Conservation Camps Corps, which contributed massive labour to forest conservation over a nine-year period. 
In the years following the war until the very end of his life Baker continued to travel the world, campaigning vigorously for the preservation and restoration of forests and the reclamation of desert areas (the Sahara being seen as a particular challenge), lecturing widely, participating in international conferences and symposia, and tirelessly spreading his expertise. His (ever modest) autobiographical writings gave a hint of the great range of his benevolent achievements over the course of a long career. He married first, on 23 January 1946, Doreen Whitworth Long ('b'. 1919/20), daughter of George Henry William Long, farmer, of Puncknowle, Dorset. They had a son and a daughter. The marriage was dissolved in 1953 and in 1959 Baker married Catriona Burnett of Mount Cook, New Zealand, and took up residence there. In 1971 he was made an honorary LLD of the University of Saskatchewan and he was appointed OBE in 1978. In June 1982, in his ninety-third year, he returned to Saskatoon, where, on 5 June, in celebration of World Environment day, he planted what proved to be his last tree. He died there peacefully four days later and following a Baha'i funeral service (a faith he had held since 1922) was buried in the Woodlawn cemetery in Saskatoon. 
Although he made no claims to being a writer as such, in the period from 1940 to the late 1970s Baker published some twenty-five seminal books about trees and the challenges he had undertaken, many being illustrated with his own very accomplished photographs. He also wrote many specialist articles. St Barbe, as he was affectionately known to many, was a practical man of exceptional vitality, motivated by an unwavering belief in the need to reverse the destruction that had been wrought from the earliest times upon the forests of this planet. The combination of his ideals, backed by his religious convictions and blended with his agreeable personality, his ability to relate constructively to everyone he encountered, and his tireless energy, culminated in the vast contribution he made to pioneering the saving of the world's forests. He was always the first to declare that what had been achieved was the outcome of teamwork, but there can be no doubt that he was the indispensable catalyst. 


@@@@@


doc= 50370


Oliver, Harry Mander (1855-1918), athletics administrator and journalist, was born at 17 John Street West, Hemingford Road, Islington, on 28 February 1855, one of at least four sons of Henry Oliver (died 1916) and his wife, Sarah Jane, formerly Mander. His father, a clerk at the Railway Clearing House, was the compiler from 1862 of a 'Hand Book of the Stations and Sidings on the Railways in the United Kingdom', but was also a keen athlete and one of the original members of the North London rowing club. Oliver was educated from 1867 at Framlingham College, Suffolk, where he made his mark as an athlete; at fourteen he finished fourth in a cross-country race that included boys four and five years older. At eighteen he was a founder member of Spartan Harriers, a club which operated from the Railway inn, Hornsey, and of which his father was president. He subsequently developed into a successful cross-country runner and steeplechaser in senior competition, finishing third in the English cross-country championship in 1878 and winning the steeplechase at the Amateur Athletic Club's meeting in 1879, an event that was effectively the championship of England. 
When he moved to Birmingham in May 1876 to take a job with the Birmingham Banking Company, Oliver joined Moseley Harriers. For at least three years he was simultaneously a member of three clubs -- the Spartan and Moseley Harriers clubs and Birmingham athletic club -- but his chief interest was Moseley. He became the club secretary, retired from running and set out to make Moseley the top cross-country team in the country. This branch of the sport provided the first national inter-club championship in British athletics and Oliver's ambitions for his club were given added impetus when Birchfield Harriers, another Birmingham club, won the prestigious team championship in 1880, the first provincial club to do so. He responded by forming a strong Moseley team that won the title in four successive years from 1881 to 1884. The team included Walter George, William Snook, and other leading runners of the day from outside the Birmingham area. This was criticized as unsporting by Walter Rye, who commented on Oliver: 'Whether his administrative ability operated for the general benefit of the sport is... an open question among those who know anything about the subject, the general impression being that the eagerness with which men are caught up into clubs and imported into crack teams has spoiled the old feeling of 'bona fide' competition. (M. Shearman, 'Athletics and Football', 1887, 376)' The organization of athletics in the midlands was developing quickly at this time and Oliver was determined to be involved at all levels. Showing remarkable energy and ambition, he was the first secretary of both the Midland Counties Cross Country Association (from 1879) and the Midland Counties Amateur Athletic Association (from 1880), the moving force behind the formation (in 1883) of the English Cross Country Union, of which he also became secretary, and editor and part owner (1879-1886) of the weekly magazine 'Midland Athlete'. He was also official handicapper, timekeeper, and judge at the summer track meetings in the midlands. A man achieving so much power and influence was bound to have detractors and Oliver's chief adversary was W. W. Alexander of Birchfield Harriers. The two men were driven by an ambition to make their respective clubs the most successful in the midlands, and the Moseley-Birchfield rivalry was a feature of the early years of club athletics. 'In constitution, composition and character they were diametrically opposite,' Edward Lawrence Levy later commented: 'Moseley Harriers were a 'Sassiety' ['sic'] club, the Birchfield Harriers were typical of the 'fierce democracy'' ('Autobiography of an Athlete', 1913, 119-20.) The likely inference was that Moseley members were 'white collar' and Birchfield's 'blue collar'. 
Moseley's standing as the top cross-country club ended in 1885 when George turned professional and Snook joined Birchfield. Oliver's position as the most influential man in midland athletics came to an end on 7 January 1887, when he went to prison for three months for embezzling money from the bank at which he worked in order to pay debts incurred in financing the 'Midland Athlete'. The magazine was discontinued, Moseley Harriers disbanded, and he played no further part in athletics. By 1891 he was running the Crown Hotel, Evesham, with his wife, Florence Maria Bromage (1856-1937), whom he married in 1881; she was the daughter of Joseph Bromage, jeweller. They had at least one son. They later managed the Royal Hotel, Sutton Coldfield. He died at the New Inn, Market Place, Lechlade, Gloucestershire, of which he was proprietor, on 9 March 1918. 


@@@@@


doc= 50371


Jackson, Clement Nugent (1846-1924), sports administrator, was born in Simla, India, on 2 April 1846, the second son of Lieutenant-General George Jackson (1812-1889), of the Bengal staff corps. Educated at Somerset College, Bath, in 1864 he was awarded a scholarship to Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1869 and proceeded MA in 1871, having taken third-class honours in classics. He remained in Oxford as a private tutor, and also held a tutorship at Magdalen Hall, which he retained when the hall was transformed into Hertford College in 1874. He was a university proctor in 1881 and held a fellowship of Hertford from 1881 until 1886, when he relinquished it on his marriage to Ada Louise Martin on 15 July. He continued to teach for Hertford, was re-elected to a fellowship in 1897, and was college bursar from 1887 until 1914. Jackson played a large part in the successful establishment of the new college; during its early days he was 'the man whom everyone knew, consulted and respected' ('Hertford College Magazine', 9, 1914, 46). 
As an undergraduate, Jackson was an outstanding athlete and cricketer. In 1865 he set a world record of 16 seconds for the 120 yards hurdles on the 'unsuitable' Marston track, and in 1867 he won the high hurdles for Oxford against Cambridge in the first match of the series to be held in London. His athletic career was ended by an accident sustained while racing W. G. Grace over hurdles: 'I spiked a hidden oyster shell when going full bat in a hurdle handicap after the seven-leagued legs of W. G. Grace', recalled Jackson (Lovesey, 29), and 'from that day onward I never ran, never tasted an oyster, and never spoke to W. G. the Great' (quoted in P. Matthews, ed., 'The Guinness Book of Track and Field Facts and Feats', 1982, 149). 
While his own participation in sport was limited to annual fishing trips to Norway, and to coaching the Hertford eight from a bicycle on the river bank, Jackson became an energetic sports administrator both inside and outside Oxford. He became the senior treasurer of the university athletic club in 1869, and it soon became a rule 'that any bankrupt club went to Jacky, and in a year or two it was showing a healthy balance' ('Hertford College Magazine', 9, 1914, 47). He became senior treasurer of the rugby and association football clubs (1886), and later of lawn tennis (1900) and lacrosse (1903). The acquisition of the Iffley Road running ground in 1876 and of the football ground in 1899 were described as his two greatest triumphs, both 'practically unaided efforts, for... he never liked divided control' (ibid.). Jackson was an early supporter of the idea of amalgamated college clubs, and was treasurer of Hertford's clubs from 1883 to 1913. 
Jackson was well known for his guidance of individual athletes at Oxford, and his nephew A. N. S. Strode-Jackson won the 1912 Olympic 1500-metre title as an Oxford undergraduate. One of the athletes he encouraged was Montague Shearman, who organized a conference in Oxford in 1880 to discuss the future of amateur athletics. Jackson, as 'guide, philosopher and friend of the OUAC' ('Hertford College Magazine', 9, 1914, 46) gave his powerful support to this meeting, and to the Amateur Athletic Association (AAA) which was formed from it, and of which Jackson was treasurer until 1910. It was his intervention at the meeting which ensured that the definition of an amateur which the new association adopted did not exclude 'mechanics, artisans or labourers' from competition, unlike the definition supported by the metropolitan Amateur Athletic Club. Had the more exclusive definition of an amateur been adopted, a split in amateur athletics would have been likely; instead the new AAA was quickly accepted as the national governing body for the sport. 
Jackson died on 28 October 1924 at his home, 12 Norham Road, Oxford, after a long period of ill health and seven years of paralysis caused by a stroke. His widow, the author of 'Gordon League Ballads for Working Men and Women' (1897), survived him. A subscription provided two C. N. Jackson memorial cups, one competed for at the Oxford and Cambridge sports, and the other at the AAA championships. An undergraduate of the 1870s wrote in his memory, 'If a man is to be measured by his influence on other men Jackson must be accounted a great man' ('Hertford College Magazine', 14, 1925, 7). 


@@@@@


doc= 50372


Hastings, Somerville (1878-1967), surgeon and politician, was born on 4 March 1878 in Boreham Road, Warminster, Wiltshire, the son of Henry George Hastings (1850?-1905), Congregationalist minister, and his wife, Ellen ('nee' Ward). He was educated at Wycliffe College, and, on a medical scholarship, at University College and the Middlesex Hospital, London, during which he received a number of prizes, including medals in botany, an enduring interest. Hastings's academic and professional qualifications were MB, MRCS, and LRCP (1902); BS (1903); FRCS (1904); and MS (1908). Alongside his lucrative private practice, Hastings had a lifetime association with the Middlesex Hospital, specializing in ear, nose, and throat medicine. On 19 October 1911 he married Bessie Tuke (1881/2-1958), daughter of William Tuke, architect; they had two children. 
Hastings was active in labour and medical reform politics before 1914, and by the 1920s he had formulated what were to remain his core beliefs. Hastings's socialized health service was to have a full-time, salaried medical personnel, and hence no private practice; and an integrated hospital system. Free and comprehensive services were to be organized around health centres, with an accompanying shift from curative to preventive medicine. Control was to be by democratically elected local authorities, centrally co-ordinated by the Ministry of Health. 
After the First World War Hastings emerged as an important figure on the medical left. He became a leading member of the Labour Party's public health advisory committee; and, in 1923-4 and again in 1929-31, the Labour member of parliament for Reading. In 1930 Hastings helped form the organization with which he is most closely associated, the Socialist Medical Association, which affiliated to the Labour Party in 1931. Hastings was its founding president and he retained the presidency until 1951. He expended considerable energy, particularly in the association's crucial pre-war and wartime period, on socialist medical politics. He was often the association's delegate to the Labour Party conference, and was instrumental in having the party commit itself by 1934 to a national health service. He wrote and lectured extensively on his vision of a socialized medical service, and travelled abroad to study foreign medical systems and meet other socialist doctors. Most significant of all was his election in 1932 to the London county council as member for Mile End. Hastings held this seat until 1946, during which time he served (in 1944-5) as council chairman. Thereafter he was, from 1946 to 1964, an alderman, and he continued to serve on various committees. He was also a member of the London Labour Party's executive committee from 1934 to 1950. Membership of the London county council was Hastings's most successful and important venture into politics. After Labour took control in 1934 he was chairman of its hospital and medical services committee for ten years. As London was the largest provider of hospital beds in the country, this was a great responsibility. His council experience confirmed Hastings's view that medical services should be provided by democratic local bodies. 
During the Second World War the influence of Hastings and the Socialist Medical Association increased. He was one of the three original association representatives on the British Medical Association's medical planning commission; and he was chairman of Labour's revived advisory committee on public health, a body charged with formulating proposals for a national health service. It seemed possible that Hastings's vision of a socialized medical service would be realized, given his own and his organization's heightened influence in labour and medical politics. 
Hastings was elected member of parliament for Barking at the 1945 general election, a seat he held until his retirement in 1959. He claimed publicly that the post-war Labour government's National Health Service was in large part attributable to the work of the Socialist Medical Association. However, not all that Hastings desired was achieved. The minister of health, Aneurin Bevan, would have little to do with Hastings or the association. Bevan created a centrally controlled system and made concessions to the medical profession over issues such as private practice. Although a commitment was made to develop health centres, this did not happen. Hastings therefore welcomed and defended the National Health Service, but only as a first, imperfect, step towards a socialized medical service. He continued to agitate for his ideal of socialized medicine; to work as an active constituency member of parliament; and to serve on numerous boards and committees. He died at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, on 7 July 1967. 
Hastings deserves acknowledgement as a pioneer of socialized medicine. But while it is easy to obtain a picture of the public figure, it is harder to see beyond this to the private individual. Hastings was a lifelong Christian (this being central to his political beliefs) and a teetotaller, and seems to have led an unpretentious, possibly somewhat austere, life. Some contemporaries have described him as rather cold, even aloof, with colleagues and patients. He was, however, regarded by others with considerable respect. He was described, on occasions, as shy; but also as enthusiastic in his passions, generous to his friends, and without pomposity. Hastings typifies the professional, altruistic, middle-class Christian socialist of his time. 


@@@@@


doc= 50376


Salter, Alfred (1873-1945), medical practitioner and politician, was born at 23 South Street, Greenwich on 16 June 1873, the son of Walter Hookway Salter and Elizabeth Jester. His father was an administrative officer with the Metropolitan Gas Company. Salter's childhood and adolescence were economically secure; his family's growing prosperity was indicated by a move to Lewisham Hill. His early experiences were also deeply religious. Initially the family were Wesleyans but later joined the Plymouth Brethren. At the age of nine Salter joined the Band of Hope; his commitment to temperance would be lifelong. Educated at the Roan School in Greenwich, Salter became a medical student at Guy's Hospital in 1889. His student career was outstanding. In 1895 he took triple first-class honours in the MB and was awarded the gold medal. The following year he came first in the MD examination and again took the gold medal. In 1897 he became house physician and resident obstetric physician at Guy's, and Joseph Lister appointed him bacteriologist to the British Institute of Preventive Medicine. His talent was apparent in a range of research papers published in British and German journals. He seemed destined for a prestigious and lucrative career. 
Salter's strong ethical sense drove his career in a very different direction. During his student years he had been attracted to socialism and had joined the Social Democratic Federation. This had been accompanied by a shift to agnosticism. As a student he had also visited homes in working-class Bermondsey. The poverty in this south-eastern London riverside borough had left a lasting impression. In 1898 he went to live in the Bermondsey settlement, a centre for social service with a strongly Christian ethos. His evenings were spent organizing activities for the settlement's programme. 
The most decisive influence on Salter came from Ada Brown (1866-1942), the daughter of a comfortably-off family in Raunds, Northamptonshire ['see 'Salter, Ada]. She lived in Bermondsey and ran the girls' club at the settlement. Her involvement was inspired by a blend of religious zeal and social concern. Together with the settlement's head, the Revd John Scott Lidgett, she brought Salter back to Christianity. They were married on 22 August 1900; both joined the Peckham meeting of the Society of Friends. They decided to devote their lives to the people of Bermondsey, where Salter established a general medical practice which provided the core of his identity within the community. Driven by his sense of mission, Salter worked prodigiously long hours. His political activities, influenced by Scott Lidgett, became focused on the Liberal Party, which seemed congenial to his religious and ethical beliefs. He was elected to the Bermondsey borough council in 1903, and two years later became a member of the Progressives on the London county council (LCC). But his discontent with the Liberals grew. On 5 May 1908 he was one of a small group that formed the Bermondsey branch of the Independent Labour Party (ILP). 
The party was relatively weak in London. Working-class Liberalism was strong and socialists tended to join the Social Democratic Federation. Yet the ethical style of the ILP was obviously attractive to Salter. The initial membership included two other partners in his practice and some working-class activists. In October 1909 the branch faced its first serious test. Bermondsey's Liberal member died and Salter contested the by-election. The ILP depended heavily on Salter's local reputation as a doctor; Liberals responded that a vote for him was a wasted vote. Especially in the context of the deepening crisis over the people's budget and the Lords, this was a powerful weapon. Salter finished bottom with 1435 votes. Subsequent socialist growth in Bermondsey was slow. Neither general election was fought in 1910; Salter, fighting for his new party, lost his LCC seat. When the ILP ran a slate in the borough elections, only Ada Salter was successful. Salter's austere and principled politics was complemented by an immense capacity for organizational work. He and his colleagues courted trade-union branches to build Bermondsey Labour Party; on a wider canvass he was heavily involved in the creation of the London Labour Party. His activism was accompanied and perhaps heightened by a personal tragedy. Alfred and Ada Salter's only child, Joyce, had died in 1910, a victim of scarlet fever in a borough where child mortality rates were appallingly high. 
Salter's response to the outbreak of the First World War was based on his interpretation of Christianity. His 'Faith of a pacifist' was unequivocal: 'I believe that all killing is murder and is wrong' ('Labour Leader', 24 Sept 1914). He participated vigorously in the anti-war propaganda of the ILP and played a significant role in the No-Conscription Fellowship. At wartime ILP conferences Salter repeatedly moved a resolution pledging the ILP to press the Socialist International to oppose any future war. Sidelined in 1915, passed but ignored by the party leadership the following year, the proposal was adopted firmly as party policy at the 1917 conference. In moving the resolution Salter emphasized a principle that shaped his political choices: 'There is no greater fallacy than to think that you can secure good results by using bad means' ('Independent Labour Party Conference Report 1917', 56). 
Labour's electoral progress in post-war London was at first uncertain. Salter predictably polled poorly in the new Bermondsey West seat in 1918, but four years later, in November 1922, he entered the Commons, aided by the division of the anti-Labour vote between three candidates. The fragility of his position was clear in December 1923, when he lost to a Liberal in a straight fight. But in the 1924 election Salter won the seat back and retained it until he retired in 1945. By the mid-1920s Bermondsey was a solidly Labour borough at every level, parliamentary, LCC, borough council, and the board of guardians. The local Labour Party was well organized, and the ILP branch was the centre of the labour movement's social activities. The Labour majority on the borough council pioneered an ambitious programme of housing construction, environmental improvements, and welfare provision, of which Salter as an alderman was typically viewed as the principal inspiration. 
In parliament Salter was characteristically assiduous in dealing with constituents' problems. His pacifism strengthened his commitment to parliament as the only instrument for a better society. But his austere and often inflexible principles made him an outsider. One of his early Commons interventions was in support of a bill to introduce prohibition. In October 1926 he was found guilty of a breach of privilege. He had commented at a temperance meeting on drunkenness in the Commons, and had repeated the claim when the issue was brought before the house. In congenial company Salter could be relaxed and humorous; in the formality of the Commons his style could be bleak. One seasoned observer captured him as 'a stern man of granite quality quite unused to the melting mood' (cited in Brockway, 150). 
Salter's attachment to the ILP was shaken by that party's radicalization in the late 1920s. He remained a supporter of MacDonald and was thoroughly hostile to the leadership of James Maxton. Salter took a leading role in the manoeuvres that produced two meetings of the ILP parliamentary group in December 1928. The purpose was to mobilize against the ILP left, but the strategy provoked opposition, not just from supporters of Maxton, but also from many who saw Salter and his allies as needlessly divisive. Nevertheless, Salter's views were endorsed by many within the Bermondsey ILP and the branch strongly opposed the national party's disaffiliation from the Labour Party in 1932. 
Within the small post-1931 Parliamentary Labour Party Salter felt unusually comfortable. He admired Lansbury's leadership, and on international issues the party seemed closer to his own position. In the Commons he led effectively for the parliamentary party on a variety of issues. However, the Italian invasion of Abyssinia and the Labour Party's debate over sanctions marked the beginning of a deepening political isolation. At the party's conference in 1935 he supported Lansbury's pacifist position. Subsequently he was a leading figure in the parliamentary pacifist group. He remained close to Lansbury as the latter embarked on his crusade for peace. Much of Salter's energy was devoted to the Peace Pledge Union. His pacifism and distaste for the Versailles settlement made him a supporter of appeasement. After the Munich agreement he insisted that 'the average German will withdraw his backing from Hitler if we show willingness to be just' (A. Salter, 'Reconciliation', November 1938, 352). Even in Bermondsey Salter could seem isolated. He quarrelled fiercely with the trades council in 1937 over its organization of a counter-demonstration against Sir Oswald Mosley. He told delegates that their behaviour made them indistinguishable from the Fascists. At the end of 1938 his disillusion was severe: 'I am very distressed about the moral and spiritual condition of the Labour Party' (Salter to Arthur Creech Jones, 30 Dec 1938, Creech Jones MSS). 
Salter's residual optimism was destroyed by the outbreak of war. His health was deteriorating; his political allies were few; bombs devastated much of Bermondsey. Salter made his last Commons speech in November 1941, a pacifist plea for an armistice. But within two weeks Pearl Harbor would herald a vast extension of hostilities. Ada Salter's death in December 1942 left Salter effectively dependent on his links with the Peace Pledge Union. Yet he and another Labour politician, James Hudson, broke with them not over policy but over the alleged sexual libertarianism of some union employees. He remained a moral absolutist. 
Salter died in Guy's Hospital, London, on 24 August 1945 and was buried at Peckham Friends' meeting-house. Bermondsey had been physically and socially battered by the war. His uncompromising pacifism had been rejected by almost all of his former political associates. Yet to many in Bermondsey he remained The Doctor, a man whose medical and municipal achievements far outweighed disagreements with his austere politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 50377


Duddell, William Du Bois (1872-1917), electrical engineer, was born on 1 July 1872 at 23 Westmoreland Place, Kensington, London, the son of Frances Kate Du Bois. The identity of his father is unknown. In 1881 his mother married George Duddell (died 1887), a landowning gentleman of Queen's Park, Brighton. An asthmatic, delicate child, William received his early education privately in England, and at the College Stanislas, Cannes, where the family had moved for the benefit of his health. William showed mechanical ability at an early age. When only four, he is said to have fitted a toy mouse with a clockwork motor. From 1890 to 1893 he was apprenticed to the firm of Davey, Paxman & Co. at Colchester. His skills were obviously known to his friends, as his landlady is said to have complained at the number of clocks being brought to her house for repair. 
William Duddell studied at the Central Technical College (later the City and Guilds College), South Kensington, under professors Ayrton and Mather, obtaining a Whitworth exhibition in 1896, and a Whitworth scholarship in 1897. There he became interested in the alternating-current electric arc. His work was hindered by the clumsiness of the Joubert 'point to point' method used at that time to delineate alternating-current waveforms. Andre Blondel, in Paris, had suggested modifying a moving-coil meter by reducing it to a rudimentary form consisting simply of one single loop of wire under tension, thereby reducing its mechanical inertia to the point where the coil could follow the instantaneous variations of the current. Movement of the loop was observed by directing a light beam at a small mirror fixed to it. Projection of the reflected beam on to a screen or photographic plate by a vibrating mirror then revealed the waveform. Using his great skills, Duddell developed this idea into a fully engineered oscillograph. He and his colleague, E. W. Marchant, described both the oscillograph and the results of their observations on the arc in a paper published in the 'Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers' in 1899 (28, 1-107). The demonstration of the oscillograph caused a sensation, since those present realized that they now had, for the first time, a convenient and speedy method of displaying waveforms. The Cambridge Scientific Instrument Co. manufactured many different models of these oscillographs and they were used until the Second World War when they were gradually superseded by cathode-ray oscillographs (or oscilloscopes as they then became known). 
Duddell developed many other instruments, including a vibration galvanometer; a thermo-ammeter based on Boys's radio-micrometer; a twisted-strip galvanometer; and a version of Einthoven's string galvanometer. All bore the stamp of his manual skills and his minute attention to detail. He retained his interest in the electric arc and in 1901 revealed his discovery that an arc connected across a capacitor and an inductor could oscillate -- the so-called 'musical arc' or 'singing arc'. He demonstrated the effect at a public lecture by causing an arc to play the tune 'God Save the King'. This phenomenon became the basis of the arc method of radio transmission, developed most notably by Valdemar Poulsen. 
William Duddell also played an active part in his profession, and received many honours, being president of the Rontgen Society in 1907, of the Institution of Electrical Engineers from 1912 to 1914, and of the Commission Internationale de Telegraphie sans Fils in 1914. He was also vice-president and honorary treasurer of the Physical Society. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society of London on 2 May 1907 and he received their Hughes medal in 1912. He was awarded gold medals from the Paris Exhibition in 1900 and the St Louis Exhibition in 1904. 
Duddell, who was unmarried, lived at 47 Hans Place, Knightsbridge, London, moving about 1904 to 36 Walton Street, Chelsea. He died at Newlands House, 180 Tooting Bec Road, London, on 4 November 1917, of general paralysis, aged only forty-five; he was buried four days later at Brighton. It was thought that the drastic deterioration in his health was caused by the intensive government war work on which he was engaged. He was survived by his mother, by then Mrs Smithers, and by his younger sister, Mrs Blanche Gladys Du Bois Colston. He left effects worth $4735 7's'. 11died Some months before his death he was appointed commander in the Order of the British Empire. However, he was too ill to go the palace, and the insignia were received by his mother two days after he died. By all accounts William Duddell was an extremely well-liked person. Descriptions of him in various obituaries refer to 'an unassuming and kindly man', and 'a man of charming courtesy' with 'lightness of manner, approachable by all and sundry'. Although his major achievements, the oscillograph and the musical arc, are no longer of any practical importance, they were crucial to the development of electrical engineering and wireless telegraphy. 


@@@@@


doc= 50381


Hammond, Robert (1850-1915), electrical engineer, was born on 19 January 1850 at Park Lane, Waltham Cross, Hertfordshire, the son of Robert Hammond, brewer, and his wife, Ann. He was educated at Nunhead grammar school. His first job was in the counting-house of a London cloth merchant, but in 1866 he joined the engineering firm Ullathorne & Co. of Lincoln's Inn Fields. In 1872 he left Ullathorne's for Bryant, Forster & Co., iron merchants, in Newcastle upon Tyne. After a short period with another iron merchant, James Jennings, he established his first engineering company, the partnership of Hammond, Kyle & Co., but this was ruined by a crash in South American securities. 
Hammond first became involved in electrical engineering in 1878, when he took it up alongside his continuing iron ore interests. His first lighting installations were of arc lamps, illuminating various iron companies' works in the north east. He soon turned to public and municipal lighting, and was involved in some of the earliest public schemes, including those at Chesterfield and Brighton in 1881, and Hastings and Eastbourne in 1882. He also helped to fund Sebastian de Ferranti's early work on dynamos. A tireless worker, Hammond was responsible for dozens of public lighting installations, as well as several for heavy industry, and schemes in Ireland and Spain. He also set up several 'house-to-house' companies for public electricity supply. However, he often faced financial difficulties, and in 1893 he gave up contracting engineering to concentrate on consulting and expert witness work. 
Elected a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE) in 1893, Hammond became honorary treasurer in 1902. He was able to apply his varied experiences to bring in reforms that strengthened the IEE's position in relation to the electrical industry. He introduced the IEE's model forms of contract in 1903, which brought a much needed element of standardization to electrical contracting. He was also responsible for introducing the IEE's membership examinations. A colleague said of him that it was just as well that Hammond's engineering knowledge was not subjected to the tests he had introduced. Despite his lack of formal training, he realized that structured, practical training courses were essential to the future of the electrical industry, and to this end he helped to establish one of the first technical colleges, Faraday House, in 1889, after an earlier attempt to found a college in 1883 had failed. 
Hammond's capacity for work was almost endless. As a result of touring the country delivering popular lectures on lighting developments, he wrote one of the first popular handbooks on electric light, 'The Electric Light in our Homes', published in 1884. In 1891 he launched a journal, 'Lightning', which aimed to provide information about the electricity industry for users and customers. 'Lightning' later became the 'Electrical Times'. However, his energy extended beyond the electricity industry. In 1889 he unsuccessfully ran as an MP for the Hallam division of Sheffield, standing as a Liberal free-trader. He was a keen golfer, and wrote two books on bridge and one on whist. He also loved travel, and often combined this with his work, visiting the USA several times to study electric traction systems, and presenting an influential paper in South Africa about electricity development in the Rand. His only son, Robert Whitehead Hammond, born in 1876 from his first marriage, to Elizabeth Whitehead, and also an electrical engineer, was due to take over his father's business, but was killed in the trenches in 1917. His first wife having died, Robert Hammond contracted a second marriage in 1914, to Martha Winifred ('b'. 1876), daughter of Joseph Edwards. Hammond died at his home, 1 Rudall Crescent, Hampstead, on 5 August 1915, and was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 50385


Paterson, Sir Clifford Copland (1879-1948), engineer, was born at Westfield, Cazenove Road, Stoke Newington, London, on 17 October 1879, the son of Frederick Paterson, a tanner and leather merchant, and his wife, Janette, 'nee' May. After attending a private school and, from 1892 to 1896, Mill Hill School, he studied at Finsbury Technical College for a year, and then served engineering apprenticeships with George Wailes & Co. in London and Mirrlees, Watson & Co. in Glasgow. In 1901 he returned to Faraday House, London, as a special student assistant in the testing department under Alexander Russell. In 1902 he was sent to Switzerland to the Maschinenfabrik Oerlikon, where he worked on the Jungfrau railway installation. 
In 1903 Paterson was appointed assistant (later principal assistant) of the electrotechnical and photometric divisions of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), which had been founded in 1900. Building work on the electrotechnical laboratory did not start until 1905 and Paterson was closely involved in its design. Not only did he gain valuable experience in setting up a research laboratory, he also undertook research on subjects including photometric units and standardization. He married, on 31 May 1905 at Stamford Hill Congregational Church, Eleanor Daisy (1875-1962), daughter of William Ogden, chartered accountant. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Paterson was deeply involved in the many committees and institutions seeking to create a national framework for science and engineering. International electrical units were being developed (work in which the NPL took a central role) and there were calls to raise the standard of engineering education and training. Paterson's first public role was linked to his research on electric lighting: in 1913 he was elected the first secretary of the international commission on illumination. He was also joint secretary of the Home Office committee on the lighting of factories and workshops, which published its report in 1915. During the First World War he was a member (later chairman) of the Board of Trade committee on ships' navigation lights and chairman of the British Engineering Standards Association committee dealing with the lamps used by the Royal Flying Corps. In 1918 he began a long service on the council of the Institution of Electrical Engineers, which he had joined in 1902. These commitments did not mean that he neglected his own research. In 1916 he was appointed OBE for his work on the Paterson-Walsh electric height finder (developed with J. W. T. Walsh). 
In 1916 Paterson was approached by Christopher Wilson and F. W. T. Driver of the Osram Lamps works to see if he was interested in setting up a research laboratory. Paterson initially declined the offer: 'I was apprehensive that I might be asked to associate myself with a scheme that would make research men mere trouble-hunters about the factory' (Paterson, 'Confidential History', 6). Wilson and Driver, however, assured him that he would have the freedom to set up the laboratory on his own terms and Paterson agreed to take on the project when the war ended. 
By 1918 the project had grown as the works were amalgamated with the General Electric Company (GEC), which had always held an interest in the concern. The laboratories were now to cover all of GEC and the first laboratory was set up at the valve works at Hammersmith in 1919. As at the NPL, new laboratories had to be designed and built from scratch. This time Paterson was in complete charge and, drawing on his NPL experience, 'made up my mind then that if ever Providence gave me another chance of designing a laboratory it should have (1) Offices; (2) room for junk (some people regard these as synonymous); and (3) properly designed facilities for piping etc., to the various laboratories (Paterson, 'Confidential History', 10)' In 1922 the laboratories moved to new premises at Wembley. Paterson planned all aspects of the laboratories' operation. The laboratories would be involved in solving problems raised by the factories and improving technical aspects of production and operation. They would also undertake long-term investigations that would be of commercial application in the future, as well as research into fundamental physics. 
Paterson became president of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1930 and presided over the celebrations in 1931 of the centenary of Faraday's discovery of electromagnetic induction. In his inaugural address he set out his views on research and its place in industry: 'The working ideal which inspires the research man is the substitution of knowledge for empiricism, and this finds as true an expression in industry as in those research institutions whose labours are furthest removed from practical utility' (Paterson, 'Inaugural address', 1). In 1937 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Birmingham. 
In 1938 Paterson was briefed on what was then termed RDF, the highly secret radar effort that would be central to Britain's success in the Second World War. From 1939 the GEC research laboratories developed and manufactured radar valves: first the VT58 valve used in anti-aircraft measures and then the VT90 used for aircraft interception (AI) and anti-surface vessel (ASV) radar. Early radar apparatus operated on metric wavelengths, but shorter wavelengths were needed for smaller, portable radio sets. The research laboratories produced 10 cm wavelengths using a magnetron (a type of electron tube) but this was superseded by the cavity magnetron developed by J. T. Randall and H. A. H. Boot at the University of Birmingham, which allowed greater control over the wavelengths produced. The Wembley laboratories were given the task of improving the cavity magnetron design and producing sets for practical use. 
During the war the GEC research laboratories also carried out research on VHF communications, wire production using diamond dies, artificial sapphires, camouflage, and lighting. Paterson had a hand in all aspects of the laboratories' work, from shuffling staff between research projects to bidding for government contracts, from worrying about staff sickness to taking his turn fire-watching on the roof. He held strong views on the qualities of the ideal research worker and tried to promote these in his administration of Wembley. He was ideologically opposed to trade unionism, which he regarded as promoting antagonism between workers and employers and creating a dependence on rules and legal arguments, and he was highly suspicious of an effort in 1944 to introduce trade union methods, including salary scales. His own conception was of a community of workers united by a shared interest in the application of science in industry, and led by a director who regarded it as a primary responsibility to safeguard the material interests of his colleagues. He felt that a balance between enabling individual research to flourish and promoting a community spirit was central to the organization of a research institution. 
The success of Paterson's approach can be judged by the GEC laboratories' results. By the end of the war they had produced over 300,000 valves and developed the technology experimentally and technically. They had adapted to changing conditions, taken on new projects, and had proved to be a vital part of the war effort. 
During this period Paterson represented the Institution of Engineering and Technology on the Electrical Industry Standards Committee, becoming chairman in 1940, and chaired the Science Abstracts Committee. He was president of the International Commission on Illumination, the Junior Institution of Engineers, the Electrical and Allied Research Association, the Institution of Engineers in Charge, and the Institute of Physics. He was involved in a number of other professional and scientific institutions, including the Royal Institution and the Royal Society of Arts, of both of which he was vice-president. Government committees on which he served included the inter-services technical valve committee, the engineering advisory committee, the Ministry of Transport street lighting committee, and the Ministry of Supply armaments committee. His honours included the Faraday medal in 1945, the Ewing medal in 1946, and the gold medal of the Illuminating Society of America in 1948. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1942 and was knighted in 1946. 
Paterson's health began to fail in 1948 during an extensive tour of Australia and New Zealand. He became very ill on the return voyage and died shortly after returning to England, at the Peace Memorial Hospital, Watford, Hertfordshire, on 26 July 1948. 
Paterson had a profound influence on the electrical engineering industry of the mid-twentieth century, both as an administrator and as a public figure working towards establishing and improving standards. His philosophy was strongly influenced by his religious beliefs and political outlook (he was an active member of the Congregational church and of Moral Re-Armament). He envisaged an electrical engineering industry based on pure science, applied to current engineering projects and looking to the future. 


@@@@@


doc= 50386


Paul, Robert William (1869-1943), maker of scientific instruments and cinematographer, was born at 3 Albion Road, Holloway, London, on 3 October 1869, the son of George Butler Paul, a London shipowner, and his wife, Elizabeth Jane Lyon. He was educated at the City of London School and at the Finsbury Technical College of the City and Guilds of London Institute at Cowper Street, off City Road. There he received an elementary education in electrical instrument making, electric lighting, and general physics. He worked first in the workshops of Elliott Brothers, scientific instrument makers, then in a draughtsman's office. After a short spell in the factory of the Bell Telephone Company in Antwerp he started his own business in 1891 as an instrument designer and maker in Hatton Garden. 
Paul maintained links with the college, where Professor W. E. Ayrton and his colleagues, John Perry, Thomas Mather, and others were engaged in designing electrical measuring instruments. Their ideas for instruments often helped Paul to find new products, which were sold under the inventor's name but succeeded thanks to Paul's manufacturing craftsmanship. In just three years his business expanded to include a four-storey factory in nearby Saffron Hill. 
Paul became interested in the new art of cinematography; in 1894 two Greek showmen, who had brought some Edison and Dickson kinetoscopes to London, asked him to make another six. In fact he made sixty; Edison had not patented it in Britain, and Paul improved the design. When film from America became unavailable he collaborated with photographer Birt Acres to design a camera. This partnership was short-lived so Paul began to make his own films, designing a mechanical arrangement, a Maltese cross ('Geneva escapement'), to advance the film frame by frame. His projector, patented in March 1896, was called the theatrograph. He demonstrated it at Finsbury Technical College and the Royal Institution and was soon recognized as an expert in cinematography. A famous exploit was to film the prince of Wales's horse, Persimmon, winning the Derby in 1896; he showed the film several times to rapturous applause the following evening at the Alhambra, Leicester Square. 
In the same year Paul began to make short films, initially using sets built on the Alhambra's roof. Such was their success that in 1897 he could afford not only to build a proper studio in Muswell Hill, but also, on 3 August, to marry his leading lady, Ellen Dawn; born Ellen Daws about 1867, she was the daughter of Augustus Daws, cabinet-maker, and also had some theatrical background. 
Both the cinema side and the instrument making side of Paul's business flourished; in 1902 for the latter he added a purpose-built factory to the Muswell Hill site, where standard products were efficiently manufactured in large numbers. Of particular note was Paul's 1903 invention, the highly sensitive yet robust 'Unipivot' galvanometer which 'played an important role in taking instruments out of the laboratory and into industrial applications' (Cattermole and Wolfe, 165). Other Unipivot instruments followed: 126 pages of Paul's 1914 catalogue were devoted to them, and Unipivot was the telegraphic address for his works in New Southgate. His instruments were recognized internationally, winning gold medals at the 1904 St Louis Exposition and the 1910 Brussels Exhibition. By 1910, though, he had become disillusioned with 'show business' and concentrated on instrument work. He burnt his stocks of film and sold his film-making equipment. Despite the highly lucrative nature of this work, Paul had always considered it as a sideline, although in 1936, with Hepworth and Barker, he gave an interesting address to a meeting of the British Kinematograph Society entitled 'Before 1910: kinematograph experiences'. 
Paul often made specialized instruments for friends to help their research. In 1911 he opened a branch in New York to where instruments were sent from Muswell Hill for American distribution. On the outbreak of war in 1914 his works were involved in providing signalling equipment for the army and navy, including wireless equipment for use in the trenches. This continued his association with Finsbury Technical College where W. H. Eccles was working on short-wave equipment for the signals experimental establishment at the War Office. Of particular note was the Paterson-Walsh auto-aircraft height-finder, manufactured by Paul once it was adopted by the War Office. He was also interested in submarine warfare and the problems of acoustic and magnetic mines and the detection of mines and submarines. 
In early 1918 his Muswell Hill factory was bought by the War Office (signals department); Paul continued his experimental work in temporary premises in nearby Fortis Green with thirty of his best workmen from the factory. He bought the works back the following March and immediately negotiated to sell them to the Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company; this was completed in November to form the Cambridge and Paul Instrument Company. From February 1920 Paul sat on the new company's board but began to withdraw from instrument design, concentrating on financial affairs. In his own workshop, though, he did work on projects of particular interest to him. One such, in 1933, was the Bragg-Paul pulsator, a forerunner of the iron lung, for which he designed and built a small hydraulic machine which pressed and released rubber bellows on the chest of a man (a friend of Bragg's) suffering from muscular atrophy, thus greatly assisting his breathing. 
Paul died on 28 March 1943 at The Priory, Roehampton, following a cerebral thrombosis. His will established the R. W. Paul Instrument Fund which was to help those whose research was hampered by the lack of funds for developing a particular instrument. He had also endowed the apprentices' prizes at the Physical Society's annual exhibition of apparatus. He had been loyally supportive of the society for many years, serving as a vice-president in 1928-31 and 1939-42, and as treasurer in 1935-9. He was awarded the Duddell medal in 1938. He was also founder fellow of the Institute of Physics and vice-president in 1927-31. He was a council member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers and served as a manager and vice-president of the Royal Institution, where he played an important role in the success of the Faraday Centenary Exhibition at the Royal Albert Hall in 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 50392


Sargrove, John Adolph (1906-1975), electrical engineer, was born at 25 Delamere Terrace, St Pancras, London, on 23 May 1906, the son of Arpad Szabadi, an electrician, of Hungarian origin, and his wife, Cissie Lily, 'nee' Solomons. He was baptized John Adolph Szabadi but changed his name to Sargrove in 1938. Soon after his birth he was taken to Budapest, the home of his parents, and received his early schooling in that city. After returning to London in 1920, he studied at the polytechnic in Regent Street, while undertaking an apprenticeship with several small engineering firms in the London area. In 1930 he was employed by Tungsram Electric Lamps Ltd (later British Tungsram Radio Works Ltd) as a patent researcher. This provided a valuable background for the innovator he was to become, his importance being marked by the large number of British and foreign patents filed under his names. In 1933 he became chief technical engineer of British Tungsram, a post which he held until 1940. During this time he contributed much to the development of new and improved types of thermionic valves. His technical interests, already broadened by experience as a patent researcher, extended into what was later known as electronics with his appointment in 1940 as chief engineer with Electro-Physical Laboratories and with Mervyn Sound and Vision Ltd. He spent the war years (1939-45) mainly with these companies, developing photoelectric devices. Towards the end of this period he began to make contributions in special research on electronic automation equipment for the armaments industry, which led directly to his post-war plans in automatic production equipment for the radio industry. 
Sargrove's wide interests in radio, electronic, and production techniques at this time determined his professional involvement, and led him in the technical direction that dominated his later career. The professional interests of most engineers are served by membership of an appropriate organization; Sargrove gained membership of and contributed fully to four of these institutions. In 1939 he became a member (and later a fellow) of the Institute of Radio and Electronic Engineers, to the activities of which he contributed for the rest of his life; from 1965 to 1968 he served on its council, and in 1966 he was elected vice-president. He was also accepted as a member of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 1942 (he became a fellow in 1949). Finally, he gained membership of both the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and the Institution of Production Engineers. He showed much talent in the technical direction of projects involving electronics allied with automation within a number of specialized companies, several of which he founded himself. This culminated in Electronic Circuit Making Equipment (ECME), which aroused enormous interest in 1946-7 and gained Sargrove the first Clerk-Maxwell premium of the Institution of Radio and Electronic Engineers. 
The basic idea of ECME was to eliminate the conventional assembly and wiring of a multitude of individual components mounted on a metal chassis, which was the common method of receiver construction at that time. Instead, Sargrove proposed to make the wiring and components an integral part of a moulded plastic panel, with only the valves, loudspeaker, and electrolytic capacitors inserted as plug-in elements. In this way he was to produce the complete radio receiver in a single production machine with very little assembly-line labour. This brilliant invention, ahead of its time and dogged by political problems, was never taken up generally. It was, however, the first modern approach to automatic operation in electronic manufacture and was acknowledged as 'the first automatic factory' by the Stanford Research Institute in a leading article under this title in the magazine 'Fortune' in 1948. 
In 1955 Sargrove moved on to introduce automation into many industries, and founded his own company, Automatic Consultants and Associates, of which he became technical director and, later, chairman. While with this firm he made major contributions to the new and growing field of automation technology and assisted in the work of organizations such as the joint services technical committee, the technical committee of the British Standards Institution, and the United Kingdom Automation Council. Sargrove can justifiably be considered as one of the pioneers of automation in the United Kingdom. He foresaw the immense advantages that the application of electronics would give to machine control and applied his ideas successfully to a number of automatic production processes. Many of his ideas found common acceptance, particularly in the automatic production of electronic equipment, such as computer systems, which became an essential part of twentieth-century technological infrastructure. 
Sargrove died of cancer on 9 January 1975, at the Nuffield Home, Shores Road, Woking, Surrey, leaving a widow, Mildred Rose Sargrove. They had made their home at Flat 3, The Leys, Esher Road, Hersham. 


@@@@@


doc= 50393


(Samuel) Alfred Varley (1832-1921) followed his brother Cromwell into the Electric Telegraph Company, entering its Manchester workshops in 1852. He supervised the first field telegraphs used in the Crimean War and published influential papers on cable signalling in 1858-9. In 1861 he took over running a London telegraph factory owned by his father. He and Cromwell had a bitter falling out, and in later years the two brothers denounced each other for a variety of real and imagined slights and betrayals. His marriage in 1860 to Emily Andrews brought them seven children, of whom at least three survived him, although it seems that Emily left him after the children were grown. 


@@@@@


doc= 50395


Zepler, Eric Ernest (1898-1980), electrical engineer and university teacher, was born on 27 January 1898 in Herford, Westphalia, Germany, the younger son of Martin Zepler (1862-1939), a country doctor, and his wife, Flora Guttfreund (1866-1943). His Jewish parents converted to Christianity in 1902, and he was baptized in the Lutheran church, Herford, on 14 December 1902. He was educated at the Realgymnasium in Altena, Westphalia, and after studying physics at the universities of Bonn (1916-19) and Berlin (1919-20) took the DPhil degree at Wurzburg in 1922. His radio engineering work began with three colleagues in a small workshop in St Blasien. He joined Telefunken in Berlin in 1925 and became head of design for receivers and direction finders in 1932. By 1935 he had thirty-seven individual patents and twenty-two joint patents. On 2 October 1926 he married Eleonore Johanna Fischer (1899-1990). 
To escape Nazi persecution Zepler moved to England in 1935 with his wife and young children, Carole and Matthew, and continued his work on radio design at the Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company in Chelmsford until 1940. During the Second World War airborne radio receivers and transmitters based on his designs were used by both the RAF and the Luftwaffe. Zepler's remarkable insight into radio circuits, and his analytical ability, enabled him to transform the design of radio systems from a black art of trial and error into a modern engineering discipline where the performance of equipment is determined before it is constructed. This pioneering work was encapsulated in his classic book 'The Technique of Radio Design', which was published in 1943. His analytical method of design was later applied to other electronic systems and thus made an important contribution to the flowering of electronic engineering during the next half-century. 
After internment in 1940, Zepler became a lecturer in 1941 at the University College in Southampton, which became a university in 1952. He worked there for the rest of his career, except for three years from 1943, which he spent at Cambridge University. He became a naturalized British subject in 1947. At Southampton that same year he founded the first department of electronics in Britain and launched a postgraduate diploma in electronics, which became a highly regarded qualification. He became the first professor of electronics in 1949, and introduced the first BSc course in electronics in Britain in 1959. Zepler's inspirational teaching stimulated students and conveyed to them his insight into electronic systems. With modesty and dedication he led by example the small team of staff which established the teaching and research in what became the leading university department of electronics in Britain. With some of those colleagues he published books on 'Electronic Devices and Networks' (1963), 'Electronic Circuit Techniques' (1963), and 'Transients in Electronic Engineering' (1971). After retiring in 1963, he worked in the Institute of Sound and Vibration Research for ten years. In 1977 he was awarded the honorary degree of DSc. In 1995, in the department of electronics at Southampton University, an exhibition was set up of some of the pre-war radio receivers which he designed, including the Telefunken T9W and the Marconi B28. 
Zepler was a distinguished radio engineer whose interests included music, literature, and bridge. His lifelong passion was the composition of chess problems, which led him to publish 'Under the Spell of the Chess Problem' with Ado Kramer in 1951, and to be granted the title of international master of chess composition. His portrait, which was commissioned to mark his presidency of the British Institution of Radio Engineers in 1959-60, and which is kept at the Institution of Electrical Engineers in London, catches the twinkle in his eyes that his colleagues knew so well. Zepler died on 13 May 1980 at Moorgreen Hospital, Southampton, and was cremated at Southampton on 16 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 50398


Bentley, John James (1860-1918), journalist and football administrator, was born at Chapel Town, Turton, Lancashire, on 14 June 1860, the third of four sons of John Bentley, a grocer, and his wife, Ann Beavan. Turton was only a small village but what may have been the first football club in Lancashire was formed there in 1872 when John Charles Kay, son of the local squire, returned from Harrow School and put together a team which played on a pitch behind the row of terraced houses where Bentley lived. By the time he was fourteen John was playing alongside his elder brothers, Tom and William; at twenty he was the club's captain, and shortly afterwards he became secretary and treasurer. His strength as a wing-half also won him selection for Bolton Association and for Lancashire. He stopped playing at the relatively early age of twenty-five but was involved with the sport at the highest level for the rest of his life. 
The early part of Bentley's professional career was as a clerk for the London and North Western Railway Company in Bolton and then as a clerk to the Bolton school board. In 1882 he set up in business on his own in the emerging profession of accountancy and on 21 September that year married Betsy (1862/3-1917), daughter of Richard Entwistle, a builder from Blackpool. Their relationship was not broken until her death thirty-five years later. They had three daughters and a son, Harry, who died at the age of two in December 1892. Bentley had begun sending in reports of Turton's matches to local newspapers while still playing, adopting as his 'nom de plume' Free Critic. In 1884 he began writing regularly for the 'Bolton Cricket and Football Field', and two years later he became assistant editor of the 'Athletic News'. Sports writing was a growing branch of journalism and Bentley learned the job as he went along. He helped to transform the 'Athletic News' from a twopenny weekly with a circulation of about 10,000 in 1886 to a penny paper with a circulation of nearly 200,000 by 1900 and a readership of many more. He was editor from 1895 to 1900. 
In 1885 Bentley became secretary of Bolton Wanderers and in 1888 he was one of those to whom William McGregor wrote proposing what became the Football League. He served on the league's management committee for the next thirty years. By the middle of the 1890s he was combining the roles of referee, journalist, editor, Football Association (FA) councillor, and president of the Football League. In 1905 he became the first league official to become a vice-president of the FA. By this time he held a wide variety of other positions within the game and must have been one of the most powerful figures in English football. It caused no surprise when he became chairman of Manchester United in 1908 after the restructuring of the club following financial mismanagement; he later filled the position of club secretary between 1912 and 1916. 
Bentley was a staunch defender of the professional player, although he supported the setting of a maximum permissible wage. He believed that professional football had to be run on business principles but thought that there should be no direct profit to individuals. His short hair and clipped moustache gave him an autocratic air, and although he was no orator (his many journalistic words were eminently unquotable) he was an influential leader of the sport during its most formative phase. He died at Fairhaven, near Blackpool, on 2 September 1918 and was buried in Turton cemetery, next to his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 50400


Hill, Sir (George) Rowland (1855-1928), rugby administrator, was born on 21 January 1855 at Queen's House, Greenwich, London, one of three children of Irish protestant parents. His father, the Revd James Hill, was headmaster of the upper school of the Royal Hospital school, Greenwich. 
Hill attended Christ's Hospital school, Newgate Street, but left at the age of fifteen to take up employment with the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Company. He worked aboard the famous 'Great Eastern' steamship, helping to lay one of the Atlantic cables. He joined the civil service and became record keeper in the principal probate registry, Somerset House. He was a member of the London county council, as was his unmarried sister, and he was also a JP; for over thirty years from 1887, he was chairman of Greenwich Conservative Association and at one stage he was also the association's president. He resisted, however, the blandishments of friends who wanted him to stand for parliament. 
Hill is best-known for his services to rugby football. He was involved in running the Queen's House club, founded by his brother Colonel E. Cleary Hill, which was one of the founder members, in 1871, of the Rugby Football Union (RFU). He gave up playing after the Queen's House club disbanded, but took a leading role in obtaining the Rectory Field for the Blackheath club, of which he was one of the original directors. He was elected honorary secretary of the RFU in 1881. He was the last holder of this particular office, being succeeded in 1904, after twenty-three years' service, by a paid secretary. He was elected the eighteenth president in 1904-5 without an intervening period as vice-president, was re-elected in 1905-6, and then elected for a further year in 1906-7. He was the first person to be knighted -- in 1926 -- for his services to the game, which covered a period of over thirty-five years. In demand as a referee, he was a member of the international rugby football board for twenty-eight years from 1890 to 1928. 
Hill is remembered above all for his defence of amateurism, for he believed incipient professionalism in rugby union football to be an evil likely to lead to violent and dangerous play. His obituary in 'The Times' described him as 'an amateur of amateurs and a Tory of Tories': when he resigned from the RFU secretaryship in 1904 he would accept 'neither bounty nor reward'. He opposed the Yorkshire clubs' attempts to legalize 'broken time' payments in 1893, an action which led to the breakaway in 1895 of the Northern Union, later to become the Rugby League. Hill was active in steering through changes in the RFU constitution to enshrine the amateur principle and to frame rules designed to expunge from the game all forms of monetary consideration beyond the reimbursement of travelling expenses. The years following the breakaway of the Northern Union were some of the most difficult in the history of the union game and Hill, among others, is credited with guiding the game during that period towards renewed success. In 1893, 481 clubs were affiliated to the RFU; ten years later that number had dropped to 244, but by 1911-12 membership had recovered to 319. 
Hill, who never married, died at the Seamen's Hospital, Greenwich, on 25 April 1928 and was buried five days later in the Royal Hospital cemetery, Woolwich Road. On 5 October 1929, at Twickenham, the headquarters of the English game, the president of the RFU unveiled in his honour the Rowland Hill memorial gate and bronze plaque. The special commemorative game, played at Twickenham between the combined sides of England-Wales and Scotland-Ireland, and refereed by a Frenchman, attracted 25,000 spectators: the large crowds were considered the best epitaph to Hill and the other stalwarts who had fought to save the game from professionalism. 


@@@@@


doc= 50401


McGregor, William (1847-1911), football administrator, was born in Braco, Perthshire. Little is known about him before he moved in 1870 to Birmingham, where he and his brother Peter opened a linen draper's shop at 306-7 Summer Lane, Newtown, then about a mile from the city centre. He does not seem to have been much of a football player himself, although he had played the game with other boys in Braco after they had seen the local stonemasons kicking a ball about. His interest may have been revived by meeting other Scots in Birmingham who were keen on the sport: J. Campbell Orr founded the Calthorpe team in the early 1870s and George Ramsay was a leading member of Aston Villa. McGregor was enthusiastic enough about the growing popular pastime to arrange the half-day closing of his shop for Saturday afternoons so that he could watch the games. He was invited to join the committee of Aston Villa in the late 1870s, and umpired for the club. His shop meanwhile began to sell football shirts and shorts and to become a meeting-place for local followers of the sport. At this time McGregor lived with his wife, Jesse, their daughter and son in a terraced house on Witton Road not far from the Aston Lower Grounds. Later the family moved to 8 Salisbury Road, close to Cannon Hill Park. They worshipped at the Congregational church in Wheeler Street, and like many Congregationalists McGregor was also a Liberal in politics and a teetotaller. 
About this time football was developing rapidly as a spectator sport, especially in Lancashire and the midlands. Local and regional cup competitions, together with the FA cup, encouraged clubs to widen their search for good players and some, including Aston Villa, began to pay them for playing. Professionalism was legalized in 1885 but the priority given to cup ties disrupted ordinary fixture lists and often led to other supposedly competitive matches becoming one-sided friendly games which proved unattractive to paying customers. What was required was a regular programme of fixtures between the strongest teams, along the same lines as the county cricket championship. This was what McGregor proposed when he wrote to five of the leading clubs on 2 March 1888. The Football League was born at a meeting in Manchester on 17 April with six clubs from Lancashire and six from the midlands. 
McGregor subsequently became chairman of the league's management committee (1888-92), president (1892-4), and a life member (1895-1911). He was also a Football Association councillor and something of a football celebrity, writing regularly on the sport in the press and giving his name to products such as the McGregor football. On 4 December 1911 he was presented with the FA's long service medal but shortly afterwards he became ill. He died at Miss Storer's Nursing Home, 70 Newhall Street, Birmingham, on 20 December 1911. Jesse had died in December 1908 and McGregor was buried next to her in St Mary's Church, Handsworth, Birmingham, on 23 December 1911. 


@@@@@


doc= 50405


Barr, Andrew Greig (1872-1903), soft drinks manufacturer, was born on 5 May 1872 in Falkirk, the second of three sons of Robert Barr, cork cutter and aerated water manufacturer, and his wife, Jane Greig. He attended the Falkirk high school before completing his schooling at Daniel Stewart's College, Edinburgh. Although his father was already in business, the business was too small to absorb both Andrew and his elder brother, Robert, and Andrew began his business career as a clerk in the Clydesdale Bank in Falkirk. He was clearly adept at his work, for when the Clydesdale opened a small branch in nearby Larbert, Andrew Barr was put in charge of its business. Barr continued in the bank until 1887, when his father decided to open a branch of his business in Glasgow to exploit the expanding soft drinks market. Barr's elder brother went to manage the new development, and Andrew and his younger brother, William S. Barr, then joined their father in the Falkirk business. 
Although Falkirk was the head office, Glasgow was the expanding market, and Robert Barr successfully established large new premises at 184 Great Eastern Road in the Parkhead district of Glasgow, producing lemonade, soda water, orangeade, sasparilla, and many other beverages. The business grew so quickly that Andrew Barr joined his brother in Glasgow in 1892. He worked aggressively to expand its activities, so much so that by 1897 he was sole proprietor, operating the Glasgow establishment as a separate concern from the family business in Falkirk. 
Barr then embarked on a forceful strategy to capture the leading place in the Glasgow soft drinks market. A major new factory was constructed and twice extended in 1901 and 1902-3, fitted out with the latest plant and designed for efficient staging of production. The storeroom could cope with 30,000 crates, each containing a dozen bottles, and the works employed about 200 people, together with 150 horses to cope with deliveries. Advertising and brand image was important, and Barr had his vans designed with a distinctive white and gold livery carrying the company name prominently. 
The heart of the new Parkhead works was the laboratory, where the syrups and essences were blended and combined according to formulae before adding to water. Barr personally supervised this activity, and in 1901 created what was later known as Barr's Irn Bru. When first introduced, his 'iron brew' was one of a number of similar competing products, but Barr's was the most successful, and the formula is still held exclusively by the senior members of the family. The phoneticized name, Irn Bru, was not introduced until 1946. Barr's new product was instantly popular and was to become the foundation of the Barr empire. He promoted it vigorously and also became heavily involved in the affairs of a number of trade associations. In particular he became treasurer of the Glasgow Bottle Exchange Association, set up to collect and recycle the expensive glass bottles to their appropriate owners. Barr had pioneered the use of the screw-on, replaceable bottle top, making it even more worthwhile to keep the bottles in circulation and prevent their use by others. Barr in fact regularly resorted to litigation to enforce his ownership of the expensive bottles and to prosecute those who tried to use them and fill them with their own products. 
Andrew Barr's rise was meteoric, and by the age of thirty he was a major manufacturer in the soft drinks trade in Glasgow. With this successfully behind him, he married Isabel Margaret Gibb, at Dollar, on 25 April 1903. Tragically, his life was cut short eleven weeks later after a three-week battle with blood poisoning and a chill, which deteriorated into pneumonia. He died on 12 July 1903 at his home, 45 Roslea Drive, Dennistoun, Glasgow. 
Knowing he would not recover, Andrew Barr had made provision in his will to enable his younger brother, William, to take over as manager of the Parkhead works for a period of eighteen months, with an option to purchase after twelve months. This was the outcome, and in 1904 the firm took the name of A. G. Barr & Co. as a private limited company with a share capital of $25,000. From 1904 to 1959 the Glasgow and Falkirk businesses grew steadily, though as separate operations; but in 1959 A. G. Barr & Co. purchased the Falkirk company to create a single company focused on Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 50406


Bell, Arthur (1825-1900), wine and spirit merchant, was born on 30 November 1825 at Surrey Square, London, the seventh of fifteen children of Robert Fitzroy Bell, a general agent, and his first wife, Hannah Bruce. 
Nothing is known about Bell's upbringing but by the late 1840s he was employed as a traveller by James Roy, who owned a wine and spirit business in Perth. This had been established, probably in 1825, by Thomas Sandeman, an agent for Sandeman & Co. of Porto. Sandeman died in 1837, leaving a business with annual profits of over $900 to his clerk James Roy. The shop in Kirkside, Perth, sold wines, spirits, malt liquors, tea, black beer, and cider, all dutiable commodities. Trade was mainly local and retail but some wholesale trade was done with publicans and hoteliers. Bell's duties were to extend sales beyond Perth and each spring he toured the highlands seeking orders and collecting payments. He became Roy's partner in 1851, an arrangement which continued until 1862 when Roy retired and Bell formed a new partnership with a nephew, Thomas R. Sandeman. On 16 November 1864 Bell married Isabella Warden ('b'. 1835/6), daughter of Robert Duff, a merchant; they had two sons and two daughters. 
The partnership between Bell and his nephew was dissolved in 1865 when they quarrelled over expenses which Sandeman had incurred on personal business but charged to the partnership. The dissolution grieved Bell, for Sandeman had been best man at his wedding, but the business was hardly returning sufficient profit ($1925 in 1865) to sustain two partners, let alone the eleven relatives Bell supported, eight of whom were female, whose financial well-being was a constant anxiety. Bell replaced Sandeman's capital of $2597 by bank borrowing, the only time in his career he did this. Although he repaid the bank by 1870 he was determined to be independent and met his future capital requirements by reinvesting a high proportion of profits. 
Other misfortunes affected Bell's attitude to business. His early attempts to market whisky in England, following the assimilation of English and Scottish excise duties in 1856, floundered. None of his London agents was successful and it was not until 1886 that Bell again tested the English market; by then Scotch whisky was becoming very popular. This was followed, in 1890, by the appointment of his first overseas agent, in Australia. Both were responses to intense competition in the Scottish spirit trade but another powerful motive was Bell's ambition to pass on a successful enterprise to his sons. 
Bell was a cautious businessman. His advice to a nephew in 1890 was: 'I think the best motto in business is 'slow and sure', but I see the present generation prefers 'fast and insecure' and in most cases they land themselves in the mud' (Arthur Bell & Sons Ltd, letter-book, 26 July 1890, United Distillers Archive). His methods were conservative. He refused to advertise and just 'allowed the qualities of my goods to 'speak' for 'themselves'' (ibid., 9 Dec 1879). Before he retired he was still arguing that 'the reason I can keep up the quality is that I do 'not' advertise' (ibid., 16 Jan 1891). His initial blending technique was extremely crude, for he simply added whisky to a tun which was never emptied. Later he recognized the importance of accumulating mature stocks and became reluctant to alter the constituents of his blends. Independence mattered to Bell. He fell out with the Distillers Company when it refused to include him in a discount scheme and thereafter refused to buy grain whisky from Distillers, an act which denied him access to credit for expansion. He supported the two independent grain distilleries, North British (founded 1885) and Ardgowan (1896). His distrust of agents also impeded expansion and he was forced to reverse the policy between 1886 and 1893 when he finally created a network of agents in England. 
Bell was totally absorbed by business and meticulous in his attention to detail. His private journals include the following note for 1897: 'Assets: Cash $16.14.1 plus 9died -- undiscovered error for the first time since 1851!' (Arthur Bell & Sons Ltd, personal journal, 1897). Bell was not a dynamic entrepreneur. Prudence in business was a perpetual refrain in his correspondence. He was an exponent of careful, plodding management and that is his very fascination, for without advertising, overseas sales trips, and brand registration Bell built a business which, by 1895, was selling Scotch whisky in England and exporting to Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, and Ceylon. He epitomized, more often than business historians recognize, the myriad numbers of small businessmen who formed a majority of the whisky trade before it became increasingly concentrated. The firm provided Bell and his family with a more than adequate income. 
Bell began to withdraw from the day-to-day running of the firm as his sons became partners. His elder son, 
On 8 June 1899 'A. K.' or 'Atty', as Arthur Kinmond Bell was known in the whisky trade, married Camilla Bruce (1871-1959), daughter of Robert Bruce, medical practitioner. Arthur Bell died on 16 February 1900 at Craigenvar, Scone, Perthshire, from cardiac disease and hemiplegia. By then annual profits had risen to $11,795, and his sons had begun to change the management of the business. More agents were appointed, a modest amount of advertising began, and, in 1904, the name Bell's first appeared on the firm's labels. A. K. Bell's bench-mark was another Perth blending firm, John Dewar & Sons, and these changes, together with the introduction of Bell's whisky to Canada, yielded impressive growth in profits to $24,573 in 1913. A. K. Bell remained the driving force in Bells' expansion, but profits were so buoyant that his brother Robert withdrew from the firm on the eve of the First World War to pursue the life of a country gentleman. 
The partners also reinvested an increasing proportion of profits in mature whisky stocks -- by 1915 stocks were valued at $105,000, five times their value in 1900 -- and this proved crucial in enabling Bells to withstand the shortages following the 'Immature Spirits Act' of 1915. Indeed, Bells would have been an attractive purchase for the larger blenders but 'A. K.' inherited his father's strong streak of independence. In 1921 the partnership was converted into a private limited liability company, with A. K. Bell as governing director holding all the ordinary shares. 
Life for an independent blending house between the wars proved extremely difficult. In the worst year, 1932, Bells lost $10,952 but reserves enabled the firm to survive. In 1933 A. K. Bell expanded by purchasing the Edinburgh whisky firm, P. Mackenzie & Co., which owned two malt distilleries, Blair Atholl and Dufftown-Glenlivet. A third, Inchgower, was purchased in 1936. Some doubted the wisdom of buying distilleries when most were silent and the trade's future highly uncertain but all were acquired extremely cheaply and enabled Bells to benefit from the recovery of exports (then the most profitable part of the industry) by 1938. A. K. Bell is remembered as 'a man who always bought cheap and never let a penny go by' (private information). 
A. K. Bell was also a noted local philanthropist. In 1922 he purchased the Gannochy and Muirhall estates and began a model housing scheme to provide cheaply rented homes. The estate, consisting of 150 houses, was completed in 1932. Five years later he founded the Gannochy Trust and in 1941 allocated some of his shareholding in Arthur Bell & Sons to the trust with the specific purpose of improving sewage treatment to ensure the purity of the local water supply to Perth and its outlying villages. He also purchased Quarrymill Den, a local beauty spot, and presented it to the trust. Other activities that he supported included the allotment garden movement, the Boy Scouts, local bands, and his favourite sport, cricket. Bell resurrected the local linen industry following the voluntary liquidation in 1936 of John Shields & Co., manufacturers of linen damask, and one of Perth's largest employers. Bell bought the premises, re-equipped them for artificial fibre production, and reconstructed the firm. For this and his philanthropy he was made a freeman of the city of Perth in 1938. 
By 1941, with profits of $100,000, Bells' future seemed assured. However, the death of A. K. Bell on 26 April 1942 at Campsie Hill, Perthshire, left an acute problem of succession. He had no children and his finances were intricately connected to the firm's. His younger brother, by then aged seventy, stood in as caretaker for just over a month until W. G. Farquharson, a chartered accountant recruited by A. K. Bell in 1927, was appointed chairman. Robert Bell died on 12 June 1942, the last of the family to be associated with Bells. The firm owed $247,000 to A. K. Bell's estate and family, and in 1949 Bells was converted to a public company to pay off the loan and finance reconstruction. 


@@@@@


doc= 50407


Bilsland, Sir William, first baronet (1847-1921), bread and biscuit manufacturer, was born on 17 March 1847 at Ballat, Stirlingshire, the eldest of four surviving sons of James Bilsland, a farmer, and his wife, Anne, daughter of William Blair. Educated at Dalmonach School, Bonhill, north of Dumbarton, at the age of fourteen he was apprenticed to, and then worked for, a grocer and provision merchant in Glasgow. By 1872 he had saved up enough money to set up his younger brothers, John, James, and Alexander, in bakeries, of which they had six in 1875. To help build up capital, they paid themselves very modest wages. As demand for their bread grew, in 1880 Bilsland Brothers -- a partnership since 1877 -- erected a brand new bakery in Hyde Park Street. Unusually for their trade, they installed the latest machinery from Baker Perkins of Peterborough, whose links with developers of baking technology in the United States led to the purchase of an American revolving oven a few years later. 
In 1885 Bilsland married Agnes Anne (died 1935), third daughter of Alexander Steven, a Glasgow engineer. They had two sons and two daughters. The company's main product was the 2 lb white loaf, and in 1900 the factory was turning out 23,000 dozen of these loaves a week and had 200 employees. The technically trained youngest brother, John, ran the production side, which left William free to concentrate on marketing. He built up a fleet of motorized and horse-drawn vans to deliver the bread to 1600 retailers in the Glasgow district, and he created markets in nearby towns and in the western highlands and islands, sending consignments by rail. His success was due partly to his deep understanding of the grocery trade; he took a special interest in the local grocers' and provision merchants' association. 
As the market for bread was limited, in 1890 Bilsland began to diversify by acquiring a partnership in Gray, Dunn & Co. of Glasgow, biscuit makers to the queen, a firm then in a stagnant condition. He steadily built it up into one of the leading biscuit firms in Scotland. However, he did not introduce more profitable 'fancy lines', such as scones and cakes, into the bread factory, and he gradually lost his technical lead under intense competition. As senior partner and, from 1915 onwards, chairman of Bilsland Brothers Ltd, he was an autocrat, and the firm marked time while he became ever more immersed in outside interests. 
A member of the city council from 1886, Bilsland was lord provost of Glasgow from 1905 to 1908. He was created a baronet in 1907, awarded an honorary LLD from Glasgow University, and made a member of several foreign orders. He was also deputy lieutenant and a JP. His ambitious plan for extending the city boundaries was achieved in 1912, and he took particular interest in promoting leisure facilities, most notably the art gallery at Kelvingrove for the middle classes and the People's Palace and Winter Gardens in the east end for the 'plebs'. Being a lifelong abstainer, he was chairman of the Scottish departmental committee on inebriates, which reported in 1909. His directorships included that of the Royal Bank of Scotland from 1915 onwards. He set up the District Visitors' Association, actively involved himself in relief schemes during the unemployment crisis of 1908, and was chairman of the Glasgow Workmen's Dwellings Company. 
Bilsland was a committed Liberal, and as a member of the United Free Church he sat on a committee planning reunion with the Church of Scotland, achieved in 1929. He began weekly meetings for the partners, and later for the board, with a prayer of thanks for the Lord's continuing blessing on the business, and he made regular charitable donations of $1000-2000 a year. Employees were considerately treated in the clean and well-ventilated factory, and relatively high wages were supplemented by cash bonuses and free bread; however, he excluded all trade unions. Bilsland remained chairman until his death, on 27 August 1921, at Gartur, Cambusbarron, Stirlingshire. The baronetcy was inherited by his second son, (Alexander) Steven Bilsland, later Baron Bilsland. 


@@@@@


doc= 50408


Calder, Sir James Charles (1869-1962), distiller, was born on 28 December 1869 in Alloa, Scotland, the younger son of James Calder, a timber merchant and brewer, and his wife, Cecilia, 'nee' Mackenzie, the daughter of an Edinburgh market gardener. Calder was educated at Perth Academy and St Benedict's College, Fort Augustus. In 1886 he joined his father's brewing business and in 1889 he was appointed manager of Bo'ness distillery, purchased by his father in 1873 from A. and J. Vannan. Originally a pot still (malt whisky) distillery, it was enlarged and converted (in 1876) to a patent still (grain whisky) distillery with an output of 870,000 gallons. In conjunction with Glenfoyle distillery, acquired by his father in 1880, this allowed the family's interests to straddle malt and grain whisky. Bo'ness also made yeast and Calder increased production and built up a sizeable business through Calder's Yeast Company as yeast proved an important source of revenue following the collapse of the grain distillers' cartel (the United Kingdom Distillers' Association) in 1888. Calder was made a partner in James Calder & Co. in 1890 and a director when the firm adopted limited liability status in 1892. 
Calder's main interest was in blended whisky (mixtures of malt and grain whiskies) where demand was expanding rapidly. Distillers sought access to this fast growing trade while blenders sought security of supply, and in 1895 James Calder became a partner in the Leith blending firm of Alexander and MacDonald. In the boom of the 1890s Alexander and MacDonald built a pot still distillery, Stronachie distillery at Forgandenny, Perthshire. When demand for whisky declined after 1900, Alexander and MacDonald were forced to reorganize and James Calder & Co. acquired control of Stronachie distillery. In the controversy over blending Calder appeared as a witness at the royal commission on whisky in 1908, arguing for a definition of whisky which would include both pot and patent still products, a view confirmed by the commission. 
The decline in whisky drinking prompted an amalgamation movement. James Calder & Co. were wooed by the 'big three' blenders (James Buchanan & Co., John Dewar & Sons, and John Walker & Sons), who were interested in obtaining an alternative source of supply to the Distillers Company Ltd (DCL), and by DCL which saw Calders as a means of further consolidating control of yeast and spirit production. James Calder participated in merger talks with the 'big three' in 1910 and was one of the few participants to emphasize managerial problems. These convinced him that independence was better and that it made more sense 'to remain on good terms with the DCL... and aim in the future at a larger affair' (J. Calder to A. J. Cameron, 14 Sept 1910, John Dewar & Sons, original amalgamation papers, United Distillers archive). Nevertheless Calder co-operated in fixing prices and restricting output during the pre-war years. 
The pace of the merger movement hastened with the anti-drink campaign during the First World War and the 'Immature Spirits Act' of 1915 which exacerbated the shortage of mature whisky stocks. In 1919 Alexander and MacDonald combined with two other blending firms, William Williams & Son of Aberdeen and Greenlees Brothers of London, to form MacDonald, Greenlees and Williams (Distillers) Ltd with Calder as chairman. With his extensive knowledge of the trade, Calder's advice was sought by distillers who were contemplating reconstruction schemes. In 1922 he advised the owners of Balmenach distillery and became chairman of the reconstructed company. After his father's death in 1917, he chaired the family timber business and during the war held the posts of deputy timber controller (1917-19) and timber controller (1920) at the Board of Trade. For this service he was made CBE in 1920 and received a knighthood in 1921. 
When DCL's plans for a post-war cartel embracing all patent distilleries proved abortive, amalgamation discussions with Calder were resumed. Calders had acquired control of a second patent still distillery, Gartloch, in 1907 and the possibility of the firm entering the DCL offered DCL control over all Scottish patent still distilling capacity except for the North British distillery whose unique, 'co-operative' constitution shielded it from take-over. Unknown to Calder, DCL and the 'big three' blenders had agreed in April 1918 that neither party would enter into negotiations with Calder & Co. without securing the other party's consent. In effect Calders' future had been decided well before August 1921 when provisional agreement was reached between DCL and Calder. Finalized eight months later, it provided for the transfer of properties, plant, and working stock to DCL in exchange for 20,000 DCL ordinary shares (some six per cent of DCL's ordinary share capital), and a seat on DCL's board. Calder proved a tough and skilful negotiator, retaining ownership of the mature whisky stocks which were the firm's most valuable asset given the post-war shortage. Calder's Yeast Company was sold to the United Yeast Company at the same time. 
When Calder joined DCL the company was desperately trying to develop new activities to replace the declining spirit market. Calder's wide business interests assisted this process. While visiting his timber interests in the Black Forest, for example, Calder heard of the 'Prodor' and 'Goldschmidt' processes for hydrolysing cellulose. This led to DCL, and Calder on a personal basis, investing in the British Bergius Syndicate which tried to develop the oil-from-coal (hydrogenation of coal) process. Calder retained his seat on DCL's board following the 'big amalgamation' in 1925, when Buchanan-Dewar and Walkers were acquired by DCL, and was active in the management. In December 1925 he brought MacDonald, Greenlees and Williams into DCL. In 1926-7 he was part of a DCL delegation investigating the production of potable spirit in Australia. This was in response to Australian import duty on Scotch whisky and the delegation recommended that DCL should build a distillery at Corio Bay, Geelong. Calder's none too compelling argument was that 'if Australian whisky was going to supplant Scotch then the company may as well supply it' (Distillers Company Ltd, annual general meeting, 15 July 1927). In fact the investment proved unprofitable because Australia was severely affected by the international depression and merchants were unable to mature stocks of whisky. 
Calder was a member of DCL's technical and research committee from 1925 to 1935, a period which saw the creation of a research laboratory at Great Burgh and an increased recruitment of scientists. When DCL formalized its management structure in 1935 Calder was appointed to the powerful management committee with responsibility for industrial alcohol, yeast, malt extract, methylated spirit, the works department, and the gin trade in the USA. As a senior director he represented DCL in several important negotiations including the attempt to prevent the Commercial Solvents Corporation invading the British solvents market, the initial discussions with ICI which culminated in the DCL-ICI agreement, and the abortive project with Union Carbide for oil-cracking. His most enduring contribution was probably the gin trade in the USA for it gave DCL a firm foothold in the liquor trade following the repeal of prohibition. It also brought Calder into contact with Joseph Kennedy, reformed bootlegger and head of Somerset Importers, one of DCL's most successful distributors. He acted as host to Joseph Kennedy and the young John Kennedy when they toured Scotland during Joseph Kennedy's period of office as ambassador to Britain. Calder retired from the management committee in December 1940 and from the board in July 1941. 
Calder also had extensive interests in brewing and forestry. He was a director of several brewing firms including the family brewing firm, though his younger brother, John, played the more active part. Calder owned sawmills in the north of Scotland and plantations in Germany and the United States. During the Second World War he was appointed director of home timber production (1940-41). 
Calder held a number of public offices, being a justice of the peace for Kinross-shire and a deputy lieutenant of the county from 1930. He owned estates at Ledlanet, Milnathort, and Lyndford Hall, Norfolk. His leisure activities included golf, shooting, and fishing, and he was chairman of the syndicate which owned the Grimersta River in Lewis. He married Mildred Louise, daughter of Colonel R. A. Manners, the Royal Scots, in 1904. They had no children. Lady Calder died in 1936; Sir James died of cerebral thrombosis, on 22 August 1962, at Ledlanet, Milnathort, aged ninety-two, and was buried at Lyndford Hall, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 50409


Colman family (per. 1814-1898), mustard and starch manufacturers, traced its origins in that trade to 


@@@@@


doc= 50410


Downes, Hubert Downes Cherry- (1876-1964), maltster, was born on 23 September 1876 at Hemington vicarage, near Oundle, Northamptonshire, the third of the four surviving children of Benjamin Newman Cherry (1840-1905), vicar of Hemington, and his wife, Rosa Georgina, daughter of Edward Barratt-Lennard of Belhus Park, Essex. In 1909 he inherited from his godfather, Samuel Downes, the family's Cheshire estate, on condition that he assume by royal licence the name and arms of Downes. Hubert was educated at Winchester College. Afterwards he trained for two years with the old-established millers and maltsters Thorpe & Sons of Newark-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, spending a final year in London studying the technical aspects of malting. In 1897 he was offered a partnership in the Burton upon Trent malting firm of L. and G. Meakin but, with two other Burton maltsters, founded Richards, Cherry and Yeoman. Three years later, the business was registered as a limited liability company (renamed Yeomans, Cherry and Curtis), but soon after, Hubert returned to Thorpes to manage the grain side of the business. 
In 1901, Cherry-Downes married Adeline Rachel Barclay ('b'. 1872), daughter of Colonel Hanbury Barclay, chairman of the London brewers, Barclay Perkins. There were two sons, both of whom followed their father into his malting business, and one daughter. The elder son, Hubert Arthur Downes Cherry-Downes, also took over the Cheshire estate. Although later sold to counter heavy taxation, land on the Nottinghamshire-Lincolnshire border, including North Clifton Manor, was purchased and farmed. 
Following his inheritance in 1909, Cherry-Downes decided to leave Newark, but after the death of Thomas Earp MP was asked to become managing partner of the prestigious maltsters Gilstrap, Earp & Sons. He accepted, and assumed effective control, and, when in 1921 the firm was incorporated with a capital of $100,000, became its first managing director. The following year, at the depth of the post-war slump, Cherry-Downes proposed a scheme to rationalize the malting industry by the closure of redundant maltings. His ideas were too radical and found little support, but six years later he merged Gilstrap, Earp & Sons with four other substantial malting firms; the company was renamed Associated British Maltsters (ABM) in 1929. Cherry-Downes served as joint managing director, 1928-54, and non-executive director until his retirement, aged eighty-two, in 1958. An expert barley buyer (so influential he was said to control local markets), he was also a driving force behind the rapid expansion which took ABM to the forefront of European malting. 
Cherry-Downes worked tirelessly to promote the interests of the malting industry. In 1917, with trade halted by war controls and threatened by the possible nationalization of brewing, he was instrumental in reviving the Maltsters Association of Great Britain, which had lapsed since the repeal of the malt tax in 1880. As its chairman (1920-24 and 1935-45), he served the executive committee for thirty years. During both wars he was appointed to the joint advisory committee of brewers and maltsters which worked in conjunction with the Ministry of Food, and in 1923 served the departmental committee advising the Treasury on barley import duties. 
Cherry-Downes' great love was the countryside. Always to be seen in his favoured dress of plus fours, he was a lifelong member of the Newark and Nottinghamshire Agricultural Society, its president in 1924, and vice-president thereafter. A great authority on horses, he rode to hounds and was for many years a steward at Southwell racecourse. In 1925 he became a racehorse owner, his greatest success coming three years later when his horse Hank won the Foxhunters' Chase at Liverpool. A talented sportsman, he was also a keen shot and golfer. He was a JP for Newark and, although not deeply involved in local politics, a member of Newark Conservative Association. Cherry-Downes died of heart failure at his home, Southfield House, Millgate, Newark, on 1 October 1964 and was cremated at Wilford Hill, Nottingham, two days later. He was survived by his wife, and left an estate valued at more than $100,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 50411


Dewar, John Alexander, first Baron Forteviot (1856-1929), whisky blender and philanthropist, was born at Perth on 6 June 1856, the second surviving son in a family of five sons and two daughters of John Dewar (1806-1880), wine and spirit merchant, and his wife, Jane (1820-1900), daughter of John Gow, farmer at Pittendynie, Perthshire. His youngest surviving brother, born at Perth on 6 January 1864, was 
During the last quarter of the nineteenth century a number of highly successful firms developed in the Scotch whisky industry. One of the most successful was John Dewar & Sons Ltd of Perth. The firm had been founded in 1846 by John Dewar, the son of a crofter. Born in Aberfeldy in 1806 and educated at the parish school, he trained as a joiner but in 1828 moved to Perth to take up an offer of employment from a relative, James Macdonald, a wine merchant. They formed a partnership in 1837 which was dissolved nine years later when Dewar decided to begin his own business. When he died in 1880 the business was still mainly local though it made sufficient profit for him to leave an estate worth over $30,000. 
John Alexander and Thomas Robert Dewar joined the firm in 1879 and 1881 respectively. Both had been educated at Perth Academy and had served the customary apprenticeship in other wine and spirit firms, John with Condamine & Co. of Leith, Thomas with Forrest and Turnbull of Leith and later with Robertson and Baxter of Glasgow. Together the brothers created a firm whose product became a household name. Profit figures indicate their achievement. When their father died annual profits were a mere $1321. By 1900 they were $59,000 and by 1925, when the firm merged with the Distillers Company, profits were over $1 million. 
The brothers' characters were very different. John was a cautious, dour individual, very much absorbed by finance and administration. As older brother he was acutely aware of the family's dependence on the firm and yet wanted it to expand. His main priority was not heavy advertising expenditure but a gradual expansion of sales, coupled with the reinvestment of available profits in mature whisky stocks. He was twice married. His first wife, whom he married in 1884, was Joan, daughter of William Tod, farmer; they had five daughters and one son. She died in 1899, and in 1905 he married Margaret, daughter of Henry Holland, merchant; they had one daughter and one son. Thomas Dewar, who never married, was by contrast an extrovert and an extremely effective whisky salesman. John's career was spent in Perth while Thomas pioneered new markets in England and overseas. Their attributes thus complemented one another where business was concerned. Their political beliefs, however, were a very different matter, with John a Liberal and Thomas an active Conservative and Unionist. As Liberal MP for Inverness-shire from 1900 to 1916, John was to find himself in opposition to his party over the people's budget of 1909 with its increased taxation on spirits, and subsequently became a prominent spokesman for the whisky trade. 
John became a partner in 1879, the year before his father's death, and his brother in 1885 when the firm was styled John Dewar & Sons. The firm made modest progress until June 1890 when John obtained a credit of $12,000 from the Distillers Company (DCL) in exchange for Dewars tying their purchases of grain whisky to the DCL. The credit, soon increased to over $75,000, freed resources for investment in whisky stocks and branch offices, and allowed T. R. Dewar to make an international sales tour between 1891 and 1893, during which he visited twenty-six countries, appointed thirty-two agents, and arranged for opening consignments to each country he had visited. The tour cost $14,000, a hefty increase in costs when current profits were less than $7000 a year, but it established Dewars on a worldwide basis. Such sales trips became a hallmark of the firm's approach to exporting. T. R. Dewar undertook another in 1898 and by 1914 the firm's representatives had made five such campaigns. 
Dewars' 'take-off' was greatly assisted by DCL and by 1896, when Dewars' debts to DCL were in excess of stock in bond at $76,790, the board of DCL noted that 'Although this was considered a very large risk to have with any single firm, it was not deemed necessary to take any steps to reduce it as the firm... were thought to be of undoubted stability' (United Distillers archive, DCL, board minute book 8, 15 Oct 1896). Reliance on DCL diminished after 1897 when Dewars made a public share issue to provide resources for further expansion. Significantly, though, John Dewar advised DCL that Dewars would continue 'to give the DCL a preference in their grain spirit orders' (ibid., 9 May 1897). His close relationship with DCL and its managing director, William Ross, later proved crucially important. 
Although Dewars' home sales continued to expand, despite the declining demand for spirits in Britain after 1900, exports were much more important for they were three times as profitable as home sales. With the largest volume of export sales among the 'big three' blending firms (Buchanan, Dewars, and Walkers), Dewars were well placed in the amalgamation discussions which began in April 1909. An amalgamation of the 'big three' proved unattainable in the pre-war years but the Dewar brothers joined forces with James Buchanan in a holding company, Scotch Whisky Brands, in 1915. This was subsequently renamed Buchanan-Dewar in 1919, and merged along with John Walker & Sons in the Distillers Company in 1925. 
John Dewar played a greater role in the merger discussions than his brother on account of his mastery of financial detail and because of his friendship with William Ross, DCL's managing director. Dewar and Ross came to share a common set of beliefs about the problems facing the Scotch whisky industry. They wished to see greater stability in the trade, a reduction in the influence of speculators, and an end to certain 'unbusiness like methods', especially 'the very extravagant distribution of advertising material' (United Distillers archive, John Dewar & Sons Ltd, letter-book, 18 Aug 1900). 
Persuading the Walker family that an amalgamation between the 'big three' and the DCL was desirable proved extremely difficult. John Dewar's contribution was to urge that it was the future earning power of the combine that was vital, not the precise value put on family interests. He also persuaded the other participants that Ross should be the chairman of the combine. His only major disagreement with Ross was over the location of the head office. Dewar, following his financial adviser, Sir Gilbert Garnsey, argued that London was essential if the company was to have the confidence of the City. Ross thought it inconceivable that the leading firm in the Scotch whisky industry should be based outside Scotland, a view that ultimately prevailed. 
John and Thomas Dewar were appointed to the board of Distillers, but were too far advanced in their careers to play a significant part in shaping future developments, as DCL became increasingly drawn into the industrial alcohol and chemical trades in response to the decline in whisky consumption. For them the amalgamation was more important as a means of rearranging their financial interests. 
John Dewar had many other interests as a politician, town and county councillor, landowner, and agriculturist. He became a member of Perth town council in 1883, was elected treasurer in 1888, and served as lord provost from 1893 to 1899, pushing through local housing and sanitary reforms. In 1907 he was created a baronet and in 1916 was elevated to the peerage as Baron Forteviot of Dupplin, the first of the 'whisky barons'. His title derived from the estate of Dupplin which he purchased from the earl of Kinnoull in 1910 for $249,000. As a landowner, Lord Forteviot set about the task of rural regeneration, building the model village of Forteviot in the style of a small Dutch township. He held directorships in Longmorn-Glenlivet Distilleries, the Dundee, Perth and London Shipping Company, and the Bank of Scotland, and was chairman of John Shields & Co. 
Part of John Dewar's fortune was used for philanthropic purposes. An estimated $50,000 was devoted to projects in Perth such as the restoration of St John's Church as a war memorial, the building and equipping of a maternity ward at Perth Royal Infirmary, and the building of a new model lodging house in Skinnergate. He also founded the Forteviot Charitable Trust with an endowment of $60,000 for the benefit of the city of Perth and its inhabitants. Other public service included chairing two commissions of inquiry into medical conditions in the highlands and islands of Scotland, membership of Perth county council and education authority, chairmanship of the Territorial Force Association, and deputy lord lieutenancy of Perthshire. 
Thomas Dewar was active in civic and political life in London: he served on the London county council for West Marylebone from 1892 to 1895, and was Conservative MP for the St George's division of Tower Hamlets in London from 1900 to 1906. He became lieutenant of the City of London. Knighted in 1902, he received a baronetcy in 1917, and was created Baron Dewar of Homestall in 1919. His interests included painting, shooting, racing, and coursing. 
Lord Forteviot died at Perth on 23 November 1929 leaving an estate worth $4.4 million. His heir, John Dewar MC, had been appointed to the board of the DCL in 1925 and became chairman in September 1937. His brother, Lord Dewar, died on 11 April 1930 at his Sussex home, The Homestall, East Grinstead, leaving an estate valued at over $5 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 50412


Taylor, George Crosland (1858-1923), bus company operator, was born on 31 January 1858 at Greenhead Lane, Huddersfield, Yorkshire, son of Henry Dyson Taylor, woollen manufacturer of Huddersfield, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Crosland. George Taylor and his sons all took Crosland as part of their surname. At the age of sixteen George went to work at his father's mill, and in his early twenties travelled to Australia on his father's business. With his brother James he formed the British Insulated and Helsby Cable Company in 1882. On 8 October 1884 he married Mary, daughter of William Radford, at Kirk Langley in Derbyshire. 
By the turn of the century Crosland Taylor, who was essentially an electrical engineer, was taking an interest in motor cars. At the Paris motor show of 1905 he met Georges Ville, and on his return he started to assemble and sell cars of Ville's design, hence his adoption of the trading name Crosville for his company. Only five Crosville cars were ever made, but the company, registered in 1906 at Crane Wharf, Chester, went in for car hire, sales, driving tuition, and a range of automotive activities. In 1910 it acquired an Albion charabanc, with which it started a bus service between Chester and Ellesmere Port. 
Crosland Taylor's eldest son, Edward, played only a small part in company affairs before emigrating to America in 1911. Edward's brother 
George Crosland Taylor's youngest son, 
George Crosland Taylor suffered a heart attack and died at his home, 20 Castle Street, Chester, on 12 January 1923. His wife survived him. Claude succeeded him as chairman of the company, devoting his long working hours to its development. It was to his efforts that Crosville Motor Services owed its success, as the memoirs of his younger brother make plain. It remained a family business, with George's widow and his brother on the board, until the four main line railway companies in 1928 obtained powers to run buses, and early the next year the London, Midland, and Scottish Railway (LMSR) made an offer for the company's share capital. Despite other offers, the two brothers advised the board to accept the sum of 27's'. 6died per share, and from 1 May 1929 the company became L.M.S. (Crosville). 
The shareholders made a good profit on the deal, and Claude and his brother, with all the staff, were kept on by the new owners. Railway money was used for the purchase of other businesses, 'out of all proportion to their value', according to W. J. Crosland Taylor. Then, as a result of the settlement reached between the Tillings and British Electric Traction interests and the railway companies, from 1 May 1930 the company reverted to its original name, but was jointly owned by the LMSR and Tillings and British Automobile Traction. Claude remained as managing director, the board being chaired by W. S. Wreathall. 
The Crosland Taylor family did not limit its activities to buses: George had been a magistrate from 1899 until his death, and was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society; Claude was mayor of Chester in 1925. Both were men who pushed themselves to the limit. Claude died on 31 March 1935 at the Westminster Nursing Home, Liverpool Road, Chester, having succumbed to peritonitis, after an appendix operation. He was survived by his wife, Hilda Nancy. His memorial service was held in Chester Cathedral. 
With route licensing now in place, Crosville was established as the dominant bus company in much of Cheshire, throughout north Wales, and down the coast as far as Cardigan, as well as on the Wirral and in south Lancashire. Express coach services complemented the bus operations. W. J. Crosland Taylor inherited this as general manager, remaining in office until 31 December 1959. He died of heart failure at Twyford Abbey, Ealing, London, on 4 October 1967. His period of office saw control of the business pass to Thomas Tillings in 1942, and then to the British Transport Commission in 1948. Yet it is true to say that Crosville Motor Services, based at Chester, was one of the great territorial bus companies. It remained in some sense a family business, so long as members of the Crosland Taylor family were in charge -- even when the chairmanship was in the hands of men such as John Spencer Wills (1904-1991) and Sir Frederick Heaton (1880-1949). 


@@@@@


doc= 50413


Grant, Sir Alexander, first baronet (1864-1937), biscuit manufacturer and benefactor, was born on 1 October 1864 in Forres, Moray, the eldest son of Peter Grant (1838-1882), a guard with Highland Railway, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James and Elizabeth Norries. While he was a pupil at Forres Academy his father died, and he left school to be trained in the office of a writer to the signet. Unhappy with legal minutiae, he had himself apprenticed to Thomas Stuart, a small but progressive local baker. Once a journeyman, he moved to Edinburgh, where the biscuit manufacturer Robert McVitie engaged him as an assistant at $1 a week. 
Grant was both capable and ambitious, and McVitie made good use of his talents, encouraging him to attend lectures on food chemistry at Heriot-Watt College. Grant also tackled all available literature in English on the craft of baking and visited Europe to learn about biscuit manufacture there. On 31 July 1887 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Alexander Norris of Edinburgh; they had one son and two daughters. Shortly afterwards he was promoted to foreman, but he resigned to run a bakery in Inverness. When this venture failed McVitie reluctantly gave him his job back; after the Edinburgh factory was destroyed by fire, Grant was made manager of its temporary replacement in Yorkshire. He returned to manage the rebuilt factory, which was claimed to be the most up to date of its kind in Britain. 
When in 1901 McVitie's partner, Charles Edward Price, retired, Grant was appointed general manager. He and McVitie established a branch factory at Harlesden, north London -- an audacious foray into the English biscuit-makers' territory. For three months after its start-up Grant travelled between Edinburgh and London on the sleeperless night train, during the week not spending a single night in his bed. The factory failed to become profitable until 1905, but by then its output was three times that of the Edinburgh factory. 
McVitie died childless in 1910, and in June 1911 McVitie and Price Ltd was registered as a private limited company with $150,000 capital. Grant became chairman and managing director. In 1914 he opened a further factory, in Manchester; it was soon being used to make army and emergency biscuits for the government. These and other wartime concerns took their toll of Grant, who fell ill with double pneumonia, but his robust constitution pulled him through. He then secured a shareholding control of the company, and by the 1920s was reported to head the largest one-man enterprise in Britain. 
Between the wars Grant made some noteworthy benefactions, totalling about $750,000. In 1920 he saved the taxpayer $25,000 by cancelling for five years the interest on $100,000 of war stock held by his firm. He donated a total of $200,000 for the rebuilding and endowment of the National Library of Scotland, where his name is commemorated on the great window, and he gave Edinburgh University $150,000 for various projects, for which he was made an honorary LLD. His most spectacular gesture -- originally anonymous, but his name soon leaked out -- was to provide Holyroodhouse with banqueting silver, linen, cutlery, and glassware -- all Scottish-made -- at a cost of $10,000. 
Public honours soon followed. In 1923 Grant was given the freedom of the city of Edinburgh, and he later became freeman of Forres and of Nairn. Then in June 1924 he received a baronetcy for public services, apparently mooted before James Ramsay MacDonald had become prime minister the previous January. MacDonald, a native of Lossiemouth near Forres, was a friend of Grant, and his secretary persuaded Grant to meet some of the expenses of living at 10 Downing Street for the first premier who lacked a private income. Grant therefore loaned to MacDonald a Daimler car and $40,000 worth of securities. 
In September 1924 the British press heard about the loan and linked it with the award of the baronetcy as the latest example of the 'honours scandals' that had beset earlier administrations. If MacDonald, and indeed his advisers, acted with a mixture of imprudence and unworldliness, Grant was politically quite as naive in reassuring MacDonald that 'it is only the opinion of good people that matters and that guides public opinion, however loud the others may be' (Marquand, 359). Never a Labour supporter Grant dubbed himself a lifelong conservative, but for some reason he backed a Liberal candidate for an Edinburgh seat in 1924. 
Grant had a round face with a full moustache and was of stocky build. He exerted himself quite as hard as he worked his employees, and indeed his son, Robert McVitie Grant. Robert, who was a modernizer like his father, died a bachelor at fifty-two, in 1947. Grant kept clear of society and enjoyed the countryside through motoring and golf. He was not involved in public affairs, apart from serving as a JP, and his religion was that of a good and practical Christian. 
A committed supporter of the Industrial Welfare Society, in 1921 Grant suggested to the future George VI the idea of a summer camp jointly for boys from independent schools and from industry. He subsidized the first few 'Duke of York' camps, which continued annually until the Second World War. In business he remained fully active into his seventies. He caught a bad chill on the train back to Edinburgh after attending the king's coronation, and died at his home, 15 Hermitage Drive, Edinburgh, on 21 May 1937 from pneumonia. He was buried at Forres, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50414


Greene family (per. 1801-1920), brewers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 50415


Macdonald, Sir Peter George (1898-1983), biscuit entrepreneur, was born on 20 February 1898 at Darnaway, near Forres, Moray, the son of William Macdonald, head gamekeeper to the earl of Moray, and his wife, Annie Cameron. He was educated at Forres Academy, but left early and joined a sequence of Scottish regiments during the First World War. These included the Black Watch and the Lovat Scouts, a corps of highlanders skilled in hunting and stalking. 
After demobilization Macdonald trained with the earl's Edinburgh solicitors to become a land agent. However, with an ex-serviceman's grant he studied law at Edinburgh University and moved into wider legal spheres in the firm of W. and J. Burness, with which he was associated (latterly as a consultant) until his death. In 1927 he became a writer to the signet, and two years later he married Rachel Irene (died 1990), daughter of the Revd Robert Forgan DD of Edinburgh. They had one son and two daughters. 
Through his friendship in the 1930s with Sir Alexander Grant, also from Moray, Macdonald was made legal adviser to the biscuit manufacturers McVitie and Price. After Grant's death in 1937 he worked closely with his son and successor as chairman, Sir Robert McVitie Grant. During the Second World War Macdonald served as regional deferment officer for the Board of Trade's Edinburgh office; he was also on the staff of the regional commissioner for Scotland. When Sir Robert Grant died in 1947, Macdonald was elected chairman and managing director of McVitie and Price. 
In 1948 McVitie and Price and the Glasgow-based Macfarlane Lang & Co. Ltd amalgamated as United Biscuits Ltd; their joint pre-merger profits were $450,000. As the first group chairman Macdonald set his stamp on the new enterprise through a combination of personality (he could be ruthless) and brainpower. He possessed great financial acumen, and backed the bold policy of concentrating McVitie and Price's output on a few leading brands of biscuit, most notably Digestive and Rich Tea. Group profits exceeded $2 million in 1957. However, United Biscuits remained no more than a holding company, with the respective units producing and marketing independently of each other. 
Between 1962 and 1966 three further biscuit companies, William Crawford & Sons Ltd, William Macdonald & Sons Ltd, and Meredith and Drew Ltd, joined the group. The resulting organizational upheavals, and the pressures of intensified outside competition, led Macdonald in 1964 to hire the management consultants McKinsey & Co. They recommended the complete integration of all activities, and in 1965 Hector Laing (later Baron Laing of Dunphail), a grandson of Sir Alexander Grant, became group managing director, charged with carrying out this restructuring. In consequence, four out of the five Scottish factories had to be closed and administration was concentrated in London. By 1967, when Macdonald retired, United Biscuits was the largest biscuit company in Britain, with a turnover of $67 million and pre-tax profits of over $5 million. The national market leader in biscuits, it had also diversified into snack foods, packaged cakes, and bakery products. 
A committed delegator, Macdonald undertook a range of outside activities. He became a director of several major insurance companies and chairman of various textile firms. He sat on the council of the Institute of Directors and was founder of the institute's Scottish branch. A Conservative, he was knighted in 1963 for political and public services. He supported many charities, but without publicity. 
With large features and an impressive physical presence, Macdonald had a lawyer's concern for 'small print' but also the entrepreneur's urge to think big. He frequently used his recreations of fishing, shooting, and golf to foster business contacts. He served as JP for the city of Edinburgh and in 1966 as deputy lieutenant for Edinburgh. An active but undoctrinaire member of the Church of Scotland, he was an elder in Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh, and by his own efforts raised from industry no less than $250,000 to finance an extension scheme for the Church of Scotland. He maintained his Scottish roots to the last, dying at his home, 18 Hermitage Drive, Edinburgh, on 21 July 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 50416


McEwan, William (1827-1913), brewer and politician, was born at Alloa, Scotland, on 16 July 1827, the third of five children (two daughters and three sons) of John McEwan, a local shipowner, and his wife, Anne Jeffrey, whose father was a farmer at Throsk on the other side of the River Forth. Alloa had a thriving harbour and industries, including malting, brewing, distilling, glass making, and textiles. McEwan's father was a partner in a small shipping enterprise from 1814, and when he died in 1832, he left shares in four vessels. The executors maintained an interest in one vessel, named the 'Fame', to provide an income for the family. A new 'Fame', a schooner of 85 tons, was built in 1835. Later, in 1852, the partnership acquired two other vessels, but the business remained modest and did not offer any employment opportunity to McEwan. 
After attending Alloa Academy, McEwan went to work at the offices of the Alloa Coal Company in 1843. Seeking to improve himself, he moved two years later to Glasgow, where he joined a firm of merchants, Patersons, as a clerk, at a salary of $30 per annum. He found this post uncongenial and spent his spare time improving his education by attending lectures at the university, and visiting the theatre. After two and a half years, McEwan was offered a job in offices in Huddersfield, but on arriving there found he was not to be engaged as a cashier in the commercial department, but as a clerk in a spinning mill at Honley, which in his diary he described as a 'village without society' (Topen, 35). Nevertheless, his salary was enhanced, first to $70 and then to $100. 
McEwan's eldest sister, Janet ('b'. 1823), married James Younger, of the Alloa brewing family, in 1850; other family connections also proved useful. In 1851 McEwan began five years' technical and management training with his uncle, John Jeffrey, who since 1835 had been proprietor of the Heriot brewery, Edinburgh. By 1856 his brewing apprenticeship was completed, and, using family and borrowed capital, he established his own business at the Fountain brewery, near the eastern terminus of the Union Canal and adjacent to the Caledonian Railway. 
With the rapid expansion of the brewing industry after the late 1850s working in his favour, McEwan was remarkably successful. Within four years his turnover was reported to be in the region of $40,000 per annum. Taking advantage of cheaper and more efficient transport, he penetrated markets in Glasgow and the west of Scotland, and this proved so successful that the area soon accounted for more than half McEwan's trade. The firm also sold widely in central and northern Scotland, established a foothold on Tyneside, and during the 1860s built up a profitable trade further afield in the British colonies -- hence the origin of one of its most famous products, McEwan's Export ale. These initiatives proved so successful that the business soon rivalled longer-established Scottish competitors. 
In 1874, McEwan's nephew, William Younger, began an apprenticeship with his uncle, and after its completion played an increasingly important role in the firm. When, in 1886, McEwan entered parliament, Younger became manager. His effectiveness evidently matched that of his uncle, for the average annual profit between 1885 and 1889 was $92,000 and, when registered in 1889, William McEwan & Co. was reported to be worth $408,000. The company, with Younger as managing director, had a capital of $1 million, with all of the ordinary, and the bulk of the preference, shares being held by McEwan and his family. 
Devoting himself increasingly to politics, McEwan, a Gladstonian Liberal, held the Edinburgh Central seat from 1886 until 1900. Although a highly regarded constituency MP, who even managed to gain support from the temperance lobby, McEwan seems to have been happy to confine himself to the back benches in the House of Commons, except when he generated controversy by demanding government action on Irish home rule. It was a measure of his popularity in Edinburgh that at the general election in 1895 he was returned unopposed. He is said to have declined a title, remarking, 'No, I would rather be first in my own order, than be at the tail end of another', indicating his personal pride as a successful self-made businessman (Donnachie, 'DSBB', 43). He was made a privy councillor in 1907. 
Apart from his association with the firm and product which still bear his name, William McEwan was a notable philanthropist, who made gifts both to the nation and to the city of Edinburgh. He acquired a valuable art collection and presented paintings to the National Gallery of Scotland. The splendid McEwan Hall at the University of Edinburgh was built (to the design of Sir Robert Rowand Anderson) at a cost to McEwan of $115,000, plus $6500 per annum for maintenance. When the hall was opened in 1897 McEwan was made an honorary LLD and presented with the freedom of the city of Edinburgh. He was a deputy lieutenant of Edinburgh for thirty years. His last home, Polesden Lacey, Surrey, was ultimately bequeathed to the National Trust by his only child, Margaret Anderson, who later became better-known as Dame Margaret Greville (1863-1942), the noted socialite and friend of royalty. McEwan had married her mother, Helen Anderson (1835/6-1906), widow of William Anderson, day porter at McEwan's brewery, in 1885. 
McEwan died in London, at 16 Charles Street, Mayfair, on 12 May 1913, aged eighty-five, and was buried at Great Bookham, Surrey. His total estate was valued at $1.5 million, an enormous sum for the time, representing his share in the firm, and investments in other industrial, railway, and mining enterprises, both in Britain and overseas. McEwan was undoubtedly one of the most successful brewers of his generation who, by good fortune, entered the industry when it was undergoing a dramatic period of expansion. One obituary described him as 'a shrewd, hard headed, hard working businessman... one of the merchant princes of Scotland' who built up his firm from 'small beginnings to huge dimensions and world wide reputation' (Donnachie, 'DSBB'). This was a fitting tribute to McEwan's enterprise and energy. 


@@@@@


doc= 50417


Mackie, Sir Peter Jeffrey, first baronet (1855-1924), distiller, was born on 26 November 1855 at Corsepatrick, St Ninians, Stirlingshire, son of Alexander Mackie (1821-1884), farmer, grain merchant, and distiller, and his wife, Janet Simpson-Brown. His grandfather and great-grandfather had been proprietors of the Dunmore Park estate in Stirlingshire; other earlier Mackies had worked in the wine and spirit trades. James Logan Mackie, an uncle, co-owned the Lagavulin distillery in Islay, and it was to his firm, James L. Mackie & Co., that Peter Mackie was recruited in 1878, some years after the end of his formal education at Stirling high school. 
Lagavulin, a dark, island malt of great distinction, sold well as a 'self' (or unblended) whisky. It was, however, through blending -- the dilution of taste and cost through mixing partly malted grain spirit with traditional wholly malted barley liquor -- that wider marketing lay. In the mid-1880s Peter Mackie became a partner in the new firm of Mackie & Co., which had offices in London with the objective of increasing sales of Lagavulin and other producers' blends. The two businesses amalgamated in 1890 to form Mackie & Co. (Distillers), and made the critical decision to use Lagavulin (with additional purchased malts) for a blend of their own -- called White Horse after an inn on the Edinburgh Canongate, adjacent to property owned by the Mackie family since the seventeenth century. In 1895, on J. L. Mackie's retirement, the firm became a private limited company under Peter Mackie's chairmanship. He remained in charge until his death in 1924, his last years being marked by an abortive bid (1920-23) to unite with Buchanan-Dewar, and the decision (1924) to convert to a public company, White Horse Distillers Ltd. 
In a conservative trade like whisky, with premiums on tradition and predictability, success lay less with technical innovation (where Mackie certainly experimented) than with effective organization and marketing. Mackie remained cautious organizationally, favouring independent status and related opportunities for personal authority and family recruitment. In sales promotion, however, he worked with vigour, widening the range of blends (Gaelic Old Smuggler, Logan's Perfection, Greyhound, and others), building a name for quality and reliability, and coming to rank in the industry's 'big five'. The company declared in 1914 that it 'never... used nor ever will use second-rate materials' ('Field', 14 Feb 1914), refusing to 'cater for the cheap trade' ('Daily Mail'). Mackie's efforts, aided by costly advertising, were particularly successful in imperial markets, most of which he inspected for himself. He also extended his distilling base, adding an old-fashioned malt mill at Lagavulin, and moving into Speyside, where he took control of Craigellachie-Glenlivet between 1890 and 1900 and secured half-ownership of Craggenmore in 1921. The Hazelburn distillery at Campbeltown, Argyll, and Holloway's gin distillery at Kennington, London, were bought shortly after the First World War. More extreme diversifications -- all abandoned when 'restless Peter' died -- produced carragheen seaweed, tweed, concrete slabs, and BBM (brain, bone, and muscle) flour. 
Outside the whisky business, and in line with his paternal ancestry, Mackie assumed the perspectives of the landed classes. In 1889 he married his cousin, Jessie Lockett Abercrombie, and their two surviving daughters, Isobel and Mary, took husbands from the lesser aristocracy (Logan, their only son, was killed in action outside Jerusalem in 1917). Estates (and accompanying magistracies) were acquired at Corraith, near Symington, Ayrshire, and Glenreasdell, in north Kintyre, the one at Corraith holding a modest library and an art collection of catholic taste. In 1903, with A. Stodart Walker and some additional contributors, he produced 'The Keeper's Book', a substantial volume on the duties of a gamekeeper, which had gone through fourteen editions by 1920. Since his Islay days Mackie had maintained a strong interest in highland affairs, inclining towards tariff reform as a means of checking depopulation. He was a determined tory, serving briefly as president of the Scottish Unionist Association. Socialism he dismissed as 'a clever device of weaklings and dupes of Society, whose heart instead of their head rules their actions' ('DSBB'). In 1909 he rounded on Lloyd George's raised duties on spirits, and later held office in both the Whisky Association and the Licensed Victuallers' Association. Imperial sentiment underlay his gift of pedigree cattle to Rhodesia and his sponsorship of the Mackie anthropological expedition to central Africa. In 1920 he was awarded a baronetcy. 
Peter Mackie was a tall, sparely built man, favouring highland dress at home and a monocle and 'low-crowned 'topper' of a slightly rakish cut' in London ('Evening News'). Robert Bruce Lockhart describes him as a mix of genius, megalomania, and eccentricity. By his own testimony, 'efficiency' was his motto, 'grit' his favourite word, and 'hard and long work' his explanation for White Horse's success ('Daily Sketch'; Walker, 9; Distillers Co. Ltd, 45). He died at Corraith on 22 September 1924 after a long illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 50419


Paul, William Francis (1850-1928), grain importer and maltster, was born on 11 February 1850 at 39 Bank Street, Ipswich, the youngest of the seven children of Robert Paul ('c'.1806-1864), maltster and wharfinger, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Woods, ironmonger, of Stowmarket. For several generations, the Pauls had been prominent members of the Independent church in Suffolk, and William's early years were shaped by his close involvement in the thriving chapel at Tacket Street. After a private education he joined his brother Robert (1844-1909) in the small family firm, then administered by their father's trustees. In 1874 the brothers inherited the business and, under William's leadership, the partnership prospered. They acquired several local competitors and were soon numbered among Britain's leading maltsters; they became major importers of barley and maize; they built up their own fleet of steamships and barges and successfully diversified into the manufacture of animal feedstuffs. In 1893 R. and W. Paul was registered as a limited liability company with assets in excess of $200,000. 
Paul was uncompromising and hasty. Typically, he resolved a dispute over the repair of barges by purchasing his own shipyard. An opportunist, he was determined to remain at the forefront of progress. In 1899, accompanied by his son, Stuart, he undertook an extensive tour of the major grain-producing regions of America. They gained valuable trading links and firsthand knowledge of the latest developments in the handling and storage of grain. Three years later, Gillman and Spencer Limited, manufacturers of flaked maize and brewers' chemicals, was acquired, and their London wharf rebuilt as an American-style grain terminal. At Rotherhithe, the company also pioneered the production of animal feedstuffs from cooked, flaked maize. In Ipswich five large, modern maltings, designed by the brothers, were completed by 1912. A financial interest was taken in the Grantham maltsters Lee and Grinling, and further acquisitions (the Hull Malt Company in 1918, and the Cereals Company seven years later), laid the foundations of the twentieth-century enterprise. 
William Paul's business acumen spilled over into other spheres. He began the family's deep involvement in farming, purchasing 1000 acres at Kirton, Suffolk. Active in civic life, Paul was a JP, a member of the Ipswich dock commission, the museum and library committee, and a trustee of Ipswich municipal charities. A staunch Liberal, he served as town councillor, 1890-1908, alderman, 1909-28, and mayor, 1900-01. An accomplished speaker, he was said to dominate the council chamber. He preached the virtues of self-help but, maintaining a lifelong commitment to his nonconformist faith, worked tirelessly to improve the welfare of the town's citizens. For many years chairman of the public health committee, he instigated the town's tuberculosis sanatorium and public refuse system. As a memorial to his brother Robert, to whom he was deeply attached, he established the William Paul Housing Trust, which in 1914 built its first tenements for the poor and elderly. And in 1927 he created Bourne Park in one of the most densely populated districts of the town. For his work at the auxiliary hospital for wounded servicemen there, Broadwater, which he donated, and administered throughout the First World War, he was appointed OBE and awarded the order of St John. 
Paul was married on 27 August 1874 to Jessie Eliza Mary (1853-1887), daughter of James Springall, grocer, of Norwich; they had three sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Bernard, a personable playboy, was banished to an estate in Argentina and never reconciled with his father. His two brothers, Hugh and Stuart, followed their father into the family business. Stuart extended his father's estates, ultimately farming 6000 acres and becoming a noted breeder of Suffolk horses and redpoll cattle. In 1889, William married Ida Florence Lankester (1866-1965), of Stowmarket. The couple had one son, Cyril, and two daughters. Paul remained as managing director and chairman of R. and W. Paul until March 1927, when he resigned because of failing health. He died at his home, Orwell Lodge, Belstead Road, Ipswich, on 4 April 1928, following a heart attack, and was buried six days later at Ipswich borough cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50421


Stead, Patrick (1788-1869), maltster, was born at Stead's Place, Leith Walk, Edinburgh, the son and probably the only child of David Stead, merchant and card manufacturer. Stead was educated at Perth Academy and afterwards trained with a London grain merchant. His work involved supplying barley to the brewers, Truman, Hanbury, and Buxton, thus beginning a relationship which was to have a decisive influence on his future. He began his career as a corn merchant and factor at Great Yarmouth, initially working with two Scottish partners, Thomas MacKenzie and John Robinson; but Stead continued the business after 1832 as sole proprietor. The partners soon began malting; by the 1820s they were renting maltings scattered throughout Norfolk and Suffolk, and exporting substantial quantities of malt and barley to London, Liverpool, and Hull. Stead quickly acquired a fine reputation as a maltster, giving evidence to the select committee on the sale of corn in 1834 and in the same year representing the region's maltsters at the excise enquiry on malt. Twelve years later he told the select committee on railway bills that he believed he was almost the largest maltster in the country. 
For thirty years Stead supplied malt to Trumans, becoming their foremost East Anglian maltster. His expertise was also recognized by the great brewer, Michael Bass, who considered him to be the best maltster in England, and in 1842 paid for him to visit Munich to study German malting methods. Four years earlier Stead had moved his headquarters from Yarmouth to Halesworth, Suffolk, where he built a large complex of seven new maltings. Here he developed a revolutionary malting system using steam and hot air to control germination and kilning. Patented in 1842, and described in White's 1844 'Directory of Suffolk', it was in many respects the prototype of modern-day mechanical malting. Although the equipment subsequently failed, for four years Stead supplied large amounts of steam malt to Trumans. Not until the 1870s was pneumatic malting successfully developed on a commercial scale, an indication, in a highly conservative industry, of Stead's originality. 
Patrick Stead was a thrusting, self-confident Scot. A whig and devout disciple of Bentham, he tackled with great enthusiasm any constraints to the progress of his business. The Yarmouth historian, C. J. Palmer, noted in particular his active promotion of 'mercantile improvements' (Palmer, 275). His efforts to modernize the neglected harbours and navigations upon which his trade depended were frustrated by those whose interests and philosophy opposed his own. At Halesworth, he resolved the problem when in 1826 he became a commissioner of the River Blyth Navigation. But at Southwold, where his ships were frequently confined, he faced the full force of the landed interest, which, under the chair of the earl of Stradbroke, dominated the harbour commission. For years Stead fought for the merchants and shipowners to be fairly represented. Twice he took his case to Westminster: in 1830, when a new harbour bill was passed, and in 1845, when the tidal harbour commission reported on Southwold. On both occasions, despite the support of his close friend, the radical reformer, Joseph Hume, he was defeated. Sensing a new era of competition, Stead was among the first directors of the East Suffolk Railway Company. Finally, in 1849 he agreed to sell his business to Trumans for $18,000. 
Stead married a Scot, Susan (1796-1875), the eldest daughter of Fulton Alexander. There were no children, and when in 1851 Stead retired, the couple returned to Scotland and settled at Lansdown Park, Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, where they had family connections. Stead retained a deep affection for Halesworth; he had served as an overseer and regularly attended vestry and parish meetings, and in his will left more than $25,000 in trust to build and endow the Patrick Stead Hospital. Stead died suddenly on 28 June 1869 at Birnam, Dunkeld, while on a visit undertaken to restore his failing health. He was buried at the parish church of Helensburgh, where he had worshipped, and was survived by his wife. He left an estate valued at $55,826. 


@@@@@


doc= 50422


Younger, Henry Johnston (1832-1913), brewer, was born on 5 October 1832 at Moffat, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, the second son of William Younger (III), of Craigielands, Dumfriesshire, and his wife, the daughter of an Edinburgh surgeon. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy and the Royal College for Civil Engineers in London and first joined the family brewing firm in Edinburgh in 1852. After two years -- presumably having completed an apprenticeship -- he left for Australia, and spent much of the period 1855-61 at a sheep farm in the Upper Murray river valley in Victoria, where many Scots had already settled before the gold rush of 1851. Coincidentally, in 1856 the firm entered the Australian market, which, on account of the gold rush, was experiencing boom conditions, and it is likely that Younger played a role in developing the business via Adelaide and Melbourne. Younger returned to Edinburgh in 1861 and became a junior partner to his elder brother, William Younger (IV), and another senior partner, Andrew Smith, whose family had been associated with the brewery since 1836. 
When Henry Younger rejoined the business in 1861 William's share was estimated at $82,000 and Smith's at $46,000, while Henry's was a junior partner's modest contribution of $2000. But within four years, when the joint capital was put at $180,000, his share was nearly $20,000, a tenfold increase on his initial holding. The old-established firm of William Younger already had an extensive trade at home and overseas, with important markets south of the border, mainly on Tyneside and in London, where in 1866 Younger was put in charge of the new office. William Younger (IV) died in 1854 and Andrew Smith retired from the business in 1869, leaving control in the hands of three partners, Henry Younger, who became senior partner, his brother David, who had joined the brewery after studying at the University of St Andrews, and Alexander Smith, the son of Andrew Smith. 
The firm expanded considerably in the 1870s and early 1880s, and by 1885 its home sales alone were worth more than $400,000 a year, making it the leading brewing enterprise in Scotland. Scottish markets absorbed a little over half of sales, while English and overseas outlets accounted for much of the remainder. During this period both the Abbey and the Holyrood breweries were greatly extended (including stores and bottling plant), and new maltings were built on the Water of Leith at Canonmills. Younger's attention to the London end of the business, a high proportion of which was directed to colonial markets, as well as his passionate concern for quality control, clearly enhanced the firm's reputation in this highly competitive sector. 
William Younger & Co. was the first major brewery in Scotland to register with limited liability, in 1887, and three years later, during the general boom in brewery shares caused by the increasing prosperity of the industry, it was floated as a public company. With Younger (as chairman), Andrew Smith (grandson of the first Andrew Smith), and Alexander Bruce (son-in-law of the explorer and missionary David Livingstone) as leading members of the board, the company had an authorized capital of $1 million, divided equally between ordinary and preference shares -- a capitalization matched only by their great Edinburgh rival, the more recently established firm of William McEwan. 
This was a period when important scientific discoveries were being made in the chemistry of brewing, leading to significant improvements in quality control and a wider range of products, including bottled beers and lagers. In 1884 Younger had ordered the translation of Louis Pasteur's famous paper on fermentation and the chemistry of yeasts, and later welcomed the scientist to Edinburgh. He also donated $500 to Edinburgh University for its building extension fund in Pasteur's honour. 
Although he effectively retired from active management on becoming chairman of the board, Younger continued to take a keen interest in the company and kept in constant touch with its affairs. In 1889 he bought the adjoining estates of Benmore and Kilmun at the head of Holy Loch in Argyll, part of which was maintained and developed as an arboretum and later gifted to the nation by his son Harry George Younger. The estate ultimately became an important satellite to the Royal Botanic Garden in Edinburgh. Younger was a deputy lieutenant and JP in Argyll for many years and was described as 'an all-round sportsman and an ideal host'. 
Younger was twice married: first to Sarah Emma Lowman; secondly to Jane Edith Richardson. He had four sons and five daughters -- three of the sons ultimately becoming directors of William Younger & Co. He suffered a heart condition for some years prior to his death, at Earls Court Hotel, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 6 March 1913. He left a personal estate of $509,000 gross, with holdings in William Younger & Co. Ltd valued at $181,000, and other major holdings in railway and industrial enterprises. Younger's career might be compared with that of his near contemporary, the apparently more dynamic William McEwan. The latter entered politics and hence had a higher public profile, whereas Younger confined himself mainly to his business and family. Nevertheless Younger made a significant contribution to the success of a major brewing enterprise in the heyday of the industry before the First World War. 


@@@@@


doc= 50423


Beckford, Peter (1672/3-1735), planter and politician in Jamaica, was the son of Peter Beckford (bap. 1643, d. 1710) and his second wife, Anne Ballard. Beckford was elected to the assembly (like his father, who was a member of the house of assembly before he was elevated to Jamaica's privy council and appointed lieutenant-governor) in most of the years from 1701 to 1731, and was speaker from 1707 to 1713 and again in 1716. He was also comptroller of the customs in Jamaica. Like his father, young Beckford possessed a violent temper, and, according to Boyd Alexander, he 'shamefully murdered the Deputy Judge-Advocate in Jamaica who was more than twice his age' (Alexander, 31). 
Few details are known of Beckford's career, but at his death he was the wealthiest planter in Jamaica and reputedly 'in possession of the largest property real and personal of any subject in Europe' (Leslie, 267). His great wealth is revealed, in part, by the inventories of his personal property. They show that Beckford was sole owner of nine sugar plantations and part owner of seven more, of which his personal property equity amounted to $69,486 Jamaica currency. Nine cattle pens, together with a provision farm and storehouse, amounted to another $13,098. In Spanish Town, the seat of government, his personal property was valued at $5686. Much of his personal property took the form of black slaves, of whom he was sole owner of 1737 and half owner of 577 others. 
Moreover, Peter Beckford was a financier of great magnitude, for his inventories list 128 individuals and firms that owed him a total of $135,044 on the security of mortgages, bonds, and open accounts. Altogether, Beckford's personal property amounted to $223,314. But this does not include the value of buildings and planted canes, which probably amounted to another $100,000 or more. Thus Beckford's personalty and realty amounted to nearly $325,000 Jamaica currency or $222,000 sterling. Another $20,000 sterling was said to consist of personal property in England, 'besides diverse large Quantities of Sugar and other Merchandise' (Pares, 25) consigned to Thomas Beckford, his cousin and London commission agent. Historian Richard Pares has estimated that Beckford's 'whole fortune must have amounted to $300,000 or so' (ibid., 70). 
Peter Beckford married Bathshua Hering; they had nine children: six sons, Peter, William Beckford (bap. 1709, d. 1770), Richard, Nathaniel, Julines, and Francis, and three daughters, Ellis, Bathshua, and Elizabeth (1725-1791). By his will proved on 6 October 1735 Beckford gave and bequeathed to his wife $1000 sterling per annum and her choice of Dirty Pitt Pen or Dry Sugar Works. To his eldest son Peter he added to what he had already given him all of his property in Great Britain. He gave and bequeathed to his 'five sons now in England, vizt. William, Richard, Nathaniel, Julines & Francis all my Estates in Jamaica both real & personal to hold to them their Heirs & Assigns for ever' (will). He gave and bequeathed to his daughter Ellis $2000 Jamaica money and $500 to each of her two children. To his two youngest daughters, Bathshua and Elizabeth, he bequeathed $5000 Jamaica money. Elizabeth Beckford later married Thomas Howard, second earl of Effingham, and was the mother of Thomas Howard, third earl, who was governor of Jamaica in 1791 before his untimely death. Furthermore, Speaker Beckford gave and bequeathed to the poor of Jamaica $2000 Jamaica money, of which $1000 was to be given to the poor of St Catherine, and the other thousand to be applied towards the building of a free school or hospital for the poor. Other clauses in his will provided an annual salary for his white bookkeeper, and instructions to set free his 'Negro man Slave Named Diego' (ibid.) and allow him $10 per annum and the use of 10 acres of land. 
Peter Beckford died, aged sixty-two, in Spanish Town, Jamaica, on 3 April 1735. He was succeeded in the bulk of his estate by his eldest son, Peter, but the latter's premature death in 1737 meant that most of the Beckford lands passed to his second son, Alderman William Beckford. In 1754 William possessed 22,021 acres of land, whereas Richard had 9241, Julines 8197 and Francis 2616. Beckford's greatest legacy was that he had accumulated an estate great enough to support his sons in their British ambitions; three, William, Richard, and Julines, became members of parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 50424


Beckford, Peter (bap. 1643, d. 1710), planter in Jamaica and politician, was baptized on 19 November 1643 at St James, Clerkenwell, Middlesex, the son of Peter Beckford, 'a shadowy and humble figure' whose dates of birth and death are unknown (Alexander, 29), and his wife Phillis. He was a descendant of the Beckfords of the parish of Beckford in Gloucestershire, one of the oldest families in England. 
Samuel Pepys recorded in his diary on 5 January 1661 that Thomas Fuller, the English divine and historian, had come to his home to desire a kindness for a friend of his. The friend was Beckford, who 'hath a mind to go to Jamaica with these two ships that are going, which I promised to do' ('Diary', 2.6). Few records of Beckford's early years in Jamaica have survived. One contemporary historian, who described him as being very active, honest, and sober, said he was bred a seaman, then became a merchant, and, having some knowledge of gunnery, was appointed captain of the forts at Port Royal. In 1675 he was described as a merchant at Port Royal, and six years later was the owner of land, a dwelling house, a storehouse, and a wharf in that town. Port Royal was a place of clamorous, murderous, drunken, brutal men, and reputedly the wickedest city in the West Indies in the lifetimes of Beckford and the buccaneer Sir Henry Morgan. Frank Cundall wrote that Beckford 'was at the capture of St Jago de Cuba', and suggests that he was present at 'the taking of Panama' by Morgan and his buccaneers in 1671 (Cundall, 1937, 13). 
Beckford was elected to the house of assembly of Jamaica from the parish of St Catherine in 1675; in later years he represented the parishes of Clarendon, St Dorothy, and St John. In 1691 he was elevated to the island's council and later became its president. He was an active member of the militia, moving up from captain to colonel; in 1683 he was made commander of the forts at Port Royal. Moreover, he was receiver-general of Jamaica in 1691, and in the following year became commander and 'custos' of Port Royal. After the earthquake of 1692 destroyed the greater part of Port Royal, he became the first 'custos' or principal justice of the peace of the port town of Kingston. 
On the death of the governor, Major-General William Selwyn, Beckford was elevated to the post of lieutenant-governor of Jamaica on 5 April 1702 and authorized to act by the same powers and instructions as did the late governor. In his inaugural speech to the assembly he said, 'I have gone through most of the offices of the island, though with no great applause, yet without complaint'. He promised to protect the liberties of the white citizens, observing that he had 'some small interest in this island, which, had I no other consideration, would induce me as far as it lies in my power, to support each particular in its just right' ('Journals of the Assembly of Jamaica', 1.236). Beckford's short tenure of eight months came in the early part of the War of the Spanish Succession, leading him to urge the strengthening of the military posture of the island against the Spanish and French enemies. 
The goal of merchants, government officials, and professional and military men who went from England to Jamaica and other Caribbean islands without capital was to use their surplus income to acquire land, indentured servants, African slaves, and milling equipment to establish sugar plantations and other income-producing properties. Beckford was pre-eminent among the Jamaicans who competed fiercely for wealth and power. By 1670 he had acquired 2238 acres in Clarendon parish, and he added to his holdings during his lifetime, notably several large properties he purchased from the London alderman Richard Beckford. Besides the large tracts of land he acquired by patent and deed, he purchased nearly a hundred small properties which were consolidated into sugar plantations of several hundred acres, each equipped with mills, boiling and curing houses, and rum distilleries, and manned by a labour force of upwards of a hundred African slaves. At his death in 1710 he was reputed to have owned twenty estates, 1200 slaves, and $1,500,000 in bank stock. Cundall claimed that Beckford possessed the largest property, real and personal, of any subject in Europe and the overseas colonies. 
Beckford's first wife was Bridget (died 1671), the daughter of Sir William Beeston, a planter and governor of Jamaica from 1692 to 1702. His second wife, Anne, was a relative of Colonel Thomas Ballard, a leading planter. She had three sons, Peter Beckford (1672/3-1735), who became speaker of the assembly, Charles, who died in infancy, and Thomas, who was killed in 1731 by a man he had offended; and two daughters, Priscilla ('b'. 1675) and Elizabeth ('b'. 1678). 
The circumstances of Beckford's death illustrate the quarrelling and violence of the planter elite. It occurred on 3 April 1710 at Government House in Spanish Town. The discussion in the assembly chamber waxed so furious that Speaker Peter Beckford the younger sought in vain to adjourn the house. Some of the members barred the door, while others drew their swords and forced the speaker to reoccupy the chair. Peter Beckford senior, who was in the council chamber, heard his son's cry for help and ran with the guards to batter down the door to rescue him. In the excitement the elder Beckford either fell accidentally or suffered a stroke and died suddenly. Boyd Alexander, the biographer and historian of the Beckford family, claims that the elder Beckford himself was 'ruthless, unscrupulous and violent', and that the Beckfords were men of violent temper that led them even to murder (Alexander, 30-31). In the cathedral at Spanish Town, where he was buried, is a white marble slab in his memory, inscribed: 'Here lyes Interr'd the body of the Honble. Coll. Peter Beckford, late Presidt. of the Councill, sometime Lieut. Govr. and Commander in Chief of this Island, who departed this life the 3rd Apr. 1710 in the 67th year of his age. (Cundall, 1937, 25)' In his will of 7 September 1705, Beckford bequeathed $100 to the poor of St Catherine's parish, $500 to his son Thomas, $250 to each of Thomas's two daughters, and $100 to his friend Thomas Nicholls. Furthermore, he set free his slaves Francis and Phillip, and devised to each an annuity of $10 annually. All of the remainder of his estate in Jamaica and England he bequeathed to his son Peter and his heirs. On the basis of the fortune acquired by Peter Beckford, the family was distinguished by William Beckford (bap. 1709, d. 1770), a grandson who became lord mayor of London and member of parliament, three brothers of the lord mayor who were members of parliament, and the lord mayor's son, William Thomas Beckford (1760-1844), a later Romantic author and prominent art collector. 


@@@@@


doc= 50425


Claypoole, James (1634-1687), merchant and pioneer settler in America, was born in December 1634 at Northborough Manor, Northamptonshire, the ninth of the fourteen children of John Claypoole or Claypole, a yeoman farmer, and his wife, Mary Angell, the daughter of a wealthy London merchant. When James was eleven his older brother John Claypole married Elizabeth, the favourite daughter of a neighbour, Oliver Cromwell. After the general's rise to power James's father was made a baronet and John was given various offices in the protector's household. 
James Claypoole benefited little from his family's brief prominence as, in 1650, he was apprenticed to a merchant in Bremen. After completing his indentures, on 12 February 1658 he married Helen Mercer (died 1688) and returned to London to set up in business for himself. He lived first in Nicholas Lane in the City, where his first son, John, was born in November 1658. He then moved to Mincing Lane, where a second child, Mary, was born in 1660, and in 1662 finally settled in Scots Yard, where a further eleven children were born (of whom six survived after the first year) and where he remained until he left England for Pennsylvania in 1683. At some stage he bought a country house in Kingston, which he described as a 'small' place for his children and where he often went for weekends. 
At this time, when the Quakers were first establishing a foothold in the capital, the Claypooles were convinced by the Friends' teachings and became important members of the Bull and Mouth meeting during the two decades of persecution which followed. Claypoole was not a martyr in the sense of having languished for years in gaol, but he was among those Besse listed as having 'frequently exposed themselves, at the hazard of their estates, liberties and lives for the public testimony to the truth' (Besse, 1.484). The relentlessness of the pressure applied to Quakers was reflected in May 1683, in Claypoole's resigned tone excusing his neglect of a Friend's wife, because he 'was being tried at the sessions for a riot, for being at a meeting, and [I] had like to have been sent to Newgate, which hindered me many days in my business, and I was harried from one magistrate to another by a warrant and a constable. (Balderston, 210-11)' The first meeting for sufferings (1676) was organized in the Claypoole house, as were weekday meetings to keep in touch with other Quaker groups, and leading Friends frequently stayed there. Claypoole was not a scholar but he did contribute to at least two of Penn's pamphlets and was in consultation with Penn and George Fox about the writing of others. 
Claypoole's letter-book covering the period from May 1681 to April 1684 provides a valuable insight into the day-to-day workings of a merchant business in a time of rapid expansion and restructuring of English overseas trade. He managed the business with the help of his son James and an indentured apprentice, Edward Haistwell, who had spent two years travelling with Fox. Claypoole operated as both a factor and a merchant on his own account with correspondents in Amsterdam, Bordeaux, Bremen, Hamburg, Ireland, Lisbon, North America, and Barbados. Many were Quakers, although, as he had brothers in Barbados and New Jersey, kin also played a part. Claypoole traded in a wide range of commodities: furs from New York and Hudson Bay; sugar, ginger, indigo, and cotton wool from the West Indies; bullion and fish from New England; linen and wine from Germany, France, and Portugal. London's rising importance as a European entrepot is underlined by the volume of goods re-exported, especially furs to Hamburg for sale in the Baltic and Russia, and linen and wine to the colonies. Claypoole's Quakerism is reflected in plain language, use of numerals for months, and a refusal to take oaths. However, the passing of white sugar for brown to reduce customs duties, the bribing of port officials, his forthright criticism of various friends and relations, and his petty squabbling over minor charges demonstrate less than perfect adherence to Quaker ideals. 
In May 1681 William Penn obtained a charter for a new colony in Pennsylvania, and Claypoole was one of the fifty-six subscribers who bought a block of 5000 acres of land for $100. After Penn appointed Claypoole treasurer of the Free Society of Traders, a joint-stock company intended to play a pivotal role in Pennsylvania's economy, the latter purchased a further 5000 acres and made the brave decision to take his family to the new country. He sold his well-established commission business to his neighbours John Bawden and John Gardiner, the leading merchants in London's West India trade. 
Claypoole's eldest son, John, migrated in 1682 and the remainder of the family, including seven children and five servants, embarked on the 'Concord' in August 1683 and arrived on 1 October. Claypoole had sent two servants ahead to build a house, which was '40 feet long and 20 broad with a good dry cellar under it which proved an extraordinary conveniency for securing our goods and lodging my family' (Balderston, 223), but unfortunately there was no fireplace and winter was approaching. Claypoole added a kitchen 20 foot square with a double chimney, and the family settled down in what was to become Walnut Street, Philadelphia. 
Claypoole had planned to bring about $700 worth of goods, but probably brought less as he had difficulty collecting all the money owed to him, especially from his brothers John and Norton, and to his great shame as a Quaker he could not entirely clear his own debts before leaving. He remarked on the many promising commercial opportunities in Pennsylvania, and he exchanged wine and dry goods for provisions, whale oil, silver, and furs, which he sent to England or the West Indies. However, he was hindered by his work for the Free Society, which proved more onerous than he had expected, and exclaimed he would not have 'undertook it if I had known for three times my salary' (Balderston, 240). He was paid $100 per annum. 
The society's problems were apparent by the time Claypoole arrived. His deputy had sold the first cargo on credit, but it would take time for the pioneer settlers to make payment, and at home investors were reluctant to furnish more capital, leaving subscriptions unpaid. Only five of the thirty-five or so merchants who arrived in Philadelphia in the first four years of its life belonged to the society. They had no intention of allowing such a closed body to monopolize the colony's trade. Instead early commerce fell largely into the hands of individual merchants, acting for themselves or for agents in England. By 1684 Claypoole complained, 'we have now neither credit nor money and now must sue or be found to lose all' (Balderston, 241). The company was itself sued in a number of suits between 1684 and 1686 and it collapsed as a significant factor in Pennsylvania's trade, drawing harsh words for Claypoole from Penn. Attempts to rescue its fortunes failed and it became a mere land company. 
Claypoole continued to play a prominent role in Pennsylvania. In February 1684 he acted as interpreter for Penn and Margaret Matson in Pennsylvania's one witchcraft trial, and in November 1685 he was commissioned justice of the peace. In 1686 he served in the assembly; he was made judge of the provincial court in August, and was confirmed as registrar in November. The next spring he was elected to the provincial council. He had been chairman of the court of quarter sessions, and he had many tasks for the meeting as well. In February 1687 Penn appointed five men including Claypoole with practically unlimited powers to act for him in Pennsylvania. He could not have shown his faith in Claypoole's honesty or ability more plainly. 
Claypoole died in Philadelphia on 6 August 1687 and was buried the following day in the Quaker burial-ground. His will showed that he had many possessions and his estate was valued at $481 10's'. 3died 


@@@@@


doc= 50426


Callan, Nicholas Joseph (1799-1864), Roman Catholic priest and physicist, was born on 20 December 1799 at Darver in the parish of Dromiskin, co. Louth, Ireland, into a well-to-do Roman Catholic family, the fifth child and third son of Donnchadh Beag or Wee Denis Callan ('c'.1745-1813), possibly a farmer, and his wife, Margaret Smith. Little is known about Callan's preparatory schooling but he later attended the academy at Dundalk run by the Presbyterian minister William Neilson. He took the name Joseph on confirmation. Callan prepared for the priesthood at Navan Seminary before entering St Patrick's College, Maynooth, on 26 August 1816. There the first three years were devoted to literature and science -- in his third year he excelled in experimental philosophy or physics; the latter three years formed his theological studies. These concluded with his election to the Dunboyne Establishment -- the postgraduate institution of the college. In theological studies he was exposed to influences of Gallicanism. At the end of the academic year 1823-4 he headed the premium list and was first in theology, canon law, and ecclesiastical history. He was ordained subdeacon in 1822, deacon on 23 May 1823, and priest, one day later. On completion of his postgraduate studies in 1824 Callan was chosen to assist the Revd Michael Blake in re-establishing the Collegio Irlandese in Rome; there he attended lectures at the Sapienza University and prepared for a doctorate in divinity, conferred on 13 April 1826. On 15 September 1826 he succeeded to the chair of natural philosophy at Maynooth which he occupied until his death. He paid little further attention to theological scholarship. 
As professor Callan strove to raise standards in physics; he wrote an introductory textbook 'Electricity and Galvanism' (1832) and brought out a new and enlarged edition of a textbook on geometry. In his life as a scientist two periods can be identified, one of outstanding activity and achievement as a young professor, and another of consolidation and development in his later years. Perhaps inspired by the knowledge of the work of Galvani and Volta gained during his stay in Rome, Callan became a pioneer in the investigation of electricity and electromagnetism; he made important contributions in developing and improving electromagnets and coils, electric motors for traction, batteries, and electric lighting. In developing electromagnets (1836-8) Callan followed up the work of Sturgeon in England and of Joseph Henry in America. With coils joined in series he recognized that the intensity of the shocks experienced depended on the rapidity of the break in the primary and he developed a device called a repeater, for rapid interruption using the escapement mechanism of a clock. He found that shocks were augmented when the circuits were separated. He discovered the principle of the step-up transformer and the induction coil, a replica of which he sent to Sturgeon, who demonstrated it in August 1837 to the Electrical Society. Employing primary coils of thick copper wire insulated with tape and secondary coils of very great lengths of fine iron wire coated with a mixture of beeswax and guttapercha, he obtained powerful spark discharges. Callan devised a motor using electromagnets for excitation and powered by batteries and he conducted experiments with a view to producing electric railway locomotion. He envisaged an electric railway from Dublin to Kingstown (later Dunlaoghaire) and designed an engine to propel a carriage and load, but practical difficulties led to the demise of the project. 
Callan modified the Wollaston cell by placing the zinc plates in copper containers without glass or porcelain vessels. In 1836 he described a very large battery containing 20 square zinc plates with about 140 litres of acid. He proceeded to improve two-fluid cells working in succession with the Poggendorff, Daniel, Grove, and Bunsen cells. He developed a new two liquid cast-iron voltaic battery, and converted his original Wollaston battery into a cast-iron one; using the zinc plates of the former he constructed 577 cells, obtaining what was probably the world's largest battery. Subsequently these cells were manufactured commercially at the Adelaide Gallery in London. His work on the cast-iron battery also led to the discovery that cast iron treated with nitric acid became resistant to weathering and he was granted a patent (2340 of 1853) for this process. He experimented with limelighting and electric arc lighting for application in lighthouses, for which he also devised a special single-fluid battery. He developed a type of tangent galvanometer which later found commercial application as did some other findings, for example in the design of lightning conductors. Of particular significance was his discovery (published in 1863) of the point plate valve or rectifier. 
Callan was active in the Roman Catholic publication movement that opposed the activities of evangelical proselytizing societies in Ireland, especially in the 1840s, the decade of the great famine. Over several years he devoted nearly all his leisure time to producing English versions of the popular devotional works of St Alphonsus Liguori, at least sixteen of which were published between 1842 and 1850; a book of meditations by Callan chiefly for ecclesiastics, entitled 'Selva' (1844), also enjoyed popularity. At the time of the famine Callan donated all of his professorial salary for relief. Whereas a considerable number of his instruments have been preserved, the corpus of his published research papers is small, consisting of nineteen mostly short papers in William Sturgeon's 'Annals of Electricity', the 'Philosophical Magazine', the 'Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy', and the 'British Association Report' for 1857. 
Callan's researches were financed largely from private or family means. Most of his apparatus was made by himself with the help of local tradesmen or blacksmiths. He was seen by many as an eccentric and was the subject of anecdote. In his later years he sought recognition for his earlier discoveries: at the Dublin meeting of the British Association in 1857, where his work was honoured, he upheld his priority claim as inventor of the induction coil. 
Callan, who was small in stature, suffered from high blood pressure and he was twice relieved of his duties and sent to convalesce on the continent, in 1849 and in 1850-51. On 2 January 1864 he suffered a stroke in the college chapel and died at Maynooth on 14 January at 8 p.m. His possessions, consisting of books, furniture, prints, and wine, and a share in property inherited from his late sister Catherine, were willed to the college library, to charity, or to his superiors and professors of the college. A Celtic cross and headstone were erected about forty years after his death on his grave in the college cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50429


Castelvetro, Giacomo (bap. 1546, d. 1616), writer and teacher of Italian, was born in Modena, Italy, and was baptized there at S. Barnaba, on 25 March 1546, the third son and ninth child of Niccolo Castelvetro (died 1578), a wealthy banker, and his wife, Liberta Tassoni, a noblewoman. Apart from the fact that he described himself in autobiographical notes (BL, Harleian MS 3344) as a sickly child, a condition he attributed to his mother, nothing is known of his early life. 
Apparently as a result of his unorthodox religious views, at the age of eighteen Castelvetro was smuggled out of Modena with his brother Lelio in two chests carried on a mule, to join his uncle Ludovico Castelvetro, the humanist critic, who lived in exile in Geneva. For the next seven years he lived with his uncle, moving to Lyon, Basel, Vienna, and Chiavenna, while studying with him Greek, Latin, French, German, Spanish, and English. Shortly after his uncle's death in late February 1571 he moved initially to Basel and then in 1574 visited England, where he became acquainted with Sir Roger North of Kirtling, Cambridgeshire, whose eldest son, John, had recently graduated from Cambridge. Castelvetro spent the next two years accompanying young North on an educational tour of Italy, before returning to Italy to claim his inheritance after his father's death in 1578. 
By this time Castelvetro was clearly a protestant, and fearing difficulties with the Inquisition if he remained in Italy, he sold some of his property to his cousin and namesake, returning to England by the summer of 1580. During this period he was engaged in the publishing trade, enjoying the patronage of Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir Francis Walsingham, for whom he probably acted as a political agent. He made frequent trips to Europe, including to the great book fairs at Frankfurt and Basel, where in 1587 he married Isotta de Canonici (died 1594), the wealthy and elderly widow of Thomas Lieber or Luber (died 1583), best known as Erastus, the distinguished physician and philosopher. Having edited a theological work by Erastus, 'Explicatio gravissimae quaestionis utrum excommunicatio' (1589), in 1590 Castelvetro published a collection of medical works by Erastus which he had edited, explaining in an elegantly composed Latin introduction how his marriage had given him this opportunity. In 1591 it was at his expense that the very popular 'Il pastor fido' was published in England. 
In 1592 Castelvetro realized a long-held ambition of becoming Italian tutor to James VI of Scotland and Queen Anne. Two years later, following the death of his wife, who made her deathbed will on 7 March 1594, he travelled to Denmark and then Sweden, where he was on friendly terms with Duke Charles, who was to become king in 1599. In May 1598 he undertook a leisurely tour of Europe, encompassing France, Switzerland, and Germany. In the autumn of the following year he settled in Venice, editing and preparing contemporary manuscripts on Italian poetry and fiction for the publisher G. B. Ciotto. His brother Lelio, after a long imprisonment, was burnt at the stake as a relapsed heretic in 1609, and Castelvetro's own stay in Venice was brought to an abrupt end in 1611 when he was imprisoned by the Inquisition. Although it is not clear if he had become a subject of James VI and I, he had been closely involved with the activities of the English embassy in Venice and had enjoyed the friendship of Sir Henry Wotton, ambassador there until late 1610. The new ambassador, Sir Dudley Carleton, successfully intervened on his behalf to persuade the Italian authorities that the incarceration of someone at one time a servant of the king, and now described as a member of the diplomatic household, could lead to a diplomatic incident. Once released, Castelvetro set off on another tour round Europe in search of patronage. 
By early 1613 Castelvetro was back in London, and that spring taught Italian for one term at Cambridge to a number of appreciative students including George Stanhope, but his poor health and financial impoverishment precluded him from obtaining more regular employment. Briefly at Oxford early in 1614, he lived otherwise in the household of Sir Adam Newton at Eltham, later moving with the family to their new mansion at Charlton, near Greenwich. 
At this time Castelvetro compiled 'Brieve racconto di tutte le radici di tutte l'herbe e di tutte frutti, che crudi o cotti in Italia si mangiano' ('Brief account of all the vegetables, herbs, and fruit... in Italy') for which he was eventually best remembered. His text bore all the inaccuracies and misnomers of an enthusiastic amateur, but was an interesting and instructive critique of the gastronomic delicacies of Italy. This was not the first text on the subject, but was probably the most detailed. Sent to eminent potential patrons, it was dedicated to Lucy, countess of Bedford, at the request of her brother John Harington, and Castelvetro hoped that she would help him to secure work as a translator, editor, and teacher, but by 1614 the countess was in dire financial straits and his attempts to gain monetary assistance proved fruitless. He was later engaged to edit a manuscript by Tadio Duni of Zurich, but his hopes that the king or City of London might reward him for his translation of 'A Remonstrance of James I... for the Right of Kings' (1615) were vain. He remained impoverished, dying after a long illness, probably at Charlton and soon after 21 March 1616, the date of his last autobiographical note. 
During his lifetime Castelvetro achieved only limited recognition, but after John Florio, the first recorded teacher of Italian at Oxford, he was the most important promoter of his native tongue and national heritage in England at this period. It was only in the twentieth century, with reassessments of his career and the publication of his 'Brieve racconto' as 'The Fruit, Herbs and Vegetables of Italy' (ed. G. Riley, 1989), that his significance as an advocate of the consumption of more fruit and vegetables was appreciated. 


@@@@@


doc= 50432


Boulestin, (Xavier) Marcel (1878-1943), restaurateur and writer on cookery, was born at Poitiers, France, where his mother, the daughter of a former lycee teacher, shared the house of his widowed maternal grandmother. Boulestin grew up and attended school in Poitiers, developing strong interests in music and the theatre. He visited his father, who maintained a largely separate existence, only for a month each summer, at the property that he owned at St Aulaye in the valley of the Dronne north-west of Perigueux. 
By the time that Boulestin was eighteen both his mother and his grandmother had died. From the latter he had a 1200 franc annuity, which allowed him to follow his aesthetic inclinations with no acute worries about adopting a serious career. Moving to Bordeaux, a city which impressed him with its elegance and sophistication, he settled down for several years, ostensibly to study law at the university there. In fact he became a full-time concert-goer and acquaintance of visiting musicians, contributing a regular 'Bordeaux letter' to the national magazine 'Courrier Musical'. Before leaving to perform his military service in 1899, he published his first, unsuccessful book, a dialogue, 'Le pacte', with a foreword by the humorous writer Willy (Henri Gauthier-Villars, husband of the novelist Colette). 
After military service, Boulestin moved to Paris and took a job as secretary to Willy. Ambitious for literary fame, he met many French and English artists and writers, translated Max Beerbohm's 'The Happy Hypocrite' (published in the 'Mercure de France', 1905), and enjoyed the smart, Anglophile social life of Paris and Dieppe. With his thickset physique and southern appearance he was frequently caricatured by artist friends, and he was clearly popular for his cheerfully sybaritic approach to life. By 1906, however, he recognized that success had eluded him. In search of a change, he settled that autumn in London, immersing himself in the music-halls and theatres, and the follies and ostentatious luxury of the idle rich. As secretary to a playwright, Cosmo Gordon Lennox, he dabbled in journalism and dramatic translations, and collaborated with a friend, Francis Toye, on a lightweight novel, 'The Swing of the Pendulum' (1911). 
Switching to a new interest, interior decorating, in 1911, Boulestin equipped his rented flat in Elizabeth Street, Mayfair, with avant-garde materials imported from Paris, Florence, Munich, Vienna, and Berlin, and solicited custom from society friends, who recommended him to others. In August 1914 he was on the point of extending the business by taking a house with the designer Paul Poiret and decorating it entirely in Poiret's own lavish style; instead, he spent the next four years as an interpreter with the British expeditionary force in France. His post-war London shop, Decorations Modernes, proved a failure, as did his 'Keepsake' (1921), an anthology bringing together the work of modern artists and writers. For some time Boulestin scraped a living by handicrafts, teaching French, and other means. 
Boulestin's first cookery book, 'Simple French Cooking for English Homes' (1923), resulted from a casual conversation with a director of Heinemann, followed by a $10 advance. The book was an immediate success, since it suited the new, often servantless, pared-down sophistication of post-war domestic arrangements. Boulestin's explanations of basic French ways with meat, game, poultry, fish, and vegetables, inspired inventions such as sardine butter as an hors d'oeuvre, and his revelations of how to cook aubergines or produce a piperade helped to widen the culinary ambitions of British people to whom French cooking had hitherto seemed unattainably exotic. 
Although originally a fervent admirer of the solider, more traditional English dishes, Boulestin reconciled this interest with an appreciation of his own earlier gastronomic background. Between 1923 and 1937 he published a dozen recipe books. Some he wrote alone ('The Conduct of the Kitchen', 'A Second Helping', and 'What Shall We Have Today?'); one, in 1930, with Jason Hill ('Herbs, Salads and Seasonings'); and three others ('120 Ways of Cooking Eggs', '127 Ways of Preparing Savouries and Hors d'oeuvres', and '101 Ways of Cooking Potatoes') with his close friend and long-term partner, A. H. (Robin) Adair, whom he first met in 1923, and with whom he briefly ran a catering business for dinner parties before opening his first London restaurant in 1925. Editions of his books were still appearing in the 1950s. 
The Restaurant Francais, on the corner of Panton Street and Leicester Square, flourished for two years despite the absence of a full alcohol licence, and received much fashionable support. In 1927 this gave way to a more ambitious venture, the eponymous Boulestin's (formerly Sherry's) Restaurant in Covent Garden. With its silk velvet curtains designed by Raoul Dufy, and its panelled walls and ceiling by Marie Laurencin and Jean-Emile Laboureur, the restaurant was a striking example of modern Parisian decor, attracting artists and opera-goers alike. The authenticity of the cooking was ensured by Boulestin's choice of chef, Bigorre, who had previously cooked at the famous Restaurant Paillard in Paris. 
Once established as an apologist for simple French food and cooking, Boulestin achieved his true role in English life during the inter-war years, and paved the way for successors such as the equally literary Elizabeth David (who quoted with relish his earthy description, in his 1936 autobiographical volume, of the country foods of his childhood summers at St Aulaye). From 1928 he held cookery courses, first on his own, then under the auspices of Fortnum and Mason's store in Piccadilly. In 1937 he gave the first cookery demonstration on British television. He wrote regular columns for the 'Daily Telegraph', 'Country Life', 'Harper's Bazaar', and later the 'Evening Standard'. His light-heartedly self-publicizing bent found expression in an autobiography in English, 'Myself, my Two Countries' (1936); a gastronomic account of a French tour, 'Having Crossed the Channel' (1934); and a volume of reminiscences in French, 'A Londres naguere', translated as 'Ease and Endurance' (1948) by Adair. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Boulestin and Adair were on holiday at Boulestin's house in the Landes. They remained in France, hoping to be able to contribute directly to the war effort. Adair was eventually interned as an enemy alien, and Boulestin moved to Paris in order to be near him. Boulestin was found dead on the morning of 20 September 1943 after a short illness, aged sixty-five. 


@@@@@


doc= 50433


Bradley, Martha (fl. 1740s-1755), writer on cookery, is known today only through her one monumental book, 'The British Housewife', which was published as a part-work from January to October 1756 and eventually came out in book form in 1758. The book is a complete manual for the housewife, the cook, the housekeeper, the gardener, and the farrier, with monthly sections of advice and recipes which cover every aspect of domestic management in the middle of the eighteenth century. The author herself was a professional cook who worked in Bath in the 1740s. She perfected her craft by her practical experience and her knowledge of earlier cookery books: she used and adapted recipes by such predecessors as Mary Eales ('Mrs Mary Eales's Receipts', 1718), Patrick Lamb ('Royal Cookery', 1710; 3rd edn, 1726), Vincent La Chapelle ('The Modern Cook', 1733), and Hannah Glasse ('The Art of Cookery', 1747). A reference to William Hogarth's 'Analysis of Beauty' (1.70), published in 1753, establishes that Martha Bradley's book was written after that date. The publisher's note that Mrs Bradley's papers, including a valued family manuscript recipe collection, were all lodged with him ('The British Housewife', 1.369) suggests that she was dead by the time her work began to be published. 
Martha Bradley is one of the most important cookery writers of the eighteenth century, not only because her book is one of the most comprehensive of its kind but also because she discusses the merits and difficulties of the dishes, gives information on European as well as English cookery, and tells the reader what is old-fashioned and what is up to date. In an age when most cookery books were simply compilations Mrs Bradley's book stands out for the author's personal involvement in her recipes. 


@@@@@


doc= 50434


Boys, Henry (1820-1904), naval officer, was born on 30 September 1820 at Upper Deal, Kent, the second son of Captain Edward Boys RN (1785-1866), superintendent of Deal dockyard from 1837 to 1841, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Sayer. His younger brother Richard also joined the navy but was killed in action against pirates on the Moroccan coast in May 1846. Boys was educated at Ramsgate School before joining HMS 'Edinburgh' in 1837. Her captain, William Wilmott Henderson, was a local political and naval friend of his father. 'Edinburgh' was active on the coast of Syria in 1840; Boys was noted for his conduct at Beirut under heavy fire on 2 October. He was slightly wounded at the bombardment of Acre on 3 November. Between 1841 and 1845 he served in HMS 'Illustrious', flagship of the West Indies station. He impressed everyone he served under with his professionalism and personality, and with his father's active solicitation and the support of Captain Henderson he secured promotion: on 15 February 1846 he was commissioned as a lieutenant of the 'Snake', 16 guns, on the west African station. Edward Boys persuaded the liberal Admiralty board to recall his son. The 'Snake' disappeared at sea after Boys left. He qualified in gunnery before returning to west Africa, in 1849, where he distinguished himself in the campaign to end the illegal Atlantic slave trade. 
Back in Britain in 1851 Boys then followed his patron Henderson to the south-east coast of America station, Henderson's position as commander-in-chief guaranteeing Boys's promotion to commander, which occurred on 14 May 1853. Early in 1854 Boys was involved in an incident at the Falkland Islands, where Henderson had sent him, at the request of the governor, George Rennie, to deal with two American whalers who were poaching livestock. Boys apprehended them, but as they were put on trial at Port Stanley in March 1854, the 'Express' was confronted by a larger American naval vessel, the 'Germantoun', which trained its guns on the courthouse and on Boys's brig. Boys stood his ground, the trial went ahead, and a dangerous incident passed. Henderson died in July 1854, but Boys remained on the Brazil station, almost dying of yellow fever. Again in Britain in 1856 he married, and on 17 October 1857 was promoted captain. In 1863 his old shipmate Captain Robert Hall, then private secretary to the first lord of the Admiralty, secured his appointment to HMS 'Pelorus' destined for China; there he transferred into HMS 'Barrosa' and he remained on station until 1866. During his absence his parents died. In July 1867 Boys took command of HMS 'Warrior' for her second commission in the channel. In this fine ship he consolidated his reputation as an outstanding officer. He was involved in securing the queen from an alleged Fenian plot to kidnap her from the grounds of Osborne, and she visited the ship, a rare honour. In August 1868 'Warrior' and 'Royal Oak' collided, but Boys was acquitted of responsibility. The following year he commanded three ships towing a huge floating dock from Madeira to Bermuda, and manoeuvred the dock into Bermuda harbour. He was then appointed captain of the gunnery training ship 'Excellent', the most important captain's command in the service. He remained five years, with many of the future leaders of the navy serving on his staff, including John Fisher, with whom he co-operated on the early development of torpedoes. In February 1872 Boys commanded the naval brigade sent to the thanksgiving service at St Paul's Cathedral, for the recovery from typhoid of the prince of Wales, the first occasion when the navy took the place of honour on a royal ceremonial occasion. 
In May 1874 Boys followed his lifelong friend and immediate predecessor at 'Excellent', Arthur Hood, as director of naval ordnance. He was responsible for weapons during a period of rapid technical progress and applied his profound understanding of the sea and gunnery to the development of new systems. His regime, like that of Hood, was one of steady if unspectacular progress. In April 1875 he went to Malta on HMS 'Devastation', the first capital ship without sails, to report on her sea-keeping and massive 35 ton guns. Promoted rear-admiral on 30 July 1875 he worked closely with his friends, the controller Admiral Houston Stewart, the secretary Admiral Robert Hall, and the second sea lord Admiral Hood. In 1878 Boys took a sea command. Initially he commanded the Reserve Fleet, mobilized when the channel squadron went to the Mediterranean. Next he was second in command of a fleet under Admiral Cooper Key, preparing for service in the Baltic. Later he investigated the tragic explosion of a 12 inch Armstrong RML gun on the battleship 'Thunderer', establishing that the gun had been double-loaded, and ensuring the end of muzzle-loading guns in the Royal Navy. 
Boys came ashore in mid-1879, served on committees concerned with port defences and small arms, and reported on gun trials. On 1 April 1881 he became vice-admiral. After promotion to full admiral on 1 June 1885 he retired. He became a director of the Nordenfelt Gun Company and the Barrow Shipbuilding Company until they were bought by Vickers. He was twice chairman of the Royal United Services Institution, and remained a vice-president until his death. He was also a governor of the Marine Society. He remained active until his final year, and died at Blackheath on 16 March 1904. Boys was a fine seaman, a careful innovator, and an effective leader. His early career was made by his father and local political friends, but his merits ensured his continued success as a captain and admiral. He was one of the modernizers of the navy. 


@@@@@


doc= 50435


Briggs, Richard (fl. 1788), writer on cookery, was for many years at the Globe tavern, Fleet Street; the White Hart, Holborn; and the Temple Coffee House, Fleet Street, London. His book, 'The English Art of Cookery', was first published in 1788 and by 1798 it had gone into several editions in England, Ireland, and America. Its name was changed to 'The New Art of Cookery' for the subsequent American editions. 
Briggs's book was aimed at housekeepers and has been described as 'largely a plagiarisation or, more charitably, a competent revision and enlargement' of John Farley's 'The London Art of Cookery' of 1783 (Mennell, 99). However, Briggs's work reveals considerable improvements over Farley's. Cooking times, methods, and quantities of ingredients are often clarified and Briggs includes a wider range of foods -- notably fish and vegetables. Interestingly he broke new ground by including recipes for fish rarely mentioned in eighteenth-century cookery books, such as 'To Boil John-a-Dore', a simple recipe remarkably similar to one favoured by James Quin, the actor renowned for his predilection for this fish (Davidson, 81). Although the book was predominantly about English food there were none the less German, Spanish, West Indian, Italian, Dutch, French, and Jewish influences in the recipes. Some were adapted and others are identical with recipes found in Hannah Glasse's 'The Art of Cookery' (1747) and Elizabeth Raffald's 'The Experienced English Housekeeper' (1769). Both writers were major sources for 'The London Art of Cookery', and Briggs selected additional recipes not found in Farley's book. 
Little is known of Briggs, but in the preface to his book he revealed that he was 'one whose Habits of Life have been active, and not studious'. This may account for the unusual spelling of occasional words, for example 'Gou de Vou' for Godiveau, 'Peregoe' for Perigueux, and 'Hollybert' for the now obsolete hollybut (halibut), as well as 'John-a-Dore' already mentioned. 


@@@@@


doc= 50440


Dolby, Richard (fl. 1826-1833), writer on cookery, of whose early life little is known, was cook at the Thatched House tavern, St James's Street, London ('c'.1826- 'c'.1832). He was registered by the Vintners' Company as a freeman by servitude on 5 April 1826. His residence was the Thatched House tavern, which was renowned for its clubbable atmosphere and which enjoyed the patronage of the duke of Clarence, later William IV. Dolby's 'The Cook's Dictionary and Housekeeper's Directory' was published in 1830, receiving outstanding press reviews. 'It appears to contain all that the veriest gourmand in Christendom could sigh for, in a life like Methusalem's, with a throat a yard long and palate all the way' (Allibone, 'Dict.'). Two further revised editions were published in 1832 and 1833, by which time Dolby was advertised as 'Late Cook at the Thatched House Tavern'. Dolby acknowledged his dictionary owed much to others in the profession. French influences can be traced back to Antonin Careme's works as well as Louis Eustache Ude's 'The French Cook'. Dolby also made use of John Farley's 'The London Art of Cookery', Duncan Macdonald's 'The New London Family Cook', and Mrs Rundell's 'Domestic Cookery'. His 5000 recipes were necessarily very much abbreviated. 


@@@@@


doc= 50441


Escoffier, Georges Auguste (1846-1935), master chef and writer on cookery, was born on 28 October 1846 in Villeneuve-sur-Loup (later Villeneuve-Loubet), Alpes-Maritimes, 15 kilometres from Nice, the son of Jean Baptiste Escoffier (died 1909), farmer and village blacksmith. At thirteen Auguste was apprenticed to his uncle Francois Escoffier, who had opened in 1856 the Restaurant Francais in Nice which provided an international cuisine for rich winter visitors and employed a Russian chef. 
After completing his apprenticeship Escoffier was offered work in Paris by Monsieur Bardoux, owner of the fashionable summer restaurant Le Petit Moulin Rouge. Near the Champs-Elysees, the restaurant attracted the 'demi-monde' of actresses, opera singers, cocottes, and their rich patrons. During the next five years Escoffier worked his way up through the various departments to become 'chef saucier' under the direction of the 'chef de cuisine'. 
Although Escoffier had done his military service in an infantry regiment in 1867, on the declaration of war in July 1870 he was posted as 'chef de cuisine' to the headquarters of the army of the Rhine in Metz. Escoffier described his experiences in 'Memoires d'un soldat de l'armee du Rhin', published in serial form in 'La Revue de l'Art Culinaire' during 1894 and 1895. He arrived in Metz in mid-July, and took part in three weeks of campaigning, which was followed by the ten-week siege of Metz. Escoffier describes collecting a secret farmyard of animals, and stockpiling essentials. He learnt to cook horsemeat. 'On the day Metz surrendered there remained one chicken, a jar of meat extract, a tin of tunny fish and the goat, which I sold' (Herbodeau and Thalamas, 28). Escoffier was the first serious chef to investigate tinned and preserved foods. Later he told Madame Ritz that his experience in Metz gave him the first idea of the potential of tinned foods and of the dire need the world had for them (Ritz, 33). 
Following the fall of Metz, Escoffier spent six months as a prisoner of war in Germany, though after two miserable months he found a job as 'chef de cuisine' for Marshal MacMahon, from France, imprisoned in Wiesbaden with his staff. Returning to France in April 1871 Escoffier escaped the siege of Paris by taking the last train from Paris to Versailles, where he worked first in Marshal MacMahon's headquarters and then for the officers of the 17th infantry regiment. During this period he learnt from an amateur sculptor the art of making wax flowers for elaborate table decorations. He later exhibited his creations at culinary exhibitions and wrote a book on the subject. After returning to civilian life, from 1872 to 1878 he worked each winter in the south of France, and returned in spring to Le Petit Moulin Rouge as 'chef de cuisine'. Despite the military defeat, Paris life blossomed. With little formal education and although the life of a chef was physically very hard, the hours long, and the working conditions unpleasant, Escoffier interested himself in literature, theatre, and opera. His long friendship with Sarah Bernhardt dates from this period (1874). In 1876 be bought premises to set up a restaurant in Cannes; the Faisan Dore opened in 1879, but was then let. Instead, on his marriage in 1878 to Delphine Daphis (died 1935), the daughter of Paul Daphis, a Paris publisher, Escoffier took a position as manager for La Maison Chevet, a famous catering firm in the Palais Royal, with a large government and international clientele. 
From 1884 Escoffier began writing for the professional journal 'La Revue de l'Art Culinaire'. He also wrote with his wife 'Traite sur l'art de travailler les fleurs en cire' (1885). A new career and a historic partnership began when Escoffier was asked by Cesar Ritz in 1884 to manage the kitchens of his recently opened Grand Hotel in Monte Carlo. Ritz brought new ideas to hotel construction, furnishings, and staff organization and deportment, and Escoffier applied to kitchen management some of the same flair for innovation and quality that Ritz evolved for hotels. 
The Grand Hotel had 250 rooms, a shopping arcade, electricity from its own steam engine, a 'cafe anglais', a separate restaurant in a Moorish style in the gardens, and a smoking room. Ritz realized that only first-class cooking would attract and keep the best clientele, and Escoffier took on the challenge of providing high-quality food throughout the day and night for large numbers, yet also providing elaborate gourmet meals for special customers. One long-lasting legacy was the 'prix fixe', a set menu devised to guide the inexperienced through the French 'haute cuisine'. 
Escoffier recruited and trained teams of chefs to work in Monaco in winter and at the Grand National Hotel in Lucerne, Europe's premier hotel, in summer; meanwhile Ritz engaged teams of specialists in wine, in waiting, and in other aspects of hotel management. They were so successful that in 1890 Ritz was approached by Richard D'Oyley Carte, the opera producer, who had expanded into property development in London and built a modern hotel, next to his theatre, the Savoy. It had opened in 1889 but lost money. Ritz put together a 'little army of hotel men for the conquest of London' (Ritz, 143); Escoffier reorganized the kitchen to provide a suitable working environment for sixty to eighty chefs and found new French staff, and the reopened Savoy Hotel was an immediate and lasting success. Led by the prince of Wales it became the meeting place for London high society and the 'nouveaux riches' of the British empire. Madame Ritz, who was involved, described how the food and the ambience lured people from the clubs to dine in public and give great parties there. It allowed ladies, hitherto fearful of dining in public, to be seen in full regalia in the Savoy dining and supper rooms. 
Ritz's contract allowed his team to take on freelance work for six months of the year, and they organized hotels all over Europe. Escoffier did not move his home to London -- Madame Escoffier and their three children remained in Monte Carlo. In 1886 Ritz formed the Ritz Hotel Development Company, of which Escoffier and his other managers became directors. However, such activities led to Ritz and Escoffier being dismissed from the Savoy in 1897. The Ritz team threatened to sue for wrongful dismissal: the Savoy's lawyers and accountants built up a counter case against them of financial mismanagement and fraud. After several years the dispute was settled, with Ritz and Escoffier repaying some money to the Savoy. In 1887, employed by the Ritz Company, Escoffier went to Paris to design the kitchens and recruit the chefs for the first Ritz Hotel, in the place Vendome. Escoffier then returned to London to organize the new Carlton Hotel. From its opening it attracted much of the Savoy's clientele, including the prince of Wales and the Marlborough House set. It paid out a dividend of 7 per cent in its first year to its influential financial and aristocratic backers, and for many years it was considered the finest hotel in London. At the Carlton in 1902, on the night that King Edward VII's coronation was cancelled, Cesar Ritz suffered a nervous breakdown, from which he did not recover. 
Escoffier now took over from Ritz as the figurehead of the Carlton and became an international celebrity in his own right, the leading chef of his time, continuing to design kitchens and to tackle such challenges as catering for the new ocean-liners. He continued as a director of the company and manager of the kitchens of the Carlton throughout the difficult war years, coping with both food and labour shortages. Both his sons were in the French army, and his second son was killed in November 1914. For his work in promoting France through its cuisine during these years President Poincare personally presented him with the cross of the Legion d'honneur in 1919. Escoffier retired in 1920. 
In his menus, his cooking, and his writing, Escoffier was the leading exponent of the idea that 'haute cuisine' should also be light and healthy. He advocated simplicity, and the banquet style with displays of ornate foods in heavy, rich sauces and indigestible garnishes gave way to dishes cooked for the individual. He insisted that a sense of occasion and luxury should come from flowers, fine china and glass, and specially designed serving dishes and containers (including sculpted ice). In his kitchens he combined the new and the traditional. Modern electric lighting was arranged over stoves and preparation tables to give clear, bright light. Surfaces were designed for high standards of cleanliness. Yet despite the advent of gas and electric cookers, Escoffier continued to rely on natural heat, and flames produced by burning wood and coke. His preferred utensils continued to be of iron and copper. 
Escoffier was a devout Catholic, and left-over food from his London kitchens was given to local French nuns for the poor. Physically very small (he always needed specially raised clogs to cook in), and temperamentally reserved, Escoffier worked to improve the morale and working conditions of his chefs and campaigned against the brutality, bad language, and alcoholism endemic in a stressful trade (he provided lemon barley-water in great quantities to cut down alcohol consumption). He encouraged his chefs to dress well and to improve their education. He was involved in setting up educational courses for more formal professional training, including that at the Westminster Technical College. His hotels provided good quarters for staff. Concerned about the long-term insecurity of catering employees, in 1903 he helped to found the Association Culinaire Francaise de Secours Mutuel. 
Escoffier was not good with finance but his talents for organization played an important role in his success. He personally visited his suppliers, commissioned new goods, and sought out new foods. He once described his role in organizing the growing of English-style green asparagus in the 1890s in Lauris in France: he went to the region and personally persuaded the reluctant growers to change their methods, which resulted in improved supply and lower prices in London. In addition, Escoffier and his elder son pioneered the manufacture of gourmet tinned and bottled foods and sauces. 
Chefs trained by Escoffier spread his practices of cosmopolitan cuisine throughout the world. However, it was through his writing that Escoffier promoted his ideas, recipes, and practices, and he left a lasting legacy. He rethought the traditional recipes and techniques of French cuisine and described them with a new precision, allowing for experimentation, especially in refining and lightening the essential sauces. In addition he incorporated recipes from other European traditions. In 1903 'Le guide culinaire' was published and became an immediate success. It has gone through numerous editions. In 1912 Escoffier published 'Le livre des menus', a book on kitchen organization and menu preparation based on his work at the Savoy and Carlton hotels. Between 1911 and 1914 he published in London the monthly magazine 'Le Carnet d'Epicure'. After retiring he wrote 'Ma cuisine, traite de cuisine familiale' (1934) for cooks in private houses. 
After an active retirement, not wealthy but much honoured, Escoffier died on 12 February 1935 at 8 bis avenue de la Costa, Monte Carlo, Monaco; his wife died three weeks earlier, in January of the same year. He was buried at Villeneuve-Loubet, where the Escoffier family house later became the Musee de l'Art Culinaire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50442


Farley, John (1755/6-1827), cook and writer on cookery, is a figure about whom little is known apart from his highly successful book, 'The London Art of Cookery' published in 1783; it went into twelve editions by 1811. It includes a handsome and youthful likeness of Farley. 
Farley's name first appears on 6 May 1778, when the Vintners' Company registered his name as a freeman by servitude. He is listed in the company's records as a servant at the London tavern in Bishopsgate, London, but by 1783 he was described by his publishers as principal cook there. Although a freeman of the Vintners' Company, Farley was also known to the Cooks' Company, as an undated cryptic note found in the Cooks' Company records reveals: 'a Cook he works at the London Tavern... employed there sometime, Roast and Boil'd, he has made a Ragout, Receiving Wages for it, Paid as a servant' (Cooks' Company MSS). 
Farley's claim to fame has rested solely on his cookery book, although this is now known to be the work of a hack writer, Richard Johnson. Ninety per cent of 'The London Art of Cookery' was compiled from the two culinary best-sellers of the eighteenth century, without ever acknowledging his female sources. These were Hannah Glasse's 'The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy' (first published 1747) and Elizabeth Raffald's 'The Experienced English Housekeeper' (first published 1769). The remaining 10 per cent of Farley's book came from several other eighteenth-century cookery books. Copyright laws did not cover the field at that time and other contemporary cookery writers borrowed material. Johnson appears not only to have used two-thirds of Glasse's book and half of Raffald's to compile Farley's book, but his copying technique involved changing the first and last lines of each recipe without seemingly improving the original text to any marked degree. His selection of excellent and often workable recipes, however, may well account for the book's popularity. 
The year following publication of 'The London Art of Cookery', on 7 April 1784, Farley paid the required fine of $26 5's'. to become a member of the livery of the Vintners' Company. In 1792 he was still listed in the company's records as being cook at the London tavern. In April 1808 he became a member of the court of assistants of the Vintners' Company at a fine of $50 and on 8 June 1819 he achieved the honour of being elected master. As master of one of the twelve superior companies of the City he was invited to assist the chief butler of England on the day of George IV's coronation. Farley's last recorded attendance at the court of assistants was on 13 April 1824. He died at his home in Clapham Common on 25 November 1827. Farley was presumably married; his son Thomas joined the Vintners' Company on 4 October 1809. 


@@@@@


doc= 50443


Cellach mac Maele Coba (d. 658), joint high-king of Ireland, belonged to Cenel Conaill, the branch of the Ui Neill settled in what is now Donegal. His mother may have been Croinsech, daughter of Aed Find, king of Osraige, and he may have been married to Dathnat (or Domnait). Cellach appears to have been joint ruler of Cenel Conaill with his brother Conall Coel mac Maele Coba (d. 654) from the death of their uncle, Domnall mac Aeda, in 642. The brothers' authority over Cenel Conaill was challenged by their first cousin, Oengus mac Domnaill, but they defeated and killed him in 650. Their status as high-kings of Ireland was accepted by the main twelfth-century regnal lists but not in the late seventh-century text 'Baile Chuinn' ('The frenzy of Conn'), a regnal list of Tara (the formal title of the high-kings) in the form of a prophecy. The silence of this source is, however, far from conclusive, since it was composed during the reign of Finsnechtae Fledach ('r'. 675-95); he belonged to the Ui Neill of Brega and 'Baile Chuinn' is notably hostile to the claims of the rival Cenel Conaill. 
The chronicle of Ireland (the 'common stock' of the annals of Ulster, annals of Tigernach, and 'Chronicum Scotorum') was uncertain about this period, for it notes under 643: 'Here there is doubt as to who reigned after Domnall. Some historiographers say that four kings, namely Cellach and Conall Coel and the two sons of Aed Slaine, namely Diarmait and Blathmac [Blaimac], ruled in shared reigns' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a.). 
At least broadly this may be accurate: these were the allies of Domnall mac Aeda in his great victory at Mag Roth in 637 and would be the natural heirs of his power after his peaceful death in 642. Diarmait mac Aeda Slaine was clearly the most active ruler in the midlands, winning a major battle against Guaire Aidne of the Connachta and his Munster allies in 649. The probability, therefore, is that, whatever the titular succession to the kingship of Tara, effective authority was shared between Cenel Conaill, led by the brothers Cellach and Conall Coel, and Sil nAeda Slaine (the Ui Neill of Brega), also led by two brothers, Diarmait and Blaimac (or Blathmac). Indeed, the alliance between these two branches of the Ui Neill, at opposite ends of the crescent of Ui Neill kingdoms stretching across the northern half of Ireland from the River Liffey to Donegal, dominated most of the seventh century. 
Conall Coel was killed in 654, probably by Diarmait mac Aeda Slaine; from then until his own death in 658 Cellach seems to have reigned alone. According to one set of annals, Cellach's death took place at Brug na Boinne, the Neolithic passage grave at Newgrange on the Boyne (Meath). 


@@@@@


doc= 50444


Fortnum, Charles (1738-1815), royal servant and grocer, is presumed to be the son of William Fortnum, of Berkeley Street, Portman Square, London. He had a brother and a sister. His grandfather William Fortnum is said to have become a footman to Queen Anne in 1707, although the name is absent from the records of the lord steward's department. About the same time, William Fortnum senior had reportedly founded a grocery business in Duke Street, London, jointly with his landlord, 
In August 1761 Charles Fortnum, then aged twenty-three, became footman to Sophie Charlotte, princess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, shortly before her marriage to George III. The meagre salary of 40 guineas a year was amply supplemented by perquisites. Thus while his grandfather (so it was said) had been entitled to candle ends and any left unburned in candlesticks, Fortnum was allowed to help himself to coal, house linen, food, and wine. No doubt he succeeded in combining his duties with the running of the grocery because he worked at the former every alternate fortnight. In 1767 -- on 26 December, after the last Christmas hamper had been sent on its way -- he married, at St James's Church, Westminster, Mary (1738-1805), daughter of Edward and Mary Monday, of Wendover, Buckinghamshire. Two sons and a daughter survived him. 
Fortnum's work at court helped him to build up an extensive clientele of wealthy and influential customers of his 'celebrated Italian warehouse'. In addition to Italian goods such as fruit and olive oil the shop sold tea, coffee, and spices, most being imported through the agency of some Fortnum cousins employed in the East India Company. It was also famous for delicacies such as portions of poultry and game in aspic jelly, Scotch eggs, mince pies, fresh fruit in season, and dried fruits during the rest of the year. Goods were always dispatched in attractive hampers, baskets, and boxes; as a slightly later advertisement put it, 'Owing to the handsome packages, the above are particularly adapted for presents' ('The Times', 30 Dec 1817). 
During the fraught period of George III's so-called madness, at the turn of the year 1788-9 Fortnum is reported to have begged to resign owing to ill health, and also to allow him to concentrate on his grocery business. At that time the current Mason in the firm, John, who later became a partner, was only eighteen. Fortnum's wish to resign was mentioned in her journal by Mrs Charlotte Papendiek, wife of a colleague at court. The dramatist Alan Bennett used Fortnum as a character in his play 'The Madness of George III' (1992), the subsequent film version showing him, quite ahistorically, sweeping out in anger at having to carry chamber pots containing the royal purple-tinged water. 
In reality, his service in the queen's household remained unbroken for the rest of his life. In 1805 his wife died, but he did not marry again. Two years later, designated as 'Mr Charles Fortnum', he was appointed a page of the queen's presence chamber, the annual salary being slightly lower at $40. He handed over his 75 per cent share of the grocery to his second son, Richard, then aged twenty-seven, John Mason owning the other 25 per cent. The 'Court and City Register' shows him, from 1810 onwards, as the queen's groom of the privy chamber, perhaps an honorary post to give him additional status. 
The Napoleonic wars, especially after the opening of the peninsular campaign in 1808, yielded much business to the grocery, which was kept busy in sending foodstuffs to army officers and civilian officials overseas. The younger Fortnum and Mason worked hard to expand the firm, and about 1811 rebuilt the premises at 181-3 Piccadilly, the design being copied from a mansion in Padua. Still in the queen's service, Charles Fortnum died early in 1815. His salary ceased on 5 April, and two days later his will was proved. He described himself as of St Giles parish, Reading, but the rate books mention only a Joseph Fortnum, and he was not buried in the town. 


@@@@@


doc= 50445


Fothergill, John Rowland (1876-1957), innkeeper and author, was born on 27 February 1876 at Kennington, Ashford, Kent, the only son of George Fothergill and his wife, Isabel Eliza ('nee' Crawshay). He had two sisters. His mother died when he was two days old, and George Fothergill subsequently remarried; there was a son by this second marriage. The Fothergills were a long-established Lakeland gentry family, claiming descent from a Norman baron, and his father was both remote and stern. At the age of eleven Fothergill was sent to Old College in Windermere and endured much humiliation and beating. A year later he entered Bath College and in 1895 went up to St John's College, Oxford, where he stayed only one term, as he failed the preliminary examinations. 
It would be fair to describe Fothergill during the next twenty-six years of his life as a dilettante. At Bath College, already a romantically handsome youth, he had some early initiation into homosexuality. As an undergraduate he met Oscar Wilde, and he was to become an intimate of Wilde both before his trial and later in France after Wilde had served his sentence. Fothergill was also closely associated with Robert Ross for a number of years. 
After leaving Oxford Fothergill drifted for a number of years without a real vocation though, with the assistance of William Rothenstein, he opened the Carfax Gallery in Oxford in 1898. During a tour of European museums he was impressed by Greek antiquities and 'decided to learn about Greek art and to live it' (Sox, 145). At about this time Fothergill had an affair with a rich young American, Beatrice Romaine Goddard. Torn between homosexual and heterosexual attachments, Fothergill joined Edward Perry Warren's unusual group of bachelor aesthetes known as the Lewes House Brotherhood. He helped collect antiquities for the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, and continued his studies in classical archaeology. Eventually leaving this milieu, Fothergill studied at Leipzig, and then at the Slade School (1905-6), and was drawn into the circle surrounding Augustus John. During this time he was briefly married to Doris Elsa Henning. 
In 1922 Fothergill abandoned the life of a dilettante and scholar. Much to the astonishment of those close to him, and at the age of forty-six, he acquired The Spreadeagle in Thame, Oxfordshire, and found his vocation. Also in 1922 he embarked on a lasting and transparently happy marriage to Kate Headley Kirby, who contributed enormously to the running of The Spreadeagle; they had two sons. In his most successful book, 'An Innkeeper's Diary', Fothergill wrote cryptically that his background and previous work disqualified him from any of the usual jobs: 'I found that I must do something for a living, so I was compelled to take an inn' (Fothergill, 'Diary', 1). 
Fothergill described himself in 'Who's Who' as an 'amateur pioneer innkeeper'. Before the Second World War innkeeping was an outre occupation for someone of his background, yet, virtually single-handedly, he made the profession of innkeeping smart as well as respectable. In its heyday during the latter part of the twenties, The Spreadeagle became a haunt for the literary and artistic world, as well as for Oxford dons and well-connected undergraduates. Its patrons included writers such as G. B. Shaw, H. G. Wells, Evelyn Waugh, the Sitwells, and G. K. Chesterton, artists such as Augustus John and Paul Nash, and actors and actresses. Even heads of state such as Field Marshal Smuts were numbered among the guests. 
Fothergill possessed many (though by no means all) of the essential attributes of an outstanding innkeeper: he was an excellent chef, a connoisseur of wine (though he drank very little himself), an early campaigner for 'real food', and cared passionately about the quality of the furnishings. Foodstuffs were regularly ordered from Athens, France, Norway, Jaffa, and Italy, and he also sought out the best local produce. Three local bakers produced 'three different kinds of bread made from flours that I have forced upon them, besides the breads we make ourselves', and there was 'cheese from East Harptree, salt from Malden, mustard from Leighton Buzzard' (Fothergill, 'Diary', 170). 
Yet the success of Fothergill's enterprise depended first and foremost on his intriguing, volatile, and provocative personality. He had a clear idea of the kind of clientele he wished to attract, and those whom he cherished felt honoured to be sharing his company. He had little compunction in showing the door to the wrong sort. 'I've determined', Fothergill wrote in his diary, 'not only to have proper and properly cooked food but to have only either intelligent, beautiful or well-bred people to eat it' ('The Times', 29 Aug 1957). H. G. Wells described Fothergill as 'a fantastic innkeeper... dressed in the suit of bottle-green cloth, with brass buttons and buckled shoes' (Sox, 161). Harold Acton concurred that: 'for a quiet dinner there was no alternative but to drive to Thame. At John Fothergill's... one could be sure of good food and better wine in congenial surroundings with a host whose affability and erudition revived a more liberal age. (ibid., 161)' Fothergill was an irresistible raconteur, but if he had lacked the art of telling stories in print it is unlikely that he would still be remembered today. Fortunately, he was persuaded to write 'An Innkeeper's Diary', which was an instant best-seller when it was first published in 1931 and has been reprinted many times since as well as being dramatized for both television and radio. Like Flora Thompson's 'Lark Rise to Candleford' it recalls with uncommon vividness the feel of Oxfordshire life in a former era; both writers convey the moral values that prevailed at their time and in their own social class. 
The 'Diary' presents an image of its author as irascible, gratuitously offensive, and an outrageous snob. He would refuse to accept guests because he disliked their notepaper or their letter-writing style. On one occasion, he recounts having charged a party who had come in for tea an extra 6died per head because they were ill-shaped, ugly or ill-dressed -- 'surely this was a more praiseworthy action than the usual one of charging people extra because they 'are' beautiful, well-bred and dressed' (Fothergill, 'Diary', 27). He particularly detested those who came in off the streets and tried to use his lavatories without asking. He would accost these interlopers and demand their addresses -- 'in case I need a pumpship when I'm passing your home' (private information). 
Ten years at The Spreadeagle brought Fothergill fame but scarcely fortune. He was a poor businessman, and book royalties could not compensate for hotel losses. He was forced to sell, spent an unsuccessful year at a hotel in Ascot, and in 1934 acquired the Three Swans in Market Harborough, where he stayed until 1952. Fothergill died at St Luke's Hospital, Rugby, on 26 August 1957. While at Market Harborough he had published two more volumes of reminiscences, 'Confessions of an Innkeeper' in 1938 and 'My Three Inns' in 1949, but neither had the bite and raciness of 'An Innkeeper's Diary'. It surpassed them as his best book, a minor classic in the annals of innkeeping. 


@@@@@


doc= 50446


Sacleux, Charles Joseph (1856-1943), Swahili scholar and missionary, was born on 5 July 1856 at Enquin, Pas-de-Calais, France, the second of three children, all sons, of Auguste Sacleux, a tobacconist, and his wife Marie Firmine Bayart. His father died when he was five and it was his widowed mother who had the responsibility of bringing up the family. In 1869 he entered the junior seminary at Arras, and in 1874 he spent a year in the senior seminary. The following year he joined the Holy Ghost Fathers and was ordained priest in 1878 and made his profession in 1879, when he left for Zanzibar where his community had their east African headquarters. In due course he was posted to Bagamoyo, then an important coastal town. It was there that he began to study Swahili, the language of Swahililand, already the lingua franca for much of the east African interior and soon the chief local language of British administration. Altogether he was to spend nearly twenty years on the east African coast, devoting a great deal of his time to the Swahili language and to botany. 
As a savant of exceptional ability (he was elected to membership of the Societe Linguistique de Paris in 1894) Sacleux was fortunate to have studied Swahili before it was influenced by standardization and, later, by English language patterns. Two of his publications are outstanding: his 'Grammaire des dialectes swahilis' (1909), still the best one-volume study of the Swahili dialects, and his 'chef-d'oeuvre', 'Dictionnaire swahili-francais' (1939), which immediately became, and is likely to remain, the definitive Swahili lexicon. 
Sacleux returned to France in 1898, and for the next forty years taught in the community's mother house at Chevilly. Just before the German occupation of Paris he was (with others) evacuated to Cellule and thence to Grasse, on the Cote d'Azur, where he died on 16 May 1943 and was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 50448


Harrod, Charles Digby (1841-1905), grocer and tea dealer, was born on 25 January 1841 at 4 Cable Street, Whitechapel, second child and eldest son of Charles Henry Harrod (1799-1885), grocer and tea dealer, and his wife, Elizabeth Digby (1810-1860). He left school at sixteen, was apprenticed to a City grocer, and trained as a commercial clerk. 
In 1861 Harrod purchased the family grocery shop (8 Middle Queen's Buildings, later 105 Brompton Road) from his father. Brompton Road was being redeveloped and wealthier people were moving into the district, enabling Harrod to build up a good counter trade, repaying his father's sale price within three years. He developed a substantial business which ultimately became Harrods Ltd. 
On 25 March 1864 Harrod married Caroline (1841?-1922), daughter of James Godsmark, grocer, of 4 Percy Terrace, Gloucester Grove West; they had seven daughters and one son. Harrod was a kindly man, very firm about honesty and punctuality. A devoted Anglican and family man, after retirement he maintained an involvement with children through Sunday schools, even giving parties for children from all denominations at his home. Grandchildren recollected happy times in the close family circle. Harrod's younger brother Henry worked with him in the early 1860s, moving to Old Compton Street with his father in 1866. 
Unlike most grocers, who allowed extended credit to households (even bribing servants to patronize their shops), Harrod advertised his goods for cash (with free delivery), at a very low margin of profit. This risky strategy worked and he competed successfully with the co-operative stores. People were curious after seeing the advertisements, came, appreciated the quality of the goods, purchased, and returned. As business expanded, more commercial space was needed and a first step was for the family to move from the house. Then Harrod roofed over the garden of 105 Brompton Road, acquired numbers 101 and 103, and, in 1883, a large block of land behind them. Continuous rebuilding increased the premises. By 1883 there were six departments, selling food and household items, staffed by 200 assistants. 
On 6 December 1883 the shop caught fire, destroying everything, including packed Christmas orders. The purchase of new goods, repacking, and delivery began immediately. Harrod was determined that everyone should be supplied for Christmas. The press wrote admiringly, the public in turn were impressed by their reports, and bumper Christmas trade resulted from the publicity. Harrod provided a staff member, taken ill rescuing some accounting books from the fire, with invalid fare until he recovered. Trade continued from premises nearby until the grand new Brompton Road store opened in September 1884. 
Although not teetotal, Harrod would not seal a business deal with a drink or accept gifts from business associates. He personally interviewed staff, and paid a half sovereign to each going on holiday. Latecomers were fined but, unusually, he would pay overtime. Harrod presided over an annual dinner for staff on the premises. The quality of staff played an essential part in the success of the business, as did Harrod's hard work and integrity. 
According to Amy Menzies, many customers asked to be served personally by Harrod, described as a 'good looking young man' serving behind the counter and 'most obliging' (Menzies, 55). In addition he was known occasionally to help customers in dire straits, charging their orders to his account. As the store became fashionable his customers ranked from 'the Peer to the peasant', and Harrods traded worldwide ('Local industries', 4). 
In his final years Harrod suffered from arteriosclerosis and retired, in poor health, in 1889. He sold the firm for cash to the newly floated Harrods Stores Ltd, recognizing he would not retire completely if he retained any interest. However the Harrod name was retained by the new firm in recognition of the quality of his business. On retirement, Harrod became involved in politics in Somerset, where he also served as a JP; and then after moving to Sussex in 1902 he was elected a Liberal member of the Sussex county council. While living at Culverwood, a house he purchased at Cross in Hand, Sussex, Harrod served as chairman of the local schools attendance council. Harrod died on 15 August 1905 at the Grosvenor Hotel, London, and was buried on 19 August at Waldron parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 50449


Hartley, Dorothy Rosaman (1893-1985), historian, was born on 4 October 1893 at the grammar school, Skipton, Yorkshire, the youngest of the three children of the Revd Edward Tomson Hartley (1849-1923) and his wife, Amy Lucy Eddy (1853-1932). The Revd Hartley was headmaster of the grammar school; his wife came from Froncysylltau, near Llangollen in north Wales, where the family owned quarries and property. Dorothy was educated at a convent in Skipton until 1904, when her father retired through failing sight and became rector of a country parish at Rempstone, Nottinghamshire. She then went to Loughborough high school and afterwards to Nottingham Art School. Her education was interrupted by the First World War, when she worked in a munitions factory, but in 1919 she entered the Regent Street Polytechnic in London where she was a prize pupil; she returned to Nottingham Art School as a teacher in 1920-22 and subsequently taught in London. 
During this period Dorothy Hartley began writing. Batsford published her six-volume 'Life and Work of the Peoples of England', written with M. M. V. Elliot, between 1925 and 1931, and in 1930 Knopf published the 'Old Book', a medieval compilation. She had a restless curiosity, and in her 1931 book, 'Medieval Costume and Life', not only recreated the clothes of peasants depicted in old manuscripts, but used pictures of herself wearing them. She temporarily abandoned English rural life in 1931 to travel by car from Cairo to the Congo, and the photographs which she took on her journey were exhibited at the Imperial Institute. 
Between 1932 and 1936 Dorothy Hartley toured the British Isles by bicycle and car, with pen, pencil, and camera, writing weekly articles for the 'Daily Sketch' on country people and their trades. Her articles covered such themes as horse-ploughing, bread making, and clog making. They used the calendar months as their basis, and were strongly influenced by the sixteenth-century agricultural writer and poet Thomas Tusser. Dorothy Hartley was a keen photographer, developing and printing her own photographs. The material gleaned on these travels went into her many other books and articles, which eventually covered many aspects and periods of English rural life. Medieval culture always held a particular fascination for her and she toured Ireland in the footsteps of the twelfth-century prelate Gerald of Wales. This led to her book 'An Irish Holiday' (1938). 
In 1933 Dorothy Hartley made her home in a cottage at Froncysylltau and this estate remained her base thereafter. Yet, despite her long residence in Wales, and apart from one book on her Irish journey, she dealt only with English life. During the Second World War she contributed to the publications of the United Nations and began work on the book for which she is probably best known, 'Food in England' (1954), a treasury of information on the gathering, storing, and cooking of food from the twelfth to the twentieth centuries. The clarity and detail of text and her charming illustrations made it accessible to a wide public. 
In the post-war years she also taught at University College and Goldsmiths' College in London, performed on television with Philip Harben, and advised on the BBC 'Archers' programmes. In between these professional activities she juggled with the maintenance of her house in Froncysylltau and its six cottages which were occupied by a constant stream of tenants and visitors. In 1964 she published a major book, 'Water in England'. This remarkable work is full of valuable information on all manner of related phenomena such as holy springs, well digging, leather jugs, spa hotels, and suchlike. 
Dorothy Hartley never married; living alone and in a remote place and coming from a generation more accustomed to communicate by the pen than by telephone, letters became her principal form of contact with the wider world. Much of her thought and writing was engaged with the minute details of the relationship between an object and its function -- the scythe to the height of wheat cut, the exact width of a linen sheet to the dimensions of the linen press. Part of the great strength of her major books lay not only in her own very exact, decorative yet diagrammatic explanatory drawings, but in the ways these were allied to her text. Her own collections of documents and illustrations of early agricultural life led ultimately to a monumental photographic bequest to the Reading Museum of English Rural Life, reflecting the pleasure that she had from her correspondence with the keeper and her visits to the centre, from its pre-war conception to her death. Dorothy Hartley died from cancer at Fron House, Froncysylltau, on 22 October 1985. 
During her lifetime Dorothy Hartley acquired an unrivalled knowledge of the life, work, and food of people living in England since medieval times. She proceeded to document this field through her writings, drawings, and photographs. In a number of books, which have become minor classics, Hartley produced some of the most absorbing and readable accounts of the history and folklore of country life and food ever published. Arguably her best work, and the one for which she will be remembered, is 'Food in England'. This book has continued to be republished, and is as full of magic and potions as any medieval herbal. 


@@@@@


doc= 50450


Heath, Ambrose (1891-1969), writer on cookery and journalist, was born Francis Geoffrey Miller (the second forename was later changed to Gerald) on 7 February 1891 at 16 Broadhurst Gardens, Hampstead, London, the son of Francis Miller (1866-1935), electrical engineer, and his wife, Rose Margaret Bockett. Possibly because his parents thought journalism an unrespectable career, he became known as Ambrose Heath professionally. The decision not to use his real name was taken, he told an interviewer in 1966, because his father was a gentleman. It is hard to believe that he changed his name (and he seems to have used the name Ambrose Heath in most of his dealings; it was not a mere 'nom de plume') because his parents disapproved of the subject of his writing; but he went on to say that 'my parents were supremely uninterested in food' (Bateman, 167). 
Heath enjoyed his schooldays at Clifton College (1905-9), 'though I was what you might call -- unorthodox... They didn't know what to do with me. I didn't like the formality of ordinary education. I was interested in special things' (Bateman, 167). He spent a lot of time in the company of the masters, but failed the scholarship examination for Christ Church, Oxford. When his father's connections failed to secure him a place in publishing, he escaped to Newlyn, Cornwall, where his father made him an annual allowance of $150 for four years, and he wrote a novel and a children's book, both of which he destroyed. For a time he worked for the Hudson's Bay Company, then in the India Office. He spoke fondly of frequenting Marcel Boulestin's restaurant in the 1920s and 1930s, and in 1933 was a co-founder of the Wine and Food Society, but he had a quarrel with the then secretary and resigned. His journalism began with the 'casual pieces' he submitted to 'The Times', the 'News Chronicle', the 'Manchester Guardian', and the 'Yorkshire Post'; and he finally became cookery correspondent for the 'Morning Post'. 
Heath was prodigiously productive; he wrote his first four cookery books in 1933, and had added another eleven by the time the Second World War started, including 'Madame Prunier's Fish Cookery Book' (1938), a translation, for which he was best-known. During the war he drew the 'Patsy cookstrip' for the 'Daily Mirror', and should be given the credit for inventing the genre. He also drew the 'Daily Mirror's' Saturday gardening strip, 'Digwell', which was still appearing in the late 1960s, though most of the staff of the newspaper did not know the identity of the artist. 
Heath wrote more than 100 cookery books. Many of them contained the word 'good' in their titles: 'good food' obviously, but also 'good' potato dishes, savouries, soups, sweets, and ices, to name but a few. They provided directions for cooking almost every conceivable foodstuff, from squirrels -- 'the recipe does not sound very convincing to me' (Bateman, 201) -- to turtle. About the latter he wrote that 'it is not likely that private houses or indeed many establishments will ever want, or be in a position to make turtle soup, but, for the curious, here are details of the way to make it,' starting with a hair-raising passage detailing 'the slaughtering of the turtle' (ibid., 202). He was a very thorough researcher: in a piece he called 'Country dishes', written during the Second World War, he catalogues the eating properties of various birds 'of edible size', common and uncommon, beginning with 'coot: as inedible, I understand, as it appears to be', and ending with a recipe for sparrows (ibid., 200). His other wartime recipes, in such books as 'The Good Cook in Wartime' and 'From the Kitchen Front', were more homely, however. His writing was graceful, with an old-fashioned turn of phrase, but with an occasional shaft of self-mockery or irony that makes it enjoyable to read. 
Heath was not a very good businessman, and in the 1960s was earning only $1000 a year, surprising for an author with so many titles to his credit. He said that he had sold the copyright in his books for $50 each, with no royalties. Near the end of his life he seemed a little bitter about his poor pay, aware that other cookery writers were getting much larger payments for their books and journalism. He was sacked from 'Queen' magazine when he was already elderly, which meant a loss of $900 a year. Aware that copyright in recipes is a difficult matter, he complained that people stole his recipes, but admitted, 'I steal from Escoffier' (Bateman, 173). He had some ambivalence about his subject, and said with reference to a wartime recipe for cod's head soup: 'What I write is dull, very dull. But I don't write dully' (ibid., 170). 
Heath's later years were spent at Grange Cottage, Holmbury St Mary, an idyllic house near Dorking -- 'It's like Walt Disney, isn't it?' (Bateman 170) -- with an Aga cooker, and a flower garden but no vegetable garden. He made his own elderberry and other fruit wines. His much younger wife, Violet May, who survived him, called him Loo, and he called her Pooh. They had a daughter, Susan. Heath died at his final home, Pratsham Grange Cottage, Wotton, Surrey, on 31 May 1969. 


@@@@@


doc= 50452


Hill, Benson Earle (bap. 1790?, d. 1845), soldier and writer, was born in Bristol and was probably the Benson Hill who was baptized at St Michael's, Bristol, on 18 August 1790, the son of William Hill and his wife, Isabel. He was educated at Dr Watson's school, Shooters Hill, and at the military colleges of Marlow and Woolwich. At the age of fourteen he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Regiment of Artillery. He was appointed first lieutenant on 17 March 1812, and served until 1822. 
Hill was passionately stage-struck and tried to make a second career in the theatre. However, he never managed to gain more than a precarious foothold there, and the rest of his life was spent in struggle as he tried his luck with varying degrees of failure as actor, writer, journalist, and editor. He was extremely well-travelled, as the army had taken him to Ireland, North America, and Europe, and pursuit of an acting career hurried him through the length and breadth of the British Isles. Journalism finally led him to the fringe of London's literary establishment. From 1837 to 1841 he was sub-editor of the 'New Monthly Magazine', under the editorship of Theodore Hook. Every experience brought adventure; none brought financial reward. 
Hill's publications included an account of his military service, 'Recollections of an Artillery Officer' (1836), as well as a book of anecdotes about snuff taking (1840). One of his last works, and the one for which he is remembered, was 'The Epicure's Almanac', published in London in 1841, which reflected the varied nature of his life. The title echoed that of the French 'Almanach des gourmands' and its English imitators, which surveyed the restaurant scene in Paris and London in the early years of the century. Although Hill hoped to link his venture to the popularity of these forebears, his own book was addressed to a different reader, not the man who dined out, but the one who dined in, and it offered a new recipe for every day of the year 'to those who study genteel economy'. Appearing in the decade which saw the first published work by Alexis Soyer and Eliza Acton, 'The Epicure's Almanac' was refreshingly original in its choice of ingredients, reflecting the cosmopolitan background and persistent insolvency of its author. The book offers many ingenious suggestions for impecunious chefs, and includes a recommendation for boiled nettles and cider with bicarbonate of soda, as a poor man's champagne. 
Just as poverty forced improvisation, so military service broadened horizons: ingredients, and instructions for their preparation, were drawn from many countries. Tours of duty had placed Hill in New Orleans and Brussels, Killarney and Mons; and the inclusion of coconut, chutneys, and kebabs hint at the ripening British love affair with India and the East, as well as the service of fellow officers there. Enthusiastic recipes for punch point to the power and popularity of the West Indies sugar trade. An interest, early for England, in the cooked tomato may have been stimulated by his time in America. The French way with a caper is noted with approval. 
Hill's pages are studded with British regional delicacies, from Cheshire pork pie to the north Wiltshire cheese, and tribute is paid by name to such hospitable tavern keepers as a Mr Reilly of the York-House, Bath, and a Mr Burnham of the Montague tavern, Bristol. In addition, Hill's good sense and gusto give the book a special savour: attention is paid to method and light-hearted titles add lustre to left-overs, as in the delightfully named 'Patrician bubble and squeak'. Cooking and eating are presented as serious entertainments, worthy of consideration by the enterprising. 
Hill lived for many years with a sister, who died of consumption in 1842. On 27 February 1843 he married Mary Ann Goulding, with whom he had a daughter. Like his sister he succumbed to consumption and died on 30 August 1845 at 2 Salisbury Street, London, in 'an obscure abode, in penury and distress' ('GM', 543), aged fifty-five, after catching a cold while engaged as that most threadbare of performers, an actor on call for last-minute work, at the Lyceum Theatre. He was buried in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50454


Kidder, Edward (1665/6-1739), cookery teacher and writer, taught cookery in London between about 1720 and 1734, but little else about his life is known. The evidence for his activities is confined mostly to his one published work, the 'Receipts of Pastry and Cookery'. In publication by 1720, this exists in six different versions; they give different addresses for his cooking schools and carry his portrait, but the date of the first edition is unknown. All copies are engraved, unusually for a cookery book at the time. 
About 1720 Kidder taught at three London cookery schools, in St Martin's-le-Grand, Norris Street, and Little Lincoln's Inn Fields. After abandoning the two latter in 1721 he divided his time between two schools, teaching three afternoons a week at St Martin's-le-Grand and three afternoons at a school next to Furnival's Inn in Holborn, until in 1722 or 1723 he moved to Queen Street, near St Thomas Apostles. Some of his pupils wrote his recipes in blank books with a printed title page, one of which, inscribed by the owner, shows that Kidder was still teaching in Queen Street in 1734. Having risen socially, he donned a gentlemanly wig for his portrait. Passers-by in Holborn 'must have taken notice of a pastry-cook's shop with the following remarkable inscription over the door; 'Kidder's pastry-school'' an 'extraordinary Academy... calculated to instruct young ladies in the art and mystery of tarts and cheese-cakes' ('Connoisseur', 2.190-91). The 'scholars' were mostly 'lower class' (ibid., 192), but the 1720 title page of 'Receipts' announced: 'Ladies may be taught at their own Houses'. 
Although Kidder ran a pastry school, his recipes covered the whole range of soups, salads, meat, fish, poultry, sauces, and jellies, as well as pies and tarts. His recipes were repeatedly plagiarized throughout the eighteenth century, yet Kidder seems not to have plagiarized recipes himself. He probably taught his students to make established favourites, so even if his 'Receipts' may not be especially inventive, it is a valuable record of 170 standard English dishes of the day, accompanied by attractive designs for pie shapes and decorations. The first recipe for puff pastry (identical to the standard commercial product of today) to appear in print is Kidder's. 
Kidder died at his house in Holborn on 23 April 1739, aged seventy-three. One of three almost identical obituaries called him 'the famous Pastry-Master' and claimed that he had 'taught near 6000 Ladies the Art of Pastry' ('London Magazine', 205). 


@@@@@


doc= 50455


Lamb, Patrick (c.1650-1708/9), royal cook, was the second of seven children of Patrick Lambe (1613- 'c'.1683) and Martha, 'nee' Russell (died 1687), of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. Lamb's father was involved in victualling and in 1660 held a crown warrant as the sole retailer of tobacco in the precincts of Whitehall. Lamb's own career in the royal household began in or before 1661, as an untitled servant in the pastry, one of the chief departments of the household below stairs. In March 1662 he was granted the lowest named rank in this office, youngest child of the pastry, a position he held until September 1671. In April 1672 he appears in the kitchen ledgers as a child of the queen consort's kitchen. The humble title belies an increasingly profitable position; he not only received boardwages, but was also eligible to collect those fees and perquisites due to his position. 
In August 1677 Lamb was appointed as master cook to the queen consort, held in tandem with the office of sergeant of his majesty's pastry in ordinary, to which he was elevated in November 1677. Finally, in February 1683, Lamb attained the status of master cook to the monarch. He was reappointed to this post under the successive household regulations of James II, William and Mary, and Anne, and was removed from it only by death. His services as a royal cook encompassed the provision of prepared dishes for daily and extraordinary consumption by the monarch and his guests at table. He also undertook provisioning contracts for the pastry and kitchen departments of the household, supplying commodities such as flour, eggs, and condiments. Lamb appears to have continued to hold his father's privileges in purveying wine, spirits, and tobacco at the court, revealed in a royal warrant of January 1683. 
Lamb's culinary skills were most effectively demonstrated in extraordinary events, and his claims for large expenditures on such occasions as the Westminster visit of the Venetian ambassadors in December 1685 testify to the splendour of these. Most spectacular of all were his arrangements for the coronation feasts of James II in 1685, William and Mary in 1689, and Anne in 1702, recorded in extensive detail in the lord steward's accounts for those years. The 1689 coronation cost $4931 to stage, and Lamb was presented with $100 for his pains in its planning. 
These and other junkets are evoked in the text of 'Royal Cookery', published posthumously in London under Lamb's name by John Morphew and Abel Roper in 1710, and subsequently reprinted in 1716, 1726, and 1731. The text incorporated recipes for elaborate dishes alongside engravings of lavish table layouts for occasions such as royal suppers. Such details suggest that the text was drawn from Lamb's papers, rather than being speculatively published under his name as some contemporaries contended. 
Lamb married Mary Froswell on 28 October 1672 at St Marylebone Church, Middlesex. The couple had at least four children: Patrick, William, Mulys, and Mary. It is not known precisely when or where Lamb died, but it was some time between 25 September 1708 and 28 February 1709, probably in London. His wife predeceased him. There is no surviving memorial to Lamb, who was unusual in being an English cook at a time when French cooks were pre-eminent within English aristocratic households. 'Royal Cookery' is nevertheless a testament to his culinary talents. 


@@@@@


doc= 50456


Hugh Mason (fl. 1707-1734), owner of a shop in nearby St James's Market. In 1734 a Hugh Mason was appointed as porter at 'His Majesty's Royal Palace of Somerset House', while John Mason esquire, a 'gentleman of his majesty's Chapel Royal' since 1715, was in 1744 made 'gentleman sewer in ordinary', the traditional job description of an attendant at the royal table. No documentary evidence of the Fortnum and Mason business appears to exist before 1756, when it moved to premises in Piccadilly that had been leased from Bethlem Hospital. 


@@@@@


doc= 50457


Miles, Eustace Hamilton (1868-1948), sportsman, writer, and food reformer, was born on 22 September 1868 at West End House, West End, Hampstead, the younger son of William Henry Miles, bookseller and later publisher, of Simpkin, Marshall & Co., and his wife, Mary M'Connell. He had at least one sister. 
Miles was educated at Heath Mount preparatory school, Eastbourne College, and Marlborough College (1882-1887), where he co-edited the 'Marlburian' with the future novelist E. F. Benson (1867-1940), who became a close friend. Unlike Benson's more sentimental Marlborough involvements, which he portrayed in an intense, crypto-erotic light in 'David Blaize' (1916), his relationship with Miles appears to have been one of straightforwardly unromantic comradeship. The two played tennis and squash rackets together, and both went up to King's College, Cambridge, in October 1887, Miles with a minor scholarship which he exchanged for a full college scholarship two years later. In part one of the classical tripos, Miles's was among the more distinguished firsts of his year, but he gained only a second class in part two; he graduated in 1891. During the next fifteen years, until his marriage in 1906, he was known chiefly as an amateur athlete, and as author of various 'how to' or 'teach yourself' books on subjects as diverse as philology, sport, and the nutrition and general education of boys. 
Miles stated in his 'Who's Who' entry that he taught as an assistant master at Rugby School, but this is not confirmed by the school's own records. Better documented are his sporting successes: he was English amateur real tennis champion (1898-1903, 1905-6, 1909-10) and amateur champion of America at squash rackets and real tennis (1900). He was amateur world champion at rackets (1902), and also for real tennis (1898-1903, and 1905). In addition, he was four times world doubles champion at rackets (1902, 1904, 1905-6). With Benson, whose interests were in golf and figure-skating, he edited a number of sporting books (1902-5) in Hurst and Blackett's 'Imperial Athletic Library', and collaborated with him on 'The Mad Annual' (1903), a humorously satirical compilation of a distinctly juvenile kind. In 1903 he was assistant editor of the 'Magazine of Sport and Health'. 
Early in 1906 Miles married Dorothy Beatrice (Hallie) Killick, daughter of the rector of St Clement Danes Church in London. Over the next thirty years she collaborated closely with her husband in the health-food shop and vegetarian restaurant, with associated enterprises for physical, mental, and spiritual self-training, which began operation the same year from premises at 40-42 Chandos Street, Charing Cross. Within a few years Eustace Miles's Restaurant, which he promoted as a 'restaurant with ideals', had established a distinctive reputation, and it was wryly celebrated in E. M. Forster's 'Howards End' (1910). The heroine of the novel, Margaret Schlegel, wonderfully captures the milieu: ''Next time,' she said to Mr Wilcox, 'you shall come to lunch with me at Mr Eustace Miles's.' 
'With pleasure.' 
'No, you'd hate it,' she said, pushing her glass towards him for some more cider. 'It's all proteids and body-buildings, and people coming up to you and beg pardon, but you have such a beautiful aura.' (chap. 17)' Theosophists, simple-lifers, aspiring writers, healers, and others of an idealistic bent were all encouraged to visit Miles's premises. He opened lecture-rooms, an advice bureau, a 'Normal Physical School' and 'School of Cookery', and a publishing business which produced a steady stream of his works, in the form of pamphlets ('Milestones') dispensing advice on health, including nervous, problems, books on food reform, fitness, the sporting spirit, and mental concentration, and a monthly (later quarterly) magazine. Mrs Miles's literary contributions emphasized the spiritual side of the movement. Bland, tasteless, and excessively simple by late twentieth-century standards, the recipes which Miles shared with his public were intended to provide a balanced, meat-free diet, and relied largely on the use of proprietary protein supplements such as Emprote combined with such humble dishes as lentil salad or scrambled eggs on toast. Husband and wife reiterated the beliefs of the food reform movement of the period, which crusaded against the wastefulness, indigestibility, and general harmfulness to health of the traditionally heavy, rich meat diet of the Edwardian upper and middle classes and of their counterparts elsewhere in the western world. 
Although essentially a figure of the pre-1914 era with its enthusiasms and strong theoretical beliefs, Miles continued to expand business operations after the First World War. By 1929, in addition to the Chandos Street restaurant and a long-established vegetarian guest house at Carshalton, Surrey, he owned the Milestone Restaurant in the King's Road, Chelsea, and health-food shops in Bloomsbury and in the north and south London suburbs. None of these activities made him rich, however, and his estate at death was less than $200. Miles died at 38 Palace Road, Streatham, London, on 20 December 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 50461


Allsopp, Henry, first Baron Hindlip (1811-1887), brewer, was born on 19 February 1811 at Burton upon Trent, the third but only surviving son of Samuel Allsopp of Burton upon Trent and his wife, Frances, only daughter and heir of Charles Fowler of Shrewsbury. 
The firm of Samuel Allsopp & Sons had claims to be the oldest brewery in Burton: Samuel Allsopp's uncle and great-uncle (both named Benjamin Wilson) were the most prominent exporters of Burton ales to the Baltic from the 1740s to the 1800s. Like M. T. Bass, Allsopps were early entrants to the Indian trade and the firm was the first to brew India pale ale (IPA) in Burton in 1822. The firm flourished both in the Indian export trade and the English domestic market in the 1830s and 1840s. Virtually no records survive for the firm before its incorporation in 1887 and it is difficult to trace its growth. Although it always appears to have followed in the wake of its great rival, Bass, Allsopps was by any reckoning a spectacularly successful Victorian firm before the mid-1880s, acknowledged as the world's third biggest brewery in the 1870s. Henry Allsopp was the key figure in its development after he took over the direction of the firm from his father in 1838. 
Relying on the burgeoning demand for premium Burton pale ales and constructing a network of agencies, stores, and bottling contracts, Allsopp saw production increase from a few thousand barrels a year in 1830 to a peak of 700,000 barrels in the mid-1870s. The firm's beers were sold in forty-four countries abroad, and the new brewery built in the late 1850s was 'the' model British brewery of the third quarter of the nineteenth century, combining the most up-to-date machinery with convenience of layout. With its 'enormous dimensions, handsome elevations', Alfred Barnard ranked it in 1889 'equal to any in the Kingdom' (Weir and others, 133). The firm was also in the van of employing brewing scientists. 
In February 1887 Allsopps was floated on the stock market and was sold by the family to the new company for $3.3 million. Following the wildly successful incorporation of Guinness as a public company in October 1886, the investing public's demand for brewery shares was insatiable, and the flotation seemed as triumphant as that of Guinness. There was said to be fighting in the street for prospectuses, and the chairman reported applications from 37,000 individuals for $105 million worth of capital, an over-subscription of some thirtyfold. The reality, as commentators in the know pointed out, was very different. Although profits over the previous five years had increased -- owing solely to the lowest brewing material prices within memory -- sales had declined by almost one-third of their 1875 peak. With Henry Allsopp's advancing years, the firm was losing its lead, especially exposed by its decision not to acquire a large tied-house estate. Goodwill in the new company balance sheet was inflated to a crazy eight times average net profits. The prospect of an 8 per cent dividend on ordinary shares was held out; in fact the company never paid more than 7 per cent in the next twenty-eight years, and in no fewer than twenty of them distributed no dividend at all. Henry Allsopp, an old and honourable man, was immensely hurt by accusations in the financial press that his family had sold to a gullible public a vastly overpriced pup on a false prospectus. Within six weeks of the flotation he was dead. 
Oddly, given his wealth and his firm's prominence in the industry, Henry Allsopp cut a much smaller figure than M. T. Bass both in Burton and the national trade. Seemingly much less conscious of publicity, he nevertheless served as Conservative MP for East Worcestershire from 1874 to 1880. Moreover, although generous to brewing trade charities, he was a more modest benefactor to his home town than his rivals, the Bass family. The principals of the two firms might meet from time to time to discuss prices, gravities, discounts, and loans to publicans, but in general a historic, deep-seated rivalry existed between the two firms. When, like many a member of the Victorian new, super rich, the Allsopps claimed ancient descent (from a knight in Richard II's reign), the news caused mirth at Bass. 
In May 1880 Henry Allsopp was created a baronet; in February 1886 he was elevated to a barony, the first fully signed-up member of the 'beerage'. He became a modest large landowner, in 1873 owning 1158 acres at Hindlip Hall, Worcestershire. On 21 August 1839 he married Elizabeth (died 1906), second daughter of William Tongue of Comberford Hall, Staffordshire; they had six sons (two of whom were MPs at the time of their father's death) and two daughters. Lord Hindlip died on 2 April 1887 at Hindlip Hall, Worcestershire. None of his sons inherited his entrepreneurial abilities; although three remained on the board of the new company after 1887, the company came to have the reputation of being the worst managed big brewery in Britain before 1914. 


@@@@@


doc= 50462


Baxter, William Alexander (1877-1973), food manufacturer, was born on 25 September 1877 at George Lane, Fochabers, Moray, the eldest son of George Baxter (died 1925), master grocer, and his wife, Margaret Duncan. He made his reputation by supplying relatively simple foods of high quality to a wide clientele, including the royal household. 
Baxter's formal education at Alexander Milne's Free School, Fochabers, ended at the age of thirteen, when he joined his father in the family's Spey Street grocery business in Fochabers. His training in business had begun much earlier, however: when he was six his father wrapped him in the shop foreman's apron and set him to work weighing tea and sugar. Later, when he graduated to collecting orders after school on Friday afternoons, George Baxter greeted his son's return with the same question, 'Well, did ye get any 'new' customers today?'. This paternal dictum guided his business life. 
The Spey Street shop was already established as a supplier of groceries to local great houses, in large part because Baxter's father had been a gardener to the duke of Richmond and Gordon at nearby Gordon Castle before setting up shop in 1868. The duke encouraged the venture by lending his custom, and the local gentry soon followed. George Baxter supplied Gordon Castle with continental wines, cheeses, and other delicacies. He visited Speyside distilleries to select fine malt whiskies for the ducal table, and also blended them under the trade name of Baxter's Pure Malt Scotch Whisky. Baxter's mother, Margaret, also employed a small staff to produce preserves made from local soft fruits taken as part payment for groceries from village women. These preserves sold well, and were appreciated by Gordon Castle visitors, who sent orders from London. The duke provided the Baxters with a recipe for marmalade used at the castle since 1837, which they marketed as Castle Marmalade. 
Baxter, who was often known as WAB, was the family's travelling salesman, whose sales technique was enhanced by a genial disposition and a flair for marketing. With his sample-laden bicycle he would board the train for Wick, and cycle back to Fochabers, taking orders on the way. There were also, later, buying trips to London and Europe. When Baxter fell ill in 1914, he was nursed back to health at the family home, Highfield House, by a nursing sister, Ethelreda (Ethel) Adam [
Ethel Baxter subsequently took charge of the firm's preserve making, but her strong, independent views resulted in the newly married couple's embarking on a bold venture as preserve manufacturers in their own right, leaving the grocery business to William's younger brother, George. Family tradition records that Baxter met the duke of Richmond and Gordon one Sunday morning after church, and together they paced out Baxters' original half-acre site by the River Spey. 
William and Ethel Baxter were partners in every sense of the word. Ethel ran the factory, bought the fruit, hired local labour, supervised production, and experimented with new recipes. William's forte was in securing new customers -- for example, Harrods in 1919. Fortnum and Mason's formidable buyer, Mr Reilly, failed to understand Baxter's Scottish accent, but bought his products on taste alone. The comptroller of the royal household bought several cases of Ethel's Little Scarlet Strawberry Jam, thus beginning the firm's long association with the royal household. 
In the 1920s and 1930s, the Baxters identified market opportunities for the abundant local produce surrounding them in the rich Laich of Moray. Their product range extended into meat processing. Moray chickens weighing precisely 21/4 lb were used for one of their new products -- jars of whole chicken in natural jelly. Royal Game Soup -- probably Baxters' best-known product -- came into being when Baxter recognized that venison, then unpopular, could be utilized in soup making. Ethel mixed venison with pheasant, game, and seasoning, and canned soup became part of their range. Many other entrepreneurial examples followed. Expansion provided greater factory employment opportunities in the Fochabers area. In 1916 Ethel Baxter and a small group of women began full-time jam manufacture. In the 1930s employment increased gradually. Restrictions during the Second World War reduced staff and production to the minimum, but by the 1950s a steady payroll of 120 was achieved, rising to 500 during the fresh fruit season. By 1960 staffing levels rose to 300 and 900 respectively. 
In 1945 the Baxter family formed a private limited company, W. A. Baxter & Sons Ltd, with $4000 capital in $1 shares. By 1956 share capital had increased to $26,000. William and Ethel's two sons, Gordon and Ian, and their wives, joined the firm; the business expanded overseas, opening offices in Chicago and Brussels. Ethel Baxter died at Dr Gray's Hospital, Elgin, on 15 August 1963. Her public role was largely taken on by Gordon Baxter's wife, Ena Baxter, whose kitchen and gourmet canned soups, their tins girdled with Gordon tartan, became the premier product of the firm. Shortly before his own death in 1973, William Baxter proudly claimed in his memoirs 'there has been a Mrs Baxter right at the heart of our family business for the last 105 years' (Baxter, 2). 
Baxter lived at Highfield House, Fochabers, from 1904 until shortly before his death. He died at Dr Gray's Hospital, Elgin, aged ninety-six, on 15 October 1973. As president of W. A. Baxter & Sons Ltd, he saw Baxters' share capital expand from $70,000 in 1967 to $500,000 in 1970. During his lifetime all shares were held in family hands and at the time of his death he himself held only 1400 ordinary shares. He was buried beside his wife in Bellie kirkyard, Fochabers, after a funeral service in the Gordon Chapel of the Scottish Episcopal Church, Fochabers, where he had been a long-standing lay elector and benefactor. 


@@@@@


doc= 50463


Lawrence, Harry Lawrence Bradfer- (1887-1965), antiquary and collector of manuscripts, was born on 1 April 1887 at 8 Paynes Court, Church Street, King's Lynn, the son of Charles Bradfer (died 1886/7), a draper's assistant, and his wife, Elizabeth Lawrence. He was educated initially at home because of poor health, and then at secondary school in King's Lynn. He married Violet Evelyn, daughter of William Charles Bradfield, a draper, on 23 July 1913. They had a daughter, Bridget Evelyn (died 1997) and a son, Philip Leslie (who shared his father's love of book collecting and became a member of the Roxburghe Club in his own right). Bradfer-Lawrence became a land agent and worked in Norfolk until 1935 when he was appointed managing director of Hammond's brewery in Yorkshire, a firm which greatly expanded under his administration. When it merged in 1960 to become United Breweries he became the first chairman. 
Bradfer-Lawrence was an enthusiastic antiquary. He made occasional contributions to the 'Antiquaries Journal' and was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1924; he exhibited items from his collections for the society. He became its treasurer in 1944 and did much to set the society's affairs in order. He gave collections of manuscript materials to the Yorkshire Archaeological Society and the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society. 
Bradfer-Lawrence published a number of volumes chiefly connected with the history and archaeology of Norfolk. He edited 'The account of Edmund Carvell and Humfrey Bedyngfelde as the executors of the will of Thomas Karvell of Wiggenhall' (1916) for the Norfolk Record Society, and 'The Muster Returns for Divers Hundreds in the County of Norfolk' (1935) for the Norfolk and Norwich Archaeological Society. In addition he wrote 'The Merchants of Lynn' (1927) and a history of Castle Rising (1929). He was also a distinguished book collector, particularly of medieval manuscripts, of which he owned nearly sixty. After his death his collection of manuscripts was deposited for a number of years in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, before being sold to Quaritch, who dispersed them by private sale and auction. He also collected printed books from the fifteenth to the twentieth centuries, many of which were sold at Sothebys after his death. In addition, he had a substantial collection of manuscripts and printed books relating to Richard Jefferies. His achievements as a book collector were acknowledged by his election to the Roxburghe Club in 1954. 
Bradfer-Lawrence died on 19 October 1965 at Ashby Hall, Ashby St Mary, Norwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 50464


Combe, Harvey Christian (1752-1818), brewer, was born in Andover, Hampshire, the second but eldest surviving son of Harvey Combe, a prosperous Andover attorney, and his wife, Christian, 'nee' Jarman. His father was a third generation lawyer, while his mother's family, the Jarmans, were London based, with interests in the corn, sugar refining, and brewing trades. Having no liking for his early legal training in his father's office, Combe then served an apprenticeship with his uncle, Boyce Tree, a prosperous City corn and malt factor, who had married Christian Combe's sister. He became Tree's partner, and eventually his heir. On 9 May 1780 Combe married his first cousin, Tree's daughter Alice Christian (died 1828); they had four sons and six daughters. 
In 1787, enjoying an annual income variously stated at between $2000 and $3000 from his corn and malt business, Combe acquired a major share in the well-known Gyfford's Wood Yard brewery (in which a Jarman cousin had previously had an interest) which came on the market in that year. Founded in 1739 in the crowded Long Acre centre of the London coach making trade, it was a progressive brewery, the fifth or sixth largest of the capital's great porter breweries. The five partners in the new management, continuing to trade as Gyfford's brewery, raised $90,000 to carry on the business. The two largest stakeholders, Combe and his friend George Shum (1751?-1805), a founding director of the Pheonix Insurance Company and an immensely rich sugar refiner, each found $26,000. The brewery seems to have been largely run by two of the other three partners, Joseph Delafield, one of Samuel Whitbread's brewers, and William Packer, long employed at the Wood Yard brewery. In the next thirty years the brewery prospered, although less spectacularly than those of Barclay Perkin, Whitbread, Truman, and Meux-Reid. Nevertheless, a stock account of 1796 reveals Gyfford's brewery to be valued at no less than $295,587 (Janes, 73), and the banker Sir William Curtis (1752-1829), fellow MP for London with Combe after 1796, told the diarist Joseph Farington that his great friend, Combe, was worth $100,000. With considerable social and political ambitions, Combe and Shum probably milked the profits of the brewery quite hard. 
After 1795, like George Shum, Combe became closely involved in City and national politics. He also had a reputation as a gambler and socialite, and as an enthusiast for pugilism. First elected alderman for the City in 1790, he was returned as one of London's MPs in 1796, the same year Shum became MP for Honiton. Combe was a moderately radical whig who, like Sir William Curtis, spoke frequently in parliament as the joint representative of City interests. He joined the Whig Club in 1785 and was admitted to Brooks's Club on Charles James Fox's nomination in 1792. Immensely public spirited, he successfully balanced public duty with his business interests. He occupied the office of lord mayor of London with great ceremony in the difficult year 1799-1800, at the height of wartime inflation and shortage. He was a governor of the Irish Society, founded for the relief of poverty in Ireland, from 1793 to 1817 and served as lieutenant-colonel in various London militia regiments between 1794 and 1809. In the City's business community he was master of the Brewers' Company (1804-5) and warden of the Fishmongers' Company (1812-14); he was a director of the Globe Insurance Company after 1805 and the West India Dock Company after 1811; he was president of the Society for Prosecuting Felons in 1817. 
Joseph Farington found Combe 'to possess a very warm heart and great kindness of disposition. He is always ready to do acts of service when applied to, and engages by his manner.' Farington also noted that: 'The connexion with the City has been attended with great expense to him, and he has the honour for it but not profit. In politics he is a party man, but the City have confidence in him when business is to be transacted. ('Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 2.110)' No brewer, except perhaps Combe's contemporary, the second Samuel Whitbread, better demonstrates the social and political range of London's super-rich brewing fraternity in the late Georgian period. He was a close friend of Charles James Fox (after whom he named in full his youngest son), Richard Brinsley Sheridan, and the prince of Wales. His annual entertainment of royalty and his aristocratic whig friends at the brewery for traditional beefsteaks, before a more extended collation at his house in Great Russell Street, became legendary. In 1807 he acquired a country seat at Cobham Park, Surrey. He appears to have suffered a series of strokes after 1812 and resigned his aldermanic and parliamentary seats in 1817. 
Combe died on 4 July 1818. His eldest son, Harvey (1782-1858), continued his father's interest in the brewery, and served as high sheriff of Surrey in 1831 as well as being a notable horse breeder and well-known master of the Old Berkeley foxhounds. The brewery later formed an important part of the brewing firm Watney Mann. 


@@@@@


doc= 50465


Manners, Arthur (1879-1968), brewer, was born on 8 December 1879 at Stapenhill, Burton upon Trent, one of the nine children of William Posnette Manners (1846-1915), brewer, and his wife, Clara Gothard. William Posnette Manners, son of a local draper, had joined the Burton brewers, Worthington & Co., as an office boy at the age of sixteen. He quickly rose to be the firm's cashier and office manager, was appointed a director on the company's incorporation in 1889, and, following the death of William Henry Worthington (1826-1894) five years later, became managing director and deputy chairman. He rapidly gained control of the company (by 1900 he held no less than 73 per cent of its equity) and under his astute leadership Worthingtons acquired a reputation for the quality of its bottled pale ales. By the outbreak of war, the company had regained much of its earlier standing, steadily eroding the market share of its arch rival Bass, Ratcliff, and Gretton. On Manners's death in 1915, control of the company passed to two of his sons, Arthur (who joined the brewery in 1903) and Ernest. Arthur married and had three sons and two daughters. 
Arthur inherited all his father's entrepreneurial drive and ambition. Autocratic in style, he consistently refused to sanction trade unions within the firm. As the architect of the merger in 1927 of Worthingtons with Bass -- undertaken to resolve problems of over-capacity -- he was to prove more than a match for Colonel Sir John (later Lord) Gretton, the chairman and major shareholder of the larger company. Despite Bass's superior capitalization, the terms of the merger (devised by Worthingtons' London advisers) were such that Manners became chairman and joint managing director of Worthingtons, and deputy chairman and joint managing director of Bass; he had obtained a dominant position in both companies and enhanced his own financial status. 
The amalgamation, described as 'the biggest non-merger in the history of the brewing industry' (Hawkins, 90), failed to realize its objectives. Apart from greater co-operation in bottled beer production and distribution, there were few economies and the two companies continued to operate as separate entities. Both boards were increasingly dominated by Manners and his family. He received the support of his brother Ernest until the latter's death in 1944 and during the 1930s and 1940s Arthur's three sons, Arthur Geoffrey, William, and Philip, were all appointed directors. After a minor dispute in 1945 which prompted the resignation of Lord Gretton, Manners replaced him as chairman and managing director of Bass. 
By the late 1940s the Manners family provided no fewer than four of the company's six directors. However, despite the duplication at board level, the deep-seated rivalry between the firms persisted and there was little attempt to create a coherent entity. James Eadie & Co., acquired in 1933, also maintained considerable autonomy. In the difficult post-war climate, this lack of rationalization was reflected in falling sales. Concern among institutional investors led to the appointment as a director in April 1953 of Sir James Grigg, a distinguished former civil servant and politician. Three months later, Manners retired. 
Manners was never deeply involved in public life. He died at his home, Longford Hall, Longford, Derbyshire, on 13 January 1968, leaving an estate worth over $2 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 50466


Sandeman, Albert George (1833-1923), port and sherry producer, was born at 31 Highbury Place, Highbury, Middlesex, on 21 October 1833, the eldest of the four sons (there were also four daughters) of George Glas Sandeman (died 1868) and his wife, Elizabeth, the daughter of Albert Forster. His great-great-grandfather was the Revd John Glas, founder of the Glasites, a nonconformist sect which became the Sandemanians after Albert's great-great-uncle Robert Sandeman married Glas's daughter. Albert was also a cousin of Sir Robert Groves Sandeman. 
George Glas Sandeman was the nephew of George Sandeman, who in 1790 had become a wine merchant in London and had built up agencies with port and sherry exporters in Portugal and Spain respectively. Albert, having completed his education at Eton College, about 1851 joined his father in the firm. His business links with Portugal brought him in contact with Maria Carlota Perpetua de Moraes Sarmento (died 1923), the daughter of Visconde Da Torre de Moncorvo, one-time Portuguese minister in London, whom he married in 1856; they had two sons and four daughters. In 1866 he was appointed a director of the Bank of England, the bank with which the firm had had an account since 1812. He retained that directorship until 1918. 
On his father's death in 1868, Sandeman became head of George G. Sandeman, Sons & Co. Two years later the firm was the main shipper of port from Portugal, and Sandeman sought to achieve a comparable leadership in sherry, which then accounted for over two-fifths of the wine drunk in Britain. In 1879, therefore, he purchased a bankrupt sherry business at Jerez, and a decade later built up the firm's stock of fine sherries by making a purchase from another producer of 800 casks of unblended wines. This dramatic step helped to ensure supplies, which could be in danger from poor harvests and diseases such as phylloxera. 
Sandeman was very active in public life. In 1872 he was appointed high sheriff of Surrey, and later became a commissioner of lieutenancy and commissioner of income tax for the City of London. He also served as major of the 12th Middlesex (Prince of Wales's Own Civil Service) rifle volunteers. Sandeman was elected to the board of the London Assurance Company, and in 1898 he held the presidency of the London chamber of commerce. 
For twenty-five years, from 1893 onwards, Sandeman served on the Bank of England's influential committee of treasury; he was deputy governor in 1894-5 and governor from 1895 to 1897. His period of office as governor was also a time of extra-cheap money, when the bank's earnings and reserves fell sharply. Having as deputy governor been responsible for supervising the bank's branches, he actively prodded the branch agents into seeking new and profitable business. Moreover, he rebuffed attempts by the chancellor of the exchequer, Sir Michael Edward Hicks Beach, to investigate the bank's management system following the sacking of its chief cashier for irregularities. 
As the Victorian era drew to its close, the cartoonist 'Spy' featured Sandeman as a worthy in 'Vanity Fair'. Portrayed as a genial, moustached, and slightly rotund figure, immaculate in green-grey frock coat and buff spats, with monocle at the ready and a gardenia in his buttonhole, he typified the shrewd city magnate who contributed commercial expertise to the not over-demanding but highly prestigious task of directing the world's leading financial institution. In 1902 he had the family firm registered as a private limited company, but ensured that its direction and shareholding remained entirely in family hands. With two sons and three grandsons then in the company, Sandeman was merely its nominal head when he died, of bronchitis, at his home, Greylands, Hastings Road, Bexhill, Sussex, on 6 January 1923. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50467


Thrale, Henry (1728-1781), brewer and politician, was the only son of Ralph Thrale (died 1758), a wealthy brewer of Southwark who was master of the Brewers' Company, high sheriff of Surrey, and MP for Southwark in 1741-7. Thrale's grandfather was a 'yeoman' of Offley, Hertfordshire. Thrale's father was head clerk of the Anchor Brewery in Southwark, a leading London brewery founded in 1616. He doubtless secured the appointment through family connections: he was a cousin of Anne Halsey, sister of the then owner of the Anchor, Edmund Halsey, and subsequently his heir, who married Richard Temple, first Baron Cobham, uncle to the Grenvilles and the Lytteltons. After a number of years Ralph Thrale was able to buy the brewery for $30,000 from Anne Halsey's executors, paying for it out of the profits over eleven years. 
Ralph Thrale's lavish social spending caused some attrition to the business, which was increased under his son, who, unlike other prominent brewers such as Samuel Whitbread and Benjamin Truman, was born and brought up to affluence in the trade. Henry Thrale was sent to University College, Oxford, in 1744 (at the age of fifteen) with the princely allowance of $1000 p.a., and thereafter on a grand tour in the company of W. H. Lyttelton (Lord Westcote), who had family links with the Thrales. Henry nevertheless developed an ambition to become the greatest brewer in London. 
When Ralph Thrale died in 1758 the assets of the firm were valued at $56,200 (a considerable decline over recent years) and annual output was 32,600 barrels, the Anchor Brewery lying about sixth in the league table of London porterhouses. Great expansion then ensued to a temporary peak of 87,000 barrels in 1778, when only Samuel Whitbread and John Calvert remained ahead of Thrale. Expansion, however, was far from smooth. Extravagant spending caused a series of crises within the family, particularly when coinciding with business depressions (1772), boom conditions (1778), and a personal crisis compounding Thrale's own health, and the death and bankruptcy in June 1779 of his brother-in-law, Arnold Nesbitt, to whom Thrale was said to be committed financially for over $200,000. On these occasions both Thrale's family and his wife's relations helped out with loans. 
Thrale married Hester Lynch Salusbury (1741-1821) ['see 'Piozzi, Hester Lynch], a fashionable, literary lady with good family connections, on 11 October 1763 (supposedly at the urging of her uncle, Sir Thomas Salusbury, as the condition of his making a settlement on her). Henry and Hester Thrale had two sons, the elder dying in 1776 aged nine and the younger in 1775 aged two, and ten daughters. Only five daughters survived to benefit from Thrale's will, each receiving $20,000. The eldest daughter, Hester Maria ['see 'Elphinstone, Hester Maria], became Viscountess Keith. 
The Thrales lived in style with a house at the brewery (which Mrs Thrale hated), a country house at Streatham Place, a hunting box (with a pack of hounds) near Croydon, and a further property at Brighton. Thrale was elected MP for the borough of Southwark in December 1765 having failed previously as a candidate for Abingdon and Camelford. He kept his seat at Southwark, almost a fief of the brewery, until defeated in 1780, when he was already prostrate and dying. As an MP he voted regularly with the administration but spoke mainly on brewing matters. 
The Thrales were 'an ill-assorted couple: she, highly intelligent, with literary ambitions, hard and masculine, yet sentimental; he, matter-of-fact and unemotional, though kindly, sensual and a glutton... he could not be her hero, and she felt wasted on him' (HoP, 'Commons', 529). Although Thrale may have elicited such a harsh judgement from his wife, Samuel Johnson described his manners as those 'of a plain independent English squire' (ibid., 529). Thrale's friendship with Johnson began in 1764 through Hester Thrale, who made Southwark and Streatham Place lively literary salons. Johnson lived with the Thrales for periods at a time and accompanied them on various tours in England and to France. At times of crisis, and then as executor following Thrale's death, Johnson was drawn into the affairs of the brewery, assisting Mrs Thrale, who perforce had to cope with the business in alliance with the salaried manager, John Perkins. 
Thrale had an apoplectic nature, from over-indulgence, which meant that he was threatened with seizures at times of stress in the brewery. He suffered a severe attack in June and again in the autumn of 1779, with a further stroke on 21 February 1780 from which he never fully recovered. The economic effects of the Anglo-American War were damaging the trade but a more immediate crisis arrived in June, when Thrale was in Brighton. At one point during the Gordon riots a mob attacked the brewery, but John Perkins placated them with porter until the troops arrived. 
The lack of a male heir at Thrale's death on 4 April 1781 forced the sale of the brewery. As Johnson commented, 'what can misses do with a brewhouse. Lands are fitter for daughters than trade' (Boswell, 2, 69). Johnson presided over the sale as an executor ('we are not here to sell a parcel of boilers and vats but the potentiality of becoming rich beyond the dreams of avarice' (ibid., 397), and the brewery was bought for $135,000 by John Perkins and the rich Quaker relatives of his wife -- Robert Barclay, David Barclay, and Sylvanus Bevan. 
The Anchor Brewery prospered mightily under this new family dispensation. It took the lead in the London porter trade after 1800, Quaker dynasties like the Hanburys and the Buxtons at the Black Eagle Brewery in Spitalfields providing greater direct family continuity than either Thrale or Truman. 


@@@@@


doc= 50468


Truman, Sir Benjamin (1699/1700-1780), entrepreneur and brewer, was born in Brick Lane, Spitalfields, London, the younger son in a family of nine children of Joseph Truman, brewer, and his first wife. His father died in 1721 and Truman became a partner in the family firm in 1722 (his elder brother Joseph withdrawing in 1730). 
Building up his stake to eleven shares in the partnership out of eighteen by 1743, Truman was the sole partner responsible for management. He was backed by various other investors and took a wealthy sleeping partner, John Baker, with a third share from 1767 to 1771 to help finance prodigious expansion. Production at the Black Eagle Brewery rose from 55,500 barrels in 1750 to 83,000 in 1766, an output surpassed only by the Whitbread and Calvert breweries. 
In the 1770s Trumans was one of six 'capital houses' in London. They were virtually single-product businesses, producing porter, a heavy black beer, which was robust enough to stand the hazards of large-scale production, long storage, and distribution. Out of 142 'common brewers' in London in 1776, collectively brewing 1,288,000 barrels, for example, the leading six houses brewed over 40 per cent, an unprecedented example of scale of individual business and industrial concentration. At Benjamin Truman's death the net assets of the firm were $171,900, compared with $23,300 in 1741. His personal estate was worth $180,000 and he had a further $160,000 capital in the business. 
This great fortune derived almost exclusively from the profits of the business, which itself grew primarily by internal accumulation from retained profits. Such a high rate of internal investment proved fully compatible with taking enough out of the trade annually to sustain the life of a gentleman consistent with Truman's great fortune. In the 1770s Truman withdrew almost $4000 annually, with large additional sums occasionally to finance the purchase of land and the expenses of his private houses. These included a country estate, Popes, near Hertingfordbury, Hertfordshire, and a grand city residence by the brewery. Truman was knighted in 1760, on the accession of George III, in recognition of his standing in the London business community and for large loans to the crown. His portrait is one of the largest and most powerful canvases Thomas Gainsborough ever painted (Gainsborough was also commissioned to paint two granddaughters and two great-grandsons). 
Unlike Samuel Whitbread, Henry Thrale, and John Calvert, Benjamin Truman never sought a parliamentary seat, which his wealth and city and country position might have suggested. Married to Frances (1702/3-1766), with whom he had a son and a daughter, he was, first and foremost, an entrepreneur and industrialist: his life's priorities may be read in the statement he wrote, as an old man, across the final page of the brewery accounts in 1775, instructing his grandson about the creation of wealth in business: 'there can be no other way of raising a great Fortune but by carrying on an Extensive Trade. I must tell you Young Man, this is not to be obtained without Spirrit and great Application' (Mathias, 265). He died on 20 March 1780 in his eighty-first year, and was buried in the churchyard at Hertingfordbury. 
Continuity of business at the Black Eagle Brewery was maintained after Truman's death, but not the family dynasty. Truman's son, James, died in 1766 leaving him no male heir. Both his two grandsons by his daughter Frances declined to follow the trade, one of them becoming a general. In his will Truman put his entire estate in trust for his two great-grandsons, appointing as executor his head clerk, James Grant, who was also to continue to run the brewery. Grant became a partner in 1788 but died in July 1789. Sampson Hanbury then bought Grant's share and took over Trumans. Hanbury subsequently brought in Quaker partners, taking the business to greater heights and establishing longer term family dynasties than the Trumans were able to achieve. 


@@@@@


doc= 50472


Rabisha, William (fl. 1625-1661), cook and author, may have been of a Yorkshire family: his surname appears to be a variant of the West Riding name Robertshaw or Robertshay. In the preface to his 'The Whole Body of Cookery Dissected' (1661), he states that he had worked as a cook in aristocratic and ambassadorial households in England and abroad since before the civil war. The book claims to be written 'for the instruction of young Practitioners' (A sig. 4'v') rather than for private householders. It begins with bills of fare for very grand dinners, of between forty and seventy separate dishes, and continues with recipes on an equally lavish scale, for instance for caviar, baked swan, and roast porpoise. It concludes with a modernized text (perhaps taken from John Murrell's 'Two Bookes of Cookerie and Carving', published in 1631) of the 'Boke of Keruynge', which had originally been printed by Wynkyn de Worde in 1508; and with a description of George Neville's vast installation feast of 1468, which was purportedly taken from 'the Records of the 'Tower'' (Rabisha, 159) but which was possibly taken from the text printed as 'The Great Feast at the Intronization of... George Neuell' ('c'.1570). 
The tone of Rabisha's book is not only antiquarian but pointedly royalist. It is dedicated to five women with royalist connections and refers to the author's experience as a cook 'in the late Kings Court, of ever blessed memory' (A sig. 3'r'). It is therefore unclear whether Rabisha the cook was also the Captain William Rabisha who brought the news of the fall of Wexford from Cromwell to parliament in 1649 and who wrote the heterodox 'Adam Unvailed, and Seen with Open Face' (1649) and a tract on Christopher Love's plot of 1651. The royalism of the cookery book must have been meant either to distance the author from his parliamentarian past, or to distance him from a parliamentarian namesake. 


@@@@@


doc= 50474


Rose, Giles (fl. 1664-1681), master cook and translator, is known only from his printed works, which give no information about his family. In 1679 Richard Bentley and M. Magnes published his translation of Boaistuau's 'Theatre du monde'. Rose described this as 'an Ancient Book, which it was my Fortune to meet with in my Travels' (A2'v'), and referred to 'my own inabilities (as being no Scholar)' (A6'r'), and 'the obscure Calling... wherein I have always been occupied' (A6'v'), in his dedication to Sir Winston Churchill (1620-1688). His calling was, according to the title-page of his next book, that of 'one of the Master Cooks in His Majesties Kitchen'. Churchill, as one of the clerks of the board of green cloth, was Rose's superior in the royal household, but they must have been on good terms; Rose had received a presentation copy of Churchill's 'magnum opus', entitled 'Divi Britannici' (1675). Bentley then invited him to translate the anonymous 'Ecole parfaite des officiers de bouche', a book of instructions for servants in great houses, as 'A Perfect School of Instructions for the Officers of the Mouth' (1682). Rose's appointment in the royal kitchens appears by this time to have been nominal: his dedication (to another clerk of the board of green cloth, Sir Stephen Fox) is dated from a private residence in the country, Langley Park, and in it he complains twice of having 'but too much time to spare' (A2'r'), and refers to 'the distance of my imploy from the Press' (A6'r'). In 1699 the term catalogue for Easter listed 'The Art and Mystery of good Housekeeping, or, A frugal Way to live well... The Second Edition... By G. Rose, late one of the Master Cooks to His Majesty' (Arber, 128). This appears to have been Rose's last work; it may even have been a misleadingly entitled posthumous edition of his book of 1682. 


@@@@@


doc= 50475


Ross, Janet Ann (1842-1927), traveller and author, was born on 24 February 1842 at 8 Queen Square, London, the daughter of Alexander Cornewall Duff Gordon (1811-1872), and his wife, Lucie Austin ['see 'Gordon, Lucie Duff (1821-1869)]. Her parents moved in prominent social and literary circles: her father, a Treasury clerk and later a commissioner for the Inland Revenue, was from a patrician family, while her mother was the only daughter of the jurist John Austin (1790-1859) and the German translator Sarah Austin (1793-1867); Lucie Duff Gordon later became the writer of the celebrated 'Letters from Egypt' (1865). Her siblings, Maurice and Urania, were not born until some years later, and Janet Duff Gordon spent her childhood as 'a spoiled and rather lonely child' (Ross, 'Fourth Generation', 7); her friends were distinguished adults, including Caroline Norton, W. M. Thackeray, Tom Taylor, and Richard Doyle. She attended tea parties held by the Miss Berrys and breakfasts by Samuel Rogers, and was acquainted with a circle of celebrities including Amelia Opie, Charles Babbage, and Thomas Carlyle (whom she disliked, considering him to be rude to her mother). 
Soon after moving from Queen Square to Esher in the early 1850s, the Duff Gordons realized that they had neglected their daughter's education. They hired a German governess and later sent Janet to spend a year at a school in Dresden; in 1856 she was taken to Paris to learn French. Although she was a natural linguist -- publishing a translation of a work by Heinrich von Sybel in 1861 -- it was clearly too late for education to turn her into a model maiden. A daring enthusiast for outdoor sports, especially riding, hunting, and fishing, Janet Duff Gordon had developed into a highly unconventional young woman, with a free and easy manner which offended mature ladies. She cultivated an extraordinarily diverse collection of men friends, addressed her father as 'dear old boy', and moved with a staggering lack of awe among a glittering circle of artistic, literary, and political celebrities. She picnicked on the River Mole with Millais, Doyle, and Ary Scheffer; spent a winter with the Tennysons, becoming devotedly attached to the invalid Mrs Tennyson; and visited the Lansdownes at Bowood House. Here she rode with the duke of Beaufort's hounds and was sketched by G. F. Watts for the Bowood frescoes (with a canny appreciation of her androgynous appeal, he cast her as Patroclus). A. W. Kinglake and A. H. Layard became lifelong and doting friends, while George Meredith (who fell deeply in love with her) portrayed her as Rose Jocelyn in his semi-autobiographical novel 'Evan Harrington' (1860). 
At a dinner in 1860 Janet Duff Gordon met Henry James Ross (1820-1902), a friend of Layard. His tales of pig-sticking in Egypt proved to be irresistible, and she invited him to stay at Esher. Here they hunted together, and, 'impressed by his admirable riding, his pleasant conversations, and his kindly ways' (Ross, 'Fourth Generation', 84), she accepted his proposal of marriage, despite his twenty years' seniority. They were married at Ventnor on 5 December 1860. This astonishing match was met with pained generosity by Kinglake and Meredith, who were further afflicted by her immediate departure to take up residence in Egypt. The couple had only one child, Alick; it seems probable that the unconventional Janet resorted to contraceptives after a miscarriage during her second pregnancy. The appeal of Eastern adventure may well explain Janet Ross's marriage. After the couple landed in Alexandria in January 1861, she immediately began to pick up ungrammatical Arabic from her house-boy and visited Cairo, which reminded her inevitably of the 'Arabian Nights'. She rode desert races against Egyptian pashas, met the historian Henry Buckle on his travels, mounted a camel to see the Suez Canal under construction, and acted as the Egyptian correspondent for 'The Times'. 
By the mid-1860s the bank in which Henry Ross was a partner was in difficulties; the couple decided to cut their losses and retire to Italy. By September 1869 they had settled in an apartment in Florence on the Lung'Arno Torrigiani, where they mixed in Anglo-Florentine literary, artistic, and social circles; in the early 1870s they rented a villa at Castagnolo, and in 1888 they bought their own property, Poggio Gherardo, near Settignano, where Janet spent the rest of her life. A quieter country life suited Henry Ross, who wanted to cultivate orchids, and Janet soon began to study the agricultural life of Tuscany, assisting with the olive and grape harvests and collecting Tuscan peasant songs, which she sang to visitors, accompanying herself on the guitar. She established a wide circle of friends and a plethora of interests: among many visitors were the future Lady Butler, the artist; the collector and connoisseur of Spanish art Sir William Stirling-Maxwell; and J. A. Symonds, whom Janet met in 1882. A friendship with Ouida was wrecked when the flamboyant novelist fell ostentatiously in love with an Italian marquess and began to view Janet as a rival, portraying her vengefully as an aristocratic adventuress in 'Friendship' (1878). 
During these years Mrs Ross established herself as a minor figure in the Anglo-Florentine literary world and played a part in looking after the aged W. E. Gladstone on his final visit to Florence. Such publications as 'Italian Sketches' (1887) and 'Old Florence and Modern Tuscany' (1904) -- collections of essays which had appeared earlier in English periodicals -- reflected her Italian life and interests, mingling short historical pieces on Florentine art and culture and accounts of visits to Italian tourist spots with more unusual descriptions of oil-making in Tuscany and the land tenure system known as 'mezzaria'. 'Leaves from our Tuscan Kitchen' (1899) was her most significant publication in this practical vein: a collection of local vegetable recipes dictated to her by her chefs, it became a classic in its field. 'The Land of Manfred' (1889) -- a more conventional historical-cum-travel narrative of a tour of south Italy -- is nevertheless remarkable for its exploration of a then neglected area; lively and well illustrated, it is one of the most readable of her works. With Nelly Erichsen she collaborated to produce two volumes in Dent's 'Medieval Towns' series, 'The Story of Pisa' (1909) and 'The Story of Lucca' (1912). The most erudite of her publications was 'The Letters of the Early Medicis' (1910): researched extensively in Florentine libraries, it contained translations of hitherto unpublished Medici letters and benefited from the assistance of scholarly friends such as T. M. Lindsay. Janet Ross had first met this endearing Scottish historian in 1906, and they remained in correspondence until his death in 1914. 
Other publications resulted from an interest in the lives and works of her family. Janet Ross published editions, with memoirs, of her mother's works and edited her husband's 'Letters from the East' (1902). In 1888 she produced the monumental 'Three Generations of Englishwomen', a triple biography of her mother, her grandmother (Sarah Austin), and her great-grandmother (Susannah Taylor of Norwich): based on and containing family papers, it remains the most important source for the lives of these three women of letters. An autobiographical sequel, 'The Fourth Generation' (1912), followed, which expanded the more lightweight 'Early Days Recalled' (1891). 
Henry Ross died on 2 July 1902. Janet Ross's later years were not untroubled ones. On a nostalgic visit to Egypt in 1903-4 she found much changed, and soon after Henry's death she argued with her niece Lina, who had been living with her for a decade, over the latter's engagement to the artist Aubrey Waterfield. Although now rather isolated at Poggio Gherardo, Janet Ross did not always appreciate the visits which she received as the acknowledged doyenne of Anglo-Florentine society. However, an intimacy grew up with the Berensons at the nearby Villa I Tatti (rebuilt with a loan from Janet Ross) and she also showed great partiality for the young Kenneth Clark, who described her as 'a well-known terrifier' (Clark, 125). Mrs Ross was later reconciled to her niece: Lina Waterfield and her two children came to live at Poggio Gherardo during the First World War, and aunt and niece were both involved in the foundation of the British Institute in Florence. After the war, the political unrest of Italy began to touch upon Janet Ross's life: her initial tendency to favour fascism was reversed when blackshirts intruded into her house, demanding money. After several months of ill health, she died at her home on 23 August 1927, leaving Poggio Gherardo to Lina and her son. Janet's own son, Alick Ross, disputed the legacy, and legal costs and high taxes eventually forced Lina to sell it in 1946. 
'Handsome... [with] classical features and... thickly marked eyebrows accentuating the earnestness of her gaze' (Waterfield, 54), Janet Ross was, according to her niece, ceaselessly active, practical, and as regular as clockwork. Despite an irresistible 'joie de vivre' and an exceptional talent for friendship, she had no understanding of romantic passion, limited imagination, and curiously little appreciation for beauty (she was apparently unmoved by the beautiful views surrounding Poggio Gherardo). Kenneth Clark described her as 'the most completely extrovert human being I have ever known... her passions had passed like water off a duck's back' (Clark, 126). Formidable yet approachable, cultured but not erudite, she was an unconventional and vital Victorian woman who used her privileged social standing, intellectual background, and attractive appearance to achieve the fullest life available to her. Her publications were second rate, but her life was certainly not. 


@@@@@


doc= 50477


Shepheard, Samuel (1816-1866), hotel proprietor, was born on 21 January 1816 at Little Preston Manor, Preston Capes, Northamptonshire, the second son and third child of Richard Shepheard (died 1820), farmer, and his wife, Jane Berwick (died 1817). Both parents died before he was four, and Samuel grew up in the family of his father's sister Esther and her husband, Joseph Stanley, the licensee of The Crown inn at Leamington. Family legend held that Samuel and a cousin, John Stanley, were sent away from home after minimal schooling to gain experience as farm-hands, and that Samuel was later apprenticed three times to pastry-cooks in Leamington. Breaking his indentures for the last time, he left to go to sea, and rose to become purser on one of the Peninsular and Oriental (P. & O.) Company's passenger and mail ships which plied between Bombay and Suez. Shortly after his twenty-sixth birthday, however, he was summarily put ashore at Suez, apparently following a mutiny of forecastle hands towards which he had shown himself to be sympathetic. 
British interest in the condition of Egypt, from 1811 to 1848 the undisputed fief of the Albanian Mehmet Ali under the suzerainty of the Turkish Porte, centred on the overland route between Alexandria, Cairo, and Suez. In the late 1830s this ordeal by riverboat and camel had become the nexus between the two parts of the new, shorter sea-route from Europe to the East. Once Lieutenant Thomas Waghorn of the East India Company's fleet had established the viability of the route P. & O. gained a contract for the overland postal and passenger-carrying service, and remained in charge of the transit business from 1840 until the Egyptian government took control of it in 1846. Passengers from Europe landed at Alexandria, made an eighteen-hour journey by the Mahmudiyyah Canal and the Nile to Cairo, and rested, often at the British Hotel, until ready for the desert crossing eastwards to Suez. By the 1840s, visitors to Cairo included wealthy European and American tourists intent on seeing the pyramids and the upper Nile, as well as those bound on more serious business for India and further east. 
Shepheard was taken on as an assistant at the British Hotel, became manager in 1844, and proprietor by 1846, renaming it Shepheard's Hotel. Two years later he moved the hotel from its cramped surroundings in the streets of the Frankish quarter to a row of buildings on the edge of the Esbekier, then a large, open, tree-lined square. By 1851 the hotel had become transformed and greatly enlarged by a grant of adjacent property from Mehmet Ali's grandson and heir, Abbas Pasha. In 1850 Shepheard was also granted a contract for the Suez Hotel. Two years later the traveller C. F. Andrews in 'Four Months' Tour in the East' described him as having 'the cuisine of all the Nile steamers', and the provisioning of the desert rest-houses established by Arthur Anderson of the P. & O. Company (Bird, 171). 
The cosmopolitanism and importance of its clientele and the determinedly entrepreneurial spirit of its proprietor made Shepheard's Hotel a household name among sophisticated travellers during the late 1840s and 1850s. Lord Stanley, the future prime minister and earl of Derby, stayed there on his way to visit India in 1852, and Lord Elphinstone, the new governor of Bombay, in 1853. In 1858, the novelist Anthony Trollope wrote much of 'Doctor Thorne' in the newly re-extended Shepheard's Hotel while negotiating a treaty with the Egyptian ruler, Sa'id Pasha, about the conveyance of mails across Egypt by railway. According to Trollope, 'the English tongue in Egypt finds its centre in 'Shepheard's Hotel'' (Bird, 160). 
Events in the East during the 1850s brought additional profits to Shepheard as a provider of large-scale hospitality to officers and troops. On the outbreak of the Crimean War in 1854 he received a government contract to ease the passage of British detachments on their way to Sevastopol. This brought him $4500, part of which he obtained by pursuing defaulting officers as far as the Crimea. In 1857, by then the proprietor of the biggest hotel in the world, he was once again in demand to house and feed British soldiers before dispatching them on relays of donkeys to Suez, on their way to India to help quell the mutiny. 
In 1859 the visit of Queen Victoria's son Prince Alfred on a training cruise to Egypt brought the entire Mediterranean Fleet to anchor off Alexandria, and many more visitors to Shepheard's Hotel. The opening of the Suez Railway in 1858 had removed many of the hazards previously associated with travel in Egypt, and Shepheard's enjoyed the peak of its international fame. In January 1860, however, having long planned retirement to England for health and family reasons, Shepheard sold the hotel to M. Zeck of Alexandria for $10,000. 
In 1844 Shepheard had married a former hotel guest, Mary Rangecroft, whom he had met when she was on her way to India as a lady's companion, and who became an active partner in running the hotel. Of their two sons and six daughters, born between 1845 and 1856, four died of cholera and other illnesses at Cairo, one daughter died at the age of ten in England, and three other daughters lived to adulthood. Increasingly, Mary Shepheard spent long periods in England with her surviving small children. On a visit home on the strength of his Crimean War gains, Shepheard bought a farm at Radway, near Edgehill, Warwickshire; this he sold on a subsequent visit in 1857 and bought his eventual retirement home, Eathorpe Hall, near Leamington. Shepheard died at Eathorpe Hall on 12 June 1866, aged fifty. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50478


Simon, Andre Louis (1877-1970), writer on wine and food, was born on 28 February 1877 in rue Taranne, in the sixth 'arrondissement' of Paris, the second son and second child in the family of six sons and one daughter of Ernest Constant Simon ('c'.1848-1895), artist and former 'zouave pontifical', and his wife, Jeanne, daughter of Emile Dardoize, artist. He was educated at Le Petit Seminaire, Notre Dame des Champs, in Paris, and after failing his 'baccalaureat' he worked for a few months in 1894 for 'L'Avant Garde, gazette bi-mensuelle des Zouaves Pontificaux', a royalist journal. He then worked in England, improving his English, before three years' military service at the Ecole Militaire in Paris, on the staff of the 'Revue d'Artillerie'. On 17 October 1900 he married Edith Winifred (1879-1963), daughter of Henry Bond Symons, a former railway engineer, of Southampton, whom he had met in England. They had two sons and three daughters; one son became a Jesuit priest, and two of their daughters became nuns. 
In 1899 Simon began an apprenticeship with the champagne house Pommery and Greno, in Rheims, and was sent to London in 1902 to Pommery's London agent, to work as a champagne shipper. At the outbreak of the First World War, Simon reported to his regiment, the 13th artillery regiment, at Vincennes, Paris, and spent most of the war as an interpreter, including two years with the 50th (Northumbrian) division. He was awarded the British Military Medal in 1916. 
In 1905 Simon published the first of more than 100 books and pamphlets, 'The History of the Champagne Trade in England', a scholarly work based on records in the Guildhall Library, followed by his 'History of the Wine Trade in England' (1906-9) in three volumes. He was one of the founders of the Wine Trade Club in 1908, and as chairman of the education committee he gave regular lectures about wine, many of which were later published, and built up a wine library, while at the same time forming his own private collection. 'The Art of Good Living' (1929), a guide to the wines appropriate to different dishes, his first book about food, was followed by an exhibition at the First Edition Club of early printed books and manuscripts from his collection, including a leaf from the Gutenberg 'Bible' with Isaiah's prophecy of the vine. He travelled to South Africa, and was active in La Ligue Internationale des Adversaires des Prohibitions, which was wound up in 1933 after the American Congress repealed the 'Prohibition Act'. In 1931 Simon was one of the founders of the Saintsbury Club, a dining club formed in honour of George Saintsbury (1845-1933), the literary critic and author of 'Notes on a Cellar Book' (1920). 
In 1932 Simon found himself without a job when Pommery appointed a new agent for the sale of the firm's champagne. He became managing director of the Madeira Wine Association Ltd, formed to popularize madeira in England after he had visited Madeira in 1933, but this was short-lived. He was also asked by Constable to edit 'Constable's Wine Library', a new series of popular books on wine. He wrote 'Madeira: Wine, Cakes, and Sauce' (1933), 'Port' (1934), and 'Champagne' (1934) himself, and commissioned friends to write the others. 
It was through Ye Sette of Odd Volumes, a literary dining club, that he met A. J. A. Symons (1900-1941), founder of the First Edition Club, and in October 1933 they started the Wine and Food Society, a private venture. Symons became secretary, and Simon organized the lunches, dinners, and wine tastings, and edited the quarterly journal 'Wine and Food'. 212 attended the first meal, an Alsatian luncheon at the Cafe Royal, and by the end of the first year there were more than 1000 members. The society's first birthday was celebrated with a banquet at the Royal Pavilion, Brighton, marking the centenary of the death of Antonin Careme, chef to the prince regent. Simon visited the United States for the first time in 1934, founding several branches of the society. 
The Second World War put an end to the society's dinners, and after the death of A. J. A. Symons in 1941 Simon carried on alone, continuing to bring out 'Wine and Food', with editorials dismissing the idea that wartime food had to be dull. The whole of the winter 1941 issue was devoted to the sausage, and Ernest Oldmeadow, an expert on frugal cookery, contributed a series of recipes. Simon published cookery pamphlets, including 'Soups, Salads, Souses: Wartime Fare for the Fastidious' (1944), and also completed his 'Concise Encyclopedia of Gastronomy' (1939-46). After the war the dinners and wine tastings resumed. Simon travelled all over the world, visiting the many branches of the society: in 1954, its twenty-first birthday, there were twenty branches in England, twenty in the United States, and twelve elsewhere. In his late eighties Simon toured Australia and published 'The Wines, Vineyards, and Vignerons of Australia' (1967). He withdrew from the management of the Wine and Food Society in 1967, when he was ninety. 
Andre Simon was regarded as the leading authority in the world on wine and gastronomy, although he himself never learned to cook. His philosophy of life is best expressed in 'Tables of Content' (1933), a record of special occasions over the previous five years: here he says that the greatest joy is good wine in good company, and refers to a birthday dinner in 1914, 'What a dinner it was! What anecdotes, reminiscences, jokes and arguments flowed good-humouredly with every one of those perfect wines!' (xviii). He remained a French citizen, and retained a strong French accent. From 1919 he was president of the French Benevolent Society, founded in 1842 to care for destitute French immigrants in London. He published 'Les pauvres de France en Angleterre' in 1924, with illustrations by well-known artists. But he also loved England: he had his own cricket field in the grounds of his Sussex house, and he believed that English food was as good as the best anywhere, especially when partnered with French wines. Jovial, enthusiastic, and good-natured, Simon had thick snowy white hair and a portly figure. In 1968 he claimed never to have had a day's illness, and he continued his lifelong habit of opening a bottle of champagne at eleven every morning. He published two volumes of memoirs, 'By Request' (1957) and 'In the Twilight' (1969). 
Simon was made an honorary CBE in 1964 and an honorary freeman of the Vintners' Company in 1968. He died on 5 September 1970 in the Middlesex Hospital, London. A memorial requiem mass was held in Westminster Cathedral on 19 October 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 50479


Simpson, John (1808/9-1864), caterer, is of unknown parentage; the John Simpson first mentioned as proprietor of the Three Tuns, Billingsgate, from 1828 to 1844, may be either the subject or his father. It is likewise not known whether he was related to the John Simpson who in 1723 opened his 'Fish Ordinary', an unpretentious eating house in Bell Alley, Billingsgate, in the City of London. This Simpson sold up and retired, but came back into the restaurant trade shortly afterwards when he acquired the Queen's Arms in Bird-in-Hand Court, Cheapside. Renamed Simpson's, the restaurant flourished into the twentieth century. 
In 1848 John Simpson moved to Westminster to join Samuel Reiss who in 1828 had opened his 'cigar divan' (a lounge where gentlemen could gather to smoke cigars) on the site of the old Fountain Tavern at 103 Strand. Under Simpson's management, the divan was enlarged, with a restaurant and tavern, and renamed as Simpson's Grand Divan Tavern. This establishment also prospered; in the 1851 census the Cigar Divan at 103 Strand was home to the tavern keeper and sixteen staff, while the manager and five staff lived at 101-2 Strand. The restaurant was, according to the Baedeker guide for 1866, a 'large well-appointed establishment'. 
Four years earlier Simpson had sold out to Edmund William Calthie, and on 4 February 1865 a prospectus was issued for a company to be called Simpson's (Ltd) with capital of $100,000 to purchase and extend the business of Simpson's Divan Tavern. The prospectus stated that the opening of the nearby Charing Cross station had brought a great increase in trade, that Simpson and his partners had retired wealthy men, that the new directors had bought the lease of 101-3 Strand and the goodwill, and that they would retain Calthie as manager. 
Nothing is known of Simpson's wife, but their son, Thomas Simpson, was born in Wandsworth, Surrey, in 1837 and by the time of the 1861 census was farming 600 acres near St Albans, Hertfordshire. John Simpson died aged fifty-five on 22 January 1864. According to the death notice placed in the 'Watford Observer' (30 Jan 1864, 1f) he was 'of Langley Lodge, Langley, Herts. (late of the Divan Tavern, Strand)', and died at the Essex Arms Inn, Watford, but according to probate of his will, he was of East Barnet, Hertfordshire, and died at the Clarendon Hotel, Watford. Simpson's restaurant was purchased for the Savoy Group by Richard D'Oyly Carte in 1898 and refurbished five years later. It reopened in 1904 and, as 'Simpsons-in-the-Strand', continues to attract a fashionable clientele. 


@@@@@


doc= 50482


Nicols, Daniel Nicolas (1833-1897), restaurateur, was born in either Champlost or Vachy, villages in Burgundy, France. He was apprenticed to a coachbuilder in Sens, moving in the early 1850s to Paris, where he continued to work as a coachbuilder. In 1854, in Paris, he married his first cousin Celestine Lacoste (1832-1917), a peasant girl from Vachy: they had one daughter. In the mid-1850s he bought a wine shop from a relative, M. Champroux, and as the business took off he opened two more shops. When Champroux went bankrupt, in 1863, Thevenon, who had endorsed some of his bills, faced bankruptcy himself for 250,000 francs, and with a warrant out for his arrest he and his wife left France for London in October 1863. In 1864 he was sentenced in his absence to ten years' penal servitude (although he had repaid all his debts by 1871 it was not until 1890 that the supreme court of France cancelled his sentence). 
From now on Thevenon lived under the name of Daniel Nicols, later calling himself 'de Nicols'. Lodging in Soho, where there was a large French population, he took on odd jobs while his wife worked as a seamstress, and by 1865 they had saved enough to take over an oilcloth shop at 19 Glasshouse Street, near Piccadilly Circus, turning it into a cafe, which opened as the Cafe Restaurant Nicols on 11 February 1865. On 27 April 1865 he was naturalized as a British subject. Later in 1865 he and his wife bought a tailor's shop at 68 Regent Street, behind the cafe, and after enlarging the premises renamed it the Cafe Royal in 1867. He continued to acquire neighbouring premises, including a former warehouse at 8 Air Street, around the corner, which he bought in 1867. 
After the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71, many French refugees settled in London, and congregated at the Cafe Royal, attracted by the French cuisine and the atmosphere of a Parisian cafe. Its reputation grew after Nicols invited his nephew, Eugene Lacoste (or Delacoste), to stock the wine cellar. Lacoste laid down the finest collection of wine and brandy in England, with eighteen cellars full of large stocks of the rarest vintages, but he spent so recklessly that Nicols was threatened with bankruptcy for a second time. He was able to repay his creditors after the first of the famous Cafe Royal wine sales, lasting fourteen days and attracting buyers from all over Europe, when one eighth of the stock was sold. As well as offering French food and wine, Nicols evoked the atmosphere of the Paris of the second empire, decorating the restaurants with mirrors, crimson velvet, and gilt. His son-in-law, Georges Pigache, a French lace maker and Bonapartist living in London, designed an emblem for the Cafe Royal with the French imperial crown and the letter N (for Nicols but also for Napoleon), and this was displayed on all the glass, china, napkins, and menus. As the restaurant became popular with an increasingly elegant clientele, in the 1870s Nicols created a second restaurant, the Grill Room. 
In the 1880s Nicols added to the banqueting rooms and enlarged the restaurants when he bought a former hatter's shop at 21 Glasshouse Street, and numbers 6, 12, and 14 Air Street. By the end of the decade, in addition to the statesmen, politicians, and members of the royal family who congregated in the Grill Room or the Restaurant, the Cafe Royal was beginning to attract a more bohemian clientele, which gravitated to the Domino Room (or Brasserie), with its gilded walls and French decorative art. Calling themselves the 'Cafe-Royalistes', artists such as Whistler, Augustus John, and Rodin met there, and it became famous in the 1890s when it was frequented by Oscar Wilde. By 1892 it was advertising itself as 'the largest, most brilliant, and best known Anglo-French cafe in the world'. 
In 1884 Nicols took over the unsuccessful Pandora Theatre in Leicester Square, renaming it the Empire Theatre. In 1887 it reopened as a music hall seating eight hundred, and like the Alhambra and the London Pavilion it was famous for its promenades and saloon bars at the back of the stalls, frequented by well-to-do young men. 
When he had made enough money Nicols built himself a mansion, Regent House in Surbiton, Surrey, set in three hundred acres of land in which he grew peaches and grapes to supply the Cafe Royal. Extravagantly furnished and decorated in the style of the Cafe Royal, with gilded panels depicting mythological figures, Regent House was the scene of lavish parties at which guests were entertained in the ballroom by the 'corps de ballet' of the Empire Theatre. A leading member of the French community in London, Nicols belonged to the Societe Nationale, the French club in London, and made large donations to the French Hospital in Leicester Place. He was also a Freemason. 
After suffering from diabetes for nine years, Nicols died from gangrene of the foot and blood poisoning on 28 February 1897 at Regent House, and was buried in Brookwood cemetery. He left a considerable estate. His widow, Celestine, disputed the will, claiming that under French law she was entitled to half the income and capital. The court found in her favour because the marriage had taken place in France, but her daughter and son-in-law appealed against the verdict, and the case finally went to the House of Lords, which in December 1899 upheld the original decision. After the will had been settled Celestine Nicols took over the management of the Cafe Royal, and revived its fortunes after its decline at the end of the 1890s, running it until her death in 1917 at the age of eighty-five. After the Quadrant was demolished in 1922, it was rebuilt on the same site, and continued to be frequented by writers and artists until the Second World War. The Brasserie closed in 1951, and in 1954 Charles Forte took over the Cafe Royal, making it the headquarters of his catering empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50483


Ude, Louis-Eustache (d. 1846), chef, became a celebrated figure in England in the later 1820s, but little definite is known of his earlier life and circumstances. However, he was French and for a time had been a cook at the court of Louis XVI. He says in the preface to his book, 'The French Cook' (1813), that he has had 'upwards of forty years practice' (Ude, vi) of his vocation, so he must have begun working in kitchens in the 1770s, somewhere near the beginning in 1774 of the doomed king's reign. He is unlikely to have continued as the king's chef much beyond the flight to Varennes in 1791, and certainly not after the king was guillotined in 1793. In the standard French work ('Dictionnaire Universal de cuisine', vol. 4, 1892, p. 1803) Joseph Favre wrote that Ude was 'maitre d'hotel' to Napoleon's mother, Princess Letitia Bonaparte, for two years. There is, however, a tradition that he fled from the terror to England. 
In any case, Ude became chef to Charles William Molyneux, created earl of Sefton in 1771, of whom Joseph Favre says 'this very rich lord, who was regarded as the king of English Epicureans, recompensed the services of his cook by leaving him an annual income of one hundred pounds sterling (2500 francs)' (Favre, 4.1803). There is a story that he left Sefton's service because a guest once added more pepper to his soup. Ude became the chef at the United Service Club, 'where his dinners were acknowledged to be better than any other Club could boast' (Humphreys, 221). The duke of York, 'the soldier's friend', subsequently employed Ude; and it was to the duke's memory that he dedicated the 1828 edition of his cookery book. Ude then became chef at Watier's Club. 
First published in London in 1813, Ude's 'The French Cook' was undoubtedly a great success, going through numerous editions. Although it was not, as Favre argued, the first culinary work to appear in London, there is some truth in the claim that Ude was 'one of the first to popularize haute cuisine in London' (Favre, vol. 4, p. 1803). The saying, 'Coquus nascitur non fit' -- 'cooks are born, not made' -- is attributed to him, and in the section of the book entitled 'Advice to cooks' he wrote that 'Music, dancing, fencing, painting, and mechanics in general, possess professors under twenty years of age, whereas, in the first line of cooking, pre-eminence never occurs under thirty' (Ude, xix). He also insists that cookery is the most difficult and demanding of the sciences; that there are few good cooks, though many who claim to be; and that a properly qualified cook can be 'placed in the rank of artists' (ibid., xxix). 
One well-known quotation attributed to Ude is: 'It is very remarkable, that in France, where there is but one religion, the sauces are infinitely varied, whilst in England, where the different sects are innumerable, there is, we may say, but one single sauce' (www.clairvision.org/UdeSauceQuote). He certainly did write that 'sauces... are the soul of Cookery' (Ude, xxiii) and also that 'Cookery in England, when it is well done, is superior to that of any in the world' (ibid., xxiv). 'How many marriages', he asks rhetorically, 'have been the consequences of meeting at dinner? How much good fortune has been the result of a good supper?' (ibid.). In an essay, 'On cookery', in the 1828 Philadelphia edition of 'The French Cook', Ude says 'The Ladies of England are unfavourably disposed towards our art... It is particularly the case with them (and indeed it is so in some measure with our own sex) that they are not introduced to their parent's table till their palates have been completely benumbed by the strict diet observed in the Nursery and Boarding-Schools. (ibid., xxvii)' One of Ude's most celebrated dishes was conceived while in the service of the earl of Sefton. This was 'an entree of soft roes of mackerel baked in butter and served with a cream sauce' (Blyth, 105). Another exquisite culinary concoction, first produced for the young Lord George Bentinck, was 'a most delicious sweet made with fresh stoned cherries, and which he christened 'Boudin de cerises a la Bentinck'' (ibid.). 
Ude's fame was at its height during the ten years in which he served as chef at Crockford's, the famous gaming club opened in 1828 at 50 St James's by William Crockford. His appointment was announced by the 'Public Ledger' in glowing terms: 'Mr Ude of culinary celebrity is engaged by Mr Crockford, to superintend the 'cuisine' of his vast establishment... Mr Ude is fitting up a house for his own family contiguous to the scene of his official duties, in Albemarle Street' (Humphreys, 227). Ude had married Barbe Lucot on 4 April 1821 at St George's, Hanover Square; and they lived in Albemarle Street until his death. 
At a time when club food consisted chiefly of boiled fowl, mutton, and roast beef, Ude's more refined cooking put Crockford's on the culinary map. He had been enticed to work for the club by the then enormous salary of $1200 -- out of which he had to pay all his assistant chefs and kitchen staff -- and by the prospect of feeding the distinguished and important men who were members. Ude had also expressly obtained 'the freedom to order whatever he liked and to cook in whatever manner he chose' (Blyth, 104). 
Conscious of the brilliance of his art, Ude would rage at any who failed to appreciate the privilege. One evening he charged a member 2's'. for a red mullet and 6died for an exquisite sauce, but exploded with anger when the diner objected to paying for the sauce as well. 'The imbecile must think that red mullets come out of the sea with my sauce in their pockets', he protested (Blyth, 115-16). 
Ude's reign at Crockford's ended in 1838 after a fierce disagreement with the management. 'There has been a row at Crockfords, and Ude dismissed', Benjamin Disraeli informed his sister Sarah on 13 October 1838. 'He told the Committee that he was worth $4,000 a year' (Monypenny, 39-40). Ude retired, but confessed to Lord Wombwell that he was very miserable and sat all day at home doing nothing. When Wombwell recommended the exercise of his art for the gratification of his own appetite, Ude replied: 'Bah!... I have not been into my kitchen once, I hate the sight of my kitchen. I dine on roast mutton dressed by a cookmaid!' Asked about Crockford's, Ude admitted that 'I love that Club, though they are ingrats' (ibid.). 
Ude remained in London until his death at Albemarle Street on 10 April 1846. His wife survived him. Reporting his death, the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described Ude as 'the celebrated 'chef de cuisine' at Crockfords, and author of a popular cookery-book, to which his portrait is prefixed' ('GM', 25, 1846, 663). 


@@@@@


doc= 50484


Verral, William (1715-1761), innkeeper and writer on cookery, was born on 10 April 1715, in Lewes, Sussex, the fifth of the eight sons (and one daughter) of Richard Verrall (died 1737), master of the White Hart inn in Lewes from about 1724, and his wife, Sarah Mores (died 1758). The family depended on the patronage of Thomas Pelham-Holles, first duke of Newcastle: William's father ran the inn, which had been converted from a Pelham family mansion; his eldest brother, Richard, managed a coffee house catering for the duke's political supporters; and after Richard's death in 1742 another brother, Henry, took over. Family members frequently petitioned the duke for places in the local surveyorship of windows, the customs, or the Post Office. After his father's death William was chosen to succeed him as master of the White Hart in 1738, after a period working in the ducal kitchens (probably at Newcastle House in London) under Newcastle's famous French cook, Pierre Clouet or Cloue. Despite Verral's assertion in his book concerning his several years' experience under Clouet, Newcastle's accounts suggest that he worked as an under-cook to the duke for only about two and a half years (BL, Add. MSS 33321, fol. 27; 33322, fol. 24). By August 1738 he was running the inn, for in that month he supplied suppers for two balls in Lewes for which Newcastle paid; similar payments were recorded in 1742, 1743, and 1744. 
In the 1740s Verral seems to have prospered: in 1740 he applied to Newcastle for the position of Lewes postmaster and, although the place was already promised elsewhere, he did obtain the carriage of letters between Eastbourne and Lewes. In 1742 he contributed 3 guineas to the subscription for the building of a new hospital in the town, and in January 1745 his name headed the petition addressed to Sir Francis Poole by a number of Lewes tradesmen to protest against the prolonged quartering of a company of soldiers in the town. As a respected member of the community, Verral was a headborough for Lewes 1748-9, high constable in 1753-4, and served as an official again in 1756. But at some point in the late 1750s his prosperity declined, perhaps after the death of his first wife, Ann Botting, in 1757. They had married on 29 January 1745, and a daughter, Elizabeth, had been born in the same year. Verral may have turned to authorship in the hope of making money. His cookery book, 'A Complete System of Cookery', which appeared in 1759, was the result of his experience under Clouet, and the recipes offer an illuminating glimpse of French 'nouvelle cuisine', with its light, simple dishes, as it was practised in England in the 1730s and 1740s. Excellent though the recipes are, Verral's highly personal preface, with its satirical anecdotes of the rustic Sussex gentry, can have done nothing to endear the book to its potential readers, and the first edition was also the last. 
Verral's fortunes went from bad to worse: early in 1761 he appealed to Newcastle for help, and the duke recommended him to the justices of the peace of Middlesex as keeper of the house of correction. But, by February 1761, his furniture had been put up for auction, and in March he was declared bankrupt and was thus ineligible for the post. On 2 March he married Hannah Turner (died 1765); he died later that month in Lewes, and was buried there on 26 March 1761 at St Michael's Church. Today Verral is remembered for his cookery book, one of the very few to give a true picture of French cookery in England in the middle of the eighteenth century. Verral's recipes are clear and well explained, with comments on the relative merits of French and English cookery, and on the success of particular dishes. Such a balanced discussion of the two cuisines is extremely rare among the mass of xenophobic comment which characterizes English cookery books of the period. 


@@@@@


doc= 50486


White, Florence Louisa (1863-1940), writer on cookery, was born on 20 June 1863 at York Terrace, Peckham, London, the fifth and youngest child of Richard White, a lace buyer for a firm in the City of London, and his second wife, Harriet Jane Thirkell (died 1869). Richard White came originally from the seaside hamlet of Worthing, Sussex, where his maternal grandfather, and later his father, had been innkeepers in the 1790s and 1830s. Florence remembered, from the 1860s, a regular Sunday dinner of beef spit-roasted in front of the kitchen fire, with the gravy absorbed by a Sussex 'bolster' suet pudding. The Thirkells came from near Cranbrook in the weald of Kent. 
In her autobiography, 'A Fire in the Kitchen' (1938), Florence recorded how her happy early childhood ended abruptly with her mother's death when she was six. A few months later Florence lost the sight of one eye in an accident with a spinning-top. This resulted in temporary blindness followed by a lifetime's frail health, with persistent neuralgic headaches and a chronically weak heart. Although she hoped during much of her girlhood to go to Girton College, Cambridge, she was removed from school in 1878, when her father's business suffered in the depression. Her job was to shop economically for food (since the family was by then poor), to wait on her uncongenial stepmother, and to teach the three small children of her father's third marriage. During the next two years, Florence and her elder sister expanded this teaching arrangement into a small, fee-paying school. At eighteen, however, she was sent to Fareham, Hampshire, to nurse her father's two elderly sisters, formerly proprietors of the Lion Hotel and Assembly Rooms. From them, as she later described in her autobiography, she learned that 'good epicurean country-house cookery which had been handed down the family from mother to daughter since the days of Queen Elizabeth' (White, 'Fire', 338). Her return to Fareham towards the end of her life, when she opened a cookery school there, was directly inspired by her memories of learning traditional English cooking techniques, an accomplishment of which she never ceased to be proud. 
Between 1884 and 1922, Florence reckoned, she held twenty-eight different types of job, including 'high-school mistress, governess in a private family, journalist, waitress, shopkeeper... matron, club organizer, settlement worker, visiting companion to a professor, newspaper reporter, fashion editor, sculptor's model, [domestic servants'] registry-office keeper, and matron of a governess's home' (White, 'Fire', 258). She was invariably short of money and ready to undertake almost any new job, although by the age of thirty she found herself too frail to continue either as a schoolteacher or as a governess. Her first book, 'Easy Dressmaking', which she persuaded the Singer Sewing Machine Company to publish in 1891, sold 110,000 copies in eight years. Several decades passed, however, before she brought out her next book, 'Good Things in England' (1932), a collection of traditional, regional recipes which represented her most abiding, lifelong interest, and its successor 'Flowers as Food' (1934). 
By the outbreak of the First World War, Florence had been employed in women's journalism in London and Edinburgh; social work in Hoxton; teaching English to private pupils in Paris; running a Girls' Friendly Society lodge in the Scottish countryside; and, in 1899, accompanying two children to India and Burma, where her elder brother had made his career. Despite an independent, almost liberated, lifestyle, she was most fulfilled (she later declared) when 'mothering' somebody, and felt confirmed in her increasingly spiritualized belief that woman's natural place was at the kitchen stove when she entered domestic service in her early fifties. During and after the First World War she looked after a succession of Roman Catholic priests, and in 1921-2 she was cook-housekeeper in a women students' hall of residence in Kensington. 
Only in her sixties, living in frugal semi-retirement in a Chelsea basement room, supported by freelance journalism and help from her family, did Florence begin research into the history of her lifelong passion, good, traditional English food. In 1928 she founded the English Folk Cookery Association, and in 1932, as well as producing 'Good Things in England', she edited the first of the association's 'Good Food Registers', which contained information, mainly passed on by contributors who had responded to her advertisements in the press, about towns, villages, hotels, restaurants, or even humble guest houses in which good English cooking or foodstuffs could be found. 
Although sketchy by the standard of later cookery writing, these works have a certain pioneering charm, intensified by Florence's determination to rescue true English cooking from the fashionable trend towards everything French. Further editions appeared in 1935 and 1936, the latter entitled 'Where Shall We Eat or Put Up?' In a note in this, entitled 'What is real English cookery?', Florence wrote evocatively of 'a roast pheasant with Celery Sauce and English Salad Sauce; a boiled pheasant with celery sauce. The correct way of making a Lancashire Hot Pot with oysters and serving it with home-made pickled red cabbage. The stuffing of grouse with red whortleberries. The jugging of hare and serving with redcurrant jelly. The making and frying of sausages. The frying of fish, in which our girls and women who live on the coast excel. (White, 'Where Shall We Eat', 173)' In 1936, at Fareham, Florence opened her domestic training school or House of Studies, which was intended to be a place where women of all ages and social classes could mingle. English cooking, she announced triumphantly in her autobiography in 1938, was now fashionable and popular, and no longer to be despised as dull or unimaginative. By that time, however, she was almost blind and crippled by various illnesses. She died at 52 Wickham Road, Fareham, Hampshire, on 12 March 1940. 


@@@@@


doc= 50487


Wilson, William Carus (1791-1859), Church of England clergyman and founder of charity schools, was born on 7 July 1791 at Heversham, Westmorland, the eldest of the eight surviving children of William Carus (1764-1851) of Casterton Hall, Westmorland, and his wife, Margaret (died 1832), daughter and heir of Benjamin Shipphard of Natland, Westmorland. His father, MP for Cockermouth (1821-6), added Wilson to his surname on inheriting the Casterton estates from his aunt in 1793. Two of William Carus Wilson's three brothers became clergyman. 
Privately educated -- including tuition by the evangelical John Fawcett of Carlisle -- to the age of nineteen, Carus Wilson was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1810 and graduated BA in 1815 (MA, 1818). He married Anne (1785/6-1859), daughter of Major-General Charles Neville, on 31 January 1815. On applying to become a clergyman he was warned by Charles Simeon that his views were 'unduly Calvinistic' (Barker, 860), and Dr Law, bishop of Chester, to whom he first applied for ordination, rejected him for this reason. 
In 1816, following ordination by the archbishop of York, Carus Wilson was presented to the rectory of Tunstall, near Casterton, which he resigned in 1828. In 1818 he was appointed chaplain to the duke of Sussex, in 1825 his father presented him to the rectory of Whittington, Lancashire, and from 1834 to 1856 he was perpetual curate of Casterton. He succeeded his father to the Casterton estates in 1851. 
Carus Wilson acquired his reputation as 'Father of the cheap religious literature of the day' ('Daily Express') by his prolific writings for and editorship of penny periodicals over a period of more than twenty-five years. He aimed to inculcate religious belief and habits by retelling admonitory and morality tales in plain and simple language accessible to the semi-literate. The emphasis on sin, hell-fire punishment, and especially death, often described at length in harrowing detail, now seems morbid and distasteful, especially as most of the literature was aimed at children, but the tracts attained a wide circulation and influence; by 1845, 3000 copies each of the 'Friendly Visitor' (established 1819), the 'Children's Friend' (1824), and the 'Teacher's Friend' (1844) were distributed monthly. 
Carus Wilson was also an energetic founder of charity schools for girls, including the School for Training Servants and Teachers at Whittington (1820) and the Clergy Daughters' School at Cowan Bridge, Lancashire (1824). The latter became notorious as the original of Lowood Institution in 'Jane Eyre' (1847). Charlotte Bronte entered the school in 1824 with her sisters, Maria, Elizabeth, and Emily; the two eldest girls developed tuberculosis there and were sent home to die. Charlotte Bronte always blamed the school's harsh regime and punitive religious discipline for their early deaths, and in her novel graphically portrayed the pupils' sufferings. Many former pupils recognized the school and its founder (Mr Brocklehurst), though Bronte always maintained that she had not felt it necessary to be impartial or objective in a work of fiction, and another former pupil, Emma Jane Worboise, who was at the school in the 1840s, remembered Carus Wilson as kind, sincere, and generous. When Mrs Gaskell identified the school and Carus Wilson by name in her 'Life of Charlotte Bronte' (1857) she was threatened with a libel action. The school's problems had been mainly confined to its early years and most of these were remedied by its removal in 1833 to a new site at Casterton, where it flourished. 
By 1845 ill health, especially sciatica, forced Carus Wilson to delegate some of his responsibilities. He ceased active editorship of his periodicals, resigned the management of his schools to his son and sons-in-law, and spent three years on the continent, wintering at Nice -- where he tried to evangelize Sardinian soldiers. He then retired to Ventnor, Isle of Wight, where from 1855 he resided at Eglinton House. He took an active interest in the welfare of soldiers and sailors. During the Indian mutiny he distributed 1,500,000 'Bibles' and tracts to British soldiers, maintained a monthly correspondence with more than 200 of them, and established a soldiers' institute at Portsmouth, where he campaigned for temperance and reportedly caused a local brewer to retire from his business. 
Carus Wilson's wife died, aged seventy-three at Eglinton House on 15 November 1859. Declaring himself 'a poor sinner creeping into Heaven' ('Daily Express'), he died of abdominal cancer at 20 Montague Place, Russell Square, Bloomsbury, on 30 December 1859, and was buried in the family vault at Casterton on 7 January 1860. In St John's Church, Newport, Isle of Wight, a monument was 'erected by the non-commissioned officers and privates of the British Army in token of their love and gratitude' (Ewbank, 22). 


@@@@@


doc= 50489


Turner, Merfyn Lloyd (1915-1991), penal reformer and author, was born on 20 October 1915 in Pen-y-graig, Rhondda, Glamorgan, the third of four children of Edward Godfrey Turner (1873-1954) and his wife, Lizzie Violet, 'nee' Lloyd (1889-1979). The family's first language was Welsh. Turner's father, a Wesleyan minister, moved his ministry every three years and the children went from manse to manse throughout Wales, attending local schools. Turner took an arts degree at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth (1935-8), where he won the Gladstone prize for history, and he gained a teaching certificate at Westminster College, London (1938-9). 
In 1940 Turner, a lifelong pacifist, was rejected as a conscientious objector and sentenced to three months' hard labour in Swansea gaol. This experience was seminal, and nurtured in Turner a passionate commitment to those on the margins of 'normal' society, especially those in prison. He said of his own prison experience, 'I felt as if all the world had abandoned me' and he never forgot how 'prison degraded the man' ('In Prison'). On release he was active in social work in Cardiff, establishing a youth club in Tiger Bay, working with the pacifist service unit, and playing football as an amateur for Cardiff City. In 1944 he moved to Oxford House, the settlement in Bethnal Green, London, and the seedbed for many social work pioneers, whom Turner viewed as kindred revolutionaries, 'comradeship in practice'. He lived and worked in London for the rest of his life, though maintaining a Welsh base. He was appointed warden of the Webbe Boys' Club in Bethnal Green but characteristically became drawn to those boys who would not join that or any other club, the 'unclubbables'. Encouraged in that interest by a committee of like-minded individuals, some of whom remained closely associated with Turner's work for over forty years, funding was obtained from the London Parochial Charities (now the City Parochial Foundation) to acquire a barge moored at Wapping. In 1949 the Barge Club experiment for 'unclubbable' boys began, with Turner as the worker until 1952. It was his first innovative success. 
All his life Turner kept notes on his work (in Welsh or English). In both languages he wrote numerous articles, and gave countless talks, including memorable ones on the BBC in the 1950s and 1960s. He wrote very little about himself, but in an early Barge Club report described himself as 'unclubbable'. He was a left-handed nonconformist who essentially worked on his own initiatives, not fitting easily into existing structures. He was not conventionally charismatic but he inspired others. Angular and lean, he had a quiet presence, unnoticed in many gatherings. Yet whenever he spoke, be it to one or a hundred, he was clear, persistent, and persuasive. He rooted his arguments in the real experience of men he knew in prison or in lodging-houses. Few conversations with him progressed far without him saying, 'I was talking to a man in prison last night'. His vision was of practical compassion because, as he concluded in his BBC Wales lecture for 1971, 'Who cares?', 'we know that if we exclude the undeserving from our society, we ourselves will also be diminished by their absence and by their loss' (Cook, 205). His own prison experience led him in 1946 to become a voluntary prison visitor at Pentonville prison, where he visited regularly until March 1991. He saw men leaving prison homeless, isolated, and unrecognized by society. Turner spent three months living in a common lodging-house, the usual bleak destination of 'inadequate' ex-prisoners. By 1953 he had developed his scheme to establish Norman House, a family home for twelve homeless former prisoners. It was funded by the London Parochial Charities, and opened in 1955 with Turner as the worker. He believed that to give former prisoners a chance was 'not an act of charity but a matter of right' (ibid., 67). The experience of the house was to be one of 'great difficulty, crisis and ultimate success' (ibid., 79). It changed forever the penal system's, and society's, thinking about prison aftercare. This, the original 'half-way house', was the second and greater of Turner's pioneering initiatives, and it stimulated a national and international network. 
The Norman House truly became a family home when on 12 August 1955 Turner married Shirley Elizabeth Davis ('b'. 1932), a young barrister who had applied to become a befriender to the residents. They lived there until 1960, and Turner also undertook in 1959 a detailed study of lodging-houses. They had five children. From 1960 to 1980 Turner -- funded by the City Parochial Foundation, the Gulbenkian Foundation, and others -- worked tirelessly to spread the idea of aftercare hostels at home and abroad and to advocate effective alternatives to prison. He also visited patients in Broadmoor and extended aftercare opportunities to them. After retiring in 1980 he continued as before, and developed a particular interest in men in the deportation wing in Pentonville as well as visiting Western prisoners in Turkish prisons. 
Turner was a modest and humorous man with a passion for all things Welsh, from poetry to rugby, and was especially proud of the honorary doctorate conferred on him by the University of Wales in 1982. His writings, including correspondence with men in prison, continued until just before his death. He published four major books, which described particular aspects of his work and distinctive approach in detail. 'Ships without Sails' appeared in 1953, followed by 'Forgotten Men' (1960), 'Safe Lodging' (1961), and 'A Pretty Sort of Prison' (1964). Unpublished material was subsequently deposited at the Institute of Criminology, Cambridge. He died of cancer on 6 August 1991 in the Royal Free Hospital, London, and was cremated at St Marylebone crematorium six days later. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50491


Vidler, Alexander Roper (1899-1991), Church of England clergyman and Christian apologist, was born at the Stone House, Church Square, Rye, Sussex, on 27 December 1899, the son of Leopold Amon Vidler (1870-1954) and his wife, Edith Hamilton, 'nee' Roper (1863-1936). His father worked for, and subsequently became the managing director of, the family shipping business, which dated back to the 1820s. His mother supplemented the family income through bookbinding and leatherwork. Vidler was kissed in his pram by his parents' neighbour in Rye, Henry James, who remarked: 'What an intelligent-looking baby!' He was educated at Sutton Valence School, Kent. In 1915-16 he was taken out of school to work for his family firm while his father was in the army, but he later returned, becoming head boy. 
Vidler had become aware of a call to ordination in his teens, and after a brief spell as an officer cadet in the Royal Field Artillery in the last months of the First World War went up to Selwyn College, Cambridge, in January 1919 to read theology. As a member of the boat club at Selwyn he met the young Malcolm Muggeridge, who persuaded him to join the Labour Party, and with whom he was to enjoy a lifelong friendship. In July 1921 Vidler graduated with an upper second and transferred to Wells Theological College to receive ordination training, but found it stuffy, and negotiated a transfer back to Cambridge to the Oratory of the Good Shepherd, a small Anglo-Catholic community of celibates founded in 1912. He became a priest-companion in January 1923, and made a life-profession in 1939. He remained a lifelong celibate. 
On ordination in December 1922 Vidler served his title at the Mission of the Holy Spirit in Newcastle, a leading Anglo-Catholic slum ministry. Despite the living conditions -- he often caught fleas from his parishioners -- he found he enjoyed the daily rounds of taking services, attending deathbeds, and house visiting. He continued his political interests, electioneering for the Labour Party, and helping to organize a northern follow-up to the 1924 interdenominational Conference on Christian Politics, Economics and Citizenship, collaborating with Leslie Hunter, later bishop of Sheffield. At this conference Vidler also showed his lifelong capacity for controversy, giving a fiery speech attacking Tyneside shipowners, one of whom was in the audience. 
In 1923 Vidler left Tyneside for St Aidan's, Small Heath, Birmingham, where he served as senior curate. It was here from 1924 that he became embroiled with E. W. Barnes, his theologically modernist bishop, on the issue of the reservation of the sacrament. St Aidan's was one of fifteen churches in the diocese that refused to accept Barnes's edict on the issue, which caused Barnes, upon the retirement of Vidler's priest-in-charge, to refuse to institute a successor. During the ensuing court battles Vidler, as senior curate, became 'de facto' priest-in-charge. In 1931, the legal battle won, Vidler informed Bishop Barnes that he was resigning, and received a terse reply attacking him for clerical disobedience, a communication that Vidler had framed and put on his wall. During these years Vidler produced his first book, 'Magic and Religion' (1930), a defence of Anglo-Catholic sacramentalism. He followed this with 'Sex, Marriage and Religion' (1932), which argued that contraception should be allowed within marriage, and which championed economic equality for women. 
In 1931 Vidler returned to the Oratory of the Good Shepherd, Cambridge. Already he was beginning to move away from the optimism of his earlier liberal Anglo-Catholicism in favour of a cultural pessimism and criticism of political and theological liberalism influenced by (among others) Reinhold Niebuhr and D. R. Davies. Set against the backdrop of looming European crisis, this trend fully manifested itself in 'God's Judgement on Europe' (1940) and 'Secular Despair and Christian Faith' (1941), books that took a severely pessimistic view of European civilization. 
In 1939 Vidler became warden of St Deiniol's Library, Hawarden, a post that left him free to write. His books from this period included 'Christ's Strange Work' (1944) on the concept of law in Christian theology, 'The Orb and the Cross' (1945), a work on the relationship between church and state inspired by St Deiniol's founder, William Gladstone, and 'The Theology of F. D. Maurice' (1948). He had been attracted by the quirkiness of Maurice's theology, and by Maurice's emphasis on church unity; with Michael Ramsey, Vidler did much to revive the Victorian theologian's reputation among twentieth-century theologians. 
Most of Vidler's time was occupied by the monthly journal 'Theology', which he edited between 1939 and 1964. Initially in the liberal catholic tradition of Anglicanism, 'Theology' rapidly broadened its scope under Vidler, increasing circulation significantly. The team of contributors he assembled included T. S. Eliot, C. S. Lewis, and John Middleton Murry. During his editorship of 'Theology' he occasionally courted controversy, arguing in October 1939 that the devilry of Nazism did not necessarily imply that the British empire was angelic, and publishing an article in 1951 critical of freemasons in the church, and by implication the archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey Fisher, who was a freemason. 
It was also at St Deiniol's that Vidler set up his first theological network. The St Deiniol's Koinonia grew to a fifty-strong group of younger theologians which produced the 'St Deiniol's Correspondence', a private theological newsletter and testing-ground for radical theological ideas, which he edited until 1954. During the Second World War he was also (along with T. S. Eliot) on the editorial board of J. H. Oldham's 'Christian News-Letter', a weekly and subsequently fortnightly correspondence which distilled the results of fresh theological thinking, and had a circulation of over 10,000. He also participated in Oldham's Moot, a heavyweight discussion group focusing on post-war reconstruction. 
Alongside his academic writings, Vidler built a reputation as a popular Christian apologist, both in books such as 'A Plain Man's Guide to Christianity' (1936), and as one of the foremost university mission speakers of his generation, addressing missions at Oxford (1938), Liverpool (1941), Leeds (1943), Trinity College, Dublin (1944), Cambridge (1947), and Edinburgh (1948). 
In August 1948 Vidler was invited by George VI to become a canon at St George's Chapel, Windsor. He accepted with the express intention of devoting his time to the Christian Frontier Council. This was another of Oldham's creations, which sought to undertake fresh theological examination of the boundaries between Christian faith and secular work. The council's offices were accommodated in his extensive canonry at Windsor, as was his own unofficial theological college, which comprised middle-aged ordination candidates known as 'the Doves', or, less charitably, 'Vidler's Vipers,' nearly fifty of whom passed through his training. 
In 1956 Vidler was unexpectedly offered the deanship of King's College, Cambridge, a post that put him at the centre of the Cambridge ecclesiastical scene, and exposed him daily to full-bloodedly intellectual unbelief, for which King's had a reputation. In January 1958 he launched the most important network of his career, a group of radical theologians in Cambridge. His own 'Essays in Liberality' (1957) had given some hints of the radicalism to come. The Cambridge group had been suggested by Hugh Montefiore and Howard Root, and also included John Burnaby and Harry Williams. After several years of deliberation the group produced 'Soundings: Essays in Christian Understanding' (1962), edited by Vidler, which declared that traditional Christian theology was faced by a range of seemingly insuperable difficulties, and offered suggestions as to how these difficulties might be overcome. It was the most intellectually heavyweight work that the 'radical ferment' in the theology of the 1960s produced, and caused a significant stir in the ecclesiastical press -- though it did not, as Vidler confessed in private correspondence, 'turn out anything like so radical as some of us at least had originally hoped' (letter from Alec Vidler to Roger Tennant, 29 Oct 1962, E. Sussex RO, 5020/2/36). 
With three other members of the group, Vidler also gave a series of open lectures to Cambridge undergraduates in February 1963 on 'Objections to Christian belief'. These drew 1500 listeners each week, and became a best-seller on their publication later the same year. He was by now a national figure, besieged by speaking invitations. He also gained notoriety through his appearances on television, most notably in a BBC 'Meeting Point' broadcast of November 1962 in which he pronounced himself 'bored with parsons', a comment that drew criticism in the press and the church assembly (LPL, Ramsey papers, vol. 28, fols. 119-49). He pursued his academic interests while at Cambridge, acting as university lecturer in church history from 1959, producing an edition of George Tyrrell's 'Christianity at the Crossroads' (1963), and writing 'A Century of Social Catholicism' (1964), '20th Century Defenders of the Faith' (1965), and 'F. D. Maurice and Company' (1966). He also wrote the highly successful 'The Church in the Age of Revolution' (1961), a volume in the 'Pelican History of the Church'. 
Though celibate, Vidler was gregarious, with a wide circle of friends. His writings and public utterances were always beautifully expressed, and often marked by a twinkle of mischief. He cut a distinctive figure, with flashing eyes and a beard that was described as 'Van Dyck in maturity and patriarchal in old age' ('The Guardian', 30 July 1991). He eschewed the clerical dog collar, instead sporting a black shirt and white necktie. This briefly set a fashion among radical clergy in the 1960s, but he typically insisted that he was merely reverting to tradition, by adopting early nineteenth-century clerical garb. 
Although he never held high church office, Vidler was a master of what he called 'theological midwifery', facilitating dialogue by bringing together diverse thinkers in informal networks. This ability, and the protean nature of his thought, enabled him to be at the forefront of trends in Anglican theology for three decades, and he influenced evangelicals, Anglo-Catholics, and liberals alike. He was also an expert on Roman Catholic modernism, and, with the knowledge of the Vatican and Lambeth Palace, led secret discussions between Catholic and Anglican theologians from 1955 onwards. His career reflects in microcosm the complex shifts and cross-currents occurring in Anglican theology in the mid-twentieth century. 
In August 1967 Vidler retired to the house in which he had been born, a thirteenth-century priory in Rye. He was elected mayor of Rye in 1972, proud to hold an office that his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather had held before him. He produced an autobiography, 'Scenes from a Clerical Life' (1977), and with his old friend Malcolm Muggeridge made a television series on the journeys of St Paul. He also indulged his passions for bee-keeping and sending tongue-in-cheek letters to 'The Times'. He had hoped to die in the house of his birth, but at the time of his death, of old age, on 25 July 1991, he was resident in the Acacia House Rest Home, Ashford Road, St Michael's, Tenterden, Kent. He donated his body to medical science. 


@@@@@


doc= 50492


Villiers, Charles Amherst (1900-1991), engineer and portrait painter, was born in London on 9 December 1900, the second child and elder son in the family of two sons and two daughters of Ernest Amherst Villiers (1863-1923), Liberal MP for Brighton from 1906 to 1910, and his wife, the Hon. Elaine Augusta Guest, third daughter of Ivor Bertie Guest, first Baron Wimborne. His father, who was descended from Thomas Villiers, first earl of Clarendon (of the second creation), was the nephew of William Amhurst Tyssen-Amherst, first Baron Amherst of Hackney. His mother was a cousin of Winston Churchill. His formal education began at Oundle School, where he first developed a passion for engineering, particularly propulsion systems for motor cars and aircraft. During the First World War, with the help of his headmaster at Oundle, H. W. Sanderson, he was apprenticed to the Royal Aircraft Factory at Farnborough. He was on the point of being commissioned into the Royal Flying Corps when armistice was declared in November 1918. In 1919 he entered Cambridge, where he read physics. 
Villiers's first appointment after Cambridge was with the Armstrong-Whitworth Development Company in Coventry, where he stayed until 1922 before joining Raymond Mays, founder of ERA cars and later of BRM, whom he had met at university. Villiers successfully modified the camshafts of two 1.5 litre Brescia Bugatti cars which Mays had acquired, enabling them to out-perform larger-engined vehicles. This attracted the attention of Ettore Bugatti, who invited Villiers to spend six months at his works at Molsheim in eastern France. This was an important period in the enhancement of Villiers's reputation, since a number of his ideas were incorporated into Bugatti cars to enable them to achieve higher r.p.m. During the 1920s Villiers established himself as a leading authority on superchargers and was much in demand as a consulting engineer of high reputation. Commissions by Raymond Mays and others enabled him to supercharge some of the leading motor cars of the day, from the 1.5 litre AC to the 7.7 litre Rolls-Royce. He also worked on Malcolm Campbell's Bluebird car, powered by a 24 litre Napier Lion aero-engine, which Campbell used in his successful attempt on the land speed record at Daytona Beach. Perhaps one of Villiers's most notable successes was his work on the supercharger of the four-cylinder Bentley engine. Although it never won a race, the 'Blower Bentley' achieved outstanding performances at Brooklands and Le Mans and was driven to second place by Sir Henry Birkin in the French grand prix of 1930. The flamboyant reputation of the famous 'Bentley Boys' of this period owed much to Villiers's engineering skill. On 30 July 1932 he married Marietta Strakosch, also known as Maya de Lisle ('b'. 1893/4), widow of George Strakosch, and daughter of Georges Mungovich, financier. There were no children of the marriage. 
Villiers's interest in flying was evident as early as 1918 when the armistice ended his plans to join the Royal Flying Corps. He founded his own aero-engine company in the 1920s but this failed to grow as he concentrated on motor vehicle development. In 1935, however, he joined the newly formed Straight Corporation where, among other things, he designed and built an advanced light aero-engine (named the Maya de Lisle, after his wife), which he tested himself in a company monoplane. During the Second World War he delivered bomber and fighter aircraft from the factories to their RAF squadrons, as a member of the RAF transport auxiliary. In his spare time he designed a heavy bomber capable of flying non-stop round the world, but this aeroplane was never built. 
In 1943 Villiers was recruited by the Canadian Car and Foundry Company, which manufactured Hurricanes in Montreal, to lead its research division. After the war he moved to the United States. He remained there for the next twenty years, becoming an American citizen. His first marriage having ended in divorce, in 1946 he married Juanita Lorraine (Nita) Brown (died 1968), daughter of Charles Brown, of Minneapolis. They had a son, Charles, and a daughter, Jane. In 1948 Villiers became president of the Rocket Society. His many projects during this period included rocket-powered spacecraft and satellite communications for the United States Aircraft Corporation, Boeing, and Douglas Aircraft at Santa Monica. This latter work was followed by six years of research with Bendix-Aviation-Eclipse and at the University of California. 
Villiers returned to England in 1965 to resume his work on the technical enhancement of motor car engines, working with Peter Berthon on the 1.5 litre BRM engine, and with Graham Hill on the Cosworth. However, his engineering work soon lapsed as he became passionately devoted to portrait painting. His subjects included Graham Hill, Cardinal Spellman, and Pope John Paul II. A portrait of Ian Fleming was used on a 'James Bond' cover. 
Some of Villiers's projects, including a Mars landing, never came to fruition, while the efficacy of others was questioned. Nevertheless, he was an engineer and inventor of truly outstanding range and talent. He was said to hold deep religious convictions and in later life tended towards the mystical. He died of cancer at his home, 46a Holland Street, Kensington, London, on 12 December 1991. He was survived by the son and daughter of his second marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 50493


Wulfstan (d. 955/6), archbishop of York, of unknown family, was the first of that name to hold the see; he was archbishop from some time between 3 April and 30 June 931 until his death. Throughout his career he showed a marked readiness to support various viking ventures against the English crown. There are chronological discrepancies between accounts of his activities in various northern annals and his signatures to royal diplomas of the English kings; on the whole, the evidence of the charters is to be preferred. 
Wulfstan witnessed King AEthelstan's charters regularly until 21 December 934. Later charters of AEthelstan have greatly abbreviated witness lists, in which the northern sees, including York, are unrepresented; it seems likely that he had lost effective control of the north. After AEthelstan's death in October 939, York was occupied by Olaf Guthfrithson, king of Dublin. Archbishop Wulfstan may have enthroned Olaf; certainly he became his supporter, travelling with him the following year on an expedition into the midlands. Olaf and Wulfstan were besieged by King Edmund at Leicester, but Wulfstan, together with Archbishop Oda of Canterbury, arranged a treaty by which Edmund surrendered to Olaf the territory of the Five Boroughs (Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, and Stamford), and Watling Street was fixed as King Edmund's new northern boundary. In the following year Olaf died, and the kingdom of York passed into the hands of his cousin, Olaf Sihtricson. In 942 King Edmund regained control of the Five Boroughs, and for a brief period Wulfstan witnessed his charters. Ragnall, Olaf Guthfrithson's brother, was then made king of York, and no surviving charter of King Edmund issued in 943 is witnessed by Wulfstan. According to AEthelweard's chronicle, however, in 944 Wulfstan drove Ragnall out of York, and King Edmund regained possession of the city. From then onwards Wulfstan's signature appears regularly on King Edmund's diplomas. 
After Edmund's death, his brother Eadred became king of England and secured Wulfstan's allegiance at Tanshelf, Yorkshire, in 947; but according to the chroniclers, Wulfstan was quick to break his oath. This alleged treachery is not reflected immediately in King Eadred's charters, which Wulfstan continued to witness until 950, though Erik Bloodaxe had gained temporary control of York in 948: Wulfstan witnessed all but three of the fifteen charters of King Eadred surviving for the years 948-9, and the sole surviving charter of 950. From 951 onwards, however, Wulfstan again ceased to witness Eadred's charters, and it seems that he was out of contact with his court during most of the period in which Olaf Sihtricson, having displaced Erik from York, was reigning there for the second time. 
Wulfstan's subsequent career can be followed in outline from late Northumbrian annals, originating at York and preserved in writings attributed to Symeon of Durham and the D text of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle; but his charter subscriptions suggest that these annals have an unsatisfactory chronology for the years 951-6. Probably in 953, Wulfstan was imprisoned by King Eadred at 'Iudanbyrig'. His restoration to a bishopric, at Dorchester, should perhaps be assigned to early 955. For the rest of his life Wulfstan seems to have remained in the south. He witnessed as archbishop a number of King Eadred's charters issued in 955, but it appears unlikely that he was able to exercise jurisdiction in the northern archdiocese. According to a retrospective statement in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' (s. a. 970, text B), Bishop Oscytel of Dorchester was given nominal charge of York late in Eadred's reign, by the king 'and all his witan'. King Eadred died on 23 November 955. Wulfstan appears as witness to two early charters of his successor, King Eadwig, but doubts have been voiced as to their authenticity. Wulfstan died and was buried at Oundle, Northamptonshire, in the diocese of Dorchester. The date of his death is disputed; the most likely date appears to be 26 December 956, but 955 cannot be completely ruled out. 


@@@@@


doc= 50495


Wainwright, Alfred (1907-1991), walker and writer, was born on 17 January 1907 at 331 Audley Range, Blackburn, Lancashire, the fourth and last child of Albert Wainwright ('b'. 1870), a stonemason, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Woodcock (1873-1942), daughter of an ironmonger. Although baptized Alfred, he never used his first name, and preferred to be known as A. Wainwright or A. W., which is how he became known to millions of Lake District lovers for his walking books. If asked what the A. stood for, he replied 'it isn't for Aloysius, if that's what you're thinking' ('The Independent', 22 Jan 1991). He was brought up in a terraced house, surrounded by cotton mills belching out their smoke and mill girls clip-clopping in their clogs along the cobblestones to work. His father was not always in work, partly because of his drinking problem, and the family suffered periods of poverty. Wainwright went to Blakey Moor higher elementary school, Blackburn, but left at the age of thirteen in 1920 to begin work as an office boy at Blackburn town hall. After three years he became a clerk in the borough treasurer's department, where it was pointed out to him that he would never be promoted unless he had passed the appropriate professional exams. For most of the next seven years he studied accountancy by correspondence and evening classes, before eventually qualifying as a municipal accountant. In any spare time he followed the fortunes of Blackburn Rovers, and later helped to found their supporters' club in 1939. 
Wainwright's first visit to the Lake District was in 1930, at the age of twenty-three. This was rather late, in some ways, as rambling in Lakeland had become very popular with young men from industrial Lancashire. In 'Ex-Fellwanderer' (1987) he described his first impressions on looking over Lake Windermere: 'It was a moment of magic, a revelation so unexpected that I stood transfixed, unable to believe my eyes. Those few hours on Orrest Head cast a spell which changed my life.' From then on he spent his leisure time walking, either locally in Lancashire or on visits to Lakeland, determined to find a job there if he could. He managed it in 1941, when he joined the borough treasurer's department in Kendal, taking a drop in salary. Meanwhile he had married Ruth Holden (1909-1985), a cotton weaver and daughter of William Holden, at Furthergate Congregational Church, Blackburn, on 24 December 1931. They had one son, Peter (1933-1998). According to Wainwright, it very soon became an unhappy marriage. Rather unfairly, he felt his wife had not kept pace with his rising professional status and that he had little in common with her. They kept up appearances in view of his august municipal position -- he became borough treasurer of Kendal in 1948 -- but at home they hardly talked to each other. 
Wainwright's passion for walking became even more intense once he moved to Lakeland, partly to escape from his unhappy home life. In 1952 he began the self-created task of walking every fell in Lakeland and recording his walks, with pen-and-ink drawings, for his own amusement, so he said, to read by his fireside when he was too old to walk. He divided Lakeland into seven regions and took thirteen years over the project, climbing 214 fells, travelling on foot or by public transport from his Kendal home. He never learned to drive a car. On completing the first book, he decided to publish it himself. He wanted his own handwriting, his own drawings, his own page layouts to be reproduced the way he had done them, without an ounce of printer's type. 'The Eastern Fells', the first in his 'Pictorial Guides to the Lakeland Fells', came out in 1955 and the final one, 'The Western Fells', was published in 1966. The early editions of the first five books in the series had the name of a colleague, Henry Marshall (borough librarian of Kendal), as the publisher. Later they were all published by the 'Westmorland Gazette'. 
Wainwright retired as borough treasurer of Kendal in 1967 and threw himself into writing and walking full-time. In all he published fifty-nine books on walking, in Wales and Scotland as well as Lakeland. The 'Pictorial Guides' were the best-known and best-loved, along with 'Pennine Way Companion' (1968), and 'A Coast to Coast Walk' (1973). By 1985 over 1 million of his 'Pictorial Guides' had been sold -- yet Wainwright had given no interviews, done no publicity or signing session, and no biographical details ever appeared on his guidebooks. He was appointed MBE in 1966. His first marriage was dissolved in 1968 and on 10 March 1970 he married Betty McNally (1922-2008), a state-enrolled nurse, and daughter of John Hayes, public works contractor. Her first marriage had also been dissolved. They had twenty years of an exceedingly happy marriage together. 
Wainwright was 6 feet 3 inches tall and burly, with thick hair which originally was carrot red, much to his embarrassment as a young man. Even when, in later years, his hair had turned a more distinguished white, Betty, his second wife, always referred to him as Red. He avoided all publicity until the 1980s, when his devotion to Animal Rescue Cumbria -- an animal refuge which he and Betty had helped to set up, and to which he was very soon giving away almost all his royalties -- led him to agree to a series of walking programmes for BBC television with Eric Robson. These turned him, aged eighty, into a national figure. He also did a series of glossy photographic walking books for Michael Joseph, in order to help the same charity. He was not naturally sociable, disliked public occasions, and could be gruff and short with strangers, but on paper, and in private, he was amusing and engaging. His 'Pictorial Guides' were considered little masterpieces -- philosophical strolls rather than mere guidebooks, with his own personal feelings and observations, written and drawn by a master craftsman. Wainwright died at the Westmorland County Hospital, Kendal, on 20 January 1991, of cardiac failure. He was cremated at Kendal four days later, and his ashes were scattered on Hay Stacks, above Buttermere, one of his favourite fells. In 'Fellwanderer' (1966) he wrote: 'If you dear readers should get a bit of grit in your boots as you are crossing Haystacks in the years to come, please treat it with respect. It might be me.' 


@@@@@


doc= 50496


Cohen, Sir Bernard Nathaniel Waley-, first baronet (1914-1991), public servant and businessman, was born on 29 May 1914 in London, the first son (and twin brother of Hetty) of the three children of Sir Robert Waley Cohen (1877-1952), businessman and government adviser, and his wife, Alice Violet (1882-1935), daughter of Henry Edward Beddington, of Bayswater in London, and Heathside, Newmarket, and his wife, Floretta Marianne. The son of a man who was large in frame and large in personality, a pioneer of industry, and a leading figure in the Anglo-Jewish community, Waley-Cohen (the hyphen was introduced by deed poll in 1950) was groomed from an early age to be of service both to his country and to his co-religionists. His lifetime's achievements were proof that he more than fulfilled his father's expectations and his family's traditional role as a leader of Anglo-Jewry and a prime actor on the financial stage of the City of London. 
Although his life was subsequently marked by achievement, the young Waley-Cohen had first to overcome the disappointment of having to give up all thoughts of a career at sea when he was forced to leave the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in 1930, after only three years, owing to a defect in his eyesight. His sight was to suffer still further when, in 1938, he lost the sight of one eye in a riding accident. A rugged, broad-shouldered young man, Waley-Cohen enjoyed horse-riding, rugby, and mountaineering -- he climbed Mont Blanc in 1934. His schooling from 1930 to 1933 was at Clifton College, Bristol, where he was a boarder in Polack's, the Jewish house founded by his great-uncle Lionel Cohen. He then went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, to read modern history. Immediately after leaving Cambridge in 1936, he began his business career for, though 'born to a considerable fortune... he had to make his own way in the City' (Bermant, 416); he began by joining Lloyd's and within three years was appointed an underwriter. 
Commercial activity was disrupted by the outbreak of the Second World War and, unable to serve his country in the armed forces owing to his eye injury, which had also caused him to be discharged by the Honourable Artillery Company, Waley-Cohen turned instead to public service. He became an executive officer attached to the Port of London Emergency Service, a recruiting officer and commander of the Exmoor patrol of the Home Guard, and, between 1940 and 1947, a principal at the Ministry of Fuel and Power alongside Harold Wilson. The end of the war enabled him to combine his commercial, financial, and public-service activities with his love of life in Somerset, where he could supervise his farm on the edge of Exmoor and ride to hounds. From 1953 to 1985 he was chairman of the Devon and Somerset staghounds, subsequently acting as president until his death. His love of hunting led to a number of confrontations with those who opposed blood sports, as well as some acrimonious correspondence in the press. 
It was in the post-war years that, still young, Waley-Cohen made his greatest contribution to the City of London, both in his career as a banker -- between 1947 and 1954 one of his major roles was as vice-chairman of the Palestine Corporation and the Union Bank of Israel -- and as a public servant. At the age of only thirty-five he was appointed a lieutenant for the City of London and alderman for the Portsoken ward. Six years later he was elected to the shrievalty, and in his electoral speech he looked back to his forebear Sir David Salomons, in whose footsteps he was following some 120 years on. Salomons's example was further followed when Waley-Cohen was created KBE in 1957, and in 1960, when he became the seventh Jew and the second youngest individual to be elected lord mayor of the City of London. 
It was as lord mayor that Waley-Cohen was truly fulfilled, able to serve the City and his country as best he could, and able to demonstrate, as had members of the cousinhood before him, that he was 'a proud Englishman of the Jewish faith' ('The Times', 4 July 1991). On 21 December 1943 he had married Joyce Constance Ina (1920-2013), only daughter and older of the two children of Harry Louis Nathan, first Baron Nathan, and his wife, Eleanor Joan Clara. Waley-Cohen and his vivacious wife made their presence felt at the Mansion House, which was enlivened by the four young Waley-Cohens, Rosalind Alice ('b'. 1945), Stephen Harry ('b'. 1946), Robert Bernard ('b'. 1948), and (Eleanor) Joanna ('b'. 1952). The charming, articulate lord mayor -- Harold Macmillan considered his speech at the traditional Guildhall dinner one of the best he had heard -- used his period of office to promote goodwill far beyond the normal lord-mayoral boundaries. During the summer of 1961 -- a period chosen so as to coincide with the civic recess -- he travelled over 30,000 miles to Australia, New Zealand, and the Far East, in order to promote better relations between the City of London and distant lands. An indication of his respect for the ceremony of his position was demonstrated by his taking with him his lord mayor's chain of office and robes of ermine. He was also an active advocate of inter-faith relations between Muslims, Christians, and Jews and, when possible, endeavoured to demonstrate his support in his civic capacity. 
Following his period of office as lord mayor, in 1961 Waley-Cohen was made a baronet. Still a young man, he determined to devote himself to good causes and public service. He was appointed commissioner and deputy chairman of the Public Works Loan Commission in 1971 and, in that same year, became chairman of University College, London, of which he had been appointed an honorary fellow in 1963; it was a position he held for nine years. During 1975 he was master of the Clothworkers' Company; among the other causes with which he was closely involved were those of his alma mater, Clifton College, as well as the St Paul's Cathedral Appeal, the College of Arms, and the Marshall Aid Commemorative Commission. The more rural passions were not ignored, however, and Waley-Cohen devoted as much time as was possible to his herds of prize-winning pedigree Devon cattle. 
Waley-Cohen was a thickset, bespectacled, physically strong, cigar-loving man, whose looks somewhat belied his affable and compassionate nature. He was a figure in the old-fashioned Anglo-Jewish establishment mould who, though little concerned with religious practice, was dedicated to communal loyalty: loyalty to the section of the Jewish faith which his family had served for well over a century. The nature of the man was revealed by the instructions that appeared in his will regarding his burial. It was to be simple and private, 'without any published date, time or place', and attended only by members of his family and specifically invited friends and colleagues. His modesty and 'joie de vivre' were further underlined by his request that no memorial service be conducted for him, but that two parties be held, one in London and one in Somerset, both on a 'generous scale' in order that his friends could be brought together 'to remember me and speak of me not in any mournful sense but more in the sense that they have enjoyed my friendship as much as I have enjoyed theirs' (Waley-Cohen, will, 20 Jan 1980, proved at Bristol). 
Waley-Cohen died on 3 July 1991 at his home, Honeymead, Simonsbath, near Minehead, Somerset, of a cerebrovascular accident. He was buried on 5 July 1991 at Willesden Jewish cemetery, Beaconsfield Road, London. He was survived by his wife and four children, and succeeded as baronet by his elder son. 


@@@@@


doc= 50498


Treece, Henry William (1911-1966), writer and schoolteacher, was born on 22 December 1911 at Oxford Terrace, Oxford Street, New Town, Wednesbury, Staffordshire, the younger of the two children of Richard Treece ('b'. 'c'.1872), bridge engineer, and his wife, Mary Fisher, 'nee' Mason ('b'. 'c'.1875). He attended Wednesbury High School for Boys and won a scholarship to Birmingham University, where he read English, history, and Spanish, graduating in 1933. He entered teaching, eventually becoming English master at the grammar school, Barton-on-Humber, Lincolnshire, in late 1938. He married fellow teacher Nelly Mary (1911-1985), daughter of William Woodman, on 6 April 1939. They had three children: David (1945-1946), Jennifer ('b'. 1947), and Richard ('b'. 1949). Treece joined the volunteer reserve of the Royal Air Force in 1941, attaining the rank of flight lieutenant but serving mainly as an intelligence officer. He returned to teaching at Barton in 1946 as senior English master, retiring on health grounds in late 1959. 
Treece started to publish poems, and then short stories, from the mid-1930s in journals such as 'Seven'. He produced six collections, the first, '38 Poems', in 1940, and the last, 'The Exiles', in 1952. However, he was best-known for founding with the Scottish poet J. F. Hendry (1912-1986) the short-lived movement which came to be known as the New Apocalypse and, later, the New Romantics. Characterized by its use of myth and imagery, it was a fairly loose association of young poets based mainly outside London. The pair edited three anthologies: 'The New Apocalypse' (1939), 'The White Horseman' (1941), and 'The Crown and the Sickle' (1943). A strong influence was Dylan Thomas, and Treece later produced the first study of him: 'Dylan Thomas: Dog among the Fairies' (1949). In late 1941 Treece, with Alan Rook and Stefan Schimanski, took over the editorship of 'Kingdom Come', succeeded in 1943 by 'Transformation' (1943-7), a series of four anthologies of prose, poetry, and plays edited by Treece and Schimanski. In the early 1950s Treece embarked on a new course as a historical novelist, producing ten titles between 1952 ('The Dark Island') and 1966 ('The Green Man'). He enjoyed his greatest success with his numerous books (including over thirty novels) for children, particularly his viking stories, such as 'Viking's Dawn' (1955) and 'The Last of the Vikings' (1964). He frequently broadcast on radio, for which he also produced plays and features. He won an Arts Council play prize in 1955 for his 'Carnival King'. 
Treece was about 5 feet 10 inches tall, well-built, with glasses, and a natural -- but not dominating -- air of authority. He was very sociable, and mixed well with people from all walks of life. Nominally an Anglican and politically Conservative, he had wide interests, including boxing, music (he was an accomplished pianist and flamenco guitarist), the theatre, and painting. He died in Scunthorpe General Hospital following a heart attack on 10 June 1966 shortly after completing another children's novel, 'The Dream-Time', which was published posthumously in 1967. His body was cremated at Grimsby crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 50499


Walwyn, Fulke Thomas Tyndall (1910-1991), racehorse trainer, was born on 8 November 1910 at The Gables, Wrexham, Denbighshire, the son of Fulke James Walwyn, a captain (later lieutenant-colonel) in the Royal Welch Fusiliers, and his wife, Louisa Norah Lockhart, 'nee' Greenshields. He was educated at Malvern College and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, before being commissioned into the 9th lancers. He resigned in 1935 following adverse publicity from a court case involving a Soho nightclub fracas in which he appeared as a prosecution witness. At the outbreak of the Second World War he was ruled unfit for active service and became a military policeman at Tidworth for two years before securing a medical upgrade and serving with his old regiment in France. His first marriage was on 28 September 1937 to Diana Carlos Clarke (1916/17-1949), daughter of Major Charles Loraine Carlos Clarke, army officer. There were no children of the marriage. On 24 June 1952 he married Catherine ('b'. 1928), fourth and youngest daughter of Sir Humphrey Edmund de Trafford, fourth baronet. They had one daughter, Jane ('b'. 1957). 
Walwyn's father had been an outstanding showjumper and master of the Monmouthshire hounds, and Walwyn and his twin sister, Helen, learned to ride and hunt at an early age. His first racing win was on Ciren in a point-to-point in April 1930 and his first under National Hunt rules on Alpine Hut at Cardiff the same month. He became a successful gentleman rider, winning the amateur championship three times and piloting Reynoldstown to victory in the 1936 Grand National despite losing both his whip and an iron. After resigning from the army he turned professional and won several races before a near-fatal fall at Ludlow in 1939 fractured his skull and rendered him unconscious for a month. He then turned to training, operating a small establishment at Delamere House in Lambourn and winning eighteen races before the outbreak of war. 
In 1944 Walwyn purchased Saxon House Stables in Upper Lambourn and in 1946-7 he took the first of three successive National Hunt trainers' titles. For a number of years he was also a successful flat race trainer. Much of his early success over jumps and hurdles was with Dorothy Paget's horses. Although she had a reputation for dismissing her trainers at whim, Walwyn lasted nearly ten years and even curbed her habit of late-night phone calls and nocturnal visits to the stables. On one memorable occasion on 29 September 1948 Walwyn and jockey Bryan Marshall almost took her horses through the card at Folkestone, winning five and coming second in the last race. Ultimately he broke with Miss Paget in 1954, after having 'had enough' of her difficult behaviour (Munting, 122). His boxes did not remain empty for long. He attracted some outstanding animals, including Mill House, who in 1963 won the Cheltenham Gold Cup, the Hennessy, and the King George, and Diamond Edge, twice a Whitbread winner, in 1979 and 1981. His favourite, however, was the diminutive Mandarin who arrived in 1954 with a reputation as a poor jumper but under Walwyn's tuition won the Hennessy and King George in 1957, the King George again in 1959, the Hennessy again in 1961, and the Cheltenham Gold Cup the following year. In 1973, following the death of Peter Cazalet, the queen mother transferred her horses to Saxon House and Walwyn went on to win 150 races for her. 
Walwyn had a remarkable career. In addition to his five training titles (he won again in 1957-8 and 1963-4) his horses brought him the prestigious Hennessy and Whitbread chases seven times each, the Grand Military gold cup also seven times, the King George VI five times, the Cheltenham Gold Cup four times, the Champion Hurdle and the Scottish Grand National twice, and the Aintree Grand National once. Ironically for a man brought up near Chepstow racecourse he never won the Welsh Grand National. Overall he trained the winners of 2188 races over jumps and hurdles. To celebrate his 2000th winner Warwick racecourse held a Fulke Walwyn Day. 
Walwyn lived for his horses. He understood them and treated each one of his string as an individual animal. He was a wizard with doubtful legs, had unswerving patience, and never hurried an injured horse back into serious training. His was an intuitive art, and when asked the secret of his success he always acknowledged the contributions of his staff, many of whom stayed with him for decades. The lads, he explained, were closest to the horses, and a good one could tell a trainer much about the animals for which he was responsible. Nevertheless he disliked delegation. He had infinite patience with horses, less with people, and jockeys who failed to ride to orders or who were too hard on his horses could expect a fierce blast even before they dismounted. Yet he was also quick to praise. If a jockey had ridden a good race he would be the first to say so. He rode out every day until he was sixty-six, only then choosing to accompany his horses to morning exercise in a Land Rover. 
Walwyn died of bronchopneumonia and ischaemic heart disease at Saxon House on 18 February 1991, a year after retiring and handing over the running of the stables to his wife, who, with his daughter, survived him. He was appointed CVO in 1983 but probably would have been more honoured by the posthumous renaming of the Kim Muir memorial chase -- the three-mile race for amateur riders on the opening day of the Cheltenham National Hunt festival -- as the Fulke Walwyn challenge cup chase. A memorial service, attended by Queen Elizabeth, the queen mother, was held at the church of St Michael and All Angels, Lambourn, Berkshire, on 11 March 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 50500


Evans, Stanley George (1912-1965), Church of England clergyman and Christian socialist, was educated at Westminster City School, King's College, London, and the College of the Resurrection, Mirfield. In spite of his pastoral and intellectual gifts, after ordination in 1935, and curacies in Shepherd's Bush, Islington, and Plaistow, he spent many years in the ecclesiastical wilderness before becoming a parish priest in Dalston, east London, in 1955. There is little doubt that this was entirely due to his political views which were closely allied to those of the Communist Party. Evans married Anastasia Cecilia Nicholson and they had two daughters. 
In the 1930s Evans was heavily involved in opposition to fascism and supported the republican cause in the Spanish Civil War. He was one of the founders of the Russia Today group which grew into the British Soviet Friendship Society. He led many visits to the USSR and countries of eastern Europe throughout the cold-war years, and was the 'Daily Worker' correspondent at the trial of Cardinal Mindszenty in 1949. He followed the Communist Party line fairly closely and preached a glowing, uncritical, sermon on the death of Stalin in 1953. However, after the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the invasion of Hungary, in 1956, he became a more open socialist, holding views akin to the socialist humanism of the New Reasoner group. He remained a Marxist in his political thinking until his death. 
Evans played an important role from the 1940s to the 1960s, both in his intellectual nourishment of the socialist Christian constituency, and in providing links for Christians with the USSR and the countries of the eastern bloc. He was a regular visitor to all the Warsaw pact countries, wrote a history of Bulgaria, and was the editor of the 'New Central European Observer' during the 1940s. He was responsible for a whole series of small journals -- 'Religion and the People', which he edited from 1946 to 1957, 'Magnificat', and 'The Junction' (named after Dalston Junction railway station) from 1958 until his death. The latter was subtitled 'a journal of Anglican realism', and it was as an Anglican realist that he wished to be known. He was the key figure in the Council of Clergy and Ministers for Common Ownership, founded in 1942, which became the Society of Socialist Clergy and Ministers, and was one of the leaders of the Christian Socialist Movement, founded in 1960. 
In many areas Evans was ahead of his time. He was writing on race and South Africa in 1944. In 1957 he argued that the old confessional divisions within world Christianity had become less important than the division about the nature of the kingdom of God, and its relation to the structures of this world (Leech, 'Back street pastor', 188). Much of his thinking anticipated liberation theology, though the term was not used until three years after his death. 
In his theology Evans was traditional and orthodox, and very critical of what he saw as relativizing trends in theology and ethics. At Holy Trinity, Dalston, where he was vicar from 1955 to 1960, the life of the parish was focused on the parish eucharist and the parish meeting. Celebration and debate were seen as inseparable, heart and head were fully engaged. Evans had a strong sense of the place of liturgy in shaping the corporate identity of the Christian community. In an interview on BBC radio about 1962, he spoke prophetically and with great perception about the future possibilities for a people's liturgy. Liturgy, he pointed out, had for many centuries been separated from the people, becoming something performed above the people's heads, by clergy or choir. A central problem for the late twentieth century was the lack of a common language and a common cultural form. Most thinking about liturgy had tended to focus on the rite rather than on the production of the whole liturgical act. Evans stressed that the Christian community at worship is 'not ever an audience. They are an expressive community, if you like, an orchestra. The distinction between the audience and the players... does not exist in Christian liturgy. We have built up an area in which it does exist and we have destroyed Christian liturgy in doing so' (private information). 
In 1960 Evans became chancellor of Southwark Cathedral and the first principal of the Southwark ordination course. In a sermon delivered at Southwark Cathedral in September 1963 he argued against the seminary model of theological education, and strongly opposed the class bias in clergy selection: 'the idea of clergy drawn from only one class of a class-divided society is one of the most dangerous of very modern Anglican innovations' (archives of S. G. Evans, Hull University). His smallest book, 'The Church in the Back Streets' (1962), is in some ways his most important. Here he confronted the crisis of the church in the inner city, which had been the context for all his ministry. Evans died in a car accident on 11 September 1965 returning from an anti-nuclear demonstration. He was declared dead at Grantham and Kesteven General Hospital, Grantham, Lincolnshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50508


Mavor, James (1854-1925), political economist, was born on 8 December 1854 in Stranraer, Wigtownshire, the eldest of nine children of the Revd James Mavor (1828-1879), a teacher from New Aberdour, Aberdeenshire, and his wife, Mary Ann Taylor, 'nee' Bridie (1828-1896), of Dundee. The family moved to Glasgow in 1862 and James, as the eldest son, left school to go to work. Evening classes at Anderson's College and some lectures at the University of Glasgow finished his formal education. His international academic stature was thus attained without benefit of an earned degree. 
Early friendship with the physicist and inventor William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) led to a thirst for science rare among men of arts and letters. At one time Mavor was both editor of the 'Scottish Art Review' and Scottish editor of the technology magazine 'Industries'. Entering business in Glasgow he saw the social effects of pell-mell industrialization, and with the town planner Patrick Geddes pioneered housing for the poor. With his lifelong friend William Morris he co-signed the founding manifesto of the Socialist League, but wary of socialism's authoritarian bent he soon broke with it. 
On 16 January 1882 Mavor married Christina Jane Gordon Balfour Watt (1850-1933), a Glasgow music teacher. They had three children, all of whom achieved distinction: James Watt Mavor, a leading biologist in the USA; Dora Mavor Moore, Canadian theatre pioneer; and Brigadier Wilfrid Mavor. 
When appointed professor of political economy and statistics at St Mungo's College in 1889, Mavor already had close contacts with co-operative, union, suffragist, and Ruskinite groups in Britain; with economists in France, Germany, and America; and, through the Glasgow Fabian Society, with Pease, the Webbs, and G. B. Shaw -- who sparred with him by naming Candida's social activist husband 'The Rev. James Mavor Morell'. London friends included the editor W. T. Stead, the critic Arthur Symons, the poet W. B. Yeats, and the emigre Russian biologist and anarchist Prince Peter Kropotkin. Mavor's reports on British railways solidified his academic reputation, and by 1892, when he left for Canada, he was counted among the leading British economists. 
As head of the department of political economy at the University of Toronto, Mavor quickly became a catalyst in Canadian cultural and economic affairs. He championed art galleries, museums, theatre, and workers' education. His report of 1904 for the British government, 'North West of Canada', dampening prospects for wheat export, became notorious in both nations. Kropotkin enlisted his aid in Tolstoy's plan to resettle Russia's oppressed Dukhobors in the Canadian west, a massive project that claimed his attention for decades. Before the First World War, Mavor had travelled through much of Canada, Europe, China, Mongolia, and Japan as an adviser to various governments, and had written (after teaching himself Russian and visiting Tolstoy) his seminal 'Economic History of Russia' (2 vols., 1914). 
In Toronto, Mavor's department spawned others: political science, economy, statistics, sociology, commerce and finance. The communications prophet Harold Innis was among his professorial appointments, and his students became notable in many fields. In 1912 the university made him an honorary PhD. His autobiography, 'My Windows on the Street of the World', appeared in two volumes in 1923, and 'The Russian Revolution' posthumously in 1926. He died on 31 October 1925 while visiting Glasgow, and was buried there. The playwright James Bridie (Osborne Henry Mavor, 1888-1951) was a nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 50509


Ward, Bernard Nicholas (1857-1920), headmaster and historian, was born on 4 February 1857, the youngest of three sons and seventh of eight children of William George Ward (1812-1882) and his wife, Frances Mary (died 1898), daughter of John Wingfield, prebendary of Worcester. The Ward family lived in a house, designed by Augustus Welby Pugin, at St Edmund's College, Old Hall Green, near Ware in Hertfordshire. Ward's father had taught moral philosophy and dogmatic theology there since 1846, the year following his conversion. 
The year after Ward's birth his father moved the family to the Isle of Wight where he had come into an inheritance, but within three years he returned to Ware and remained there for another ten years. Bernard's earliest instruction was at home under the care of tutors, but he entered St Edmund's in August 1868 and remained there as a lay student until 1875. He planned to enter upon a business career, but first, accompanied by his sister Emily, he toured Canada and the United States. He had developed a taste for travel when, in 1873, he joined a pilgrimage to Paray-le-Monial. A year later he visited the shrine of St Edmund at Pontigny. His first visit to Rome was in 1877, and he returned in 1879 when he included Switzerland and Lourdes in his itinerary. Shortly afterwards he determined to become a priest. 
In January 1880 Ward began his theological studies at Oscott College, Birmingham, where he was ordained deacon on Holy Saturday 1882. He then returned to St Edmund's as prefect of discipline and on 8 October 1882 was ordained to the priesthood by Cardinal Manning in the chapel of the Archbishop's House. In 1885 he was assigned the task of founding a mission at Willesden, where he worked until January 1888, when he accepted a position at Oscott as professor of science. In the summer of 1890, however, he returned to St Edmund's as vice-president and prefect of studies. He remained there until 1916. 
When Herbert Vaughan became archbishop of Westminster in 1892, St Edmund's was in precarious financial straits, with a declining number of students. Vaughan considered closing the college, but first appointed Ward as president to see what might be done to save it. Ward proved to be a far-sighted and astute administrator. He was also generous in sharing his personal resources to benefit the college. 
In 1893, to mark the centenary of St Edmund's, Ward founded 'The Edmundian', the college magazine, for which, until 1915, he wrote most of the editorial notes. Also in 1893 he published his 'History of St Edmund's College', thus launching his historical career. In April 1895 he was elevated to the rank of domestic prelate by Pope Leo XIII. In that year, in response to a request by Cardinal Vaughan, the Holy See gave permission for Catholics to attend English universities. Ward, hopeful that at least some students at St Edmund's would receive university degrees, began negotiations which led to the affiliation of the college with the University of Cambridge, 'on the understanding that a hostel subject to the ordinary laws of the University should be opened there' ('The Edmundian', 12, 1920, 331). With the financial assistance of the duke of Norfolk, St Edmund's House was founded, and in 1897 studies were arranged at St Edmund's College for the Cambridge local examinations. 
Ward was instrumental in founding an organization of Catholic headmasters which he served as secretary. On three occasions (1898, 1906, 1911), he hosted meetings of the group at St Edmund's. He was also a member of the education committee of the Hertfordshire county council. In May 1903, to mark the golden jubilee of the college chapel, he published his 'Life of St Edmund', as well as 'Catholic London a Hundred Years Ago'. 
In 1905 Ward was named a canon of the archdiocese of Westminster. In October 1907 a rumour circulated to the effect that he was to be the new bishop of Northampton. The appointment was never made, but he seems to have been unable to settle down again at the college. During the subsequent six years he nevertheless made his most significant historical contribution with 'The Dawn of the Catholic Revival in England, 1781-1803' (2 vols., 1909), 'The eve of Catholic emancipation, being the history of the English Catholics during the first thirty years of the nineteenth century' (3 vols., 1911), and 'The Sequel to Catholic Emancipation, 1830-1850' (2 vols., 1915). These seven volumes have remained the most comprehensive study of Roman Catholic institutional life in the last quarter of the eighteenth and first half of the nineteenth centuries. Ward was inspired, at least in part, by the work of Canon Edwin Burton, vice-president of St Edmund's, whose 'Life and Times of Bishop Challoner' (2 vols., 1909) he had read in manuscript form. His own research was carried out in England and also in Rome where he consulted documents at the English College as well as those which he was permitted to use at the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith. In 1909 he was elected a member of the Old Brotherhood of the Secular Clergy, an honour which he deeply appreciated. 
In November 1915 Ward's health clearly began to fail. He formally resigned his office on 19 July 1916 and was appointed to the mission at Brook Green, Hammersmith. In 1917 he was named bishop of the new diocese of Essex. He was to serve initially as apostolic administrator of the designated territory until the new diocese could be organized. He was elevated to the episcopate, therefore, as titular bishop of Lydda. Within a few months it was determined that Brentwood would be the cathedral town of the diocese, and in October of 1917 Ward was enthroned there. 
In spite of poor health, Ward proved to be an energetic bishop, visiting every church of the diocese as well as undertaking the annual visitation of all convents. New missions were opened, the cathedral chapter was formed, and churches were consecrated. In 1918 he published a volume on 'The Priestly Vocation', composed of lectures that he had given as president of St Edmund's. In March of 1919 he made his 'ad limina' visit to Rome and later in the year, his last pilgrimage to Lourdes. He died during the night of 20 January 1920 and was buried, as he had requested, in the chapel of St Edmund's College on the 26th. 


@@@@@


doc= 50510


Close, William (1775?-1813), antiquary, was reputedly born on 25 May 1775 at Field Broughton, Cartmel, Lancashire. His father, John Close, variously described as farmer and molecatcher, subsequently moved to the Isle of Walney, off the Furness coast, before settling by 1795 at Dalton in Furness. Until he was ten, Close attended the chapel school on the Isle of Walney, where the only book was 'Lilly's Grammar'. He recalled supplementary study under an ash tree in the chapel yard, and apparently desired originally to be a sailor. But in 1790 he was apprenticed to Mr Parkinson, a surgeon at Burton in Kendal. In 1796-7 Close attended lectures at the Royal Infirmary and the university in Edinburgh. Shortly afterwards, having apparently obtained a diploma, he joined Thomas Brockbank in medical practice at Dalton in Furness. On 30 October 1803 he married Isabel, daughter of Robert Charnock, a blacksmith, and his wife, Isabella; a son was born in 1805, and a daughter in 1806. 
For sixteen years Close devoted himself to professional duties while also studying music, drawing, natural philosophy, and the history of the Furness area. He showed awareness of medical advances: in 1799 he experimented with vaccination against smallpox; children in the village of Rampside were inoculated at his own expense and with supposed success. In 1805 he produced a new edition of Thomas West's 'Antiquities of Furness', with a supplement of eighty-six pages. Among other topics, he added local detail on Dalton, a biography of George Romney, the portrait painter (born in Dalton in Furness), engravings, and lists of plants. Between 1805 and 1813 he prepared a topographical work, 'An Itinerary of Furness and the Environs'. The historian T. A. Beck later tried arranging Close's unfinished notes into a continuous narrative, and the subsequent manuscript survives at Manchester Central Library. The work contains descriptions of country seats, picturesque scenery, and other local sights, supplemented by transcripts of documents and epitaphs and observations on recovering land from Walney Channel. 
Between 1800 and 1805 Close contributed to William Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy'. From youth, he had also performed music, which he initially taught to Dalton children. By 1798 he was contemplating improvements to wind instruments. In 1809 he sent proposals to the Society of Arts for improving the range of trumpets by using tubular appendages. His techniques were also adaptable to the french horn and the bugle. After commissioning trials, a committee recommended Close for the society's gold medal, but he was offered only a silver medal. Close declined the award (the society's minutes suggested controversy) and he was also asked to relinquish patent rights. During 1812 he published a treatise and on 14 April was granted a patent for improvements to 'polyphonian trumpets'. He subsequently sold the rights to Thomas Percival, a London dealer. Close died from consumption at Dalton in Furness on 27 June 1813; he was buried at Walney chapel on the 29th. 
One writer described Close as 'a little slender man, very clever but rather changeable and fond of riding on horseback' (Gaythorpe). His medical colleague William Harrison mentioned his 'natural irritability', while estimates of his medical and academic work have varied. Although some of his interests seemed eccentric, later scholars utilized and generally admired his writings. However, the contemporary diarist William Fleming of Pennington (possibly because of academic rivalry) was often contemptuous of his personality, appearance, music playing, and editorial ability. Certainly his musical innovations were quickly superseded by later advancements. But during his lifetime Close was probably the most active personality in the intellectual life of the Furness area. 


@@@@@


doc= 50511


Schneider, Henry William (1817-1887), industrialist and politician, was born on 12 May 1817 at Beaver Hall, Southgate, Middlesex, son of John Henry Powell Schneider ('bap'. 1768, died 1861) and his second wife, Elizabeth Moule. The family had moved from Switzerland in the eighteenth century. Schneider's father was second-generation head of John Schneider & Co., merchants, London. 
After 1824 the Schneider firm was primarily associated with mineral exploration in several countries. Aged eighteen, Schneider was made secretary of an associated organization, the Mexican and South American Company. In 1839 he travelled to the English Lake District and the Furness area, suspecting unexploited deposits of hematite iron ore. While remaining prominent in his family firm, this expedition anticipated his ensuing career. 
In 1840 Schneider leased from the earl of Burlington the royalty of Park Farm, Dalton in Furness, Lancashire. He purchased nearby Whitriggs mine in 1842, subsequently leasing Mouzell mine in 1845 to form Schneider, Davis & Co. These operations achieved modest success. A major breakthrough followed in 1850, when renewed speculation at the previously unprofitable Park estate uncovered huge reserves of ore. The subsequent Burlington pit supplied substantial markets in south Wales and the Staffordshire ironworks. 
Schneider's original partner, James Davis, withdrew before the discovery was fully recognized. Schneider had also succeeded his father as chairman of the Anglo-Mexican Mining Company, with further mineralogical interests in Exmoor, south Wales, Australian copper, and Cornish tin. In 1853, needing extra capital for Burlington pit, he joined Kirkcudbrightshire landowner Robert Hannay, establishing Schneider, Hannay & Co. 
Schneider was still resident in London, travelling on business whenever required. Eloquent in advocating free trade and commerce, he also developed political aspirations, being elected in March 1857 as a Liberal MP for Norwich. Although he played no prominent part in the Commons, he was re-elected in 1859. But charges of electoral malpractice led to his being unseated the following year. 
Following improvements to local railways, success at the Park mine, and increasing dominance within the Furness iron industry, Schneider eventually moved north. During 1859 Schneider, Hannay & Co. began building blast furnaces at Hindpool, within the expanding town of Barrow in Furness. Competition from a new steel works (established in 1863 by a partnership involving the duke of Devonshire, the duke of Buccleuch, and Furness Railway manager, James Ramsden) led to the amalgamation of the two companies in 1866. The Barrow Iron and Steel Company mainly manufactured railway lines. Schneider continued as a director until his death. 
Schneider married first on 14 September 1842, Augusta Smith ('bap'. 1821), daughter of Richard Smith of Urswick. They had three sons, and she died in 1862. His second marriage, on 1 October 1864, to Elizabeth Turner (1830/31-1881), daughter of Canon Joseph Turner of Lancaster, doubtless aided his renewed attempts to enter parliament. At a by-election in February 1865 he was returned unopposed for Lancaster, and was re-elected the following July at the general election. Once again, the opposition raised allegations of bribery. A royal commission of inquiry, appointed in 1866, delivered a critical report -- and for the second time Schneider was ejected from the house, with Matthew Fenwick, his fellow candidate, being likewise removed. The borough of Lancaster was disenfranchised the following year. 
Schneider returned to Barrow, immersing himself in local affairs. The town achieved borough status in 1867, with James Ramsden the first mayor. Schneider became an alderman, serving the remainder of his life. He supported the development of the dock system, the Barrow Shipbuilding Company, the Flax and Jute Company, and other smaller industries. He participated on local school boards, contributing lavishly towards the development of local schools, churches, hospitals, and clubs. He was mayor of Barrow from 1875 to 1878, besides being chairman of the borough finance committee, a leading freemason, and a supporter of the local volunteer force. He owned several residences, purchasing Belsfield, an Italianate mansion at Bowness-on-Windermere, in 1869. He was a justice of the peace in both Lancashire and Westmorland. 
Barrow became a parliamentary constituency in 1885, James Ramsden declining nomination. Schneider stood for the Conservatives but lost the election to David Duncan. In a curious reversal of previous events, Schneider himself alleged corruption and unseated Duncan on petition -- but then waived his claim on the seat. Shortly afterwards, his health broke down. He died at Belsfield on 11 November 1887, being buried in Bowness cemetery four days later. His wife Elizabeth, with whom he had four daughters, had died in 1881 while holidaying at Dresden. 
Schneider's greatest success was as the driving force behind the Furness iron industry. But his political career, bedevilled by accusations of electoral corruption, never got off the ground, in spite of his ability as a speaker. His other talents were recognized in 1866 with election as an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers. At the institution's subsequent meeting he skilfully defended the advantages of steel for railway lines, while in 1880 the 'Proceedings' of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers recorded in detail his comments on Furness iron. 
Schneider was a constant churchman. Following his death, newspapers mentioned his munificent support for local causes -- which he had seldom attempted to conceal. Contemporaries often thought him autocratic -- but the author Robert Casson also mentions praise for 'the most generous and liberal despot in Lancashire'. He never openly expressed remorse about his political troubles -- although these significantly increased pressure for electoral reform. Furthermore, despite intermittent difficulties, Schneider also considered himself a good employer. He recounted how the Park mine discovery occurred while certain workmen -- opposed to the imminent abandonment of exploration -- were offering one final week's labour without payment. 
Schneider lived ostentatiously, regularly traversing Windermere on his yacht 'Esperence' to catch his private train to Barrow. But his eventual fortune proved less than expected, and his memorial in Bowness cemetery is relatively simple. Nevertheless his services to Furness and his business acumen were well recognized -- particularly in 1891, when a life-sized statue, provided by public subscription, was unveiled in Barrow. 


@@@@@


doc= 50512


Cooper, Myles (1736/7-1785), Church of England clergyman and American loyalist, was born near Broughton in Furness, Lancashire, the son of William and Elizabeth Cooper, and was baptized probably on 19 February 1737 at Holy Trinity Church, Millom, Cumberland. He matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 27 February 1753, aged sixteen, and proceeded BA (1756) and MA (1760); in 1767 he was granted a DCL by diploma. During 1760-61 he was a schoolteacher in Kent. Having returned to Queen's College as chaplain in 1761 he published, with collaborators, a volume of secular verse, 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1761). 
In 1762 the governors of King's College (subsequently Columbia University) in New York city, anticipating the retirement of the founder and first president of the institution, Samuel Johnson, and advancing the Anglicization of the college, asked Thomas Secker, archbishop of Canterbury, to recommend a clergyman as a successor. The request was sent to the Revd Edward Bentham, a canon of Christ Church, Oxford, and later regius professor of divinity in the university, who selected Cooper. The 25-year-old joined a band of Queen's College graduates who had accepted clerical posts in America. 
Having arrived in New York on 30 October 1762 Cooper was immediately appointed by the governors as an assistant to Johnson as well as professor of moral philosophy and fellow of the college. He immersed himself also in the affairs of the Anglican church in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut; he was elected president of the 1765 annual convention of the New York and New Jersey clergy. At the college he strengthened the library and provided intellectual leadership. 
Under Cooper's aegis the curriculum, rules of conduct, and discipline of the college were revised, following the practices of Queen's College. The restructured procedures of the college imitated practices at Oxford University rather than those at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. Whereas in the previous curriculum science and mathematics had been stressed, emphasis was now placed on Aristotelian principles of ethics, poetry, and politics and on Latin and Greek grammar and logic. Cooper's guidance inspired the governors to enhance the college in other ways; James Jay, brother of the revolutionary leader John Jay, sought financial support in England, while Cooper appointed new members of faculty and started a medical school. The college also received an endowment of land in Gloucester county (later part of Vermont). These measures may have contributed to the rise in the number of undergraduates entering King's College during this period. Cooper published in Latin his lectures on Aristotelian ethics, 'Ethices compendium' (1774). In recognition of his services and leadership the governors of King's College granted him an LLD in 1768. 
Probably half the college's students and alumni alive in 1776 were loyalists at the outbreak of the war of independence. Included in this assembly were Cooper, four of the five faculty members between 1770 and 1777, and more than two-thirds of the governors. On the eve of the war college authorities sought a 'Royal Charter for the College constituting it a University'. The college would be an instrument for Anglicization, for 'cementing the Union between Great Britain and the Colonies', and for providing for the education of native colonists for the ministry. Cooper travelled to England in 1771, seeking the charter, grants of land, legal privileges comparable to those of Oxford and Cambridge, and royal funding for professorships. His efforts garnered more land grants, meagre funding for professors' salaries, and reduced quitrents on college lands. He pressed London authorities for the appointment of an American bishop, believing that a resident prelate would provide supervision over college affairs, subdue external critics, and superintend the provincial clergy. He returned to New York in 1772 without British officials having taken action on either a charter for the college or the appointment of a bishop. He brought with him, however, a valuable collection of books for the college library, donated by the Clarendon Press at Oxford University. 
Cooper was the target of rising popular objections to English policies. As head of the college and as an Anglican clergyman he was a prominent symbol of imperial power and influence in the political turmoil of revolutionary New York. In April 1775 he was one of five New Yorkers to be warned in a public letter that 'Repeated insults and unparalleled oppressions have reduced the Americans to a state of desperation'. Fearing for his life, Cooper fled for a few days to a British warship anchored in New York city harbour but soon returned to his duties. About midnight on 10 May 1775 a mob invaded the campus, and Cooper, aroused by a student, escaped half-dressed through a rear exit and sought safety in the home of a friend. The next day he boarded a British vessel; on 25 May 1775 he sailed for England. 
A poem that appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for July 1776 recounted Cooper's New York experience; he provided his interpretation of the causes of the American War of Independence in a sermon preached at Oxford on 13 December 1776. As a loyalist he was granted a royal pension of $200 per annum for life, later reduced by half. He resumed his fellowship at Queen's College, where he lived for several years. At the end of 1777 he was appointed senior minister of the episcopal chapel in Edinburgh. According to his will he also held two other benefices -- as rector of Cowley, in Gloucestershire, and vicar of Neen Savage, in Shropshire. A bachelor, late in life he supported several orphaned children in his family. 
A large man of cultivated tastes, Cooper enjoyed good food and wine. He died among friends at a luncheon in Edinburgh on 20 May 1785. A man of his times, an active and persuasive leader of the state church in New York, Cooper unswervingly embraced his ordination oath of allegiance to the crown and parliament. His will, proved at London on 6 October 1785, bequeathed nearly all his estate, valued at more than $2000, to his nephews and nieces, children of his brother Major John Cooper of the Cumberland militia and his sister, Esther Warrington of Carlisle. 


@@@@@


doc= 50513


Laycock, Samuel (1826-1893), dialect poet, was born on 17 January 1826 at Intake Head, Pule Hill, Marsden, Yorkshire, the third of the four children of John Laycock (1791-1861), a hand-loom weaver, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' France (1791-1860). The family worshipped at Buckley Hill Independent Chapel, Marsden, and Laycock's only formal education was at the Sunday school and a few months at the minister's school. He started work, aged nine, in a woollen mill. In 1837 the family moved to Stalybridge, Cheshire, where Laycock worked as a cotton weaver, then as a foreman cut-looker. He married Martha Broadbent ('b'. 1828), a cotton weaver, on 9 December 1850, but she died two years later, and he remarried on 30 October 1858; his new wife was Hannah Woolley (1837-1863). 
Laycock began to write poetry while working in the mill, his first published work being a broadsheet in 1855. The cotton famine (1861-5) left him unemployed and gave him the time and incentive to write while providing a market for his broadsheet poems. Other unemployed cotton workers set them to music and sang in the streets for spare coppers. This success encouraged Laycock to publish two books, 'Lancashire Rhymes' (1864) and 'Lancashire Songs' (1866). These poems, recording the everyday life of cotton workers, are his best. 
The death of Hannah in 1863 left Laycock with several young children, including John Edward ('b'. 1859) and Hannah, later Mrs Schofield (1863-1939), and he became unsettled, taking a range of different, unsuccessful, jobs while his already poor health further declined. His fortunes changed with his third marriage in June 1864 to Eliza Pontefract (1836-1917), as she took an important role in supporting the family. Laycock then became the librarian at Stalybridge Mechanics' Institute in 1865, and at Whitworth Institute, Fleetwood, in 1867. After a year the family moved to Blackpool, eventually settling in Foxhall Road where Eliza ran a lodging-house and confectioner's shop while Laycock worked as a photographer (retired by 1881). They had at least two more children, Bertha, later Mrs Bowness ('b'. 1870) and Arthur (1869-1957) who became a Labour councillor and novelist. Laycock published a collection of poems, 'Warblin's fro' an Owd Songster', just before his death from bronchitis on 15 December 1893 at his home, 48 Foxhall Road, Blackpool. He was buried in Layton cemetery, Blackpool, on 18 December. His 'Collected Writings' was edited by George Milner and published in 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 50514


Pinney, John Pretor (1740-1818), merchant and planter, was born at Chard, Somerset, on 18 September 1740, the second of the two children of Michael Pretor (died 1744), a gentleman, of Okehampton, Devon, and his wife, Alicia Clarke (died 1759). At the age of fifteen he passed into the guardianship of his cousins Azariah and John Frederick Pinney at Bettiscombe, Dorset, and was apprenticed to a warehouseman in London until 1763. John Frederick Pinney, who had no living children, died around that time and left his property in England and Nevis to Pretor on the condition that he and his heirs assumed the name of Pinney. The properties on Nevis, the smallest of the British Caribbean sugar islands, consisted of slave-based sugar plantations acquired by John Pretor Pinney's great-great-uncle Azariah towards the end of the seventeenth century. 
Pinney set out for Nevis in 1764 to manage the estates he had inherited. He was notably successful as resident proprietor there: he settled two sugar estates, Cresseys and Choppins, in Gingerland parish; improved his lowland plantation, consisting of Charlots and Mountravers, which he worked as a single estate of 273 acres; and in the 1770s bought Woodland or Cole's plantation (120 acres). Such was his success that he improved his fortune by at least $35,000 in the twenty years after 1764. On 14 June 1772, in Nevis, he married a white Creole, Jane Weekes (died 18 May 1821), with whom he had seven children, including Charles Pinney, later mayor of Bristol. He took an active part in public life, being elected to the Nevis assembly in 1765 and gaining a seat on the council in 1767; he was also a JP and colonel of the regiment of foot in the militia. 
Like many English adventurers in the Caribbean, Pinney regarded England as his real home and wanted his children educated there. While retaining his plantations, he left Nevis in 1783 with his younger children -- his wife and older children having already returned to England -- and became a West India merchant at Bristol and a landowner in Dorset. He had already accumulated a substantial amount of money. In 1784 he held bank annuity stock worth a nominal value of $10,000, a navy bill valued at $1080, twelve India bonds worth $1200, and nearly $70,000 lent on the security of English lands. Although he made several brief return trips to Nevis, he lived for the rest of his life at Bristol, Racedown in Dorset, and Somerton Erleigh in Somerset. William and Dorothy Wordsworth were tenants of Racedown Lodge from 1795 to 1797. 'My greatest pride', he once remarked, 'is to be considered as a private Country Gentleman therefore am resolved to content myself with a little and shall avoid even the name of a West Indian' (MacInnes, 'A Gateway of Empire', 325). 
Pinney formed a West India commission house in Bristol in 1783 in partnership with James Tobin. This firm lasted until 1850 with many changes of partners. It was a fairly small concern, with an original capital of $12,000 and ownership of only two or three ships at any one time, and traded largely with St Kitts and Nevis -- refusing Jamaica connections presumably because these were already well established at Bristol. The firm's business was conducted from 7 Great George Street. These premises, which were completed in 1790, have been preserved under the auspices of the Bristol Museum and Art Gallery as a typical example of a Georgian merchant's counting and dwelling house. 
Pinney rarely participated in political life in Bristol, though he was a member of the common council in 1796. Nor did he belong to the prestigious Society of Merchant Venturers, but in 1786 he joined the Bristol West India Society, a recently created group of the most influential businessmen in the city with Caribbean connections. This society lobbied against the abolition of the slave trade and slave emancipation. Pinney agreed with their views to begin with, but by 1805 he had changed his mind; he then regarded the abolition of the slave trade with equanimity because it would not harm well-established West Indian estates and would check new settlements that might compete with his own. Yet when the 'Slave Registration Bill' was discussed in parliament in the years 1812-17 Pinney thought it would tamper with slavery and ruin the sugar economy of the Caribbean. 
Pinney had greater difficulty in controlling his plantations after he returned to Bristol than when he had lived in Nevis, which was to be expected. But he kept a tight rein on their management even from a distance, paying meticulous attention to his accounts. He sold Mountravers estate in 1808. Wealth accrued to him from plantations, sugar commission sales, shipping profits, and, above all, interest earned on money lent to other planters. Pinney died at 7 Great George Street on 23 January 1818, and was buried in the family vault at Somerton Erleigh church. Richard Pares estimates that Pinney was worth $267,000 on paper at the time of his death (excluding money planters owed him on mortgage and the value of ships and current account of his mercantile firm). This was the peak of the Pinneys' West India fortune, which totalled around $340,000 by 1818. The family connection with Nevis continued for a couple of generations more, but Pinney's sons were less successful as businessmen. 


@@@@@


doc= 50515


Bright, Henry (1715-1777), merchant, was born on 21 March 1715 at Brockbury, Worcestershire, the second of the six children of Henry Bright (1692-1726), a landed gentleman, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Hill (1692-1780). Young Henry moved to Bristol, where he was apprenticed to Richard Meyler, a hooper, in 1731. This marked the beginning of a long period of business interaction between the Bright and Meyler families. Bright and Meyler established a West India mercantile business in the late 1730s. Bright was sent as the firm's supercargo to St Kitts and then served as its agent in Jamaica, where he built up a successful trade in sugar, slaves, provisions, and dry goods. After his return to Bristol, on 27 September 1746 he married his partner's daughter, Sarah Meyler (1720-1769), the heir to Ham Green, a fine country house on the Somerset side of the Bristol Avon. They brought up one child. 
Bright returned to Jamaica for the period 1748-51, after which he came home for good. During this final spell in the Caribbean he arranged sugar consignments for Meyler and was active in the slave trade, especially the illegal traffic with the Spanish American market. He was the managing agent of twenty-one slave voyages between 1749 and 1766, and was a member of the Company of Merchants Trading to Africa in 1755. With Meyler he continued to run a mercantile house in Jamaica with two branches, one in Kingston, the other in Savanna la Mar. 
By the 1760s the Brights and the Meylers went their separate ways in terms of West India trade. Bright, ill with gout, retired in 1775. But he ensured the continuity of his merchant house by putting his son Richard into partnership with his nephew Lowbridge Bright. By the time of the American War of Independence the Brights had established an important provincial trading dynasty: they were known to be men of large fortune, and their merchant house was considered to be in higher credit than any other West India concern in England. 
Bright's West India trading was supplemented by other business activities. He was a shipowner and partner in various privateering ventures during the Seven Years' War. In Jamaica he owned land in St Catherine's parish with his brother Francis, took out a mortgage on Cabarita plantation in Westmorland parish, and owned properties in Kingston. He became a member of the Harford Bank, one of the earliest banks established in Bristol. 
Bright played an active role in local politics in Bristol. He served on the Bristol common council from 1753 until 1777, being appointed sheriff in 1753 and mayor in 1771. He was an active whig at general elections. In 1767 he became a member of the Society of Merchant Venturers, the most prestigious mercantile body in Bristol, on payment of a fine. He was a member of the Congregational meeting at Castle Green, Bristol. Although he lived mainly in a town house at 28 Queen Square, one of the most fashionable residences for Bristol merchants, and at Ham Green, he also owned land at Welland Court, Worcestershire, and in Colwall and Coddington parishes, Herefordshire. Bright died at Bristol on 25 November 1777 and was buried at St Nicholas's Church in the city on 29 November. He is reputed to have left a fortune worth $50,000, a substantial amount for a provincial merchant of the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 50517


Backhouse, John (1784-1845), civil servant, was born on 14 October 1784 at Wavertree, Lancashire, the son of John Backhouse, a Liverpool merchant. He was educated at the Carmel School, Westmorland, and the foundation school, Clitheroe, Lancashire. After becoming a partner in his father's business, he was sent in 1812 to be secretary of the firm's office in London. There his talents were soon recognized by George Canning, MP for Liverpool, who employed Backhouse as his private secretary, first at the Board of Control from 1816 and subsequently at the Foreign Office, first as private secretary and then as under-secretary while Canning was foreign secretary from September 1822 to January 1823. When Canning moved to the Foreign Office, he asked the prime minister to find Backhouse a vacancy which would pay $1000 a year and be 'not liable to the vicissitudes of ministerial arrangements' (Middleton, 'Administration', 128). This was achieved by his appointment as a commissioner of excise (January 1823-April 1827). When in April 1827 Backhouse succeeded Joseph Planta, who had been under-secretary at the Foreign Office since 1817, he was appointed to the office of receiver-general of excise, as his previous office as a commissioner was incompatible with the office of under-secretary. He received $1500 per annum from this office and $500 from the Foreign Office. After Canning's death Backhouse was not asked to resign, and by continuing to hold office irrespective of a change in ministry his subsequent career helped to define the position of the permanent under-secretary as the head of the Foreign Office. 
From its inception in 1782 the Foreign Office had two under-secretaries by virtue of the amalgamation of the northern and southern departments. Both under-secretaries were political appointments, with equal rank and salary, and they shared equally the political business of the office along the lines of the old north-south division. The senior of the under-secretaries by virtue of experience came to be associated with questions relating to Turkey, Russia, and France, which were considered to be of enduring interest. By 1840 Backhouse had assumed responsibility for managing affairs relating to all the great foreign powers. He was also responsible for the personnel and administration of the Foreign Office and the management of the secret service fund. Palmerston described his two under-secretaries as being 'like the two figures in the weather house who rusticate and labour alternately' (Bourne, 417), but under Palmerston, Backhouse seems to have laboured more than he rusticated. A kindly, well-meaning man, he was overworked and overawed by Palmerston; in consequence his health was ruined and a mental collapse led to his retirement in April 1842. 
Backhouse married in 1810 Catherine Nicholson of Stockport. They had four daughters and two sons, one of whom -- George Canning Backhouse -- was murdered in Havana on 31 August 1855 while on foreign service. Backhouse was a close friend of the publisher John Murray. He regularly contributed articles to popular periodicals and edited one book, the 'Narrative of the American sailor Robert Adams' residence in the interior of Africa at Timbuctoo'. He died on 13 November 1845 at his residence in Hans Place, Chelsea, and was buried seven days later in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50518


Ashton, Thomas (1818-1898), cotton manufacturer and philanthropist, was born on 8 December 1818 at Flowery Fields House, Hyde, Cheshire, sixth child to Thomas Ashton (1775-1845) of Flowery Fields and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Booth. He was educated first at a Liverpool academy and then at the University of Heidelberg, Germany, in 1838, where he studied chemistry and printing techniques. In 1851 he married Elizabeth Gair (1831-1914), daughter of Samuel Stillman Gair of Rhode Island, USA, and Liverpool. They had nine children, including Thomas Gair Ashton, first Baron Ashton of Hyde, and Margaret Ashton. Edward Tootal Broadhurst became a son-in-law. The family resided at Flowery Fields House, which formed part of the Ashton Brothers mill complex at Flowery Fields. He had inherited the cotton mills and the merchants' business in Manchester in 1845, and maintained the expansion programme initiated by his father, making the Flowery Fields mills complex the largest industrial concern in the district. The mills were considered to be 'The best of their class in the country, thoroughly equipped and conducted with every regard for the comfort and welfare of the operatives' (Bedford, 'Ashtons of Hyde', 47). 
Not only did Thomas carry on the Ashton family tradition he had inherited as an employer -- that of an employer who realized his responsibilities to the men and women who worked for him -- he improved on it. He enlarged the mill school, built a church at Flowery Fields, and expanded the village built by his father; he also established scholarships at the Hyde Mechanics' Institute and the technical school which enabled students to go to Owens College and to the Manchester Technical School. Care of his employees had always been an important factor to him, and during the cotton famine, when many mills were closed and most employers ruined, Thomas Ashton made sure that his mills never stopped. Ashton's resources were equal to the strain, and in spite of the immense personal and financial loss he kept his workforce in full employment by setting them to work in his brickworks and building a new mill, Throstle Bank mill, an act which resulted in him being presented with 'a richly-embellished address' by his workforce expressing their gratitude for the kindness and liberality afforded them on many occasions, but 'more especially during the late cotton panic' ('North Cheshire Herald', 23 May 1866). 
Following his move to Ford Bank in Didsbury, Ashton maintained his strong links with the town of Hyde. He took a very active part in local politics, and succeeded in obtaining the charter of incorporation in 1881 for Hyde. He was one of the first radicals elected to Hyde town council, and at the first meeting of the new authority he was elected as alderman and also first mayor of Hyde, in recognition of the 'interest he took in the town's welfare and for his many public benefactions' (Middleton, 'History', 266). He also became a figure of note in Manchester society: he funded many projects and was regarded as the second founder of Manchester University; he reconstructed the Hulme Trust which resulted in the establishment of Manchester High School for Girls in 1874. He was also an active member of the Manchester branch of the National Educational League, which did much to prepare the way for the passing of the 1870 act, and he was associated with Lydia Becker in this undertaking. His work on the Hyde Relief Committee was one of the reasons that the city council gave him the freedom of the city in 1892. 
As well as his many activities in Hyde and Manchester, Ashton served as high sheriff of Lancashire and also as a magistrate for Cheshire and Lancashire. He was a leading member of the Liberal Party in Manchester, indeed it was commented that he was the Liberal Party in Manchester, but he declined invitations to become a member of parliament. In 1882 he declined a baronetcy offered to him by William Gladstone, who became a close friend and who stayed at his Ford Bank home when he came to Manchester for the National Liberal Federation meeting at the Free Trade Hall in 1889, finding it 'refined and pleasant' (Gladstone, 'Diaries', 2 Dec 1889). 
Ashton died at Ford Bank, Didsbury, on 21 January 1898, and was buried at Hyde Chapel three days later. He is to be remembered as a man who gave his life to the service of high principles and to beneficent labours in his native town of Hyde and his larger home of the city of Manchester -- a man who knew he could do most good 'dwelling among his own people' ('Manchester Guardian', 22 Jan 1898) and going among them fulfilling the obligations of neighbourhood and of the employer of labour. 


@@@@@


doc= 50522


Disbrowe, Sir Edward Cromwell (1790-1851), diplomatist, was the eldest son of Colonel Edward Disbrowe (died 1818), MP and vice-chamberlain to Queen Charlotte, and his wife, Lady Charlotte Hobart (died 1798). He was named in memory of his ancestor Major-General John Disbrowe, the Commonwealth general who married Oliver Cromwell's sister. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 21 October 1808, and in 1810 he entered the diplomatic service as attache to his cousin Sir Charles Stuart at Lisbon. After service at the headquarters of the Russian army and at St Petersburg (May 1813 - April 1814), he was appointed secretary of legation first at Copenhagen, where he remained until June 1820, and then at Bern until April 1823. On his way to Bern, Disbrowe undertook a mysterious trip to Milan 'on the affairs of Queen Caroline' shortly before parliament began proceedings to dissolve her sad and unfortunate marriage to George IV. Disbrowe himself married Anne Kennedy (died 1855), the eldest daughter of the Hon. Robert Kennedy, on 24 October 1821. The Disbrowes had two sons and three daughters; both sons died on military service, Edward at the battle of Inkerman (5 November 1854) during the Crimean War and William while in Canada. Disbrowe served briefly as MP for New Windsor (February 1823 - June 1826) and was as a consequence able to live in the family home, Walton Hall, Walton-on-Trent, Derbyshire, for the only time in his life. 
After another tour of duty at St Petersburg (March 1825-April 1828), Disbrowe received his first independent appointment, as minister to Wurttemberg, a 'mission de famille' as Charlotte, the princess royal, had married the king of Wurttemberg. In 1831 he was made a KCG. In 1833 he went to Stockholm as minister to Sweden, and in January 1836 he went to The Hague, where he remained minister until his sudden death there on 29 October 1851. He was buried in the family vault at Walton Hall. 
A representative example of the unreformed diplomatic service, and according to Lord Palmerston a man of only moderate ability, Disbrowe nevertheless served with distinction at The Hague. He successfully negotiated a commercial treaty with the Netherlands in 1837 and manoeuvred the irate Dutch towards the recognition of an independent and neutral Belgium. 


@@@@@


doc= 50523


Aitken, William (1812?-1869), Chartist and factory reformer, was born in a barrack room near Dunbar, possibly on 2 June 1812, the youngest but one of nine children of Scottish parents, natives of Duns. His father, originally a cordwainer, served thirty years in the army and rose to the rank of sergeant-major. After leaving the army Aitken's father decided to move the family to the Lancashire mill town of Ashton under Lyne. At eleven, William became a cotton piecer in a mill; a few years later he graduated to mule spinner. He received little formal education; however, he read widely in history, science, and literature and fell in love with poetry, a passion that lasted throughout his lifetime. 
In the early 1830s Aitken took up the cause of the ten-hour working day in cotton factories; his activism led to conflict with his employer and eventually to his dismissal. Out of work, he decided to open in 1833 a school in Mill Lane at Ashton. A few years later he married Mary, 'nee' Hanley Taylor ('b'. 1801/2), a native of Ashton. Of their six children four died in infancy or in childhood; the survivors were Peter and William Wallace, who was born at their home in Park Street, Ashton, in 1841. In 1840 Aitken's school, where his wife also taught, enrolled 120 day and 40 evening students, mainly of the working classes, and yielded a weekly income of about 3 pounds. 
In the late 1830s Aitken was active as a Chartist speaker and organizer in Ashton and Stalybridge. Although he avoided any direct involvement in the buying and selling of firearms and pikes, he upheld the right of the people to bear arms and supported the call for a general strike. In August 1839 he was arrested on the charges of seditious conspiracy and speeches and unlawful assembly. In 1840 he went to prison and served nine months at Kirkdale, near Liverpool, where he wrote poetry. 
In the summer of 1842 Aitken and other members of the Chartist leadership spoke at a series of mass meetings to protest against a round of wage cuts in the Ashton and Stalybridge area; they came out in favour of a general strike for a fair day's wages and the Charter and later travelled to towns in the cotton district and West Riding to urge working men and women to join the strike. In September 1842, after the strike's collapse, Aitken left the country, in the company of Samuel Radcliffe and James Taylor, on the ship 'Ebenpreble'. He spent about a year in the United States and returned to Ashton in late 1843. At the urging of friends he published a short account of his adventures, 'A Journey up the Mississippi River: from its Mouth to Nauvoo, the City of the Latter Day Saints' (1845). 
In 1848, during the Chartist movement's third (and final) national campaign, Aitken spoke at Chartist meetings and rented the lower floor of his school to the Chartists; it became a meeting place for the Chartist national guards. Well aware of the insurrectionary plotting of that summer, he took no part, however, in the August uprising in Ashton by the national guards. In the wake of these events the authorities arrested Aitken and charged him with conspiracy and sedition; in December 1848 these charges were dropped. 
With the decline of Chartism, Aitken remained active in public life but directed his time and energies into other causes. In the early 1850s he used his skills as a speaker and writer on behalf of a local movement to enforce the ten-hour day; in 1854 Ashton factory workers presented him with a purse of 100 guineas in recognition of his labours. A well-known leader of the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows, Aitken also served as an auditor and secretary for different local societies and devoted considerable effort and personal expense to the building of Oddfellows Hall, which opened in Ashton in 1856. Throughout these years he took a lively interest in municipal and parliamentary politics in Ashton and eventually came to align himself, in terms of electoral politics, with the Liberal party; in the late 1850s he also spoke at a number of reform meetings. Perhaps the most controversial aspect of his post-Chartist career was his outspoken support of the confederate cause during the American Civil War. Critical of the blockade of southern ports, which led to the 'cotton famine' in Lancashire, he defended the confederacy's right to secede from the union. Confederate sympathizers apparently supplied Aitken with some of the funding for his pro-southern activities in the cotton district. 
In the late 1860s ill health and depression led Aitken to withdraw from public life and to give up his school. Against this background of poor health and growing despair, he set out to tell the story of his life; in September 1869 his autobiography began to appear in instalments in the 'Ashton News'. On 27 September 1869, at his home, 362 Katherine Street, Ashton under Lyne, Aitken took a razor and cut his throat. His age was given as 57. In a show of support and respect, thousands thronged the streets from his home to his funeral on 1 October at St Peter's Church, Ashton, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 50528


Bankhead, Charles (c.1797-1870), diplomatist, was probably the son of Dr Charles Bankhead ('c'.1768-1859), personal physician to Lord Castlereagh. Bankhead began his diplomatic career as a clerk to The Hague from 5 July 1814 to 5 January 1815 and then worked at St Petersburg from June 1820 to December 1822 and again from December 1824 to June 1825. In 1826 he was transferred to Washington as secretary of legation. He served as charge d'affaires for long periods during the 1830s while the British minister, Sir Charles Vaughan (1774-1849), was on leave of absence in Britain. He took part in the continuing negotiations over the north-eastern boundary dispute between Maine and Canada and was instrumental behind the scenes in resolving the crisis in 1835-6 between France and the United States over unpaid indemnities owed to the latter. He was relieved in 1836 by Henry Stephen Fox (1791-1848), who had been appointed minister-plenipotentiary. 
Bankhead's next assignment was in 1838 as secretary of embassy in Constantinople; then in 1843 he was transferred to Mexico as minister-plenipotentiary. He arrived in March 1844 and was confronted by a deepening crisis in Mexican-American relations. Texas, formerly a province of Mexico, had overthrown Mexican rule and established an independent republic in 1836. Mexico had refused to conclude a treaty with Texas and for years Britain had tried to mediate a settlement between the two states as part of a wider strategy of maintaining Texan independence. Bankhead was instrumental in persuading Mexico to recognize Texas in 1845; however, when given the choice between annexation to the United States or independence, Texas opted for the former. This led directly to war between the United States and Mexico, and Bankhead was instructed to offer mediation by Britain, which was rejected by both parties. He was, however, able to facilitate communication between the adversaries during the conflict. 
Bankhead was also active in promoting British commercial interests in Mexico, and at one time advocated an ambitious colonization scheme in California to prevent the province from falling under American control. He also believed that a European-sponsored monarchy would be a solution to Mexico's political instability. Neither suggestion, however, was followed up by the British government. Bankhead left Mexico on 19 October 1847 owing to illness and retired officially from the diplomatic service on 6 April 1851. He died at his home, 8 St James's Street, London, on 11 March 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 50529


Clover, Joseph Thomas (1825-1882), anaesthetist and surgeon, was born on 28 February 1825 at home, over his father's shop, at 6 Market Place, Aylsham, Norfolk, the third of the five children of John Wright Clover (1780-1865), draper, and his second wife, Elizabeth Mary Anne Peterson (1791-1883), property owner. He was educated at Grey Friars' Priory School, Norwich, and at the age of sixteen he was apprenticed to a local surgeon, Charles Mends Gibson, and enrolled as a dresser at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital. His apprenticeship was interrupted by ill health, almost certainly tuberculosis. In 1844 he proceeded to University College Hospital, London, where his fellow students included Joseph Lister and Henry Thompson. His claim, made many years later, that he was present on 21 December 1846 when Robert Liston amputated a leg under the first general anaesthetic to be given in England, though not supported by his diary, was confirmed by the fellow student who gave the ether, William Squire. 
Clover qualified MRCS, LSA, in 1847, and in 1848 he was appointed to the onerous post of apothecary, renamed resident medical officer in 1851, at University College Hospital. Here he operated, administered anaesthetics by a method of his own devising, and taught students. He attained the fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons on 11 April 1850. In 1853 he entered private practice and moved with his parents to 44 Mortimer Street, renamed 3 Cavendish Place in 1860, where he lived for the rest of his life. Here, in his own workshop, he made the prototypes of his many inventions, most of which were produced commercially by Mayer and Meltzer and Coxeter & Sons. Clover had become a skilled lithotritist, and went on to design improved blades and to invent a bladder syringe to facilitate the removal of the crushed fragments of stone. He also designed the Clover crutch, to hold the patient in the lithotomy position, and a gas cautery. But the greater part of his professional life was spent as an anaesthetist. 
Appreciating the importance of knowing, and having control over, the concentration of chloroform vapour being inhaled by the patient, about 1860 Clover set about designing an inhaler free from the problems caused by cooling or breath-holding that were inherent in all contemporary vaporizers. The result was a more practical application of an idea first tested by John Snow, who had occasionally acted as anaesthetist for Clover. It consisted of a very large reservoir bag that was filled with a known concentration of vapour before the start of the operation. This established a safe maximum, which could be diluted by admitting air at the facepiece. The contents of such a bag would have lasted some fifteen minutes. By hanging this cumbrous device on his back to keep it out of the way of the surgeon, Clover initiated the fashion that required the well-turned-out Victorian anaesthetist to appear with pieces of apparatus suspended about his person. He exhibited the inhaler at the International Exhibition of 1862, and the official report described it as 'undoubtedly, the safest instrument which has yet been devised for the administration of chloroform, [which] would surely be generally adopted if it could be rendered a little less cumbersome. It is, however, admirably suited for hospital use ' (Traer, 148-9). The administration of chloroform by this apparatus became the approved method at St Mary's Hospital, the Great Northern, Guy's, and the Westminster. The quest for latent heat of vaporization continued throughout Clover's life. It resulted in his counter-current inhaler, and in vaporizers designed to be worn in the anaesthetist's axilla, and on the top of his head; this latter was rejected because of the discomfort caused by pressure on the scalp. 
In 1863 the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society, disturbed by the number of chloroform deaths, set up a committee of inquiry. No practising anaesthetist was included among its members, but Clover, who was a fellow of the society, played a great part in its experimental investigations, which were carried out in the physiology laboratory of University College. It was widely thought that he drafted its report and was largely responsible for its recommendations ('Report of the committee appointed... to inquire into... chloroform', 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 47, 1864, 323-442). The investigation confirmed that 5 per cent chloroform vapour was the safe upper limit, and showed conclusively that when strong mixtures were inhaled the pulse became impalpable well before the heart ceased to beat. From this came the recommendation that the pulse should be monitored continuously. The photograph of Clover demonstrating the use of his chloroform bag shows him with a finger ostentatiously on the pulse, and he was always critical of any apparatus that did not allow the anaesthetist to keep one hand free for this purpose. 
Clover's principal appointments were at University College, London, where he was lecturer on anaesthetics, and at the Dental Hospital. In October 1864 he was offered an attachment at the Westminster, but this, and his sessions at Guy's, lasted less than three years. Much of his private work was in dental anaesthetics. He was a very active member of the Odontological Society of Great Britain, to which several of his more important papers were read. Until the process of antisepsis allowed the body to be subjected to more extensive surgical interventions, it was in anaesthesia for dentistry that the advances were being made. Clover was much in demand by dentists. Unlike deaths in the anonymity of the hospital, a death in the dental chair was a death in the community, and dentists contrasted the pleasure of operating with Mr Clover, when they had not the slightest passing uneasiness, with their anxiety when the patient's own doctor volunteered to give the chloroform, when, as they said, they were often frightened out of their wits. Clover, with a few quiet words of explanation, was able to gain the confidence of the most nervous patient, and of the dentist too. 
Clover prepared the official report when the use of nitrous oxide ('laughing gas') was demonstrated at the Dental Hospital by T. W. Evans in 1868 (J. T. Clover, 'Anaesthesia in dentistry by protoxide of nitrogen', 'BMJ', 4 April 1868, 337-8). He immediately recognized its advantages for dental anaesthesia and rapidly adapted his own apparatus for its use. But the apparatus for which Clover is best known is his portable regulating ether-inhaler, the subject of several modifications, and illustrated in every textbook of anaesthetics for the next fifty years (J. T. Clover, 'Portable regulating ether-inhaler', 'BMJ', Jan 20 1877, 69-70). Its portability made it very popular with the peripatetic jobbing anaesthetists of the period. Oddly, it was the one he least liked to use himself. 
Clover kept a careful record of his cases. His continual search for safety led him to try, and to reject, other anaesthetic agents. Realizing that some deaths were caused by the inhalation of vomit, he campaigned against the surgical practice of dosing the patient with alcoholic stimulants before operation. He insisted that the patient fast for six hours before the anaesthetic, and preferred to anaesthetize before breakfast or at two o'clock in the afternoon. 
Clover's other contributions to the instrumentation of the speciality were a nosepiece for dental anaesthetics, a spring-loaded dental prop, an oral airway, a device for the rapid performance of laryngotomy, and 'funnel-shaped india-rubber tubes for conveying the anaesthetic to the back of the mouth during operations on the jaw'. These, together with a plenum vaporizer supplied by a foot-operated bellows, and a 'down-draught dilutor', which he was still developing at the time of his death, were shown at the 1881 congress (J. T. Clover, 'On apparatus for giving anaesthetics with precision', 'Transactions of the International Congress of Medicine', 1881, 2.390-92). 
Clover worked with the leading surgeons of the day, and often with the urologist Sir Henry Thompson; among their patients was the deposed Napoleon III of France. Clover also anaesthetized Alexandra, princess of Wales, Princess Beatrice, Florence Nightingale, and Sir Erasmus Wilson. He enjoyed a rich social life, and made many friends. Among them were Tennyson, the Terrys, Holman Hunt, Burne-Jones, Ruskin, Coventry Patmore, Carl Rosa, and Brunel. He very likely participated in Sir Henry Thompson's celebrated dinner parties for eight, the 'octaves'. In 1869 he married Mary Anne Hall (1839-1929), artist and musician. Of their five children, three sons and a daughter survived to adult life. 
Clover was indisputably the leading British anaesthetist of his day. He did not publish a textbook, but spread his ideas at meetings, through lectures and the journals, and by example. His well-received articles on anaesthetics, artificial respiration, and resuscitation, in Sir Richard Quain's 'Dictionary of Medicine' (1882), appeared posthumously. 
Clover died at 3 Cavendish Place, Cavendish Square, on 27 September 1882, of the tuberculosis that had troubled him for most of his life. Many tributes were paid to his professional and personal attributes. He is depicted as the supporter on the sinister side of the coat of arms of the Royal College of Anaesthetists, and a biennial Clover lecture is delivered in his memory. He was buried on 30 September in the Brompton cemetery in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50530


Cantlie, Sir James (1851-1926), physician and medical administrator, was born on 17 January 1851 at Keithmore Farm, Dufftown, Banffshire, the eldest son of William and Janet Cantlie. Growing up on his father's farm, he absorbed a strong sense of duty and obligation, and the ethics of the Scottish clan remained with him throughout his life. Often in the course of his long medical career he would offer his services free of charge, and he took a great interest in the welfare of those less fortunate than himself. The forthright manner in which he was later to express many of his views on social issues can also be attributed to the formative influences of his childhood, especially that of his father, who was known as the 'biggest Tory in Banffshire', on account of his massive size and independent, though conservative, views. Cantlie resembled his father in both these respects, and his broad shoulders, strong arms, and deep chest made him a powerful boxer and batsman. His pride in his Scottish ancestry also showed itself in his enduring interest in the music, poetry, and language of his homeland. 
The young James Cantlie received his education first at Botriphnie's School in the nearby village of Drummuir and then, from the age of thirteen, at Milne's Institution at Fochabers, Speyside. Two years later Cantlie passed the bursary examination for the University of Aberdeen, where he matriculated in 1866. At Aberdeen Cantlie studied both sciences and arts; he graduated in 1871 MA in natural science. By this time he had taken the decision to enter the medical profession and to this end he began training at Aberdeen. After one year he left to join his friend J. Mitchell Bruce at the Charing Cross Hospital, London, for the summer session; he returned to Aberdeen to graduate MB CM in 1873 with honourable distinction. 
Cantlie next returned to London to take up a post as instructor in anatomy at the Charing Cross Hospital, where he later became demonstrator in anatomy, house physician, house surgeon, and surgical registrar successively. During his time there he developed an interest in first aid, as the hospital received many accident victims. This led him to join the newly formed St John Ambulance Association, in which he became an instructor. His interest in first aid also extended to the battlefield, and in 1882 he joined the London Scottish Volunteers as a surgeon; this service convinced Cantlie that medical aid for non-regular forces was too inflexible, owing to the strong attachments that developed between medical officers and their regiments. A more flexible system was needed, whereby a pool of medical labour would be available for work wherever it was most needed. This was the inspiration behind the Volunteer Medical Staff Corps (established in 1883), which was the brainchild of Cantlie and the army medical reformer George Evatt. 
Later in 1883 Cantlie, together with eleven other civilian doctors and six army regulars, volunteered for service in Egypt, where their knowledge of first aid was needed in the treatment of victims of a cholera epidemic. This marked the beginning of Cantlie's lifelong interest in tropical diseases and whetted his appetite for medical work overseas. Before leaving for Egypt, Cantlie became engaged to Mabel Barclay Brown (died 1921), whose father was also a volunteer with the London Scottish. The couple were married in 1884 and had four sons, one of whom -- Neil -- went on to become director-general of the Army Medical Service. 
While in London, Cantlie also developed an interest in the physical condition of the urban poor. He was appalled by the sanitary conditions in the area around Charing Cross and became convinced, too, that lack of fresh air and exercise was leaving an indelible mark on the population -- a taint transmitted from one generation to the next. These views were expressed in a controversial paper read at the Parkes Museum in 1885, entitled 'Degeneracy among Londoners', which argued that the poor health and physique of many Londoners was in large part attributable to the absence of ozone from the air they breathed, since overcrowding and industrial pollution had diminished the gas in cities. Cantlie's opinions were widely discussed in the press, in which he was portrayed as a somewhat eccentric and ridiculous figure. 
It may have been the unfavourable response to his paper that led Cantlie to accept an invitation from Dr Patrick Manson to replace him at his practice in Hong Kong, though by this time Cantlie's interest in medicine in tropical regions was already firmly established. After arriving in Hong Kong with his wife early in 1887 he threw himself into his work with characteristic vigour. He was actively involved in all aspects of medical work in the colony, including public health, and established the Vaccine Institute, which afterwards provided Hong Kong with a regular supply of high-quality vaccine against smallpox. Cantlie was also involved in fighting an epidemic of bubonic plague in 1895, which experience later led to his appointment as an adviser to the India Office after bubonic plague arrived in Bombay in 1896. However, Cantlie's most lasting achievement in Hong Kong was the establishment of a medical college for Chinese students, located at the Alice Memorial Hospital. One of the first to graduate from the college, which opened in October 1887, was Sun Yatsen, who in 1911 became the first president of the Chinese republic. 
In 1896, after nine exhausting years in Hong Kong, Cantlie returned to London to take the chair of applied anatomy at the Charing Cross Hospital. Soon afterwards he was informed that Sun Yatsen had been kidnapped and imprisoned at the Chinese legation in London and that he was to be sent to China to face trial (and almost certain execution) for sedition. Cantlie immediately organized a watch on the legation, which ultimately involved the Metropolitan Police. At the same time, news of the kidnap reached the press, which mounted a successful campaign for the release of Sun Yatsen. Sun remained a friend of the Cantlies until his death in 1925. 
By virtue of his experiences in Hong Kong, Cantlie had gained a reputation as an expert in tropical diseases and he began to build up a successful private practice in this field. He was famed particularly for his treatment of tropical liver abscess, on which he wrote many articles. His interest in tropical medicine also led to his decision to found, with Dr William Simpson (a former health officer in Calcutta), a new journal devoted to the subject: the 'Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene', which was first published in August 1898. Cantlie remained an editor of the journal for twenty-three years. He also assisted Patrick Manson in his efforts to establish a school of tropical medicine in London. These efforts were successful and Cantlie became the first surgeon and lecturer in tropical surgery at the London School of Tropical Medicine, which opened in 1899. 
Cantlie's return to London also reawakened his interest in the physical condition of the British people, and his reflections on this subject were published in 1906 under the title 'Physical Efficiency'. In many respects the book was typical of the alarmist writings on physical deterioration which abounded in the period after the South African War, but some of the opinions expressed in it were rather idiosyncratic, even by the standards of the time. Among other things Cantlie believed that all prospective wives should be required to pass an examination in cookery before they could obtain a marriage licence. 
Cantlie's other great, enduring commitment was to first aid and organizations for emergency medical aid. He continued his association with St John's and the volunteers, and he acted as an adviser to the War Office on the establishment of the medical section of the Territorial Force (later the Territorial Army), formed in 1907. During the First World War he and his wife also became commandants in the British Red Cross Society, which was charged with co-ordinating voluntary medical aid. As well as their duties with the Red Cross, the Cantlies found time to found a College of Ambulance (which continued in existence until 1923) and a humanitarian corps to aid those in distress because of disease or poverty. For these services Cantlie was made a knight of the British empire in 1918 and, in the following year, his wife was appointed OBE for her wartime work with Voluntary Aid Detachments under the Red Cross. In 1919 Cantlie also received an honorary LLD degree from the University of Aberdeen. 
These honours marked the peak of Cantlie's career, after which his life was blighted by sadness and physical decline. Cantlie never fully recovered from his exertions during the war and from the death of his beloved wife on 21 December 1921. In 1925 he retired to live near his sister in Scotland and the following January he experienced a severe haemorrhage, which led to his being admitted to a nursing home in Aberdeen. After moving to a succession of nursing institutions, Cantlie died at Dorset Square, London, on 28 May 1926. He was buried at Cottered cemetery, Buntingford, Hertfordshire. His lifelong friend, Dr J. Mitchell Bruce, remembered Cantlie as 'essentially an inventor... a pioneer in things great and small' ('BMJ', 5 June 1926, 972), and this is probably the best description of his long and varied career. 


@@@@@


doc= 50532


Carter, Henry Vandyke (1831-1897), epidemiologist, was born on 22 May 1831 in Hull, the son of Henry Barlow Carter (1803-1867), a well-known artist; nothing is known of his mother. His brother, Joseph Newington Carter (1835-1871), was also an artist, and Henry showed some talent in this area himself but was inclined from an early age towards the study of science. After leaving Hull grammar school, where he was instructed in science by his uncle John Sollitt, Carter studied at St George's Hospital, London, and shortly afterwards, in 1852, he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons and a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. Four years later he graduated MD at the University of London. In London he collaborated with Henry Gray on the latter's 'Anatomy: Descriptive and Surgical' (1858), jointly undertaking many dissections, and providing the illustrations. In 1858 he joined the Indian Medical Service as an assistant surgeon. 
Carter joined the Bombay establishment and spent most of his career in the city and its environs. His scientific interests marked him out from most of his colleagues, and he was soon appointed professor of anatomy and physiology at Grant Medical College; he was later to become its principal. During his time in Bombay he devoted himself to a number of schemes for medical reform, including one which aimed at appointing honorary physicians and surgeons to the Jamsetji Jijibhai Hospital -- a charitable institution founded by the Parsi philanthropist of that name. Carter was also instrumental in establishing, in 1884, a course for women doctors at Grant Medical College and in endowing a lectureship in physiology on the occasion of his retirement. 
The scientific work for which Carter is chiefly remembered is his research on leprosy and 'spirillum fever'. Research into the latter began during the famine years of 1876-80, when large numbers of starving people flooded into Bombay from the surrounding countryside in search of food and work. A disease broke out among them which Carter identified as a form of relapsing fever. His research was published in 1882 under the title of 'Spirillum Fever -- Synonyms, Famine, or Relapsing Fever -- as Seen in Western India', winning him the British Medical Association's Stewart pathological prize. 
Carter's work on leprosy did not involve laboratory or clinical research but rather a comparison of leprosy in a number of different contexts. His first publication on the subject came in 1874, with his 'Report on Leprosy and Leper Asylums in Norway, with Reference to India'. This followed a visit to Norway -- paid for by the government of India -- in which Carter attempted to ascertain whether the leprosy identified in Norway was the same disease as that found in India, and what measures might be useful in the treatment and prevention of the disease. Carter concluded that the leprosies of Norway and India were the same disease and that leper asylums like those in Norway should be established in India. As he made clear in his book 'On Leprosy and Elephantiasis' (1874), he thought that leprosy was primarily a hereditary disease and that it might be eradicated if lepers were prevented from having children. He therefore recommended that, if asylums were to be established, a policy of sexual segregation should be enforced. 
By the 1880s, however, Carter had changed his mind about the way in which leprosy was spread. The gradual acceptance of G. H. A. Hansen's claim to have discovered the bacillus causing leprosy in 1874, together with the discovery of the micro-organisms causing other diseases, led Carter to place more emphasis on contagion than on heredity, believing that the disease might be spread in a similar manner to tuberculosis. In his earlier work he had been prepared to acknowledge that contagion might play some role in the spread of the disease but had stated that there was no conclusive evidence for this. Carter's conversion to the contagion theory served only to strengthen his advocacy of leper asylums. Working with other Europeans, who were concerned about the number of vagrant lepers congregating in the centre of Bombay, and with a number of Parsi philanthropists, Carter persuaded the government to establish a number of leper asylums in the region and, in 1882, to permit the passage of by-laws pronouncing the congregation of lepers to be a sanitary threat. 
The prominent part played by Carter in the campaign for leper asylums in Bombay, and his other philanthropic and scientific achievements, led to his being promoted to the rank of deputy surgeon-general in the Indian Medical Service. He also became an honorary surgeon to Queen Victoria. After leaving India, Carter retired to his native East Riding of Yorkshire. He died at his address, 2 Belgrave Crescent, Scarborough, on 4 May 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 50534


Corbyn, Thomas (1711-1791), pharmaceutical chemist, was born on 13 February 1711 in Worcester, the son of John Corbyn and his wife, Candia, daughter of John and Cecilia Handley of Pontypool. His parents were members of the Society of Friends. He was apprenticed for eight years from September 1728 to Joseph Clutton, citizen and apothecary of London. His time finished, he continued to work with Clutton and did not apply for his freedom of the Society of Apothecaries until April 1743, the year in which his employer died. Mrs Clutton decided to continue the business herself, and as the sole surviving son, Morris Clutton, was only four years into his apprenticeship with his father, Corbyn was brought into the business. A co-partnership was finally formed when Mrs Clutton remarried and Morris Clutton gained his freedom of the Society of Apothecaries in July 1747. Each partner put in about $2000. 
Joseph Clutton had spread his pharmaceutical interests beyond the confines of London; for example, he had been the 'chymical' supplier to the county hospital in Winchester since 1739. Some years before Clutton's death, Corbyn had been sending letters to overseas correspondents. From extant letter-books it is known that by 1741 Corbyn had developed a good trade with the American colonies, in February sending 'Jesuit's Bark', rhubarb, and cinnamon to Virginia, and soon after importing drugs such as senega. Corbyn was a staunch upholder of the purity of drugs, though well aware of the increased profits he could make if he descended to adulteration. In 1750 he wrote to John and Esther White in Pennsylvania, 'The simple drugs are the best of their kind, and the composition not only true, but curiously prepared, and charg'd reasonable according to the market price' (Western MSS 5435-5460). In 1752 Corbyn married Sarah Garret of Colchester; they had two daughters and a son. In 1754 he wrote to his cousin, John Corbyn, a doctor in New England, 'I don't know any thing particularly new & valuable in Physick. My wife has br[ough]t me a new girl now ab[ou]t 6 weeks old and thrives well' (ibid.). 
Corbyn's probity both at home and abroad was an important factor in the success of the firm. When Morris Clutton died in 1754, a balance sheet shows that the concern had increased in value from about $4000 to some $14,000 in the seven years of the partnership. Corbyn also seems to have had no difficulty in raising the necessary capital to buy out Clutton's heirs. For a while he ran the firm alone but by 1762 he had entered into agreements with John Brown and Nicholas Marshall. When Marshall died in 1776 he was replaced by John Beaumont, and ten years later Beaumont's brother-in-law, Josiah Messer, joined the group. They in turn were followed by Beaumont's son, Abraham, and two more Josiah Messers -- strong evidence of the close Quaker network both in business and family life. The most important partner, however, proved to be George Stacey, John Beaumont's son-in-law and the first of a dynasty of Staceys. 
Corbyn had an excellent relationship with his suppliers, customers, and agents, but he expected prompt payment and did not hesitate to say so. He saw the necessity for taking out insurance, and in 1788 he published in the 'Morning Chronicle' an article entitled 'Advantage of insurers or underwriters to merchants and traders exporting goods'. He also produced a catalogue, 'Chemical and galenical medicine truly prepared and sold with all sorts of drugs, by Thomas Corbyn. Chemist and druggists, at the Bell and Dragon in Holborn, London. 1 month [January] 1789'. 
Corbyn remained an active Quaker. In the severe winter of 1767 he joined with a number of other Friends in John Fothergill's scheme for the relief of the poor. Fish and potatoes were purchased at wholesale prices and sold at a small loss from established warehouses. He was, however, severe, authoritarian, and uncompromising in his attitudes, so much so that he was nicknamed 'the Quaker pope'. He clashed with William Cookworthy in Plymouth over disownment and the implementation of rigid discipline. However, James Jenkins wrote that he frequently lent money to young men starting in business -- and not infrequently lost it. 
Towards the end of his life, Corbyn moved from High Holborn to Bartholomew Close, where he died a widower on 14 February 1791. In his will he bequeathed sums of 5 to 50 guineas to his partners and employees, and to his Quaker friends and executors, and nearly $2000 in government securities to relatives and the Society of Friends. His son, John, already a partner, was to receive the property in Holborn and Coldbath Fields provided he paid $4200 to the executors. The residue of the estate was divided equally between all three children. The life and career of Thomas Corbyn shows that the expanding drug trade of the eighteenth century was based on greater trust and probity than is often thought. 


