@@@@@


doc= 50535


Cherry, Sir Benjamin Lennard (1869-1932), lawyer and parliamentary draftsman, was born on 30 August 1869 at Yardley Gobion, Northamptonshire, the son of the Revd Benjamin Newman Cherry of Clipsham rectory, Oakham, and his wife, Rosa Georgina Barrett Lennard. He was educated at Winchester College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took honours in both parts of the law tripos and was awarded the LLB. He was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn in 1893. In 1895 he married Laura Mary Gamlen, daughter of R. H. Gamlen of New Place, Welwyn, Hertfordshire. They had two sons and three daughters. 
Cherry practised as a conveyancer and draftsman of parliamentary bills. He was appointed conveyancing counsel to the Supreme Court in 1914. He wrote extensively about land law. He was joint author of 'The Land Transfer Acts, 1875 and 1897' (1899) and author of 'The New Property Acts: Series of Lectures with Questions and Answers' (n.d.). He was joint editor of the following works: with George Edwin Tyrrell, Arthur Dickson, and Isaac Marshall, the seventh edition of 'Dart's Treatise on the Law and Practice Relating to Vendors and Purchasers of Real Estate' (1905); with Arthur Eustace Russell, the ninth edition (1905) and with Russell and Claud Vivian Rawlence, the tenth edition (1913) of 'Wolstenholme's Conveyancing and Settled Land Acts', and with John Chadwick and John Robert Percival Maxwell, the eleventh edition (1925) of the same work retitled 'Wolstenholme and Cherry's Conveyancing Statutes, &c.'; and with Reginald Beddington, the twentieth (1911) and twenty-first (1913) editions of 'Prideaux's Forms and Precedents in Conveyancing (Incorporating Wolstenholme's Forms and Precedents)'. 
As well as being an author and editor, Cherry was a significant parliamentary draftsman, and was the main author of the Birkenhead property legislation, consisting of the 'Law of Property Act' of 1925 and six ancillary statutes. This converted into the relatively orderly system known today a tangle based on customary and feudal tenures, springing and shifting uses, and numerous other arcane features said to have been characterized by Oliver Cromwell as 'an ungodly jumble' (Williams, v). It revolutionized land law, and was at that time the largest single body of legislation which had ever been placed on the British statute book. 
Sir Arthur Underhill, a fellow conveyancer and member of one of the committees responsible for overseeing the new property legislation, said it was a wonder that Cherry steadily refused to practise in court, for he had many of the qualities required in a Chancery barrister: a flow of language, great power of argument, and persistence ('The Times', 15 Sept 1932). Reginald Bedding, a pupil of Cherry's at the Chancery bar, said he was supreme in clearness and conciseness and satisfied only with the production of the very best work (ibid.). Professor D. Hughes Parry said of the revolutionary 'Birkenhead Acts', named after the lord chancellor of the time, that Cherry nursed them jealously and defended them wholeheartedly, as if they were his children, adding that he took endless pains in lectures, textbooks, and articles to make their effect generally known and he won over the solicitors of the country, who had profited greatly from the complexities of old-style conveyancing, to a sympathetic administration of the new law (ibid.). 
Viscount Haldane, one of five lord chancellors associated with the prelude to and creation of the 'Birkenhead Property Acts' (the others were Lord Cairns, Lord Selborne, Lord Cave, and Birkenhead himself), said of Cherry that he was master of the new oceans on which, as a result, practitioners had been called to embark ('New Property Acts', v). Wolstenholme, himself a great reformer and conveyancer, had already suggested making land transferable, like stocks and shares, free from trusts and settlements and Cherry called him 'the originator of the germ' ('Wolstenholme and Cherry'). Lord Davey had brought this idea before parliament originally, and various committees of Chancery lawyers took on the task which resulted in the passing of the 1925 legislation, together with the first parliamentary counsel, Sir Frederick Liddell, to whom, Cherry said, so much of the artistry in draftsmanship and clear arrangement was due (ibid.). Cherry was throughout the workhorse and, as Lord Haldane put it, the mastermind in the fashioning of the new system (Cherry, viii). Cherry himself said he was there to run the gauntlet, and consoled his students with the thought that 'something very much worse might have been passed' (ibid., lecture 1). One of the obstacles with which he had to contend was the ignorance of many of those in authority. After Lord Cave, the lord chancellor who was in office when the 1925 legislation went through, had made a confused speech about the proposals in 1920, Cherry's sardonic comment was 'a little knowledge is a dangerous thing' (Heuston, 439). 
Cherry was knighted in 1922 and made a bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1927. His recreations were golf and shooting, and he was a member of the Rye, Wheathampstead, and Knebworth golf clubs. He died in a nursing home at 7 Portland Place, London, on 12 September 1932. 


@@@@@


doc= 50536


John Hardman (1811-1867), who was baptized on 9 August 1811 at St Peter's Roman Catholic Church in Birmingham, the third of the four surviving children of 


@@@@@


doc= 50537


Crace, John Gregory (1809-1889), interior decorator and author, was born on 26 May 1809 at 34 Curzon Street, London, the elder of two surviving sons of Frederick Crace (1779-1859), interior decorator and collector, and his wife, Augusta Harrop Gregory (1783/4-1827), the daughter of John Gregory of Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, magistrate and treasurer of the Whig Club, and his wife, Mary. His father was renowned as decorator to the prince regent, and was head of a decorating firm founded in 1768 by Frederick's grandfather, Edward Crace ['see under 'Crace family], a coach decorator and keeper of the king's pictures. 
Crace was apparently sickly as a young boy but grew very tall (6 feet 1 inch) and was of generally robust health as an adult. He was educated first at Dr Crombie's school in Greenwich, and later at Mr Pollard's school in South Kensington. Although he was never formally apprenticed, he was admitted to the freedom of the Painter-Stainers' Company in 1855 and, after a long and distinguished career, became master in 1879-80. He made his first trip abroad to Paris in 1825 in the company of his father, and returned there frequently during his life. In 1829 he made an extended study tour of France and Germany in the company of a family friend, Mr Buchan, returning to Paris and Rouen the following year to assist with a lawsuit brought against his uncle, Alfred Crace. He was in Paris during the revolution of July 1830, witnessed fighting on the streets, and he himself narrowly missed being shot in the place des Greves while browsing at a bookstall. 
Crace began his career in 1825 by working for his father, who was commissioned to execute decorative work at Windsor Castle and Buckingham Palace by George IV. He later recalled rising at 5.30 each morning to give the workmen their orders for the day. On attaining the age of twenty-one in 1830 he received property and $3200 in cash from his mother's estate. This inheritance enabled him to become a full partner in his father's business, which was known thereafter as Frederick Crace & Son until the former's death in 1859, when it became J. G. Crace & Son. A memorandum in J. G. Crace's hand, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum archives, suggests that this partnership came at a critical point for the firm, whose business had significantly fallen off owing to Frederick Crace's having devoted himself almost exclusively to commissions for George IV, notorious for his non-payment of debts. 
A further sense of urgency was added by Crace's marriage, on 26 January 1833, to Sarah Jane Hine (1815-1894), the daughter of John Inwood Langley (1780-1874), a civil servant at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich. Crace had become friendly with Mr Langley while undertaking decorative work on behalf of his father, who was painter to the board of works. Shortly afterwards Crace and his wife, to whom he remained happily married all his life, began what was to become a large family of twelve children, eleven of whom survived infancy. Crace was determined to improve his income and build up a larger client base for the firm. To do so, in 1837 he embarked on a study tour of interior decoration in Paris, returning to decorate a new showroom at the Crace premises in 14 Wigmore Street, Cavendish Square (occupied by Crace & Son from 1827 to 1899, and renumbered 38 Wigmore Street in 1859). Invitations were issued to prospective clients and country house owners to view the new decorations in the French Renaissance and other styles at a series of open-house evenings. 
The open-house evenings at Wigmore Street proved to be an immediate success, and Crace quickly established himself as the leading London decorator. One of his most important clients was Andrew Spencer Cavendish, the sixth duke of Devonshire, a patron of the arts whom Crace described as the noblest gentleman he ever knew. Throughout the 1840s Crace worked extensively for the duke, most notably at Devonshire House, London, and Chatsworth, Derbyshire, where he created a remarkable private library in the 'old French style', including a suite of library furniture. At Hardwick Hall, another Devonshire property, Crace was involved in the care and conservation of the important collection of early textiles. In conjunction with the great Gothic revival architect, A. W. N. Pugin, with whom he formed a partnership in 1844, from 1849 to 1852 Crace decorated and produced furniture at Lismore Castle, the duke's summer retreat in Ireland. 
Crace also came to the attention of the queen and prince consort. In 1841 he designed wall and ceiling decoration in a medievalizing style at Taymouth Castle, Perthshire, for the second marquess of Breadalbane, who engaged him to create a suite of state rooms in which to receive Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. Crace's duties included attendance at the evening reception for the queen and Prince Albert, complete with fireworks, bonfires, and dancing highlanders. Prince Albert later asked Crace to decorate a number of interiors at Windsor Castle, including the Waterloo chamber (1860-62). 
By 1844 Crace's designs -- notably the Gothic state rooms he created at Knebworth, Hertfordshire, for the novelist Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton -- were displaying the imprint of Pugin in certain details. Crace had travelled to Munich in 1843 to study the principal buildings of the new town, built under the supervision of the architect Leo von Klenze. He came away with a theory of using bold polychromatic decoration in architecture that was to support his work in the Gothic style, which continued for about a decade after the death of Pugin (in 1852). His principal commissions in the Gothic style included Chirk Castle, Wales (1846-8), Eastnor Castle, Herefordshire (1849-50), Abney Hall, Cheshire (1852-7), Tyntesfield, Somerset (from 1854), and the new palace of Westminster (1845-69), all begun in partnership with Pugin, with whom he formed a close friendship. 
It was, however, at the international exhibitions of 1851 and 1862 in London, of 1855 and 1867 in Paris, and at the 1857 Art Treasures Exhibition in Manchester, that Crace achieved a wider fame, beyond royal and country house circles, resulting in an increasing number of civic and institutional commissions. In 1851 he was closely involved with Pugin in creating the Medieval Court, and in 1862 he took over the decoration of the entire controversial building at short notice, as well as acting as exhibitor and a principal juror. He was again a juror in 1867 in Paris, where he exhibited and received a medal from the Imperial Commission under Napoleon III. 
In 1852 Crace became interested in wet process photography and became a founder member of the Photographic Society (later the Royal Photographic Society). In 1855, to recover from a breakdown in his health, Crace travelled to Moorish Spain and made the first photographs of the Alhambra at Granada, the Alcazar at Seville, and other monuments. After the 1862 exhibition, his eldest son, John Dibblee Crace, increasingly took over the running of the firm, becoming a partner with his father in 1873. This left the elder Crace free to devote himself to travel and study. As well as lecturing to the Institute of British Architects (later the RIBA) and other learned bodies, which he had done since 1839, he published a number of articles on colour theory, decorative practices, and the first history of wallpaper. He continued a limited amount of professional work during the 1880s. 
Crace lived at the Wigmore Street premises from 1833 to 1851, when he moved to 6 Grove End Road, St John's Wood, with a garden laid out by his friend, Sir Joseph Paxton, staying there until 1858. Thereafter he lived in a large Italianate house, called Springfield, in Half Moon Lane, Dulwich, where he died at the age of eighty on 13 August 1889. J. D. Crace observed that with his father he had lost his most valued friend and adviser. The historic Crace decorating firm outlived John Gregory Crace by only ten years: his son wound up the business in 1899 in order to devote himself to decorating and consulting work. 


@@@@@


doc= 50538


Lollard women (act. c.1390-c.1520) were a significant feature in nonconformist and heretical circles before the end of the fourteenth century, and remained so throughout the subsequent history of the Lollard movement. Most of the information about them, even more than for men, comes from the records of prosecuting authorities, and as a result is almost always tantalizingly brief -- snapshots taken at the time of their appearance in court. Even so, a rich variety of characters and roles is revealed. It should be noted at the outset, however, that the appropriateness of the term 'Lollard' (which originated as a word of abuse) rather than 'Wycliffite', as well as the size of the movement and the extent of its dependence on John Wyclif (whose earliest followers do not appear to have included women), are issues much debated by historians. There is also considerable discussion regarding the role of gender in Lollardy, and particularly whether the movement afforded women more, or fewer, opportunities than orthodox religion. 
Looking at the best documented examples in chronological order, a formidable personality is presented by 


@@@@@


doc= 50540


Lollard knights (act. c.1380-c.1414) is the name conventionally given to a close-knit group of influential courtiers, accused by contemporary chroniclers of promoting heretical Lollard doctrines during the reigns of Richard II and Henry IV. The Leicester chronicler Henry Knighton (writing during the 1380s) names 


@@@@@


doc= 50542


Berisford, Charles (1830-1898), silk manufacturer, was born at Buglawton, Cheshire, the seventh of eleven children and fourth son of Isaac Berisford (1794-1854), toll-keeper turned farmer, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Bonsall (1798-1860), formerly of Monyash. Charles started work when he was nine, presumably in textiles like his brothers. He was so small he had to stand on a stool to work. Later he was formally apprenticed, possibly to James Orme, silk throwster of Macclesfield, whose granddaughter he married, but more likely to a ribbon weaver (the trade he later adopted). He attended Sunday school, and then night school. Tradition has it that he extended his education by reading while at his loom. 
In 1858 with his older brothers, William (1827-1879) and Francis (1829-1888), Berisford leased part of the Victoria silk mill on Foundry Bank in Congleton. It was a difficult time to start weaving silk, for Cobden's free trade treaty of 1860 virtually destroyed the British silk ribbon trade, as it allowed the entry of duty-free goods from France. The Berisfords turned to other silk small wares like ferrets (coarse tapes woven from floss silk and used as binding), Prussian or Paris bindings, galloons, and lutes. 
In 1871 the three brothers entered into a formal partnership, calling themselves Berisford Brothers, silk manufacturers, but also carrying on a second business as silkmen, throwsters, and ribbon trimming manufacturers at Pool Street Mill, Macclesfield. In 1872 they bought the whole Victoria building at Congleton, on a mortgage paid off in 1893. In 1879 William died and Francis left the partnership to run the business at Macclesfield. By then the brothers had built a four-storey extension to the original mill and employed 110 people. 
Charles Berisford married twice, but all that is known about his first wife is that she was the widow of a Captain Birchenhall. In 1861 Berisford married Sarah Ann Orme (1832-1910) of Sutton Lane Ends as his second wife. Of their seven children, three of the four sons were to enter the firm: Harry (1864-1936) in 1879, Philip Charles (1872-1945) in 1889, and Ernest Johnson (1875-1944) about 1893. David Birchenhall, his stepson by his first wife, became a partner in 1891, the firm being renamed Berisfords and Birchenhall. In 1892 they bought Parkside Mill, Prestwich, Manchester, and Birchenhall became its manager. There were also branches in London, Leeds, and Liverpool. Thus from its small beginnings the firm developed into one of the major ribbon and trimming manufacturers in the country. Until the year of his death Berisford retained an active interest in the firm, going to Manchester every Tuesday and Friday to buy cotton and to sound out the market. The firm's motto, 'The sapling has at length become a tree', was a fitting epitaph. 
Physically frail from boyhood, Berisford lived a full and active life, 'an admirable example of those enlightened Victorian industrialists who to thrift and shrewdness added honesty in business and benevolence towards their work people' ('Berisfords: the Ribbon People', 40). He was a trustee for the Methodist New Connexion chapel in Congleton (1871-84) and an 'Exhorter' for the chapel in Havannah. In 1884 he transferred to the Wesleyan Methodist chapel at Wragg Street, Congleton, and was instrumental in organizing and financing an enlargement of the premises. He was also a justice of the peace. 
Berisford died at his home, Poplar Villas, West Road, Congleton, on 22 January 1898, and was buried at Astbury church. After his death his son Harry became chairman. In 1902 Philip Berisford moved to London to run that branch until he retired in 1924. Needing further accommodation to match expansion, in 1908 the Berisfords rented a mill at Derby to produce cotton bindings, and in 1913 they took over the small wares business of R. Thorp & Son of Macclesfield. The enlarged firm was incorporated as a limited company in 1916, known as Berisfords Ltd, a name it retained to its centenary in 1958 and beyond. The flexibility which characterized Charles's early success contributed significantly to the firm's survival between the wars. Berisfords was quick to innovate, introducing rayon in 1919 and producing bias binding in 1931 soon after the patent in the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 50543


Blandford, Thomas (1861-1899), co-operative movement activist, was born on 19 August 1861 in Curragh, co. Kildare, to a father of Scottish extraction and a mother of Irish descent. Blandford's parents are recorded in one source as strolling players and this is consistent with the limited record of his early life. The family settled in Newcastle upon Tyne where Blandford obtained employment in a warehouse. By 1881 he had moved to London, finding new opportunities both in employment -- he became a foreman in a wholesale house -- and in education. Blandford attended lectures at the Men's and Women's College, Queen Square, where his interest in economics was developed by James Bonar; such was his appetite for learning that he temporarily gave up his warehouse work to study in the British Museum. 
Blandford's interest in labour conditions and co-operative production led him to join the Labour Association in 1885. This recently formed educational and propagandist body promoted principles of co-partnership including profit-sharing and worker participation in the ownership and administration of business. Blandford served as president of the association for two years and was vice-president at the time of his death. He was also involved in specific co-operative productive ventures, including the Co-operative Bookbinders and the London Productive Society. Blandford's perception of productive societies' need to display their output to potential customers led to involvement with the Co-operative Festivals Association which held its first annual event at Crystal Palace in 1888. Blandford also served on the Co-operative Congress Exhibitions committee which organized other festivals in northern and midland England and Scotland during the 1890s. 
In 1894 Blandford took up a full-time post as the general secretary of the Co-operative Productive Federation, a group founded in 1882 and to which the Labour Association owed its origins. The federation aimed to assist producers' co-operatives, acting as a central agency providing capital and opening up markets for co-operative output. Initially its concrete achievements were few; under Blandford, however, the organization did begin to fulfil some of its original objectives. He established a loan department to assist the capitalization of producers' co-operatives, and had some success in reviving trade union support for such ventures. Blandford was also a relentless propagandist and spoke at over 200 trade union branches urging support for co-operative production. He was equally active in print, establishing 'Labour Co-Partnership', a monthly journal, in 1894 and producing the 'Co-Operator's Year Book'. Producers' co-operation remained under-developed in Britain by comparison with the success of the consumers' movement. It did, however, undergo modest expansion in the later 1890s, with twenty new societies applying to join the Co-operative Productive Federation between 1896 and 1899. This revival of interest was at least in part associated with Blandford's charm, idealism, and energy in promoting the cause. 
Blandford was involved in the international development of co-operation. By virtue of his birth he took an interest in the development of agricultural co-operation in Ireland. Blandford served as chairman of the trading relations committee of the International Co-operative Alliance and was delegated to attend congresses in Paris (1896) and Delft (1897). This, however, increased the strain on Blandford's health, and as early as 1897 friends expressed concerns about his physical well-being. He suffered from consumption and incipient heart disease, as well as the mental stress suffered by a private, contemplative man driven to a public role by a sense of duty. Blandford refused to curtail his work, and even while convalescing in Devon in 1899 visited trade union branches. He returned home to Camden Town while still far from recovered, and died there of influenza on 25 February 1899. He was buried in Highgate cemetery three days later. Blandford was unmarried; he was survived by a sister, also resident in London. On his death he was hailed as a martyr for co-operation, and his work was commemorated in the naming of the Blandford Congress Memorial Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 50544


Bentley, Derek William (1933-1953), victim of a miscarriage of justice, was born on 30 June 1933 at 13 Surrey Row, Blackfriars Road, Blackfriars, London, the third of five surviving children of William George Bentley (1905-1974), an engineer, and his wife, Lilian Rose (1903-1976), daughter of William Cooper and his wife, Sarah. Bentley, the survivor of a pair of twins, was born into a respectable working-class family. He was legally borderline feeble-minded, with a mental age variously estimated as between nine and twelve years and an IQ of 66-77. He was rejected for national service as mentally sub-standard. He was ill co-ordinated, epileptic, and totally illiterate. He attended several state schools but received little education and left Ingram Road School in July 1948, immediately after his fifteenth birthday. A timid person, he kept many pets, including cats, dogs, and a chicken. He was particularly attached to his elder sister 
At fifteen Bentley was convicted of petty theft and sentenced to twenty-one months at the Kingswood approved school near Bristol. After his release he was mentally disturbed, and refused to leave the house for over six months. He worked as a furniture remover, then as a dustman before being downgraded to road sweeper. He was ultimately dismissed as even this proved beyond him. When arrested for murder he was unemployed, and almost certainly unemployable. 
On the night of 2 November 1952 two figures, identified in court as Derek Bentley and Christopher Craig, were seen entering a warehouse in Croydon. The police arrived and trapped the youths on the roof. Detective Constable Fairfax climbed up and seized Bentley, placing him under arrest. Police witnesses claimed -- but both defendants steadfastly denied -- that Bentley shouted 'Let him have it, Chris!' -- an instruction which, even supposing it had been said, 'was on any showing ambiguous' (as the Court of Appeal observed in 1998). Craig, the dominant male leader, fired a revolver, and Fairfax received a graze on the shoulder and let go of a cowed Bentley, who made no effort to escape. Craig fired several more shots, one of which killed Police Constable Miles. Craig then dived off the roof in a futile effort to kill himself. 
Bentley's defence was not well handled. In a two and a half day trial no defence witnesses were called on his behalf, and neither the details of his mental incapacity nor the fact of his being on prescribed medical drugs was revealed. The judge, Lord Chief Justice Rayner Goddard, was a domineering man who acted in a partisan manner. He created an atmosphere which led to a verdict of guilty by the use of emotional language and behaviour, prematurely used the word 'murdered', muzzled a defence witness, and helped prosecution witnesses; his summing up was also biased and lacked proper direction to the jury. Both Bentley and Craig were found guilty, the former with a jury recommendation for mercy. Craig at sixteen was too young to hang but Bentley was sentenced to death. 
Bentley appealed but Goddard refused to add his recommendation for mercy to that of the jury. The appeal was rejected, despite apparently valid legal grounds being available. The home secretary, Sir David Maxwell Fyfe, refused to recommend that the queen exercise the prerogative of mercy. In the House of Commons, Sydney Silverman's attempt to get this decision debated was refused, the speaker ruling that only after Bentley had been executed could it be discussed. There was a widespread feeling of disquiet that Bentley, who was dim-witted, had no record of violence, had no gun, had not fired the shot, and had been under police arrest for fifteen minutes before the fatal shooting, was to hang. Petitions and letters, and even a delegation of MPs, failed to alter Maxwell Fyfe's decision. Bentley was executed at Wandsworth prison at 9 a.m. on 28 January 1953 while an angry crowd waited outside. 
There is little doubt that the home secretary was wrong in refusing to commute the sentence of death. Clemency can normally be exercised for any one of the following reasons: youth; mental problems; a jury recommendation for mercy; widespread or strong local public opinion; the principle that if the leading actor cannot be executed then neither should any associate; and the existence of more than a scintilla of doubt about the evidence. Bentley met each criterion. Maxwell Fyfe's advisers recommended clemency but he remained obdurate to the end. 
Despite a broken marriage to Stewart Dingwall and a twenty-three-year battle against cancer, Bentley's sister Iris devoted her life to campaigning for a pardon for him. In 1966 his body was disinterred from the grounds of Wandsworth prison and reburied in Croydon cemetery on 4 March. Initially a headstone was not permitted; in July 1994 it was allowed, after a dispute about the wording. The tombstone bears the words 'A victim of British justice'. In 1991 Peter Medak's film 'Let him have it' revived the general public's interest. In 1992 Iris achieved a police re-examination of the case, but the home secretary refused to take further action. A new home secretary, Michael Howard, granted a rather strange partial pardon on 29 July 1993, which admitted it had been wrong to execute but maintained the guilty verdict. During the 1990s linguistic evidence emerged that suggested police witnesses had lied; and Police Constable Claude Pain, who claimed he had been on the warehouse roof at the time, but was never called as a witness, maintained that police witnesses had perjured themselves and the fatal words 'Let him have it, Chris' had never been uttered. Iris Bentley died on 22 January 1997 at St George's Hospital, Tooting, and was buried on 31 January at Croydon cemetery. 
In 1997 the case was one of the earliest examined by the Criminal Cases Review Commission for a suspected miscarriage of justice. The commission determined that it merited referring back to the Court of Appeal to reconsider the verdict. This time the court decided that the conviction was unsafe and quashed it on 30 July 1998. The lord chief justice, Lord Bingham, ruled that Goddard's summing up had been 'a highly rhetorical and strongly-worded denunciation of both defendants and of their defences. The language used was not that of a judge but of an advocate (and it contrasted strongly with the appropriately restrained language of prosecuting counsel)'. The appeal court noted that Bentley's appeal had mistakenly not complained about Goddard's summing up, for it was questionable if it 'would have been thought acceptable even by the standards prevailing at the time' (Court of Appeal judgment in 'R. v. Bentley', 30 July 1998). 
This was one of the most controversial British criminal trials of the twentieth century. It affected public opinion, causing many supporters to reconsider the desirability of capital punishment; it raised the issue of parliament's inability to discuss matters of royal prerogative; it is a case that is regularly cited as an example of the irreversibility of the death penalty should the verdict be later called into question; and it is a shocking reminder that state criminal justice systems can sometimes be barbarous and fail with disastrous consequences. 


@@@@@


doc= 50546


Maxwell, Arthur Terence (1905-1991), banker and company director, was born at Rosslyn, Hammers Lane, Mill Hill, near Hendon, Middlesex, on 19 January 1905, the only son, in a family of one son and one daughter, of Brigadier-General Sir Arthur Maxwell (1875-1935), banker and company director, of Mill Hill, and his wife, Eva Jones. Educated at Rugby School and Trinity College, Oxford, where he took an MA, Maxwell travelled in Africa on a James Whitehead scholarship, and in South America, before being admitted to the bar in 1929. 
Maxwell chose a career in the City, joining the long-established firm of private bankers, Glyn, Mills & Co., where his father was a managing partner. Glyn Mills's many connections, together with those that sprang from his marriage in 1935 to Beatrice Diane, daughter of Sir J. Austen Chamberlain, MP, and his wife, Ivy, provided the tall and powerfully built young Maxwell with stepping stones for new interests. He and his wife had two daughters and a son. On his father's death in 1935, Maxwell became a director of Glyn, Mills & Co., and also succeeded him as a director of the Union Bank of Australia, one of the oldest British overseas banks, with whom the Glyn and Mills families had been associated since the 1850s. 
Maxwell embarked upon a career that made a decisive contribution to British banking interests in Australia and New Zealand. He was a director of the Union Bank, and its deputy chairman and chairman in 1949 and 1950, respectively. The merger of the Union Bank and the Bank of Australasia in 1951 to form the Australia and New Zealand Bank (ANZ) signalled a revitalized British presence in Australasia after decades of declining influence. Maxwell played a key role in the creation of the new bank. It was he who was instrumental in renegotiating the terms of the merger to promote the interests of the Union Bank. He was largely responsible for the resolution of the many complex legal and operational issues still outstanding before the merger could be consummated. However, the vigour with which Maxwell pressed his own claims and those of his bank rankled the directors of the Bank of Australasia who felt that the surrender of their royal charter was more than sufficient sacrifice. In these circumstances it was not surprising that Maxwell was denied the ultimate prize of chairmanship that went to Sir Geoffrey Cokayne Gibbs (1901-1975). 
As deputy chairman of ANZ Bank, now the second largest private bank in Australia, and as chairman of its standing committee, a position of 'de facto' executive director, Maxwell exerted a dominant role in the new institution, overshadowing the urbane and more diplomatic Gibbs. As a frequent visitor to the Antipodes, Maxwell displayed a 'hands on' style of management. His ambitious vision of ANZ as an international bank with a significant presence in the City of London was effectively thwarted by the restrictive policies of the Australian monetary authorities in the early 1950s. Nevertheless, ANZ improved its position in its domestic markets, and spread its business into new areas such as savings banking and hire purchase. Maxwell stood down as deputy chairman in 1965. His other business interests and advancing years demanded a lessening of his commitment to the organization he had done so much to build. Maxwell sat on the board of the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group, which resulted from the merger of ANZ and the other British bank, the English, Scottish and Australian Bank, in 1969. He remained as a director until the ANZ's transfer of domicile to Australia in 1976. By that stage leadership had passed to others. 
While his involvement with the Union Bank and ANZ took up much of his time, Maxwell had diverse interests. He sat on many other boards, including Vickers, and was chairman of the Powers-Samas Accounting Machines, which merged with International Computers and Tabulators to become International Computers Limited. Maxwell served in the Territorial Army of Britain from 1923 to 1935 in the 7th City of London regiment (Post Office Rifles) and in 1935 was promoted to captain in the reserve of officers. He held a number of staff posts during the war, notably that of deputy chief of military government section attached to Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, on the staff of General Eisenhower. His rank was that of colonel. Maxwell was also active in civic affairs, being a governor of Rugby School and the British representative on the investment committee of the International Labour Organization; he also sat on a government inquiry into rural bus services, as well as serving a number of charitable causes, including the Royal Hospital for the Incurables. 
Maxwell's achievements, although considerable, never matched those of his illustrious father and father-in-law. The creation of ANZ, which remains, together with the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, and the Standard Chartered, one of the survivors of the earlier wave of British overseas banks, is his most enduring legacy. Maxwell died at his home, Roveries Hall, Bishop's Castle, Shropshire, on 27 June 1991, after a long illness, and was buried on 2 July at Lydham parish church, Bishop's Castle. He was survived by his wife and three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 50547


Thomas, Christopher James (1807-1894), soap boiler, was born on 16 August 1807 in Llangadog, Carmarthenshire, the eldest of nine children (seven sons and two daughters) of Thomas Thomas (1776-1856), wholesale grocer and butter merchant, and Anne (1785-1842), daughter of Christopher James, grocer of Melingriffith, Glamorgan, and his wife, Mary. Both parents were Welsh. 
Thomas's education was disrupted. He attended Taliesin School in Merthyr Tudful, but left at twelve to help run the family business while his father was away, though he returned briefly just before his fourteenth birthday. By 1830 he had moved to Bristol to work in the family soap business at the Red Lion Yard, 7 Redcliffe Street, after his uncle Jones, in one of his 'unaccountable fits' (Somerville, 29) had threatened to discharge the men and close the house. 
In 1831 Thomas Thomas bought out John Jones, who was replaced by Christopher. Thomas Thomas retired in 1841 and the firm amalgamated with the soap boilers Fripp & Co. as Thomas, Fripp, and Thomas. In 1856 the four surviving brothers, Christopher, Thomas, Herbert, and Charles, bought out the Fripps and the company was renamed Christr. Thomas & Bros. In February 1844, at Lewins Mead Unitarian Chapel, Christopher married Mary (1813-1893), the daughter of Samuel Lang, a Bristol ironmonger, and his wife, Protheria. After several moves the couple settled at Drayton Lodge, Durdham Park, Bristol. They had six children. 
The technical progress of the firm owed much to the brothers' willingness to seek out and adopt new ideas, and they took out several patents: for 'Improvements in the manufacture of soap' in 1852, for example, and 'the extraction of glycerine from lyes' in 1879. The firm also pioneered the use of silicate of soda to fill soaps, patenting their method in 1855 and 1862. Christopher and Charles travelled widely in Europe and America. A visit to the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence apparently inspired the design of the chimneys of the Broad Plain works, rebuilt in 1882. Like other soap boilers Christr. Thomas & Bros. adopted brand names. In the 1870s they introduced the good quality Sinclair's Cold Water Soap and the cheaper Magic Arizonic Soap which was sold beyond their usual territory by a Mr Harrison, 'a thorn in the side of many Northern makers' (Somerville, 50). Christopher Thomas retired in 1877 on a pension of $600, and in 1881 he transferred his interest in the Broad Plain works to the other partners. The entry in 'Kelly's Directory' for Bristol in 1894, the year of his death, shows how much the firm had diversified during his life, from just soap boilers to 'manufacturers of composite and paraffin candles, silicate of soda, glycerine & refiners of Edible Cotton seed Oil' as well. 
From 1845 until 1887 Thomas served as Liberal councillor for the St Philip's ward of Bristol. In 1874 he was elected mayor, the council being influenced in their choice by his 'wide reading and cultivated mind' (Somerville, 26) which the councillors thought made him best suited to preside over the visit to Bristol that year of the British Association. He served on the Bristol city docks committee from 1848 until 1878, and was a member of the Bristol chamber of commerce from 1853 until 1877. He was president of the Anchor Society in 1853 and of the Bristol and Gloucester Archaeological Society in 1878. He was chairman of the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway which opened in 1863, and one of its ferries was named after him. 
Thomas died on 2 January 1894 in Bristol, less than three months after his wife, Mary. His memorial in Lewins Mead Unitarian Chapel, where he was an active worshipper, is a fitting tribute, recording that 'he here bore testimony to the simple truths of the Unitarian belief whereon his heart was ever stayed'. Thomas's only son William died as a child and none of his five daughters was directly involved in the business, though the youngest, Anna Louise, married the brother of one of the directors. However, his brothers' descendants continued the family's involvement in the business until its take-over by W. H. Lever in 1912-13. 


@@@@@


doc= 50550


Dickenson, Thomas (bap. 1717, d. 1751), grocer, was baptized in the parish of St Mary's, Stafford, in November 1717, the younger of two sons of Thomas and Elizabeth Dickenson. Little is known of his early life, but in May 1741 Dickenson became a freeman of Worcester having been apprenticed to grocer Timothy Edwards, probably for the usual seven years. In the March of that year he was elected to the annual office of overseer of the poor for the parish of St Nicholas, where he was churchwarden in 1743 and 1744, attending parish meetings there until 1751. 
On 9 August 1748 Dickenson married Jane Bearcroft of Evesham, who had been left $600 by her father, with $200 to come after her mother's death. According to a certificate signed in 1764, the Dickensons' daughter Frances was christened on 5 March 1750; strangely, despite the rector's claim that it was a 'true copy of the Register Book of the Parish of St Nicholas' (Worcester Borough RO, Bearcroft deeds 3964/25), there is no corresponding entry in the actual book. 
Dickenson left detailed records of his Foregate Street shop: the bought ledger, 1744-51, contains names and addresses of his suppliers; his account book, 1740-49, shows method and dates of payment; while in his daybooks for the years 1740-51 Dickenson recorded 252 named customers. Approximately half the customer entries include their occupation, address, method of payment, and details of their purchases. Some, perhaps as many as 18 per cent, were themselves retailers. Just over half his customers came from Worcester, but he also supplied people from Droitwich, Evesham, and Bromyard, and as far afield as Shrewsbury, Wolverhampton, Stafford, and Bridgnorth. 
Dickenson had a good number of middle-class customers, among whom were apothecaries, clergy, and attorneys. There were also skilled craftspeople, including several who would rank quite high within the hierarchy of working people, such as a tailor and a mantua maker. Their systems of payment varied considerably: cash, credit, bills or notes for other goods or services, or a combination of these methods. Some, such as a gardener, paid for goods by 'work done', others paid in kind; the carpenter settled his account with a pig! 
Dickenson mainly obtained his basic supplies from thirty-three Bristol firms, including sugar imported from the colonies, soap, and flour. More sophisticated produce came from twenty-one London companies: candied fruit and ginger, tea, Turkey coffee, 'pistache nutts', Durham mustard. Gloucester supplied snuff and twine; starch, hardware, and hops came from Worcester, clay pipes from Broseley, and anchovies from Chester. Many of his suppliers were on or near the transport system of the River Severn or its coastal links; goods from London combined River Thames shipping with road haulage. Best-selling items were tea, followed closely by sugar and sugar products. Dickenson stocked such ready-made goods as several varieties of biscuit, including 'Savoy biscakes', and a range of confectionery -- orange chips, round drops, barley sugar, and Bristol chocolates. He also sold alcohol, some hardwares, and tobacco. His wares clearly define him as a grocer in the mid-eighteenth-century interpretation of that term; unlike the mercers, he had little in the way of cloth, clothes, haberdashery, or apothecary wares. 
The account books Dickenson kept are of special interest, being those of a young man just setting up in the retail trade. They illustrate the eighteenth-century system of delayed payment of bills by both customer and retailer; Dickenson generally paid his smaller suppliers within four weeks, but larger companies had to wait for several months. He allowed customer discounts for cash and short-term credit, yet his daybooks indicate an income of only two or three sales per day and the expected extended credit must have made considerable demands on the finances of a new shopkeeper. 
Dickenson was buried in Worcester on 23 August 1751; his wife had died twelve days earlier. Although Dickenson was probably not regarded as an influential man by his contemporaries, his up-to-date selection of goods and the range of his suppliers were doubtless important in helping to promote in Worcester and its environs the rapid expansion of wares in the mid-1700s. Dickenson's records are helpful in illuminating an area which suffers from a paucity of documentary evidence -- that of the eighteenth-century county-town retailer, his wares, and his customers. 


@@@@@


doc= 50551


Dudley, Sir William Edward (1868-1938), co-operative society administrator, was born on 29 May 1868 at 1 Loch Street, Runcorn, Cheshire, the son of William Dudley, house painter, and his wife, Rebecca Cottrell. Dudley attended Runcorn parish church school until 1883, when he began work with Bridgewater Navigation as an office boy. Dudley transferred to the engineer's office, which he eventually headed. He was prominent in local public life as a leading churchman and, from 1914, as an independent member of Runcorn urban district council. Dudley was council chairman in 1921-3; he also served as an overseer of the poor and a JP, and he was involved with numerous local societies and charities. 
Born into a family already involved in co-operative trading, Dudley joined the Runcorn Co-operative Society in 1893, on his marriage to Theresa Sutton (died 1927). In 1895 he was elected to the society's management committee, and in 1896 he became chairman. Dudley directed the reform of the society, which enjoyed unprecedented growth. 
Dudley had larger ambitions to co-operative leadership. He campaigned for better representation for the Cheshire and north Wales district within the north-western section of the Co-operative Union, and he took the new seat created on its board in 1904. By 1911 he was chairman of the union's central board, and he oversaw revision of the Co-operative Union's rules at congress. This success assisted his election to the Co-operative Wholesale Society (CWS) board in the same year. Dudley then resigned from Bridgewater Navigation and as chairman of Runcorn and Widnes Co-operative Society. 
Dudley served on the grocery committee of the CWS, acting as chairman from 1916. He was central to co-operative attempts to influence government food controls during the First World War. In 1918 Dudley was one of six co-operative nominees to the consumers' council at the Ministry of Food. He served on fourteen wartime government departmental committees and helped to revise post-war import restrictions. He served on the royal commission on food prices of 1924 and the National Food Council established in 1925. 
Dudley was appointed CWS president in 1933, overseeing an operation with sales of around $100 million. His presidency saw extension into storekeeping, through the formation of the CWS Retail Society in 1934. From 1919 Dudley represented the CWS as a director of the Manchester Ship Canal and from 1930 he chaired the committee controlling Bridgewater Navigation. He was also a director of Bridgewater and Manchester collieries. Dudley was honoured through election as president of the 1925 Co-operative Congress. He was appointed OBE in 1920 for his work with the Ministry of Food and a knighthood in 1926. Dudley was in addition decorated by the governments of the CWS's trading partners, particularly of Denmark and Quebec. 
Dudley's health was already failing at his retirement as CWS president in 1936. He died on 7 May 1938 at his Runcorn home, Cranleigh, Weston Road. Lady Dudley had died in 1927, but he was survived by his son and daughter. His funeral, on 11 May, at Runcorn parish church, was attended by co-operative and civic dignitaries. Dudley's energy as a self-made man was combined with a practical view of co-operation: 'I am for doing one job well, and my business is to improve and extend co-operative trading' (Co-operative Union, '57th Congress', 348). 


@@@@@


doc= 50552


Ganley, Caroline Selina (1879-1966), co-operative movement activist and politician, was born on 16 September 1879 at 33 Admiralty Street, East Stonehouse, Plymouth, the daughter of James Blumfield and his wife, Selina Mary ('nee' Norgrove). Her father was a bombardier at the time of her birth, and later a tailor. She attended Plymouth church and national schools, and Ottershaw School, Chertsey. On 24 July 1901 she married James William Henry Ganley, a tailor's cutter; the couple lived in Westminster before settling in Battersea, and raised two sons and a daughter. 
Mrs Ganley became active in left-wing politics in opposition to the South African War, and in response to the poor social conditions of the working-class communities in which she lived. She joined the Social Democratic Federation in 1906, campaigned for the suffrage, and was instrumental in setting up a socialist women's circle in Battersea and developing it into a branch of the Women's Labour League (later the Labour Party women's sections). In 1914 she was involved in the British committee of the International Congress, anti-war suffragists who detached themselves from the more patriotic National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies to work with European women for peace. 
After the war Mrs Ganley's politics gradually became more moderate and geared to reformism but she was no less energetic. Having campaigned for citizenship rights, she made every effort to ensure that they were put to good use. She joined the co-operative and Labour parties, and in November 1919 won a seat on Battersea borough council; she chaired the health committee, and it was mainly through her efforts that a well-equipped maternity home was opened in Battersea in 1921. In 1920 she became one of the first women magistrates in London, and for twenty years sat in juvenile courts. She also served as a London county councillor and as a member of the London county education committee. 
In the 1930s Mrs Ganley set her sights on Westminster, seeking nomination as a Co-operative Party candidate. In 1935 she stood unsuccessfully for Paddington North but in 1945 she was elected Co-operative-Labour MP for Battersea South, delivering a maiden speech on the subject of national health care. In 1950 she held the seat with a margin of 368, and the next year her golden wedding anniversary was marked at Westminster when her female colleagues made her a presentation. In the 1951 general election she was defeated. Mrs Ganley was appointed CBE in 1953, and in the same year was re-elected to Battersea borough council where she continued to serve until 1965. 
An outstanding figure in the consumers' co-operative movement, Mrs Ganley was an elected director of the West London Society from 1918, and after its merger with the London Society in 1921, of the London Co-operative Society, which position she retained until 1946. In 1942 she became the first woman president of the London Co-operative Society, the largest retail society in the world with 792,000 members in that year. In the early 1940s she appeared as the presenter in an educational film about its work. 
Mrs Ganley was also prominent in the labour and co-operative women's movements. She sat on, and chaired, the standing joint committee of industrial women's organizations, and chaired the national conference of Labour women. She belonged to the Lavender Hill branch of the Women's Co-operative Guild and held a number of official positions in the guild's national committee structure including a place on the south-eastern sectional council. She was an experienced and respected guildswoman, knowledgeable on such diverse subjects as tariffs and the consumer, married women's nationality rights, and the supply of milk to schoolchildren. Although she avoided the politically sensitive issue of birth control, and was in agreement with Labour's opposition to family allowances between the wars, the care of maternity remained one of her chief concerns; in a speech at the 1928 national guild congress, for example, she urged that more co-operative women should get elected onto local authorities in order to promote measures to combat the high maternal mortality rates. In June 1943 she was honoured by the guild as one of the speakers at its diamond jubilee demonstration at the Royal Albert Hall. 
Mrs Ganley died in London at the Bolingbroke Hospital, Battersea, on 31 August 1966, aged eighty-six. Her husband, who predeceased her, had worked for the co-operative movement prior to his retirement. 


@@@@@


doc= 50553


Greening, Edward Owen (1836-1923), co-operative movement activist and social reformer, was born on 17 August 1836 at Warrington, Lancashire. His father owned a small wire-drawing factory, and the family moved to Manchester in Edward's early years. There he attended the Quaker school in Mount Street and remained influenced by Quaker teachings all his life, although for most of his adult years he seems to have belonged to the Unitarian church. 
Greening left school at thirteen and was apprenticed to the wire-working trade. In his middle teens he moved into office work, began to attend evening classes to remedy the deficiencies in his formal education, and at seventeen became involved in the Anti-Slavery Society, a Manchester organization which collected funds for the abolitionist movement in America. He also joined the temperance movement and later served on the executive committee of the United Kingdom Alliance. 
Manchester was a major centre of support for the Northern cause in the American Civil War and it marked an important stage in Greening's intellectual and political development. He was a founder member of the Union and Emancipation Society, and served as one of its two honorary secretaries. He lectured in many parts of the country in support of the north and was a prolific correspondent and writer in the local and regional press, and, to a lesser extent, in national papers such as the 'Daily News'. His own political views moved steadily to the radical wing of the Liberal Party, and he helped to establish the Manchester and Salford Manhood League, a regional section of the Reform League, remaining closely involved in the suffrage agitation until the passing of the 1867 'Reform Act'. He was also becoming involved in the growing co-operative movement, and was working with the leading personalities at the national level, including G. J. Holyoake, E. T. Craig, Lloyd Jones, and Thomas Hughes. 
Greening's only direct intervention in politics was in 1868, when he was invited to stand for Halifax by a group of local radicals in the general election. Halifax was a two-member constituency, and one of the sitting MPs was a local industrialist, a conservative whig much disliked by the radicals. Greening joined forces with the other candidate, James Stansfeld, a friend of Mazzini and Garibaldi, and although unsuccessful he gained 2802 votes. 
For the rest of his long life Greening worked within the various organizations of the co-operative movement. In 1868 he founded the Agricultural and Horticultural Association, popularly known as the One and All. He became its managing director and, as it was established in London, Greening left Manchester to live in the south. The object of the new association was to supply agricultural requirements -- tools, seeds, manure -- on co-operative principles, and in its early years it prospered. Greening also edited its main publications, including a widely circulated 'One and All Gardening Annual'. His energy was remarkable and his involvement wide-ranging: in May 1869 he had taken a central part in the organization of the first national Co-operative Congress; he was a prime mover in the annual National Co-operative Festival held at the Crystal Palace between 1886 and 1910; and he was closely involved, with G. J. Holyoake and E. V. Neale, in the formation of the International Co-operative Alliance in 1895. He was a prolific writer on co-operative affairs, a lively and much sought-after speaker, and he travelled widely at home and abroad, as he recorded in 'The Co-Operative Traveller Abroad' (1888). 
The co-operative movement, as it grew steadily during the third quarter of the nineteenth century, developed a range of ideas about its role and future development. In the 1870s there arose a vigorous debate on the 'bonus to labour' schemes whereby co-operative enterprises, especially those in manufacturing, should pay supplementary bonuses parallel to the dividend on purchases of the retail societies. Greening belonged to the group which favoured radical ideas for co-operative production, but they were in a minority, and with falling prices and economic depression after 1872 they were easily defeated by their more conservative opponents. 
While Greening remained quite radical towards the co-operative movement, he was becoming steadily more conservative in his political ideas as the end of the century approached. The emergence of socialist ideas in the 1880s and the increasing demand for independent labour representation at Westminster met with his vigorous opposition and his continued adherence to the Liberal Party. Until the beginning of the First World War Co-operative Congresses rejected the calls for independent representation, although the minority views were growing steadily. The war years radically altered the position. At the 1917 Swansea congress a motion to seek 'direct representation in Parliament and on all local bodies' was agreed by an overwhelming majority. Greening and Fred Madison had moved a dismissive amendment which received only 201 votes against 1979 for the substantive resolution. 
Greening's own business collapsed in 1870 and thenceforth his income came from work in and about the co-operative movement. In his last years he was in some financial difficulties and these were in part met by at least two testimonial appeals. He had first married in 1860 Emily Hepworth, and they had several children, of whom at least one, E. W. Greening, shared his father's interest in the co-operative movement. His second wife survived him. Greening died at his home at Oak Lawn, Belmont Grove, Lee, Lewisham, on 5 March 1923, and he was buried in Hither Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50554


Howarth, Charles (1814-1868), co-operative movement activist, was born on 9 February 1814 in Rochdale, Lancashire, the son of George Howarth and his wife, Susan ('nee' Bamford). Little is known of Howarth's early life and education, but while in his teens he was drawn to socialism and influenced by the ideas of Robert Owen. An Owenite project of self-employment among flannel weavers in Rochdale was established in 1829, followed in 1830 by the First Rochdale Co-operative Store. It is unclear how long the latter survived and whether it was through this venture or a successor that Howarth became associated with co-operation. He was, however, linked with a store trading at 15 Toad Lane between 1833 and 1835. 
On 5 April 1835 Howarth married Ann Chadwick, and in the years to 1862 they had four sons and five daughters. Howarth secured relatively well-paid employment as a warper at Hoyle's cotton mill on Oldham Road, Rochdale, and was recorded as living nearby in 1841 and 1851. He remained an active Owenite as a member of the no. 24 branch of the Rational Society from its foundation in 1838 until 1845. During the early 1840s Howarth was also locally prominent in agitation for the 'Ten Hours Act', being sent as a delegate to lobby parliament. He is, however, most associated with the revival of co-operative trading in Rochdale. 
At the first formal meeting of the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers Society ['see 'Rochdale Pioneers] on 11 August 1844 Howarth was appointed as one of three trustees. He was also chiefly responsible for drafting the society's rules. These reflected not only immediate concerns about wage rates and malpractice by shopkeepers but also radical causes then current in Rochdale. The project attracted disillusioned Chartists, and the planned temperance hotel suggests the involvement of teetotallers; but it was pre-eminently Owenite in stamp, and its aims included industrial and agricultural self-employment and the development of a co-operative colony. Howarth indeed drew upon existing Owenite sources, notably the model rules presented at the 1832 Co-operative Congress and those governing the Rational Association Sick and Burial Society of Manchester. He also included provisions for the conduct of co-operative storekeeping which have been seen as laying foundations for successful consumers' co-operation. Claims made for the originality of this constitutional development cannot, however, be substantiated. Dividend on purchase, for example, was known from at least the 1820s and was more widely discussed in the 1830s and 1840s than some historians have credited. It is unlikely that Howarth independently reinvented the 'divi'. 
Howarth's rules were, however, the basis for the development of the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers Society, which started trading on 21 December 1844. Howarth acted as president of the society during 1845 and as secretary for several periods. In 1850 Howarth drafted rules for a co-operative corn mill society being established in Rochdale, and became its first secretary, and in 1854 he was a promoter of the Rochdale Co-operative Manufacturing Society. Howarth also contributed to the wider extension of co-operation. In 1856 he was a delegate at a conference in Rochdale which considered developing a wholesaling operation co-owned and funded by several consumers' co-operatives. Howarth was also involved in campaigning for the amendment of the 'Industrial and Provident Societies Act' to allow such co-operative federation. The passage of new legislation in 1862 enabled the foundation of the North of England Co-operative Wholesale Society of which Howarth was a leading promoter, serving on its management committee until October 1866. 
During the late 1850s Howarth moved some 3 miles to Heywood. By 1859 he was auditor for the Heywood Co-operative Society. He was also manufacturing washing soda and bleach which were sometimes purchased by the Co-operative Wholesale Society -- a potential conflict of interest which led to his departure from its committee. Howarth was, however, a founder of the Co-operative Insurance Company in 1867, remaining a director until his death. 
Howarth's death on 25 June 1868 at his home, 28 Wilton Street, Heywood, was attributed to asthma. He was buried five days later at Heywood cemetery. Howarth was probably not well off in his later years, having left his work as a warper during the mid-1860s. On his death the Co-operative Wholesale Society granted $20 to Howarth's wife who, with five of their children, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50557


Archibald [i] Kenrick (1760-1835). Born in 1760 at Wynn Hall, Ruabon, Denbighshire, Archibald was the third eldest son among the seven children of John Kenrick (1725-1803), a small landowner, and his wife, Mary Quarrel or Quarrell. Timothy Kenrick (1759-1804) was his brother. 
Archibald's first business venture, which commenced when he moved to Birmingham during the mid-1780s, was in the buckle trade with a distant relation who, like Archibald, was a Unitarian. After acquiring a knowledge of plating, Archibald was able in 1787, with financial support from his father, to enter into partnership with another buckle maker. However, when buttons and laces began to replace buckles Archibald turned to the hardware trade. The finance for this change of direction came from the dowry he received from his father-in-law, Joseph Smith of Staffordshire, on his marriage to Rebecca Smith (1770-1809) in December 1790. In 1791 Archibald set up an iron foundry business in West Bromwich which produced cast ironmongery, beginning with coffee mills, door furniture, cast nails, and mole traps, supplying households and the building trade. 
Through patented technical improvements, litigation, and collusion, and by close attention to quality and appearance, which depended on careful control of casting and variation in finishes, Kenrick's tinned hollowware established a reputation for lightweight, attractive, and hygienic cooking utensils of a quality and at a price that enabled them virtually to replace 'black', or untinned, hollowware and to compete with similar vessels made from copper or brass. Growing sales of coffee mills, tinned light cast-iron hollowware, and nails were obtained from an increased asset base and a rise in the number of workers employed, counted in tens before 1815 but in two or three hundreds by the time of Archibald's death on 6 November 1835. Little is known about Archibald's life outside the business. He was a supporter of the Sunday school movement and of the diffusion of knowledge among workers. He established a works library and a savings society for his employees. In 1812 he married his second wife, Mary Eddowes (1763-1854). There were four sons and three daughters from his two marriages. 
Archibald's death left two of his sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 50558


Lines, Walter (1882-1972), toy manufacturer, was born on 10 March 1882 in London, one of the four sons of Joseph Lines, a rocking-horse maker, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Fitzhenry. After education at Owens School until 1896, he joined the family firm of G. and J. Lines, taking evening classes in woodworking and design at the Camden School of Art and the Northern Polytechnic. In 1908 he became the company's managing director. Demobilized after the First World War, in 1922 he married Henriette Hendrey (died 1970); they had four children. 
In 1920 Lines launched his own toy and pram business in partnership with his brothers, William and Arthur. When asked for security against the required bank loan, he simply showed his hands to the bank manager; and there is no doubt that he was a talented toy designer with a good eye for a novelty. His brothers took specific responsibilities for running the firm's purpose-built factory, designed to facilitate mass production, and for selling the products under the famous Triang trade mark. Lines himself had special responsibility for the design department, and was also managing director. His was the public face of Lines Brothers, a vigorous, relatively small man, whose occasionally prickly exterior hid a generous and warm-hearted spirit, not least towards his workforce. In 1933 Lines Brothers, by now the biggest toy manufacturer in Britain with some 1600 employees, became a public company. Numerous acquisitions during this decade, including Hamleys, London's famous toy store, further strengthened the company's prominence in the contemporary toy trade. Lines enjoyed an equally high personal profile. A member of the board of the British Industries fair, he played a major part in creating the Toy and Fancy Goods Federation in 1922, and was chairman of the manufacturers' representatives on the toy trade board. During the Second World War he successfully represented the toy manufacturers in negotiations with the Board of Trade. He took the lead in establishing the new British Toy Manufacturers' Association in 1944, remaining chairman for a decade. 
Lines's resignation from the association in 1955 was prompted by a policy disagreement. Thereafter he devoted himself largely to his own company which by the 1950s claimed to be the world's largest toy producer, responsible for 40 per cent of British production and a third of the industry's exports. In the post-war years Lines ensured Triang's continued dominance by opening new manufacturing facilities all over the world, modernizing existing plants, and developing a stream of new products. When he finally retired as chairman in 1962, company profits stood at an all-time record level. 
In the longer run, however, Lines's legacy was perhaps less beneficial, and there is some truth in the claim that he was a toy maker first and a businessman second. It was said that he could rarely resist a new idea, and his group was certainly permeated by an ethos which emphasized play value and children's enjoyment, sometimes at the expense of hard economic logic. This did not matter too much in the immediate post-war years but in the later 1960s as the international toy business became increasingly competitive, and as the tariffs protecting the home market were progressively dismantled, Lines Brothers' profits came under pressure. Even as he formally stepped down, commentators were suggesting that the group's business empire was over-extended, its toys increasingly derivative and imitative, and its senior management too inbred (seven of the ten members of the board in the 1950s were family members, including Lines's own two sons). In 1971 the family enterprise which he had made virtually synonymous with the British toy trade went into liquidation. Lines's own enthusiasm for toys remained unabated, however. Restless and still energetic, even in his eighties, he set up a small manufacturing business in his garden shed, which as Good-Wood Toys eventually became a thriving business in its own right. He died at Leigh Place, Godstone, his Surrey home, on 23 November 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 50559


May, Henry John (1867-1939), co-operative movement activist and internationalist, was born on 16 July 1867 at 98 Villas Road, Plumstead, Kent, the son of Henry May, painter, and his wife, Mary Jane ('nee' Kimber). After an elementary education he joined the Royal Arsenal Co-operative Society (RACS) as a shop boy in 1880. Aged seventeen May followed his father into the Woolwich arsenal as an engineering apprentice. Parental influence also prompted his involvement with the management of the RACS. May subsequently chaired the education committee and edited the society's magazine, 'Comradeship'. By the age of thirty he had joined the RACS management committee. 
May became an active co-operative propagandist and secretary of the south metropolitan district board of the Co-operative Union. He sat on the southern sectional board, joining the union's central board in 1898. From 1905 to 1913 he held the paid appointment of secretary to the southern sectional board. An advocate of co-operative participation in politics, May was secretary of the joint parliamentary committee of the Co-operative Congress from 1909 to 1918. During the First World War, May was a member of the War Emergency Workers' National Committee established by labour and co-operative leaders to defend workers' interests. He also led co-operative representations to government on matters including food control and taxation. There followed service on governmental bodies, including the food rationing committee. May represented co-operation on the royal commission on income tax of 1919-20 and the national railway wages board from 1921. This service was recognized when May was appointed OBE. 
Wartime experience confirmed May's belief in the direct political representation of co-operation. In 1917 he became secretary of the new co-operative parliamentary representation committee. May stood, unsuccessfully, as its first candidate in the 1918 Prestwich by-election and in Clackmannan at the subsequent general election. However, he withdrew from parliamentary campaigning to devote himself to co-operative internationalism. 
May's work with the International Co-operative Alliance (ICA) had begun fortuitously when he deputized for its then secretary, Dr Hans Muller, at the ICA Congress at Glasgow in 1913. May assumed the post permanently, along with the editorship of the ICA 'Bulletin'. During the First World War, he upheld co-operative neutrality amid what he saw as an imperialist and capitalist conflict. Contact was maintained with co-operators in belligerent countries and included publication of English, French, and German editions of the 'Bulletin'. 
After the war, May re-established good relations between French, German, and Belgian co-operators, restoring the ICA's triennial congresses. He travelled throughout Europe, cementing links with national co-operative movements, and he visited North America in 1928. He wrote extensively for the 'Bulletin', from 1928 enlarged as the 'Review of International Co-Operation'. May secured recognition for the ICA, and it was involved with the World Economic Congress of 1927 and of 1933, and with the League of Nations. 
In 1913 the ICA represented 20 million co-operators in twenty countries; by 1930 this had increased to 56 million members in forty countries. Yet co-operative autonomy was threatened by the rise of totalitarianism, first in Italy and the Soviet Union. May's pacifism and his work with the National Peace Council and the International Peace Campaign did not preclude vigorous resistance to fascism during the 1930s. However, his personal diplomacy on behalf of German, Austrian, Bulgarian, Spanish, and Czech co-operators enjoyed little success. May co-ordinated relief for victims of the Spanish Civil War and for refugees from continental Europe. In 1937 he attempted unsuccessfully to initiate an ICA boycott of Japanese goods following aggression against China. By 1939 only twenty-eight national co-operative movements were ICA members. Thus, for May, co-operative neutrality could not be maintained in the war against fascism. 
May died suddenly of cancer on 19 November 1939 at Eltham, London, survived by his wife, Ada Martha. He was cremated on 25 November and interred at Plumstead cemetery on 26 November. Despite wartime travel restrictions, several European representatives attended and co-operative journals carried overseas tributes. The 'movement's No. 1 internationalist', as he was described by 'Co-operative News' on 2 December 1939, was celebrated for his idealism and his brave defence of co-operation against totalitarianism. 


@@@@@


doc= 50560


Taylor, John (1710/11-1775), button manufacturer, is thought to have been born of humble parentage. Although little is known of his early years, William Hutton stated in his 'History of Birmingham' in 1782 that Taylor began his working life as an artisan. Taylor was married to Mary Baker (1710/11-1784). 
In July 1755 two Londoners wrote of a visit to 'Mr Taylor, the most considerable Maker of Gilt-metal Buttons and enamell'd snuff-boxes' at his workshops, possibly in Crooked Lane, off Dale End ('Four Topographical Letters', 55). Four years later Taylor was one of two manufacturers explaining to a House of Commons committee the importance of the metal toy trade in Birmingham. They claimed that the town had increased by roughly a half since the industry began, employing at least 20,000 people in Birmingham and the neighbouring towns and having a trade value of about $600,000 per year, of which the greater proportion was exported. They also stressed the use of machines or engines, invented by the people of Birmingham, which 'lessens the manual labour, and enables boys to do men's work' (Hopkins, 7). 
In 1766 Lord Shelburne was impressed by Taylor's use of an alloy, by the heavy reliance on machinery, and his division of labour to speed the production process. 'Thus a button passes through fifty hands, and each hand perhaps passes a thousand a day;... by this means the work becomes so simple that... children of six to eight years old do it as well as men, and earn from ten pence to eight shillings a week' (Fitzmaurice, 403). The value of Taylor's weekly output of buttons was estimated as at least $800. 
Three processes were used in the finishing and decorating of Taylor's wares: gilt plating, japanning or enamelling, and painting. One employee is recorded as regularly earning $3 10's'. by painting 3360 snuff-boxes weekly. Taylor was credited with the production of the unique and fashionable wavy tinted patterns on one line of snuff-boxes, on which, using his thumb on a second coat of colour while it was still wet, 'he wove, in endless variety, the patterns he desired' (S. Lloyd, 41). 
Taylor's business acumen and flair for organization led to the founding of Birmingham's first bank in 1765, in partnership with Sampson Lloyd (1699-1779). Taylor and Lloyd expanded to London, becoming Lloyds Bank in 1852. The capital of $8000 was raised equally between the partners, but Lloyd family correspondence indicates that Taylor may well have been the force behind the venture. 
Beginning the trend for wealthy industrialists to live outside town, Taylor bought land and began rebuilding Bordesley Hall at an eventual cost of $10,000. His rent books from 1754 show properties in Bishops Itchington, Coleshill, Yardley, Bordesley, and Sheldon, with rents from 30's'. to $290 annually. By 1765, when he wrote his will, he had forty-three properties including houses, farms, and land, producing an annual income of $872. 
Taylor was held in high esteem by his fellow townsmen and he was one of fifty commissioners named in the local 'Improvement Act' of 1769 for the betterment of Birmingham streets. His participation in a venture was thought to guarantee success. Boulton called him 'our great manufacturer' (Hopkins, 84); he was eulogized by Hutton as 'the Shakespeare or Newton of his day' (ibid.); he was one of the 'valuable acquaintances' made by Samuel Johnson; and Boswell noted that Taylor had acquired a fortune 'by his ingenuity in mechanical inventions, and success in trade' (Sayers, 7). 
John Taylor died in Bath on 27 March 1775; he was interred in the family vault in St Philip's Church, Birmingham, on 2 April. In his will he bequeathed an annuity of $1600 to his wife; $10,000 and a harpsichord to his daughter Mary; and $8000 each to his younger sons, William and Charles. His properties were left to his eldest son, John, and after various bequests the residue of his estate, reputed to total $200,000, was to be divided equally between the sons. 'Aris's Birmingham Gazette' described him on 3 April 1775 as 'a man to whose extraordinary Ingenuity and indefatigable Diligence, the Trade and Manufactures of this Town are much indebted for their Increase and Estimacion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50561


Henry Overton [i] Wills (1761-1826), who in 1786 became a partner in a small tobacco business known as Wills, Watkins & Co. of Castle Street, Bristol. 
The family origins of Henry O. [i] Wills are obscure. He was born in Salisbury, Wiltshire, and his father is believed to have been a watchmaker. Why he chose to enter the tobacco industry is unknown, but his choice of partner was probably connected with his religious affiliation since Watkins, like him, was an active Independent (Congregationalist). In any event, it was an opportune time to enter the tobacco industry: tobacco consumption was growing steadily and the amount of capital a tobacco manufacturer needed was moderate by contemporary standards. From the beginning of the nineteenth century, however, the economic status of Bristol began to decline as the forces of economic change undermined the traditional and predominantly merchant basis of its prosperity. Unlike many other industries in the city, however, tobacco did not disappear, because the industry in the country at large remained small-scale and much dependent on local markets. 
H. O. [i] Wills proved to be exceptionally skilful, and through a series of partnerships and amalgamations he expanded the firm to the point where by 1820 it was one of the three largest of the ten tobacco manufacturers in the city. While he turned his nonconformist network to good business advantage, he benefited financially, also, from strong Anglican connections through his marriage to Ann Day in 1790. He and his wife had three sons and two daughters. Following his death on 2 December 1826 H. O. [i] Wills was succeeded by his second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 50563


Beale, Sir Samuel Richard (1881-1964), engineer and industrialist, was born in Birmingham on 7 February 1881, one of two sons of James Samuel Beale (1840-1912) ['see under 'Beale family], solicitor and company director, and his wife, Margaret Field. He was educated at Marlborough College, and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he achieved an engineering degree and a rowing blue. In 1908 he married Sylvia Constance Bell (died 1953); they had three sons. 
Beale's father had been chairman of L. Sterne & Co. Ltd, a Glasgow-based engineering firm, since 1882; and in 1903 Beale took up an apprenticeship with the company. His father had built up its traditional products of railway springs, emery wheels, and grinding machines, and he had also diversified into refrigerating equipment so that, when his son joined the company, refrigeration was the largest single element in the firm's turnover. 
Beale began his training in the pattern shop at the company's headquarters -- the Crown ironworks in North Woodside Road, Glasgow. He soon saw that the works were in need of reorganization and that the management had become very conservative. Profits were, consequently, less than they had been in earlier years. His opportunity to improve matters came very quickly, in 1905, only two years after he had joined the firm, when John Guthrie, the commercial manager, became ill and Beale was asked to take over the role. His authority, however, seems to have extended beyond the normal tasks associated with his job title. Despite resistance from his father, and in the face of complaints from Guthrie, he had a new machine shop built for the manufacturing of emery wheels, and new machinery, including radial drills, installed, all of which added greatly to the cost competitiveness of the firm. Improvements in the manufacture of springs met with modest success, but Beale was particularly interested in the refrigeration side of the business. Accordingly, Louis Sterne, the founder of the company, and chairman from 1912, brought back some small refrigerators from one of his frequent trips to the United States. One of the machines which found its way to the Crown ironworks was a Remington refrigerator, which Beale set about improving. 
It was not just domestic refrigeration in which Beale was interested, however, for in the early years of the twentieth century the iron industry was involved in a dry-blasting process for pig-iron manufacture which necessitated refrigeration installations of 200-300 tons capacity. Beale senior, encouraged by his son, obtained a contract from Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds (GKN), in which he had an interest, to build the necessary equipment in south Wales. The Commercial Bank of Scotland lent $10,000 to L. Sterne & Co. for the purpose, but GKN eventually decided that the method was not economical and abandoned it. Experiences such as this doubtless confirmed the company in its rather cautious policy. 
When Beale's father died in 1912, Sterne became chairman and Beale joined the board as general manager. Under his direction large projects were not neglected, despite the earlier experience with the iron industry. In 1915 the firm obtained a contract, for sizeable cold stores, from the Port of London Authority and several years later similar work was undertaken for the Clyde Cold Storage Company. Other large land-based products included a very large number of ice rinks, including those at Earls Court and Wembley, London. It was not until the First World War that Beale decided to enter the marine refrigeration business. 
In the inter-war years Beale pursued a policy of rationalization. Many firms did likewise in these difficult years and achieved only a contraction in their business; but Beale was more successful and his well-judged policies resulted in an expansion of the company. He was the first Englishman to become president of the Glasgow chamber of commerce (1929) and several years later he served as president of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce. In politics he was an active Unionist and served for a time as president of the St Rollox Unionist Association. 
In 1924 Sterne died and Beale's brother, Sir John F. Beale (1874-1935), was brought in as chairman, leaving Samuel as managing director. The death of Sir John in 1935 led to Samuel replacing him as chairman of L. Sterne & Co., though in a non-executive capacity. At the same time he succeeded his brother as chairman of GKN. Apart from his interests in L. Sterne & Co. and its associated and subsidiary companies, he was also a director of other leading engineering firms such as Glenfield and Kennedy Ltd and Mavor and Coulson Ltd. None of these firms specialized in GKN's main lines of business, but with extensive managerial experience and also being 'Ambitious and able, Beale was an obvious candidate for the chairmanship' (Jones, 2.283). 
Just before going to England, Beale sent his nephew Peter Brown to North America to identify a firm that produced a small automatic type of refrigerator. Brown found what he was looking for in Ontario, where the Universal Cooler Company had developed just such a machine. L. Sterne & Co. acquired the patent rights, and the Sternette, perhaps the firm's most famous product, came into being with the minimum of development costs. Variants of this machine were produced for domestic use to meet the growing consumer demand for household refrigerators. 
The Second World War broke out before Beale could make much of a contribution to GKN, and the firm was then turned over to war production. In 1940 he became a member of the Export Council, which worked to promote exports to help fund the war effort and to allocate scarce industrial materials sensibly, and for a time he served as chairman of this committee. In addition he also served on the consultative council appointed to advise the Treasury on financial problems arising from war conditions. In 1942 he was made a KBE. 
Beale retired as chairman of GKN in 1947 but remained a director until 1951. Retirement allowed him to join the boards of Thomas Cook & Son and the Scottish Amicable Life Assurance Society. He also continued to sit on the board of the Union Bank of Scotland -- a connection which was maintained after that bank's merger with the Bank of Scotland in 1955. In 1950 he was a director of some nineteen companies. He retired in 1960 and was succeeded as chairman of L. Sterne & Co. by his nephew, Peter Brown. 
'A man with a sense of humour, Beale adopted an uncomplicated lifestyle and had the ability to make quick decisions' (Jones, 2.283). During his retirement his interests included shooting, and he divided his time between his London residence at Campden Hill and his Scottish country home, Drumlamford, at Barrhill, Ayrshire. He died at Drumlamford on 10 October 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 50564


Howden, James (1832-1913), marine and general engineer, was born on 29 February 1832 in Prestonpans, East Lothian, the son of James Howden and his wife, Catherine Adams. His father was a market gardener and his early schooling was received in Prestonpans parish school. In 1847 he made his way to Glasgow by boat, on the Forth and Clyde Canal. Whether he chose the boat over the train for reasons of preference or of economy is not certain but it soon became clear that his lifelong career interest was to be in boats rather than trains. 
On arrival in Glasgow, Howden took up an engineering apprenticeship with James Gray & Co. -- a firm with an established reputation for stationary engines. His talents for technical drawing were considerable and even before his formal apprenticeship was concluded he was promoted to the position of chief draughtsman. This did not satisfy a man of his ambitions, and almost as soon as his apprenticeship was completed he sought alternative employment, before setting up on his own account in 1854, aged only twenty-two, as a consulting engineer and designer. He had already taken out a patent for rivet making and had sold the rights to a Birmingham company. Nevertheless his early career was not a great success and he had to supplement his income by teaching mechanical drawing in the Glasgow School of Art. 
Howden's first major contract came in 1859 from Hendersons for the Anchor Line's ship 'Ailsa Craig'. The order was for compound engines and water tube boilers, of Howden's own design, using steam at 100 lb pressure. This was a considerable advance on existing technology. Although he did not win every race to invent new technologies it is clear that Howden's inventive genius placed him in the forefront of several developments which were to establish Clydeside's reputation as a world leader in shipbuilding and related activities. 
In 1862, in partnership with James Mathie, Howden purchased land at Scotland Street on the south side of Glasgow, and established the firm of James Howden & Co. to manufacture engines and boilers. Shipbuilding was later added to the firm's activities, although the work of hull building was contracted out. A shortage of working capital presented problems but it did not ultimately inhibit the long-term growth of the firm. This success was undoubtedly due to Howden's growing list of patent rights, which cover almost the whole field of engineering and boilermaking. Although he spent a great deal of his time at the drawing board and in experimentation, Howden did not neglect the all-important sales dimension of his business; and he established a wide network of acquaintances in the Glasgow business community. He soon numbered many of the world's leading shipping lines among his customers. 
The invention for which Howden is best remembered, and which added so much to his fortune, was the forced-draught system for boilers. He had begun to experiment with this in 1862 but it was not until the 1880s that he perfected it by utilizing waste gases to heat the air used in the combustion chamber. The effect of this was to provide a more efficient combustion process at varying speeds, using any quality of steam coal. The resulting improvements in efficiency and cost reduction were considerable. The system was soon in widespread use and the company's energies were devoted almost entirely to its promotion. Howden himself devoted much of his time to establishing connections with shipbuilders and shipowners of note in most parts of the world. Several ships equipped with the forced-draught system in their boilers subsequently won the Blue Riband for the fastest Atlantic crossing. 
Howden was fully aware of the dangers of relying too much on one product, and despite the success of the forced-draught system he continued to design new engines. By 1900 his company was busy making high-speed engines of the enclosed, forced-lubrication type, which were used chiefly for generating electricity. This was followed by the Howden Zoelly impulse type of steam turbine, which the firm supplied to many municipalities, including an installation for the corporation of Manchester. Not only was this a new technology for Howden but it also involved a new marketing strategy in selling to local authorities throughout the country. At the time of Howden's death in 1913 his company was busy experimenting with land-based applications for the forced-draught system and with diesel engines, which were to revolutionize the shipping industry in the inter-war years. 
Howden's restless spirit did not always produce marketable products, however. In 1904 he became involved with another large Glasgow company, James Finlay & Co., in a process for curing tea. In the early stages of development Howden recruited a scientist from Glasgow University and set him up in a laboratory, but despite the best efforts of the men of science and business, the process could not be turned into a commercial success. Another of his business interests was a marble quarry in Greece, for which he used his business contacts to raise capital. In 1912 he raised capital among his friends for the St Helena Whaling Company. In 1912 he was involved in secret work for the Admiralty, for whom he made a recoilless gun using a non-explosive (pneumatic) propellant. He had the vision to see how useful this type of gun would be on aeroplanes, but the experiment was not a success. 
Howden was a public figure and participated vigorously in debates in the various professional bodies of which he was a member. These included the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland, the Institution of Naval Architects, and the Institution of Civil Engineers, to whose journals he contributed many articles. An active churchman, Howden was a member of the kirk session of Wellington United Free Church. He also contributed largely, but privately, to various charitable and religious causes including Barnardo's Homes, missionary activities, and Indian orphans. A member of the Merchants' House of Glasgow and of the Incorporation of Hammermen, Howden was also a JP for the city of Glasgow. His political convictions were with the Liberal Party until Gladstone introduced the 'Home Rule Bill', whereupon he became a Unionist, but he did not take any active public part in politics. He was married first to Helen Burgess Adams, and then to Allison Moffat Hay, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. Both of his wives predeceased him. His principal residence was at 2 Princes Terrace, Dowanhill, Glasgow. 
Howden was one of that enterprising group of engineers whose inventive genius and flair for business transformed the Scottish economy in the second half of the nineteenth century. Tenacious and outspoken in his views, Howden spent his working life in Glasgow, where he died on 21 November 1913. 


@@@@@


doc= 50565


Lang, Sir William Biggart (1868-1942), machine tool manufacturer, was born on 19 September 1868 at 59 High Street, Johnstone, Renfrewshire, the youngest of five sons in the large family of John Lang ('c'.1825-1906), machine tool maker, and Annie Biggart. His father had founded his own firm in 1874 in Johnstone, a town which had seen its early growth closely linked to the development of the cotton industry. As the cotton industry began to decline, engineering expanded from the mid-nineteenth century; and John Lang & Sons was a typical example of a firm set up to serve the needs of the shipbuilding and engineering trades, and which specialized in the production of lathes. 
Lang was educated at Paisley grammar school, followed by attendance at classes at the Glasgow and West of Scotland Technical College. He became an apprentice in his father's firm, learning all aspects of engineering. This pattern of education and training was similar to that followed by his brothers, three of whom also joined the family business. A fourth joined the well-known company of G. and J. Weir Ltd of Cathcart, Glasgow. 
By the time that Lang joined it, the firm had established a significant presence in the engineering industry: it served every shipyard on the River Clyde, exhibited at international exhibitions, and its customers nationwide included the British Admiralty, Armstrong Whitworth & Co., and Messrs Vickers and Maxim. Expansion and modernization of the premises in 1893 and 1899, with a workforce increased to 350, established John Lang & Sons as one of the foremost machine tool manufacturers in Scotland, if not Great Britain. It was during this decade of expansion that Lang became more involved in the running of the business. He became a partner in 1895, aged only twenty-seven. The decade of the 1890s also saw Lang's marriage, on 15 June 1897, to Agnes, the daughter of James Barr, a well-known local businessman in the firm of James McDowall & Sons, saw mill engineers. They had a family of three daughters. 
His father retired in 1898, and when the firm became a private limited company in 1916, Lang served as its first managing director, and also as chairman from 1927. He had few interests in other companies, devoting his business life to the family firm and to the machine tool trade. From 1912 he was a member of the North West Engineering Employers Association, serving as its president in 1921-2. John Lang & Sons played an important role in munitions in both world wars, and from 1915 Lang became chairman of the machine tool committee of the Ministry of Munitions. The first chairman (1917-22) of the Associated British Machine Toolmakers Ltd of London, he also served on the tariff advisory committee of the Machine Tool Trades Association, and in 1934 became president of the Machine Tool Trades Association. A member of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland from 1906, he also served on the various boards and committees of the Engineering and Allied Employers Federation. 
Throughout his life Lang was involved in local affairs in Johnstone. He was a councillor from 1908, and in 1914 succeeded his brother John as provost. He served three consecutive terms until his retiral in 1923. A JP for Renfrewshire, he was president of the local YMCA from 1911, and a member of the committee of management of Paisley Savings Bank from 1932. For most of his life he was a member of the Johnstone High Church. In honour of his services to the local community and national contribution to the machine tool trade, he was awarded a knighthood in 1937. 
Lang died at a nursing home at 121 Hill Street, Glasgow, on 17 February 1942 after a short illness, and was buried on 19 February. His wife predeceased him the year before. His death occurred at a time when John Lang & Sons was again playing a key role in the production of munitions, and especially lathes for aircraft guns and tank parts. Aided by other members of his family who were involved with the firm, Lang successfully endeavoured to keep the concern at the forefront of the machine tool industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 50566


Lorimer, Sir William (1844-1922), locomotive engineer and industrialist, was born on 4 November 1844 in Sanquhar, Dumfriesshire, son of William Lorimer, house factor, and Margaret Whigham. Little is known about his family origins and early life in Sanquhar. He attended the local parish school and at the age of fifteen joined the Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway Company, probably as an apprentice or clerk. In 1864 he moved into locomotive engineering as a cashier in the newly founded business of Dubs & Co. This firm became one of the principal locomotive engineering companies in Glasgow, and was founded by Henry Dubs at the Glasgow locomotive works, later known as the Queen's Park works, Polmadie, on the south side of Glasgow. Lorimer made an impression on Dubs and was made his principal assistant in 1867. By 1875 Lorimer was made a partner in the firm and only one year later Dubs died, leaving the business in the hands of his two sons, Henry and Charles, and William Lorimer. As managing partner Lorimer held a key role in the firm with the Dubs sons assuming a lower profile. 
In 1874 Lorimer began a long association with the Steel Company of Scotland Ltd. He acted as its general manager, in a caretaker role between 1874 and 1878. He then joined the board, following in the footsteps of Henry Dubs, who had also been a director. From 1878, under the chairmanship of Sir Charles Tennant, the company went through a period of technical innovation and expansion. However, it was also a period of over-expansion which brought the company close to bankruptcy. When Tennant resigned in 1895 it was Lorimer who took over as chairman and restored business confidence and a measure of stability, in an industry where economic fluctuations and market forces caused uncertainty. He resigned in 1918, but was then given the position of honorary president. 
Such qualities of leadership also led to Lorimer's appointment as chairman of the North British Locomotive Company in 1903. This firm was an amalgamation of Sharp Stewart & Co. Ltd, Neilson, Reid & Co., and Dubs & Co., all leading Glasgow companies. Unity in the face of competition, increasing overheads, and declining markets created a company which dominated locomotive engineering in Britain and Europe with a combined workforce of nearly 8000 and a capacity to produce some 600 engines per annum at the Hydepark and Atlas works, Springburn, and at the Queen's Park works, Polmadie. It was typical of Lorimer and his interest in the welfare of his workers that, in order to mark the amalgamation in 1903, he conveyed to trustees a large number of shares in the North British Locomotive Company to provide pensions for aged and infirm workmen. 
Despite the dual role which Lorimer fulfilled at the head of two leading Scottish companies, he also devoted much of his time to a wide range of public duties and activities. His interests were wide-ranging over education, politics, and local issues. As an extension of his business interests he was a director of the Glasgow and South Western Railway Company. He was elected a member of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland in 1896 and also was a member of the West of Scotland Iron and Steel Institute. From 1900 he was chairman of the Locomotive Manufacturers' Association of Great Britain. As a resident of the south side of Glasgow he took an interest in local issues and was one of the main campaigners in the 1880s to establish a third voluntary hospital on the south side of Glasgow, which resulted in the opening of the Victoria Infirmary in 1890. He was appointed vice-chairman of the board of governors. 
Education was also close to his heart and Lorimer served on various bodies. He was appointed a governor of the Royal Technical College of Glasgow, serving on its university advisory joint committee for a while. As a governor of Hutcheson's Education Trust he served as a representative on the burgh committee of secondary education. He was also a member of the juvenile delinquency board. However, his greatest involvement was in university education. In 1905 he was appointed lord rector's assessor to H. H. Asquith, who had become lord rector of Glasgow University. Three years later under Lord Rosebery he became chancellor's assessor until 1913. The university conferred on Lorimer the honorary degree of LLD in 1910. 
Lorimer's university service was closely linked to his political stance as a Liberal Unionist and free trader. He had been an active member of the Glasgow parliamentary debating society and was a fluent speaker. While his political activities were confined to promoting local campaigns they were none the less important; and when Rosebery arrived in Glasgow on 10 September 1909 to deliver his famous budget speech it was Lorimer who welcomed him to the city and chaired the meeting. Indeed, Lorimer had been the chairman of the committee promoting the Glasgow meeting. On the same day Lorimer also organized the formal opening by Lord Rosebery of the new administrative building of the North British Locomotive Company. 
In 1911 Lorimer was appointed to the dominions commission, a body set up to survey the natural resources of the overseas dominions and to assess the possible trade links. Despite increasing deafness, Lorimer took on this task with the same dedication and application so characteristic of his business career, travelling extensively overseas between 1911 and 1917. 
Lorimer was a man of simple tastes and outlook. In his younger years he developed an interest in literature and through his membership of several literary societies and clubs became a keen collector of books. On 4 February 1869 he married Jane Gray Smith (died 1902); they had four sons and four daughters. Two sons followed their father into locomotive engineering; and in 1903 Lorimer passed the day-to-day running of the Queen's Park works to his son William, one of the joint managing directors. His daughter Janie was one of the early women medical graduates from Glasgow University. He married for a second time on 18 September 1913; his new wife was Mary Elizabeth Muir Simpson, a widow, the daughter of John Sieber, a calico printer. Although not a pioneer or an innovator, Lorimer displayed great leadership skills and business acumen. After an outstanding career in Scottish industry, recognized by a knighthood in 1917, he died on 9 April 1922 at home at 27 Mansionhouse Road, Glasgow; his second wife survived him. He was buried at Cathcart cemetery on 12 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 50567


Macdiarmid, Sir Allan Campbell (1880-1945), steel manufacturer, was born at Glasgow on 18 August 1880, the youngest son of Allan Macdiarmid, a partner in a Glasgow merchants (James Anderson & Co.), and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Tulloch. Educated at Kelvinside Academy in Glasgow, and then at Uppingham School, Macdiarmid declined to follow his two elder brothers to Cambridge and instead trained as an accountant with a local firm, McClelland, Ker & Co. 
In 1909 Macdiarmid began his career in the steel industry, becoming company secretary to Stewart and Lloyds, a firm he was to be associated with throughout his career. It had been formed in 1903 as an Anglo-Scottish merger of two steel-tube producing interests: Stewart and Menzies on Clydeside and Lloyd and Lloyd of Birmingham. Profitable and relatively efficient, the combine produced about half the UK's output of steel-tube products and exported nearly one-half of its finished tubes and fittings. Controlled by family interests (the Stewarts in Scotland and the English Lloyd and Howard families) and commercially tough and competitive, the company, under its chairman, John G. Stewart, offered Macdiarmid both an opportunity and a training. He soon made his mark as a board-room adviser, making contributions to both accounting systems and some policy decisions. 
In 1918 Macdiarmid joined the board of Stewart and Lloyds and immediately set up an important policy unit -- the general purposes advisory committee. This organization helped the drive towards centralization and modernization in the 1920s. Macdiarmid's influence was felt in some pioneering improvements in information systems, which sought to give better control of capital requirements and cash flows. By the mid-1920s, Macdiarmid had become J. G. Stewart's most logical successor. When the latter died in 1925 he became briefly deputy chairman; then in June 1926 he was appointed chairman. 
Macdiarmid now entered the most dynamic phase of his career as he pursued Stewart and Lloyds' long-term policy objectives. These included international competitiveness and a leading position in the domestic steel-tube business, based on the cheapest production of steel tubes in the country. These objectives had been traditional ones at Stewart and Lloyds, but Macdiarmid refined them for the more difficult era of the inter-war years. 'To these tasks he brought formidable supplies of guile, nerve and persistence. He became a pastmaster particularly at stonewalling and playing hard to get, exuding mystery or noncommittal helpfulness, taking a long view and plotting forward sequential moves well in advance. ('DSBB')' Macdiarmid brokered important agreements to supply oil companies, absorbed rival tube makers, negotiated for both domestic and international cartels, and sought best-practice tube technology from the USA and Germany. 
Stewart and Lloyds was relatively well-placed in the early 1920s. The older dynastic family elements within the firm, which had crippled many other steel firms, had given way at Stewart and Lloyds to professional managers, such as Macdiarmid. The firm's restrained financial policies meant that it had also avoided the kind of heavy debts that other firms had incurred in the brief post-war boom. However, Macdiarmid recognized that the firm's relative prosperity was threatened by its fragmented layout, which prevented the use of the newest tube technologies. Macdiarmid's answer was to build a major new integrated iron and tube works at Corby, Northamptonshire. This aimed to produce the cheapest bulk steel in Europe. For this undertaking a canny negotiator like Macdiarmid was able to utilize government support, which came in the form of advice, financial help (through the Bankers' Industrial Development Company (BID Co.), and protectionism. This enabled Stewart and Lloyds to build its works cheaply and to consolidate its hold on the steel-tube business, despite the opposition of some powerful voices within the industry, such as the United Steel Companies. There were some negative aspects. Corby was an ecological blot on the landscape and labour relations at the company were uninspired. Macdiarmid's critics found him rapacious, and his hard-nosed attitude to BID Co. and other firms, such as Colvilles, did not win him admirers everywhere. The company stood aloof from some important developments: it refused to affiliate, for example, to the new British Iron and Steel Federation (BISF), and was also choosy about following voluntary price controls set by the import duties advisory committee of the BISF. However, the Corby initiative was fortuitously well timed -- it was built quickly and economically and came on stream at the end of 1934 as steel demand began to recover -- and Stewart and Lloyds became one of the few British steel firms to break decisively and successfully from its Victorian past. 
Within the firm Macdiarmid was an autocrat who by the early 1930s dominated the board-room. Like many of the old Victorian owner-managers, he acted as both chairman and managing director. Like them, he needed help, which came, notably, from leading managers such as Guy McClay and Francis McClure (his double brother-in-law), J. H. Lloyd (marketing), and R. Menzies Wilson (works management). One of Macdiarmid's sons, Niall, was also to become chairman and managing director of Stewart and Lloyds. However, the elder Macdiarmid was the dominating presence at the company, maintaining his position by the force of his personality and his successful policies. He evidently cared little for great wealth or social status. A shy man who disliked formal occasions and had no particular interest in religion, he had few commitments outside his family (which consisted of his wife, Grace Buchanan, 'nee' McClure, whom he had married in 1910, and two daughters and three sons). In business he found rewards in the pursuit of trade as a great intellectual game, in which his success could not be doubted. By the late 1930s Stewart and Lloyds was returning record profits. The approach of war had obviously helped: however, it was 'in many ways a copy book case of successful competitive strategy' ('DSBB'). 
In the Second World War, Stewart and Lloyds became a major shell producer. Such was the level of demand, even activity in Scotland began to revive. Macdiarmid threw himself into the armaments drive with his usual energy, developing closer ties with Whitehall and giving some thought to the reconstruction of the industry after the war. He became president of the BISF in 1944, healing his former rift with that body. He was knighted in 1945. However, just as it looked as though he was about to emerge as an industrial statesman for the post-war steel industry, his career was ended by his death in London on 14 August 1945. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50568


Russell, Joseph (1834-1917), shipbuilder, was born on 8 April 1834 at Blackheath, London, the son of Joshua Russell, a solicitor in Southwark, and his second wife, Jane Ann Russell. In 1835 the elder Russell gave up his legal practice to become the Baptist minister of Melksham in Wiltshire. He was comfortably off since his father, Archibald Russell, also a solicitor, had speculated successfully in the London property market. In 1844 the family returned to Blackheath and the young Joseph Russell was sent to Mill Hill School, Middlesex. 
After leaving school in 1848 Russell attended classes at King's College, London, and was then apprenticed in 1850 to J. W. Hoby & Co., engineers, iron-founders, and shipbuilders at Renfrew on the River Clyde. This firm had been established by his stepsister's husband, J. W. Hoby, a partner in the Birmingham civil engineering firm of Fox and Henderson. During 1854 Hoby's business collapsed and was taken over by its creditors. Russell completed his apprenticeship the following year and on gaining his majority was given $1000 by his father. He was immediately appointed manager of the works. In 1858 he married Elisabeth (Bessie) Wright; they had three sons and six daughters. 
Russell left Renfrew in 1859 to take over the lease of the Ardrossan dockyard in Ayrshire, building over the next six years about thirty small vessels. In May 1865 he gave up the lease as the owner would not sell the yard to him. In May 1866 he accepted the post of manager of Lawrence Hill's shipyard at Port Glasgow on the lower Clyde, investing $4000 in the business. Over the next three years he built twenty-nine ships but left in 1869 because Hill was a poor businessman. He returned to London in that year in order to care for his father, who died in 1870. He spent the next three years looking after his inherited property interests in London, before returning to Scotland in 1873 to start a new shipbuilding firm, Russell & Co., at Port Glasgow in partnership with Anderson Rodger and William Todd Lithgow. 
Russell & Co. was an immediate success, building large sailing vessels to semi-standard designs with interchangeable parts, in which the partners were prepared to take investments to encourage custom. However, Joseph Russell was dealt a serious setback when the City of Glasgow Bank failed in the autumn of 1878. He held $300 of stock, on which he was forced to pay calls of $8271. Nevertheless, in 1879 the firm expanded its facilities by acquiring J. E. Scott's bankrupt Cartsdyke yard in Greenock. This was followed by the construction of an entirely new yard at Kingston in Port Glasgow at the end of 1881. The business continued to prosper throughout the 1880s, despite the uncertainties that affected most of the shipbuilding industry. This success in part reflected the partners' willingness to experiment with new technology. In 1886 they introduced a standard 3000 ton class of sailing vessel equipped with auxiliary engines and brace halyard winches. Russell retired from the firm in 1891, loaning it nearly $123,000 and leaving Lithgow in control of the Kingston and Cartsdyke yards. 
Aged only fifty-seven, Russell was not ready entirely to retire from business concerns. He continued to assist Lithgow, particularly in looking after the financial side of the firm, and he also sought commercial opportunities for his sons William Russell and Archie Russell. He purchased a large country house, Seafield, at Ardrossan, where he could indulge his passions of shooting and riding. He had always travelled regularly to the continent and now began to go for longer periods. More of his time was devoted to work for the Free Church of Scotland and the Port Glasgow school board, and he gave regular 'Bible' classes, as well as serving on the church's foreign missions, highland, and Livingstonia committees. He played an active part in the negotiations leading up to the amalgamation of the Free Church with the United Presbyterian church in 1900. 
During the 1890s Russell began to speculate heavily in the property market, acquiring houses and land, and making loans for development in the west of Scotland. Lithgow fell seriously ill in 1907 and, although his loan to the firm had been paid off, Russell helped Lithgow's sons run the company. He managed the financial side of the business for them until 1913, when he finally retired. He died on 3 June 1917 at Seafield House, Ardrossan. His wife died in 1921. 


@@@@@


doc= 50569


Stewart, Andrew (1832-1901), iron and steel manufacturer, was born in the small textile and engineering town of Johnstone, Renfrewshire, the elder son of John Graham Stewart, a coal merchant, and his wife, Andrina (Annie) Orr. Andrew and his brother James moved with their parents from Johnstone to Glasgow in 1839. Stewart's early upbringing is unknown, but in 1849 he was apprenticed as a trainee engineer to a Glasgow tube-making firm, Messrs Chrichton and Eadie, with whom he worked for the next twelve years. He married Jane Cuthbert; they had four sons and a daughter. 
Stewart's training and early industrial experience were acquired in a decade of rapidly expanding demand for pipes and tubing for gas and water supplies as Glasgow's urban population grew swiftly, and for boiler tubing as the Clyde became Britain's leading centre for marine engineering and iron shipbuilding. Consequently in 1861, with modest savings of $400 and another $800 subscribed by friends and family, the young Stewart branched out on his own as a small-scale manufacturer of iron tubes. He set up his Clyde Tube Works in St Enoch's Wynd, Glasgow, close to the river and the engineering works thronging its banks from the Broomielaw downriver to Govan. Six years later, when the Glasgow and South Western Railway bridged the Clyde and began acquiring property to build its St Enoch's railway terminal, Stewart sold up and moved out of Glasgow to the heart of Scotland's iron districts in the Monklands, 10 miles east of the city. There he re-established the Clyde Tube Works in Coatbridge, taking his brother James into partnership. Where he had previously been close to his immediate market, he was now establishing his firm, A. and J. Stewart, close to supplies of raw materials and in the middle of Scotland's complex of cast- and wrought-iron foundries. 
The Coatbridge area was Scotland's centre of tube making, its great rival in Britain being the Birmingham district. The industry was characterized by a large number of small manufacturers, and A. and J. Stewart was fairly typical, its premises covering about an acre and providing employment for about 150 men. Growth and success came only slowly and as a consequence of hard work and close attention to detail on the part of the Stewart brothers. A. and J. Stewart became distinguished by its concentration on higher-quality tubing; it was an early developer of lap- and butt-welded pipes and took out a number of patents for special and high-pressure joints. Its products found ready customers locally, in England, and increasingly as exports overseas to Europe and the USA, where it confronted severe competition. 
Coping with such competition prompted the Stewarts to increase the range of their products and extend the scale of their operations. After fifteen years of steady development of the Clyde Tube Works, they gambled on a larger scale, and in 1882 converted their partnership to private limited company status capitalized at $150,000. Over half the shares of $10 denomination were held by the brothers, with each holding 3000 and their senior manager, James Wotherspoon, held another 2000. The other 3000 shares were held by senior management and other family members. This step inaugurated a new strategy of growth by acquisition and merger. In 1882 A. and J. Stewart acquired the Sun Tube Works in Coatbridge and the Clyde Pipe Foundry in Glasgow, both adding much needed capacity. 
The push for growth might have been quickly stalled in 1886 when James Stewart died suddenly at the early age of fifty; but in response Wotherspoon took on extra responsibilities and Andrew Stewart's two eldest sons, Andrew Graham Stewart and Thomas Cuthbert Stewart, were brought into the business. Soon after, with the management reinforced, further acquisitions were made. In 1889 the British Tube Works was acquired and operated as Stewart Brothers under the management of Andrew Stewart's two sons. Quickly thereafter, in 1890, a much larger addition was achieved with the negotiation of a merger with the Clydesdale Iron and Steel Company. This company operated works at Mossend, near Coatbridge, and in 1884 had added new steelmaking capacity to the earlier iron-making facilities. The Clydesdale Iron and Steel Company was controlled by Dugald and Duncan McCorkindale and Andrew Bain; both Bain and Dugald McCorkindale joined the board of the merged enterprise, which now took the name A. and J. Stewart and Clydesdale Ltd and was registered as a public limited company in 1890, capitalized at $700,000. At the same time Andrew Stewart brought Stewart Brothers into the new company and his two sons joined the board, which also included Sir William Arrol, Stewart's close friend and long-time customer. 
The 1880s was a period of remarkable expansion for Stewart, who effectively increased the scale of his operations fivefold and transformed his company into the largest operator in the Scottish tube trade. He had through his acquisitions and mergers created a large, vertically integrated combine controlling its own supplies of iron and steel and performing all the stages of manufacture, from raw materials to finished products. The company then manufactured a very wide range of products, including all types of tubes and pipes, but had also diversified into angle and boilerplate manufacture. Stewart invested heavily in improving plant and machinery and indeed redesigned and built most of his own requirements. On taking over the Clydesdale works these were effectively reconstructed, the old hammer and tilting machinery being replaced by three new rolling mills. 
Stewart and his family resided in Glasgow in a fine town house at 17 Park Terrace, but they also enjoyed country living at their Kingsmeadows estate near Peebles. Stewart was an active churchman and member of Park parish church in Glasgow, and through that was also active in the management of many Glasgow hospitals and benevolent societies. He was a director of the Glasgow Maternity Hospital and of the Glasgow Old Man's Society. Like his fellow industrialists and Scots Sir William Arrol and Andrew Carnegie, with whom he was friends, Stewart was a regular benefactor of many institutions and societies. His patronage ranged widely, including in London the Royal Caledonian Asylum and the Royal Scottish Hospital. Like Carnegie he was also a promoter of education, and in 1891 he provided funds to Glasgow University to endow the Adam Smith chair of political economy. The university recognized this, and his wider contributions, with the award of an honorary LLD in 1900. 
After his sons joined the business, Stewart became less active in the daily conduct of affairs. By the mid-1880s he effectively controlled the Scottish tube trade and was able to minimize the pressures of competition, at least in the local market. But by the end of the decade these pressures were again increasing, and in 1898 he made a further acquisition, taking over the Phoenix Tube Works of James Menzies & Co. in Rutherglen. This company had pioneered the process of manufacturing solid drawn-steel tubes, and the merger kept Stewart in the forefront of technological developments. He paralleled this by further extending his Coatbridge operations, and in 1900 constructed the Imperial Tube Works there, and on an adjacent site established the Climax Engineering Works to manufacture his company's requirement of machines and tools. By then the Stewart companies, now renamed A. J. Stewart and Menzies, produced 36,000 tons of tube per year -- about 70 per cent for export -- and their only real rival was the Birmingham firm of Lloyd and Lloyd. 
With the formation of A. J. Stewart and Menzies the company was now capitalized in excess of $1 million. Stewart's company then controlled nine large works, the establishment covering 85 acres and employing some six thousand men. His products covered every aspect of demand, from gas to water and general industry, and he had also moved into the complex naval market for water tube boilers. He had acquired a large portion of shares in Babcock and Wilcox and had become chairman of the company, holding the patent for the Babcock high-pressure boiler. Stewart was then aged sixty-eight and had been in ill health for some time; he died on 16 August 1901 at his country residence, Kingsmeadows, near Peebles; he was survived by his wife. His philosophy of mergers for market control was followed by his sons, who in 1903 joined with their rivals in Birmingham to establish the great firm of Stewarts and Lloyds, a union which effectively covered the British tube market. 


@@@@@


doc= 50570


Wallace, Sir William (1881-1963), marine engineer, was born on 25 August 1881 in Paisley, Renfrewshire, the son of Mathew Wallace, master dyer, and his wife, Agnes Reid. His early education was at Paisley grammar school, after which he was taken into apprenticeship in the Paisley shipyard of Bow, McLachlan & Co.; during this time he also attended technical classes at the West of Scotland Technical College in Glasgow. His next step was to gain engineering experience and, as was common at that time, that meant a position as an engineering officer in a prominent shipping line. Wallace joined the British and Burmese Steam Navigation Company, with whom he gained the Board of Trade first class certificate and rose to the rank of chief engineer. 
Wallace spent nearly ten years at sea before he came ashore in 1910 and joined the prominent Edinburgh firm of Brown Brothers, hydraulic and general engineers and iron-founders, whose premises were at the Rosebank ironworks. A talent for invention was quickly demonstrated, and Brown Brothers took out patents for his developments with steering gear and hydraulic equipment. In 1916 Wallace was appointed managing director and celebrated his advancement by marrying, on 24 March, Christina, daughter of John Stewart, a coachman. They had a son and a daughter. Brown Brothers was then deeply involved in naval work, especially in supplying gear for submarines; and in 1917 Wallace was on the submarine K13 on a test in the Gareloch when it sank with seventy-seven men on board. He is reported to have stopped water flooding the boat by blocking off the hydraulic system, and was one of the forty-six survivors rescued after being submerged for fifty-seven hours. 
Wallace's most long-lasting engineering innovations came in the 1930s, when he was again undertaking work for the Admiralty. He was among the first to develop catapults for the early aircraft-carriers and regularly risked his life by being his own test pilot, insisting that he be the first to be catapulted by each of his improved devices. His most important development came in 1936, when he took out a patent to improve the stability of ships; the device was the first activated fin-ship stabilizer. The idea was ingenious but required considerable development, which was undertaken in co-operation with Maurice Denny (1886-1955) of the famous Dumbarton firm of shipbuilders. Their collaboration finally produced the Denny-Brown stabilizer, the first commercial version being installed in 1937 in the 'Isle of Park'. The innovation was widely used by the Royal Navy during the Second World War to help stabilize gun-platforms, and in the post-war period it came into widespread use in merchant ships. 
Brown Brothers prospered under Wallace's engineering inventiveness and shrewd management, and war work greatly extended its facilities until it employed over a thousand men, twice the size it had been when he had joined it before the First World War. Wallace's leadership and contributions to engineering earned him the CBE in 1944 and the KB in 1951. He was an active member of numerous professional associations, notably as vice-president of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland, and also of the Institute of Marine Engineers. His inventive talent and distinction won for his firm in 1951 a royal commission award of $27,510 for his work on stabilizers (shared with Denny of Dumbarton), and in 1954 the Society of Engineers awarded him the Churchill gold medal. The following year he received the gold medal of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland, and in 1956 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and had an honorary LLD conferred on him by the University of Edinburgh. 
At Brown Brothers, Wallace enjoyed a long and successful career as an inventor and engineer. He was managing director of the firm from 1916 to 1957, and then became chairman for a further two years before retiring. He was well known and respected in the business community and held positions on the boards of the British Linen Bank, Alex Cowan & Son, and the North British Rubber Company. He was also a director of the First, Second, and Third Edinburgh investment trusts, of William Beardmore & Co., and of the Leith shipbuilders Henry Robb & Co. His active business life was backed by his passion for golf. He was a member of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers (Muirfield) and captain of his local Bruntsfield Links Golfing Society. He was a family man whose son, William, succeeded him on the board of Brown Brothers. When he died on 27 May 1963 in a nursing home at 12 Drumsheugh Gardens, Edinburgh, his entire gross estate was worth over $45,000. His wife survived him. The company with which he was associated almost all his life did not outlast him for very long, as it was taken over by Vickers Ltd in 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 50574


Hill, Samuel (bap. 1678, d. 1759), textile manufacturer, was born in Soyland in the West Riding of Yorkshire and baptized on 7 September 1678 in the parish of Elland, Yorkshire, the son of James and Deborah (1657-1741) Hill of Soyland. His early life and education remain obscure though his later financial accounts and commercial correspondence demonstrate his proficiency in bookkeeping, set down in a distinctive, florid script, with long quill strokes and decorative capitals. In 1706 he purchased a remote seventeenth-century farmstead at Making Place, Soyland, at a high altitude close to the Pennine ridge, which became both his commercial base and his home for the rest of his life. On 21 April 1712 he married Elizabeth Holroyd (1691-1756) of Sowerby at Coley church in the parish of Halifax, but their family life was dogged with tragedy and disappointment. Of their six children, Sarah died on 23 July 1729, aged fifteen; her sister, Ann, on 3 April 1730 aged five; and her brothers Joseph on 14 January 1730 aged three; Samuel on 11 June 1732 aged twelve; and James on 16 January 1753, aged thirty. Moreover, their sole surviving son, Richard (died 1780), who was admitted into partnership with his father in 1746, had become estranged from his father by 1752, when he set up in business on his own account. He was declared bankrupt in February 1759, and when he was effectively disinherited by his father eight months later, he complained bitterly in his diary that his father's will, which had left him 'in a situation too deplorable to relate', was 'never formed nor invented but by the devil'. Indeed, litigation arising from the controversial will and associated deed poll, which had provided for the settlement of the major part of the estate upon his granddaughter, Betty Nuttall Hall, the sole surviving child of Richard Hill, when she came of age, continued until 1793. Lord Kenyon, the lord chief justice, was prompted to observe in 1790: 'the maker of these instruments or his advisers have certainly produced such a case as never happened before and in all probability never will happen again'. 
Hill masterminded a remarkably successful international textile marketing operation, from an unpromising upland environment, accessible only to packhorse trains, and over 70 miles from the nearest port. 'We have had so much rain and snow upon these hills that we could scarce get anything dry', he explained in a letter to a Dutch customer in February 1737, expressing his frustration with the protracted Pennine winter. By 1726 he had become sufficiently well established to issue a promissory note to his brother James's creditors. He was then operating an extensive putting-out system, buying wool from all over the country and arranging for it to be spun and woven by a network of domestic outworkers, perhaps numbering as many as 250 by the 1730s. Initially, Hill traded primarily in woollen kerseys, his largest consignments destined for charitable institutions, for example Christ's Hospital, as well as military and naval requisitions and the export market. He supplied customers in most parts of Europe, especially the Low Countries, Spain, Portugal, and Russia, and indeed further afield, dispatching at least one pattern sheet to Persia, via St Petersburg and Astrakhan. He entered the worsted trade only in the 1730s, a generation after the trade had been introduced into the West Riding of Yorkshire, when worsteds were rapidly becoming fashionable for the middling and lower ranks of society, obtaining his supplies from both domestic outworkers and independent worsted manufacturers. His surviving business records reveal that the value of his annual turnover of cloth never fell below $23,000 during the period 1744-50, reaching a peak in excess of $35,527 in 1747, and confirm that he was still primarily a kersey manufacturer, selling twice as many kerseys as worsteds during the 1740s. A later pattern book, containing an impressive range of samples in both fabrics from 1750, displays the superb quality, brilliance, and diversity of colour and design achieved in the weaving and dyeing of his cloth. By this time he was one of the wealthiest entrepreneurs in the West Riding. 
Hill is revealed in his correspondence as a sturdy, independent character with a shrewd business sense, determined to maintain a reputation for quality at a competitive price, insisting that his cloth, much of which carried his own name or the names of individual members of his family, was 'not to be outdone in England by any man'. Stubbornly resolute in refusing 'to deal with those who will not accept my goods at market price when ready', he displayed flexibility in his willingness to sell worsteds initially 'for small profit till they be known' and his readiness to realize 'as near as I can' the exact specifications of his customers. Moreover, his wife helped to cultivate special relationships with prized customers, by supplying them with token gifts of ham and tongue. Hill was also evidently a considerate and respected employer. He was anxious to avoid frequent changes in production so as not 'to spoil the weavers' and at least one former employee fondly recalled in a letter to his son Richard his 'good father'. He invested most of his wealth in local property, transforming Making Place and nearby Kebroyd into 'elegant places', lavishing upon the former 'at least $8000, and upon the latter $4000', as his son, Richard, observed in his diary. 
Samuel Hill died at his home, Making Place, Soyland, on 22 October 1759. He was buried in the churchyard of the chapel-of-ease at Ripponden on 24 October, where, according to its curate, the antiquary John Watson, he had erected a 'handsome well-cut tombstone' over the vault containing the remains of his wife and children, and where he had planted a grove of yew trees with the help of John Collier (1708-1786), alias Tim Bobbin, the Lancashire artist and dialect poet, an erstwhile frequent visitor to Soyland. However, Watson made no reference in his parish history of 1775 to any epitaph, inscription, or monument to Hill at Ripponden. Moreover, Hill's intended public benefaction of a bridge at Soyland was apparently never realized. Nearly 200 years after his death, Hill provided the inspiration for the Halifax novelist Phyllis Bentley's character Sam Horsfall in her historical novel 'Manhold', published in New York in 1941. 


@@@@@


doc= 50578


Barlow, Hannah Bolton (1851-1916), ceramicist, was born on 2 November 1851 at Church End House, Little Hadham, Hertfordshire, the seventh of nine children of Benjamin Irlam Barlow (1813-1866), bank manager, and his Quaker wife, Hannah Bolton (1816-1882). As she grew up in rural Hertfordshire and Essex, Hannah Barlow acquired a love of nature, particularly animals, which inspired her art. After attending Lambeth School of Art and Design in London in 1868, she was briefly employed at Minton's art pottery studio in Kensington Gore. In 1871 she joined the Doulton art pottery in Lambeth founded by the industrialist Sir Henry Doulton. Hannah's work in the sgraffito technique, incised drawing, either directly on to the clay body or through applied slip (liquid clay), was instrumental in the success of Doulton ware, relief-decorated saltglazed stoneware pottery. Her etched designs featured, more usually in a reserved frieze or panel, on vases, jugs, and bowls. Collaborators sometimes included her siblings also employed by Doulton: Arthur (1845-1879), whose early death cut short a promising future, and her younger sisters, Florence, who specialized in 'pate-sur-pate' painting of birds, and Lucy, a relief border decorator. While her sketchbooks (now in the Sir Henry Doulton Gallery, Stoke-on-Trent) include humorous anthropomorphic compositions, Hannah's ceramic subjects are naturalistic and unsentimental, mainly of domestic livestock and pets and occasionally wild animals. Human figures feature rarely. John Sparkes, the Lambeth School of Art's principal, wrote: 'She possesses a certain Japanese facility of representing the largest amount of fact in the fewest lines, all correct, and all embodying in a high degree the essential character of her subject. (Sparkes)' Sometimes she painted on other Doulton ceramic wares: Faience, Crown Lambeth, and Carrara, and in 'pate-sur-pate'. Occasionally she decorated plaques and tiles and more rarely modelled in high relief. 
A prolific artist, whose style changed little during her long employment, Hannah Barlow produced an estimated 1000 unique pieces annually until her retirement as head of studio in 1913. From 1871-2 her work was shown at major national and international exhibitions, winning many awards. Her watercolour paintings were included in 'Studio Notes', the Doulton art pottery's manuscript in-house magazine, during the 1880s, when the Royal Academy also exhibited a number of her high-relief terracotta animal sculptures. Hannah was famed for her unusual menagerie which included a tame fox, Simon, and a 'black mountain sheep answering to the euphonious name of Lady Gwen Morris' ('Lady artists: Miss Hannah Bolton Barlow', 215). A terracotta panel of Sir Henry Doulton and his artists, modelled 'c'.1876 by George Tinworth (1843-1913) above the old Doulton art pottery on Lambeth High Street, includes Hannah and her pet cat. 
Employment by Doulton & Co. offered career possibilities for 'respectable' middle-class women in Victorian times. As a successful artist and designer, signing her own work, Hannah Barlow represents one of the earliest female contributors to the British pottery industry. Her ceramic designs for Doulton exemplify the radical arts and crafts movement's advocacy of a return to individual craftsmanship in manufacture. Ruskin, on visiting the Lambeth pottery, selected a jug by Hannah 'with all the little piggies scurrying around under the handle' (Gosse, 85). Examples of her work are held in museum ceramic collections worldwide including the Sir Henry Doulton Gallery, Stoke-on-Trent; the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; Powerhouse Museum, Sydney, Australia; National Museum of Tokyo, Japan; and the Smithsonian Institution, Washington. 
Hannah Barlow died, unmarried, on 15 November 1916 at 46 Binfield Road, Clapham, London, and was buried in Norwood cemetery in south London on 20 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 50579


Jones, Claudia Vera (1915-1964), communist and journalist, was born on 21 February 1915 in Trinidad. In 1924 she and her sisters joined their parents, who had emigrated to New York two years earlier. Unhealthy housing and overwork led to Mrs Cumberbatch's death in 1927; Claudia's father, Charles, died in 1958. In 1932 Claudia was hospitalized for a year with tuberculosis. Managing to complete high school despite the increasing ravages of the depression, Claudia worked at a series of unskilled jobs, but sustained what was to become a lifelong interest in drama by joining the drama club of the National Urban League (an African-American organization). 
Inspired by the Communist Party's support of African-American struggles, Claudia joined the party in 1936, taking the 'nom de guerre' of Jones. She rose rapidly in the party structure, becoming, for example, chair of its education committee for New York state, a columnist in the 'Daily Worker', and eventually editor of the Young Communist League's monthly 'Spotlight' magazine. By 1945 Jones was 'negro affairs' editor on the 'Worker' and an executive member of the party-affiliated National Negro Council, an organization which campaigned for civil rights. 
Being on the second level of the party hierarchy, Claudia Jones suffered from the McCarthyite anti-communist 'witch-hunt' which began in 1948. Repeated arrests resulted in a heart attack in 1951. She was imprisoned for twelve months; on her release she was extradited to Britain in December 1955. Very ill on her arrival in London, she was hospitalized for some months. Though initially she received some support from the Communist Party of Great Britain, it never recognized her talents and her organizing and editorial experience. In order to continue her political life she became active outside the party. She began to publish a monthly paper, the 'West Indian Gazette', in March 1958 and organized a series of broad-based groups which led the protests after the 1958 race riots in Notting Hill, London, and the lynching of the Antiguan Kelso Cochrane in the same area the following year. In collaboration with other organizations, Jones was a leader of the struggles against the 'Immigration Act' of 1962. Other campaigns she was involved with included the first moves against the apartheid regime in South Africa; the anti-Vietnam war movement, and the march in support of the 1963 march on Washington for civil rights. In 1959 she also began an annual indoor event to showcase Caribbean talent, which after her death was developed into the Notting Hill carnival. 
On being granted a British passport in 1962 Claudia Jones visited the USSR at the invitation of the 'Soviet Woman'; in the following year she returned for the World Congress of Women. In 1964 she was in Tokyo for the 10th Anti-Hydrogen Bomb Conference and went from there to visit China. This, at the height of the contretemps between the USSR and China, demonstrated her international perspective as well as her commitment to socialism. Throughout a hectic, committed, and financially impoverished life, she suffered repeated hospitalization. Her brief marriage to Abraham Scholnick ended in divorce; there were no children. Claudia Jones died of a heart attack in her sleep on 29 December 1964 at her home, 58 Lisburne Road, Hampstead, aged forty-eight. Her ashes were buried in Highgate cemetery. The 'Gazette' outlasted her by only two issues. 


@@@@@


doc= 50580


Lilian Verna Rolfe (1914-1945) was an imperturbable thirty-year-old woman who was set down by Lysander in April 1944 and destined for the area around Orleans. Three months later she was arrested by accident: the Germans were making a sweep of the area before evacuation, and discovered to their surprise that they had caught an SOE wireless operator. She was shot at Ravensbruck on 5 February 1945. She received the Croix de Guerre and was appointed MBE. Her fate at Ravensbruck was shared by the fiercely patriotic 


@@@@@


doc= 50581


Otterbourne, Thomas (fl. c.1340-1346), historian, is thought to have been a member of the Franciscan order. He has sometimes been confused with his namesake, Thomas Otterbourne (fl. 1420). A man of that name was sixty-fifth lector in divinity at Oxford 'c'.1340, had graduated DTh at Oxford by September 1343, and was licensed to hear confessions in the archdeaconry of Durham by Bishop Bury on 21 September 1343. From his name, and the diocese in which he was licensed, he was probably a native of north-east England. 
Otterbourne's historical importance lies in his probable authorship of the continuation from 1297 of a Franciscan chronicle, now lost, but known in the sixteenth century as the chronicle of Richard of Durham. This chronicle was the source on which the Lanercost chronicler drew for much of his material; indeed, the Lanercost chronicle, which survives in only one manuscript, BL, Cotton MS Claudius D.vii, is in large part an adaptation of Richard of Durham's chronicle. In all probability the author of the Anonimalle chronicle of St Mary's Abbey, York, also made use of the continuation of Richard of Durham's chronicle. The evidence for Otterbourne's authorship of that continuation is provided by Sir Thomas Grey (died 1369). In the prologue to his 'Scalacronica' Grey states that he had made use of a chronicle by Thomas Otterbourne, a Franciscan friar and Oxford doctor of divinity. Although Grey does not say that Otterbourne had lived in Carlisle, it is unlikely that there were two Franciscan chroniclers writing in the far north of England at much the same time, and on the basis of Grey's evidence modern scholars have identified the author of the continuation of Richard of Durham with Otterbourne. 
The section of what is now the Lanercost chronicle from 1297 to 1346 was written by an author interested in the history of the north of England in the first half of the fourteenth century, who shows particular knowledge of events in and around Carlisle. He gives a vivid account of the siege of Carlisle by the Scots in 1315, and a detailed and sympathetic description of the treason and execution of Andrew Harclay, earl of Carlisle, early in 1323. The warden of the Franciscan house in Carlisle heard Harclay's confession before his execution. His knowledgeable accounts of military matters have led to suggestion that the author may have been a knight before entering the Franciscan order. He writes about national politics in Edward II's reign from a pro-baronial standpoint, and shows little respect for Edward II, criticizing him for pursuing in his youth 'pointless and trivial occupations unsuitable for the son of a king' ('Chronicon de Lanercost', 236). He also shows an interest in the history of the Franciscan order, and he observes, in discussing the deposition of Edward II, that Queen Isabella held the order in high regard. 


@@@@@


doc= 50586


Christian, Jonathan (1808-1887), judge, born at Carrick-on-Suir, co. Tipperary, on 17 February 1808, was the third son of George Christian, solicitor, and his wife, Margaret Cormac. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, entered King's Inns, Dublin, in 1829 and Gray's Inn, London, in 1831, and was called to the Irish bar in 1834. On 16 May 1859 he married Mary Churtian Thomas, the daughter of Edward Thomas of Levenhampton, registrar to Judge Churtian. 
Christian joined the Leinster circuit and became one of the leaders of the equity bar; he was made a queen's counsel in 1841 and third serjeant in 1851, and was appointed as solicitor-general by Lord Palmerston in 1856. In 1858 he was appointed a puisne judge in the court of common pleas. In 1867 he was appointed lord justice of appeal in the court of chancery appeal. 
Christian had a high conception of the role of the courts of equity in the administration of justice and a passion for efficiency in those courts and their procedures. He considered two persons who were his colleagues on the equity bench for some time, Hedges Eyre Chatterton (who was appointed vice-chancellor in 1867) and Thomas O'Hagan (who was appointed lord chancellor in 1868 on the formation of Gladstone's first government) to be unfitted for their positions by reason of their lack of experience and knowledge of chancery matters. He remarked of O'Hagan once in open court that 'I have known the Court of Chancery longer than he has. My acquaintance with it does not date from the day I first sat upon its Bench' ('Irish Law Times', 25 May 1872). Remarks such as this gave rise to a view expressed by 'The Times' upon his retirement, that 'although unsociability of temperament and a belief in his own superiority, both in conscientiousness and intellect, brought Christian into conflict with others, especially O'Hagan and Chatterton, his learning and acumen earned him a place among eminent Irish judges' ('The Times', 13 Nov 1878). None the less, Christian's abilities as a judge, his erudition, and his independence of mind came to be overshadowed by conduct which was widely believed to be inappropriate for a sitting judge, in conducting public debate and in expressing what were in effect political opinions from the judicial bench. 
Christian considered the reforms in landlord and tenant relations effected by the 'Land Act 1870', with the policy of which O'Hagan was closely associated, to be a confiscation of landowners' rights, and he described a provision in the act as being 'shocking to all our ideas of property law' ('Irish Law Times Reports', 6.131). He proposed with respect to the 'Irish Judicature Bill' that the office of the lord chancellor, being the only one on the judicial bench whose occupant held office at the pleasure of the prime minister, should either be abolished or that it should cease to exercise any judicial functions, these being transferred to the master of the rolls. Christian also made extravagant attacks on other judges, counsel, law reporters, and politicians, at times from the judicial bench -- a practice, remarked the 'Irish Law Times and Solicitors' Journal', that had 'the advantage of immunity from retort' ('Irish Law Times', 4.697). Christian published a number of pamphlets and wrote to 'The Times' on the legal and political subjects which concerned him. He requested the Incorporated Council of Law Reporting for Ireland not to report his judgments because of the supposed incompetence of their reporters. He was the subject of two rebukes from the prime minister in the House of Commons -- by Gladstone in 1872 and by Disraeli in 1876 -- on account of his inappropriate judicial remarks. 
Christian retired from the bench because of deafness in November 1878, and died at his home, 53 Merrion Square, Dublin, on 29 October 1887. He was buried at Dean's Grange cemetery, co. Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 50587


Digby, Sir Kenelm Edward (1836-1916), lawyer and civil servant, was born on 9 September 1836 at The Ridge, Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire, the eldest of six sons of the Hon. and Revd Kenelm Henry Digby (1811-1891), honorary canon of Norwich and rector of Tittleshall, Norfolk, and his wife, Caroline (died 1866), daughter of Edward Sheppard of Firgrove, Shropshire. The Digbys were an old-established county family from Dorset, with a strong tradition of public service. His father's elder brother became the ninth Baron Digby in 1856. 
Digby attended a school in Blakeney, Norfolk, and from Harrow School (1849-55) gained a closed scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Oxford (where he matriculated in 1855). As an undergraduate he played cricket for the university (1857-9), became president of the union, and took firsts in classical honour moderations and Greats (BA 1859, MA 1861). He was elected a fellow and tutor of Corpus (1864), where he threw himself into the teaching and study of law, continued to excel at cricket and rowing for his college, and became a leading and seemingly universally popular figure of his generation. He was called to the bar as a member of Lincoln's Inn in 1865. 
From 1868 to 1874 Digby was Vinerian reader in English and civil law at Oxford and in 1875 was a university examiner for the new school of jurisprudence. Concerned about the lacuna in law textbooks for undergraduates, he published 'An Introduction to the History of the Law of Real Property' (1875), which became a standard text and ran to five editions. At Oxford, Digby moved in the same circles as a group of young reformers associated with the positivist movement, and became a close friend of Frederic Harrison. As a young barrister in London he shared chambers with his lifelong friend and contemporary James Bryce, who was also a member of Lincoln's Inn. He was a strong supporter of Gladstonian Liberalism and believed in 'the greater importance of giving substantial power to the working classes'. Later in his life he was involved in working out fair and effective means of compensating workmen for industrial injuries. 
Digby married on 30 August 1870 Caroline (1848-1926), second daughter of Edward Strutt, first Baron Belper, the Liberal politician. They settled in Kensington in their early married life, when he left Oxford to make his career as a young barrister, and had four children -- two sons and two daughters. Always an enthusiast for physical activity and travel, Digby was a keen sportsman, a good shot, and an experienced fisherman, and in London regularly rode before breakfast. A mountaineer and member of the Alpine Club (from 1867), he recorded many climbs with friends such as Harrison, Bryce, and Courtenay Ilbert. He enjoyed regular holidays with his family, during which they frequently walked and climbed in Scotland, Austria, Switzerland, and Italy. 
Digby was a sound, learned, and painstaking lawyer with a strong practical sense. In 1892 he was appointed county court judge in Derbyshire and the family moved to Aston Hall just outside Derby. In 1891 he became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn and in 1904 took silk. He enjoyed his Derbyshire life and was hesitant about abandoning it when in 1894 he was unexpectedly approached on behalf of the Liberal home secretary, H. H. Asquith, about an appointment as permanent under-secretary at the Home Office. However, a strong devotion to public duty weighed in the balance against his fears about his inexperience in administration and public office. Digby was appointed permanent under-secretary at the Home Office in January 1895, succeeding Sir Godfrey Lushington (whom he must have known as another Oxford positivist). 
Digby's personal fears about becoming a senior civil servant late in life proved unfounded. Edward Troup, subsequently to fill the same post, later commented that 'no one could have been quicker in leaving behind the ways of a lawyer and adapting himself to administrative work on broad and vigorous lines' (Bryce, 248). In fact, Digby's very lack of detailed personal knowledge about the work of the Home Office may have been an advantage. He arrived at a time when senior civil servants in the department were for the first time forced, through the growth of legislation and the complexity of new responsibilities, to devolve responsibility. Digby recognized that the new breed of open competitive entry officials was now reaching maturity and must shoulder a greater amount of the workload. Part of this derived from new industrial legislation, such as the 1897 'Workmen's Compensation Act', much of which involved delegated powers and the need for analysis of statistics. On the criminal side of the office's work, the sheer increase in the volume of papers, together with a lack of the necessary legal expertise, led to the departmental scandal of the Beck case in 1904. Digby and his subordinates were blamed for their failure to spot a case of mistaken identity which led to wrongful imprisonment. (The case eventually led to the establishment in 1907 of the court of criminal appeal.) 
Immigration was another area of increased activity as England was affected by the great influx of eastern European refugees migrating westwards. Digby was appointed to the royal commission on alien immigration, which reported in 1903. He wrote an influential minority memorandum, which did much to discredit the majority report. He was strongly opposed to the idea of an inquisitorial immigration sub-department with wide powers of investigation and referral of cases to the courts, partly because it involved the reversal of long-established policies on the right of asylum and the law of extradition. Digby's doubts about the practicality of implementing the recommendations of the report were fully justified in the years following the 'Aliens Act', 1905. 
Digby retired from the Home Office on 9 September 1903, having had a two-year extension of the normal retirement age. He was created KCB in 1898 and GCB in 1906. He was one of the last of a type of Victorian head of department: socially highly placed, a brilliant 'all-rounder' who was appointed to the highest ranks of the civil service from outside. Over the subsequent ten years he sat as a member of numerous departmental committees of inquiry, chairing the Home Office departmental committee on workmen's compensation (1904), and acted as an arbitrator in labour disputes. In 1914 he was appointed a member of the commission chaired by Bryce to investigate alleged German war atrocities in Belgium. He died peacefully, after two days' illness, on 21 April 1916 at the Bankes Arms Hotel, Studland, Swanage, Dorset. 


@@@@@


doc= 50590


Markby, Sir William (1829-1914), judge and legal writer, was born on 31 May 1829 at Duxford St Peter rectory, Cambridgeshire, the fourth son of the rector, the Revd William Henry Markby (1786-1866), and his wife, Sophia, 'nee' Randall (1798-1865). He was educated at King Edward's School, Bury St Edmunds, before matriculating at Merton College, Oxford, in 1846. A mathematics postmaster, he graduated with first-class honours in 1851, having played cricket and rowed for his college. Admitted to the Inner Temple on 9 November 1853, he read in the chambers of Edward Turner, and was called to the bar on 5 June 1856, being made an MA by Oxford and, by incorporation, Cambridge, in the same year. 
Markby practised on the Norfolk circuit (1856-66) and was recorder of Buckingham (1865-6), before being appointed a judge of the high court of Bengal (1866-78). On 22 March 1866 he married Lucy (1841-1928), daughter of John Edward Taylor of Weybridge, and niece of the jurist John Austin's widow, Sarah, whom Markby helped prepare Austin's 'Lectures on Jurisprudence' for publication (1863). 
As a judge Markby was noted for his care and conscientiousness, which were constant features in a life conspicuous for the achievement of excellence and devotion to duty. Politically a Liberal, he was sympathetic to those around him aspiring for Indian self-government. He was vice-chancellor of Calcutta University (1877-8). On retirement from the bench in 1878, he was knighted and returned to England. 
Immediately Markby took up the newly created readership in Indian law at Oxford, a post he held until 1900. His duties involved the supervision of probationers selected for the Indian Civil Service studying at the university, as well as lecturing on the Anglo-Indian codes and teaching the elements of Hindu and Islamic law. Active in university committee work, he was a member of hebdomadal council, a curator of the university chest, and a delegate of the Clarendon Press. The university settlement in east London, Toynbee Hall, was one of the liberal causes which he promoted. A fellow of All Souls by virtue of his readership, he also served as its domestic bursar until Balliol recruited him as its bursar and made him an official fellow (1883-1900). It was in Markby's rooms at All Souls that he, Thomas Erskine Holland, Frederick Pollock, James Bryce, and William Anson initiated the 'Law Quarterly Review', which became a legal journal of international renown. A county alderman and JP, noted for his business acumen, Markby was appointed KCIE (1889) and served as a commissioner to inquire into administration of justice in Trinidad and Tobago (1892) and as a railway commissioner (1906). 
The fruit of Markby's teaching and legal career is to be found in his published works: the eleventh edition (with W. Mills) of H. Roscoe's 'Digest of the Law of Evidence in the Trial of Actions at nisi prius' (1866), 'Lectures on Indian Law' (1873), 'The Indian Evidence Act' (1897), 'An Introduction to Hindu and Mohammedan Law' (1906), and, most importantly, his 'Elements of Law Considered with Reference to the Principles of General Jurisprudence' (six editions: 1871, 1874, 1885, 1889, 1896, and 1905). Whereas some of his other works were undertaken after deafness had begun to curtail his involvement in committee work, his 'Elements' had been written while he was in India teaching Hindu students, and mirrored the interest in legal theory and general jurisprudence which his contact with other legal cultures had stimulated. The work, once much read, earned him the DCL from Oxford (1879), but belongs to a genre which later became virtually extinct. Undoubtedly, such studies were inspired by the contact with other legal orders afforded by the colonial experience and reached their apogee in the work of scholars such as Henry Maine. The book's importance lies in that it was among the first to present English law in terms of general jurisprudential categories, obtained as a result of comparative analysis. When it was written, there were no textbooks as such dealing with subjects such as tort or crime in English law. Its achievement can be measured by the fact that when such books came to be written, the analytical models they adopted were those pioneered in works such as Markby's 'Elements'. Its influence was therefore great, but its fate was to be overtaken and replaced by those later works. Interest in this type of analytical approach waned with the decline of empire and increase in the influence of American theorists together with a return to philosophical rather than comparative and historical perspectives in jurisprudence. 
Markby died at his home at Headington Hill, Oxford, on 15 October 1914, and was buried four days later at Headington cemetery. In 1917 his widow published a memoir of his life containing a portrait. 


@@@@@


doc= 50599


Lane, Thomas (c.1640-1710), merchant, was baptized on 7 January 1641, the son of Thomas Lane, of Dodford, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Sarah, daughter of the Revd Walter Evans. The family were minor gentry with a strong clerical and colonial element: Lane had two grandfathers and an uncle in holy orders, as well as two uncles in Barbados; of his seven brothers, one later entered the church and two went to Jamaica. As the second son in a family of eight sons and four daughters, it was almost inevitable that he would follow a career that took him far from Northamptonshire. Though evidence is lacking, it is likely that during his early years he spent some time as a factor or trader overseas in the Chesapeake or elsewhere in America. He was active as a merchant in London by 1672, when he was importing tobacco from Virginia. About that time he became the partner of Micaiah Perry the elder in the firm of Perry and Lane, Virginia merchants of London. The firm prospered, rising from twelfth among London tobacco importers in 1676 to second in 1686, during years when London accounted for more than half of England's total tobacco imports. After the death in 1688 of its most important competitor, John Jeffreys, the firm moved into first place and held that position until at least 1720. This made it then the largest firm in London trading to North America. 
In December 1679 Lane obtained a licence to marry Mary Puckle (1661-1727), daughter of Major William Puckle, a Cromwellian officer, functionary, and later merchant. Her mother was a daughter of Richard Hutchinson, treasurer of the navy under Cromwell. With the patronage of Robert Thomson, another former Cromwellian functionary and later deputy governor of the East India Company, Major Puckle was given a commission to inspect that company's trading stations between Madras and Bengal, where he died in 1676, leaving his daughter an orphan. 
The business of Perry and Lane was particularly prosperous during the 1690s, when it added to its direct trade a considerable commission business from larger tobacco planters attracted by the higher European prices in wartime. Lane is not known to have invested in any of the great company flotations of that decade but in 1697 used $6550 of his personal fortune to purchase lands in Charwelton parish, Northamptonshire. He also owned (with the Perrys) Chester's Quay on the Thames, near the Customs House. He died after 17 October 1710 (when his will was signed) and before 10 December of that year, when it was proved. At his death Lane, then of Bethnal Green, left his widow an annuity of $250 derived from the income of his Charwelton lands. They had no children. He is probably the Thomas Lane who was buried on 8 November 1710 at St Dunstan's, Stepney. 
Lane took no known part in the guild or public life of London. However, in 1711, after his death, his wife's cousin, the London notary James Puckle, published 'The Club', a collection of humorous sketches, dedicated to Lane and the Perrys, 'Whose Consummate wisdom, Matchless industry, and Perfect honesty, so justly made them Live Beloved, and Die Lamented'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50600


Grubb, Thomas (1800-1878), engineer and telescope builder, was born on 4 August 1800 at Waterford, son of William Grubb, draper, of Capel Street, Dublin, and his second wife, Eleanor Fayle, both members of the Society of Friends. Thomas was the great-great-grandson of Ishmael Grubb who had emigrated to Ireland from Northamptonshire in 1656. He disowned the Society of Friends on his marriage to Sarah Purser on 12 September 1826. They had nine children. 
The nature of Grubb's education and training is unknown, but by about 1830 he was in business in Dublin as a mechanical engineer. His first telescopes were modest instruments for his own use. He soon made contact with the then substantial Irish astronomical community, and in particular with the Revd Thomas Romney Robinson (1793-1882), director of Armagh observatory. Robinson appreciated his skill and inventiveness, and had a knowledge of optics which complemented Grubb's understanding of the mechanical problems of mounting large telescopes. Through Robinson, Grubb was asked to mount a 13.3 inch lens by Cauchoix of Paris for E. J. Cooper of Markree, co. Sligo. As a preparation for working on this instrument he made a full-scale model which was transformed into a 15 inch reflector for the Armagh observatory. The metal mirror of this telescope was supported by a system of triangular levers designed by Grubb, which greatly reduced the flexure of the mirror under its own weight. This system was used by the third earl of Rosse in mounting the mirror of his 6 foot telescope at Parsonstown, King's county, which he completed in 1845. Grubb also made various minor optical components for him. 
Grubb's mastery of mounting large telescopes led to other commissions, including the 'Sheepshanks telescope' for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich (1838), a 22 inch reflecting telescope for the University of Glasgow (1853), and a 12 inch refractor for Trinity College's observatory at Dunsink, co. Dublin, in 1868. Grubb did not make the object glasses or primary mirrors for these instruments. 
Grubb's business was not confined to astronomy. He carried out a variety of scientific work for Trinity College, Dublin, and in 1839 made about twenty sets of magnetometers for Professor Humphrey Lloyd, who was establishing a network of magnetic observatories in the British colonies: Lloyd preferred to have them made in Dublin rather than London so that he could oversee the work. From 1840 until his death Grubb was engineer to the Bank of Ireland, responsible for designing and constructing machines for engraving, printing, and numbering banknotes. 
The success of Rosse's 6 foot telescope in revealing that some nebulae had a spiral structure, and in greatly increasing the number of nebulae known, prompted Robinson to argue that a comparable telescope built by Grubb should be sent to the southern hemisphere to review the southern skies. Robinson's requests for funding were rejected by the government in 1850 and 1853, but in 1862 the colony of Victoria offered to pay for an instrument. After indecision and disagreement about the nature of the most suitable telescope, Grubb signed a contract in 1866 for the construction of a Cassegrain reflector with two interchangeable 4 foot metal mirrors. It was made in 1866-7 in specially built premises in Rathmines, on the south side of Dublin, and installed at Melbourne in 1869. Hailed before its erection as a technical triumph, it was such an expensive and embarrassing failure that its defects were never analysed dispassionately, but the principal one was probably the inability of the astronomers in Melbourne to repolish the mirrors in the way that the earl of Rosse had regularly reworked his at Parsonstown. The choice of metal at a time when silvered glass mirrors were being made in increasingly good quality was unfortunate. Thomas Grubb was elected FRS in 1864 and died at his house, 141 Leinster Road, Rathmines, on 19 September 1878. He was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery, Dublin. 

Sir Howard Grubb (1844-1931), maker of scientific instruments, was the fifth and youngest son of Thomas Grubb. He was born in Dublin and read civil engineering at Trinity College, Dublin. He joined his father in business in 1865 and took control of the firm in 1868: he remained in charge for fifty-seven years. He made most of the large telescopes required by Britain and the colonies during his lifetime, including five instruments for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, in 1890-97; on one of these, a 30 inch Cassegrain reflector, P. J. Melotte discovered the eighth satellite of Jupiter in 1908. Grubb also had significant sales elsewhere, from the 27 inch refractor for the University of Vienna in 1881, which was for a short time the largest refractor in the world, to the 40 inch reflector for Simeiz observatory in the Crimea, which was delivered after he retired. The majority of his largest instruments were refractors. Around 1890 he delivered seven of the thirteen photographic instruments for the worldwide 'Carte du ciel' project. It was with one of these telescopes, at a solar eclipse in 1919, that Sir Arthur Eddington provided the first experimental verification of Einstein's theory of relativity by showing that the apparent position of a star was altered when its light passed close to the sun. Grubb also made smaller telescopes but did not sell them under his own name. 
In the second half of the nineteenth century astronomical research required larger telescopes which could be used to photograph increasingly faint objects: these instruments required very steady mountings and smooth driving mechanisms. From the 1860s spectroscopy developed rapidly; the spectroscope was at the centre of the new science of astrophysics, and Howard Grubb was a leader in the improvement of instruments to meet these demands. In 1870 he built a 15 inch refractor which was bought by the Royal Society and used by William and Mary Huggins in their pioneering work on photographing stellar spectra. Grubb was more of a scientist than his father and was able to master a succession of technical challenges, though in the optical design of some of his largest instruments he was aided by another Irishman, Sir George Gabriel Stokes, Lucasian professor of mathematics at Cambridge. Sir David Gill, after his retirement from his post in South Africa, gave Grubb advice on designing his largest telescopes. In 1871 Grubb married Mary Hester Walker (died 1931), daughter of a physician from Louisiana: they had four sons and three daughters. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1883, and was knighted in 1887. 
At the beginning of the twentieth century Grubb became interested in the military use of optical instruments, and designed rangefinders and gunsights. He constructed the first submarine periscope. During the First World War his firm became heavily involved in the war effort, and because of unrest in Ireland it was moved by the government to St Albans in 1916-18. Grubb sold the firm to Sir Charles Algernon Parsons in 1925, when it was transferred to Tyneside. Grubb retired to Ireland. He died at 13 Longford Terrace, Monkstown, co. Dublin, on 16 September 1931. 


@@@@@


doc= 50601


Benjamin Gray (1676/7-1764), a leading watchmaker, it is believed, in St James's Street, who was noted for making fine repeating watches and pedometers. On 12 July 1741, Vulliamy married Gray's daughter Mary (1707-1783); they had four children, Jane ('b'. 1743), Benjamin (1747-1811), Lewis (1749-1822), and Mary ('b'. 1750). 
In 1742 Gray was appointed watchmaker in ordinary to George II and Vulliamy, who became Gray's partner at about this time, was closely associated with these duties, though there is no evidence that he himself ever held the royal warrant. In 1752, the business moved to 75 (later renumbered 68) Pall Mall, where it remained for the next hundred years. The partnership continued to produce the high quality watches which had made Gray's reputation, as well as a number of clocks, chiefly of conventional type but including an advanced regulator using John Harrison's 'grasshopper' escapement, which was given to the Society of Antiquaries by Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy in 1848. 
After Gray's death on 1 February 1764 Vulliamy continued to produce expensive watches for his fashionable clients as well as cheaper watches to be sold under fictitious names, as his successors were to do. He also made clocks and a number of fine barometers. Although Vulliamy was not as concerned with the search for greater precision in timekeeping as some of his contemporaries, his reputation was sufficiently high for the board of longitude to select him as possible replacement for one of the three watchmakers asked to assess Harrison's revolutionary marine timekeeper H4 in 1765. Gray had lost his royal warrant to George Lindsay on the accession of George III in 1760, but Vulliamy was able to maintain close connections with the horologically minded new king, supplying him with a regulator and a 'follower' clock for timing astronomical observations for the private observatory which the king built at Kew to observe the transit of Venus in 1769. Vulliamy and his elder son, Benjamin, assisted with these observations. 
The 1760s also saw Justin Vulliamy increasingly active outside the business. In 1762 he took a leading role in founding the Eglise Helvetique, or Swiss protestant church, in London, becoming president of its 'consistoire' or governing body; in 1766, with other Swiss emigres, he helped to found a French-speaking lodge of freemasons. Such social activities strengthened Vulliamy's connections within London's large French-speaking community of expatriate merchants and craftsmen, connections which were further reinforced by the apprenticeship of his younger son, Lewis, to the Huguenot merchant John Daniel Lucadou in 1764. Lewis was later to marry one of Lucadou's daughters and this, like the marriage in 1779 of Justin's elder son Benjamin to Sarah de Gingins (1758-1841), natural daughter and heir to the English property of a Swiss officer formerly in the East India Company's service, placed the Vulliamys firmly within the more prosperous ranks of this expatriate community. Justin Vulliamy's wife, Mary, died in 1783 and he died at Kensington on 1 December 1797, leaving his share of the business to his elder son and partner, Benjamin. 



@@@@@


doc= 50602


(Francois) Justin Vulliamy (bap. 1712, d. 1797), a Swiss watchmaker, son of a pastor at Gingins in the Pays de Vaud, who moved to London in the 1730s to study English watchmaking, particularly, it is believed, the cylinder escapement recently developed by George Graham. By the late 1730s Justin was associated with 


@@@@@


doc= 50603


Benjamin Vulliamy (1747-1811) had assumed the daily running of the firm many years earlier, possibly in the late 1770s. He was born in St James's on 27 August 1747 and trained in the family business. It is not certain when he became a full partner but he was appointed clockmaker to the king (a post distinct from that of watchmaker, held by his grandfather) as early as 1772. He further developed the firm's contacts with the court, the evident competence of his work allowing him to survive a major reduction in civil list posts in 1782, subject to agreeing to look after the crown's turret clocks -- a condition which, under his successor, was to lead to the firm's involvement in turret clock design and construction. However, Benjamin's own horological interests lay in other directions. The market for astronomical clocks such as those made by the Vulliamys for the king was clearly limited. On the other hand, their core business of high quality watches was increasingly threatened by illegal imports of cheaper foreign watches. Attempts at control by the Clockmakers' Company, stimulated by Vulliamy and other leading watchmakers who became honorary freemen in 1781 for this purpose, proved ineffective. Benjamin therefore decided to move into the market for expensive, ornamental, clocks, hitherto dominated by French makers. Not only did this fit the firm's existing clientele but it also suited Benjamin's own artistic tastes (shown as early as 1758 when, as a child, he had won a prize for drawing from the Society of Arts). During the 1780s he began to produce a series of clocks in the latest neo-classical style which were to establish the firm as the leading British producer of ornamental clocks. This expanded during the 1790s into the production of ornamental objects in ormolu, bronze, and marble, such as candelabra and chimney pieces. Under the patronage of wealthy connoisseurs like the prince of Wales and stimulated by the wars which made French luxury products more difficult to obtain, the supply of such 'objets d'art' became, for a time, more important to the Vulliamys than their traditional business of clock- and watchmaking. Unfortunately, this concentration on very expensive luxury articles made the firm vulnerable to delays in payment by its major customers. By 1807 Benjamin Vulliamy was having to borrow money to sustain the business and his problems were compounded by the collapse of his bankers, Devaynes & Co., in 1810. The confusion in his financial affairs was unresolved at his death in 1811, preventing a proper settlement of his personal estate. 
Given these problems in his final years, it is not surprising that Benjamin's second son, Justin Theodore, should later describe him as 'too much a gentleman to make a good tradesman', a judgement which may appear to fit the rather refined figure shown in the portrait of Benjamin Vulliamy owned by the Clockmakers' Company, but which is misleading if applied to the earlier stages of his career. Nearer the truth was Justin Theodore's further comment that his father had been a 'clever, unsociable man'. Although Benjamin succeeded his father as president of the Swiss church in London, he was certainly less active in the institutions with which he was associated than either his father or his sons, and seems to have been an essentially private man. Nevertheless, he possessed an enquiring mind and was acquainted with scientific and industrial leaders like Sir Joseph Banks and Matthew Boulton. His inventiveness led him in such varied directions as patenting improved methods of harnessing and suspending two-wheeled carriages in 1792; and sinking what is said to have been the first artesian well in Britain in 1794, an achievement which he reported to the Royal Society in 1797. The well was on the Norland estate in Kensington, which he had bought with his brother, Lewis, in 1792. Originally Benjamin had the farm while Lewis, a prosperous sugar refiner, occupied the main house and its extensive grounds. However, Benjamin later reunited the estate (valued at $13,000 in 1806), and Norland House became his main home from about 1800 until his death in 1811. This, combined with bouts of ill health, meant that the running of the Pall Mall business was increasingly entrusted to Benjamin's eldest son, Benjamin Lewis ['see below'], assisted by his second son, Justin Theodore ['see below'], though Benjamin undoubtedly retained an active interest and must take much of the responsibility for the difficulties which the business experienced in these years. 
In spite of his financial problems, the business which Benjamin left to his successors on his death on Christmas day 1811 was much larger than under his predecessors, with net profits approaching $1900 per year. He also left property in stocks and land worth about $30,000. In default of a comprehensive will, the main beneficiary was Benjamin Lewis, who inherited the whole of the Norland estate (which was soon let), as well as a share of his father's personal wealth. He also took control of the business, with Justin Theodore as junior partner. Benjamin and Sarah's other surviving children -- Mary ('b'. 1781), Lewis Vulliamy (1791-1871), Frances ('b'. 1801), and Frederick (1803-1892) -- fared relatively badly in the disposition of their father's estate and this led to protracted legal disputes within the family which were not finally concluded until after Benjamin Lewis's death in 1854. None of these younger children joined the family business: Lewis became a successful architect and Frederick entered a bank, while Mary married first a naval captain, C. W. Boys RN (died 1809), and subsequently a barrister, W. V. Hellyer, and Frances married the Revd Frederick Neale. 



@@@@@


doc= 50604


Justin Theodore Vulliamy (1787-1870), who took on much of the administrative work, but problems in working with his domineering older brother led Justin to leave the partnership in 1821. In 1822 Justin became residuary legatee of his uncle Lewis Vulliamy's estate and in 1824 moved to Normandy, where he established a factory for spinning woollen yarn. 
During the later years of the regency and the reign of George IV, the steady expansion of government and the rebuilding of central London brought about a gradual shift in the Vulliamy firm's output from the production of expensive decorative objects for private customers to the supply of larger numbers of well made but more austere clocks for the new public institutions. This trend was most pronounced in its growing involvement in producing turret clocks, a field in which Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy became an acknowledged expert and in which he introduced a number of practical improvements, such as the two second pendulum with very heavy bob used on the clock supplied to the Plymouth victualling yard in 1831. In 1844, at the request of his friend the architect Sir Charles Barry, he drew up the original specifications for the great clock for the new houses of parliament. His subsequent failure to secure the contract was attributed by Vulliamy to unfair influences; and being, as Manby's obituary was to note, 'fearless in the expression of his opinion of any deviation from the right path', he reacted by publishing much of the relevant correspondence in 1848 in order to demonstrate the rectitude of his own actions. Several of his other publications were also on the subject of public clocks, though he had earlier contributed to the article on watches in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (1819). 
Unlike his father, Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy played a major role in the Clockmakers' Company, of which he was made free in 1809, serving as master five times and fighting strongly on behalf of the declining London trade. He showed a pioneering interest in the early history of the industry and was active in building up the company's museum and library, although his methods of restoration, while typical of his time, have subsequently given him a largely unjustified reputation as a destroyer of his predecessors' work. Apart from business matters, he had an unusually wide range of artistic, scientific, and technical interests, and was a fellow of the Royal Astronomical, Geographical, and Zoological societies and an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers, to which he left his important horological library. He married Frances Moulton Stiles, daughter of George Stiles, on 3 January 1815; they had three children, Benjamin Lewis (1815-1895), 


@@@@@


doc= 50605


Vulliamy family (per. c.1730-1886), clock- and watchmakers, was founded in London by 


@@@@@


doc= 50606


Griffin, John Joseph (1802-1877), chemist, author, and business manager, the fourth and youngest son of Joseph Griffin (1752-1838), was born at Webb Square in Shoreditch, London, on 22 January 1802. The family later moved to Glasgow where the father sold books and chemicals. The eldest son, Richard Thomas Griffin (1790-1832), trained in the book trade under Thomas Tegg at Cheapside, London, for a five-year term, on 30 March 1820 joining him in equal partnership. From this time the business in Glasgow was styled Richard Griffin & Co., while the London business traded under Tegg & Co. By contrast, John Griffin received a chemical education under Andrew Ure at Anderson's Institution. His connection with the Glasgow Mechanics' Institution brought him under the influence of Thomas Clark who taught chemistry there. For some time in the 1820s he was employed on the staff of the 'Scots Times'. 
Griffin's enthusiasm for chemistry and his desire to help those students seeking an education in the subject was displayed in his various texts. Initially 'Chemical Recreations' was written to assist those attending the newly formed Glasgow Mechanics' Institution in their home-based practical studies. It ran into six editions between 1823 and 1826. Towards the same cause he added 'A Practical Treatise on the Use of the Blowpipe in Chemical and Mineral Analysis' in 1827. In 1829-30 he visited Paris and Heidelberg where he noted various works of potential value for consideration at home. Of these, he translated F. P. Danger's 'L'art du souffleur a la lampe' and H. Rose's 'Handbuch der analytischen Chemie' to launch, in 1831, a 'Polytechnic Library' series through a joint arrangement between Richard Griffin & Co. and the London-based publishing house of John Bumpus. 
In 1832 Griffin married Mary Ann, 'nee' Holder ('b'. 1802); they had twelve children. Also in that year, just before Richard's death, John became a co-partner to the family business. He then, effectively, ran the business alone until Charles Griffin (1819-1862), his deceased brother's son, completed his education at the Anderson's University. When Charles joined the business about 1842 the earlier arrangement with Tegg was terminated. In time, Charles became a freeman of the City of Glasgow and, by 1850, was president of the Stationers' Company of Glasgow. Meanwhile, John Griffin developed the business of trade in chemical apparatus and, by 1848, had transferred these interests to London. By 1852 he had relinquished his part in Richard Griffin & Co. in favour of his nephew. From the early 1860s the publishing side traded separately, first under the style Griffin, Bohn & Co. to 1862, and then as Charles Griffin & Co. 
Under John Griffin's direction the publishing side of the family business developed a scientific leaning, as shown by the 'Scientific Miscellany' series which appeared in the early 1840s and included 'A System of Crystallography' (1841) which Griffin wrote principally to demystify and promote an otherwise inaccessible mathematical subject. Another venture included a prestige contract to republish, in a much extended form, the original (1816-45) Smedley, Rose, and Rose 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. This appeared during 1848-9 in thirty volumes. Later involvement with other publishing houses came through the Cavendish Society, a group set up to perpetuate the name of the German chemist Leopold Gmelin (under whom Griffin had studied during his brief stay at Heidelberg) through the translation of the multivolume 'Handbuch der Chemie'. 
In parallel with these activities, John Griffin embarked on a project to supply apparatus to accompany the various texts. A trade catalogue dated November 1837 formally marks the start of this business, although a cartoon of the 'Billsticker' in the company's 'Book of Trades' (4th edn, 1837) suggests that he had already opened a chemical bazaar at the new premises in Buchanan Street to sell the portable chemical laboratories, prepared by Robert Best Ede of Dorking, to accompany the seventh edition of 'Chemical Recreations' (1834). The eighth edition (1838), however, explains that he had set up a 'chemico-commercial' project to see just how low prices for apparatus could be brought to develop a market need for cheap, robust, and reliable apparatus. With this new line established and developing he set out, in 1841, to Germany, Austria, and Bohemia, expressly to make contacts and to trade with suppliers in glass instruments and porcelain ware. By 1844 his catalogues showed apparatus sets for J. F. W. Johnston's 'Catechism of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology' (1844), a pioneering text in elementary school science, as well as for the 'Scientific Miscellany' series. 
Griffin's social and intellectual life in Glasgow is recorded through his attendance at the Glasgow Philosophical Society, which he joined in April 1834. There he mixed with other influential persons from Anderson's and Glasgow universities, including, respectively, the chemists Thomas Graham and Thomas Thomson. Later, through the 1840s, he held the position of librarian to the society, and it was through the medium of the society that he announced his views on the 'proximate constitution of chemical compounds'. These views were elaborated in a special 'Romance' contained in the seventh edition of 'Chemical Recreations' (1834) wherein, after describing the chaos of chemical nomenclature which then pervaded the literature, he denounced the views of the celebrated Jacob Berzelius before offering his own notions in substitution. 
The inconvenience of Glasgow as a centre for the distribution of apparatus and the development of professional chemistry in London through the Chemical Society, of which Griffin was a founder member, were among factors which eventually led to the business being transferred to London. (Likewise, his nephew moved the publishing side to London, although not until the late 1850s.) In 1848 he opened a chemical museum in Marylebone under his own name, where he traded in chemicals and chemical apparatus as well as books for Richard Griffin & Co. An expansion took place in 1850 when he added philosophical apparatus to his range following the take-over of a long-established London wholesaler, John Ward. Two further editions of 'Chemical Recreations' (1849 and 1854/1860) ensured a dominant market share in the rising educational trade. 
Although plagued by health problems, Griffin published 'The Radical Theory in Chemistry' (1858), an interesting work on nomenclature applied to organic chemistry, yet unanalysed, in which there are echoes of his earlier views on chemical notation. The final works to appear under his name, 'Chemical Testing of Wines and Spirits' (1866) and 'Centigrade Testing Applied to the Arts' (1872), may have been written with the assistance of his sons, Charles Griffin FSA (1838-1900) and William Griffin (1839-1883) who, from the early 1870s, had conducted the business under the style J. J. Griffin & Sons. John Griffin died on 9 June 1877 at his home, 31 Park Road, Haverstock Hill, London. 
By 1889, under the direction of William's son John Ross Griffin (1863-1921), the business was incorporated as a limited liability company. Family connections remained with the business until John Ross's death, although some shareholding had passed into the family of Thomas McKinnon Wood MP, a close relative of the Griffin family, who, from about 1908, was director and later chairman; from about 1919 to 1957 the business was in the hands of his three sons. Under the direction of this family various mergers took place: first with the Scottish firm of Baird and Tatlock Ltd in 1925 to become (in 1928) Griffin and Tatlock Ltd, and then with W. and J. George and Becker Ltd in 1954 to become Griffin and George Ltd. From 1957 Griffin and George Ltd, together with T. Gerrard & Co., formed the Education Group of Fisons Scientific Equipment Division. 
Throughout his life John Griffin was passionately concerned with the promotion of chemistry. With equal vigour, he felt it his duty to clarify the language of chemistry which then suffered from a clutter of systems in mineralogy, chemical nomenclature, and crystallography. His texts demonstrate a high quality of thought, prescriptive action, and fearless criticism of established ideas. Even if his own ideas remained mostly untouched by the academic establishment, he was, nevertheless, largely responsible for creating the means of study to a growing mass audience through ingenious and cheap forms of chemical apparatus. He received many accolades in later life, including two prize medals from the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the International Exhibition of 1862, respectively for his graduated glass instruments and research apparatus. Equally, he should be remembered for his contributions to the subject itself, including, for example, the concept of normality as well as many laboratory techniques. In addition to his texts and trade catalogues, he published papers in the 'Proceedings' of the Glasgow Philosophical Society and 'Chemical News'; he can also be traced in the 'Reports' of the British Association, of which he was a member. 


@@@@@


doc= 50607


Griffin, John Joseph (1802-1877), chemist, author, and business manager, the fourth and youngest son of Joseph Griffin (1752-1838), was born at Webb Square in Shoreditch, London, on 22 January 1802. The family later moved to Glasgow where the father sold books and chemicals. The eldest son, Richard Thomas Griffin (1790-1832), trained in the book trade under Thomas Tegg at Cheapside, London, for a five-year term, on 30 March 1820 joining him in equal partnership. From this time the business in Glasgow was styled Richard Griffin & Co., while the London business traded under Tegg & Co. By contrast, John Griffin received a chemical education under Andrew Ure at Anderson's Institution. His connection with the Glasgow Mechanics' Institution brought him under the influence of Thomas Clark who taught chemistry there. For some time in the 1820s he was employed on the staff of the 'Scots Times'. 
Griffin's enthusiasm for chemistry and his desire to help those students seeking an education in the subject was displayed in his various texts. Initially 'Chemical Recreations' was written to assist those attending the newly formed Glasgow Mechanics' Institution in their home-based practical studies. It ran into six editions between 1823 and 1826. Towards the same cause he added 'A Practical Treatise on the Use of the Blowpipe in Chemical and Mineral Analysis' in 1827. In 1829-30 he visited Paris and Heidelberg where he noted various works of potential value for consideration at home. Of these, he translated F. P. Danger's 'L'art du souffleur a la lampe' and H. Rose's 'Handbuch der analytischen Chemie' to launch, in 1831, a 'Polytechnic Library' series through a joint arrangement between Richard Griffin & Co. and the London-based publishing house of John Bumpus. 
In 1832 Griffin married Mary Ann, 'nee' Holder ('b'. 1802); they had twelve children. Also in that year, just before Richard's death, John became a co-partner to the family business. He then, effectively, ran the business alone until Charles Griffin (1819-1862), his deceased brother's son, completed his education at the Anderson's University. When Charles joined the business about 1842 the earlier arrangement with Tegg was terminated. In time, Charles became a freeman of the City of Glasgow and, by 1850, was president of the Stationers' Company of Glasgow. Meanwhile, John Griffin developed the business of trade in chemical apparatus and, by 1848, had transferred these interests to London. By 1852 he had relinquished his part in Richard Griffin & Co. in favour of his nephew. From the early 1860s the publishing side traded separately, first under the style Griffin, Bohn & Co. to 1862, and then as Charles Griffin & Co. 
Under John Griffin's direction the publishing side of the family business developed a scientific leaning, as shown by the 'Scientific Miscellany' series which appeared in the early 1840s and included 'A System of Crystallography' (1841) which Griffin wrote principally to demystify and promote an otherwise inaccessible mathematical subject. Another venture included a prestige contract to republish, in a much extended form, the original (1816-45) Smedley, Rose, and Rose 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana'. This appeared during 1848-9 in thirty volumes. Later involvement with other publishing houses came through the Cavendish Society, a group set up to perpetuate the name of the German chemist Leopold Gmelin (under whom Griffin had studied during his brief stay at Heidelberg) through the translation of the multivolume 'Handbuch der Chemie'. 
In parallel with these activities, John Griffin embarked on a project to supply apparatus to accompany the various texts. A trade catalogue dated November 1837 formally marks the start of this business, although a cartoon of the 'Billsticker' in the company's 'Book of Trades' (4th edn, 1837) suggests that he had already opened a chemical bazaar at the new premises in Buchanan Street to sell the portable chemical laboratories, prepared by Robert Best Ede of Dorking, to accompany the seventh edition of 'Chemical Recreations' (1834). The eighth edition (1838), however, explains that he had set up a 'chemico-commercial' project to see just how low prices for apparatus could be brought to develop a market need for cheap, robust, and reliable apparatus. With this new line established and developing he set out, in 1841, to Germany, Austria, and Bohemia, expressly to make contacts and to trade with suppliers in glass instruments and porcelain ware. By 1844 his catalogues showed apparatus sets for J. F. W. Johnston's 'Catechism of Agricultural Chemistry and Geology' (1844), a pioneering text in elementary school science, as well as for the 'Scientific Miscellany' series. 
Griffin's social and intellectual life in Glasgow is recorded through his attendance at the Glasgow Philosophical Society, which he joined in April 1834. There he mixed with other influential persons from Anderson's and Glasgow universities, including, respectively, the chemists Thomas Graham and Thomas Thomson. Later, through the 1840s, he held the position of librarian to the society, and it was through the medium of the society that he announced his views on the 'proximate constitution of chemical compounds'. These views were elaborated in a special 'Romance' contained in the seventh edition of 'Chemical Recreations' (1834) wherein, after describing the chaos of chemical nomenclature which then pervaded the literature, he denounced the views of the celebrated Jacob Berzelius before offering his own notions in substitution. 
The inconvenience of Glasgow as a centre for the distribution of apparatus and the development of professional chemistry in London through the Chemical Society, of which Griffin was a founder member, were among factors which eventually led to the business being transferred to London. (Likewise, his nephew moved the publishing side to London, although not until the late 1850s.) In 1848 he opened a chemical museum in Marylebone under his own name, where he traded in chemicals and chemical apparatus as well as books for Richard Griffin & Co. An expansion took place in 1850 when he added philosophical apparatus to his range following the take-over of a long-established London wholesaler, John Ward. Two further editions of 'Chemical Recreations' (1849 and 1854/1860) ensured a dominant market share in the rising educational trade. 
Although plagued by health problems, Griffin published 'The Radical Theory in Chemistry' (1858), an interesting work on nomenclature applied to organic chemistry, yet unanalysed, in which there are echoes of his earlier views on chemical notation. The final works to appear under his name, 'Chemical Testing of Wines and Spirits' (1866) and 'Centigrade Testing Applied to the Arts' (1872), may have been written with the assistance of his sons, Charles Griffin FSA (1838-1900) and William Griffin (1839-1883) who, from the early 1870s, had conducted the business under the style J. J. Griffin & Sons. John Griffin died on 9 June 1877 at his home, 31 Park Road, Haverstock Hill, London. 
By 1889, under the direction of William's son John Ross Griffin (1863-1921), the business was incorporated as a limited liability company. Family connections remained with the business until John Ross's death, although some shareholding had passed into the family of Thomas McKinnon Wood MP, a close relative of the Griffin family, who, from about 1908, was director and later chairman; from about 1919 to 1957 the business was in the hands of his three sons. Under the direction of this family various mergers took place: first with the Scottish firm of Baird and Tatlock Ltd in 1925 to become (in 1928) Griffin and Tatlock Ltd, and then with W. and J. George and Becker Ltd in 1954 to become Griffin and George Ltd. From 1957 Griffin and George Ltd, together with T. Gerrard & Co., formed the Education Group of Fisons Scientific Equipment Division. 
Throughout his life John Griffin was passionately concerned with the promotion of chemistry. With equal vigour, he felt it his duty to clarify the language of chemistry which then suffered from a clutter of systems in mineralogy, chemical nomenclature, and crystallography. His texts demonstrate a high quality of thought, prescriptive action, and fearless criticism of established ideas. Even if his own ideas remained mostly untouched by the academic establishment, he was, nevertheless, largely responsible for creating the means of study to a growing mass audience through ingenious and cheap forms of chemical apparatus. He received many accolades in later life, including two prize medals from the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the International Exhibition of 1862, respectively for his graduated glass instruments and research apparatus. Equally, he should be remembered for his contributions to the subject itself, including, for example, the concept of normality as well as many laboratory techniques. In addition to his texts and trade catalogues, he published papers in the 'Proceedings' of the Glasgow Philosophical Society and 'Chemical News'; he can also be traced in the 'Reports' of the British Association, of which he was a member. 


@@@@@


doc= 50608


Bacon, Anthony (bap. 1717, d. 1786), merchant and ironmaster, the son of William Bacon and his wife, Elizabeth Richardson, was baptized at St Bees, Cumberland, on 24 January 1717. His father and grandfather Thomas were ships' captains in the coal trade between Whitehaven and Ireland, though his father also made several trading voyages to the Chesapeake. His mother died in 1725, when he was eight, and his father a few years later, and the boy was taken to Talbot county on the eastern shore of Maryland, where he was raised by his maternal uncles, Thomas (died 1734) and Anthony (died 1741) Richardson, who were merchants there. Young Anthony was trained by them as a merchant and as a mariner. He apparently made a good impression for, on coming of age, he was in 1738 made master of the 'York', a vessel in the Maryland tobacco trade owned by John Hanbury, the leading London tobacco importer. 
After the death of his two uncles, Bacon found himself the guardian of his uncle Anthony's two young sons, Anthony and Thomas Richardson. He then moved to London, from where he operated as an itinerant merchant mariner during the period 'c'.1742-1747 and as a resident merchant thereafter. In the 1740s he traded primarily with Maryland, but in the 1750s added Virginia and the Spanish wine trade. During the Seven Years' War he entered government contracting in collaboration with John Biggin, a native of Whitehaven and a large London coal merchant (who had been a major navy victualling contractor in the 1740s). Bacon was recognized as a specialist in shipping, and he provided vessels and carrying services to the Royal Navy. He was a major transporter of victuals in the Quebec campaign of 1759. In the later stages of the war he also branched out into army contracts, undertaking to victual and pay the troops stationed on the African coast at Fort Louis, Senegal, and at Goree. This transaction was in part an extension of his trade with the Canaries, source of both wine and coin for his African contracts. 
His experiences in wartime contracting revealed new possibilities to Bacon. Although he continued to be active in North Carolina, he withdrew from the tobacco trade in 1764. Instead he sought to develop a strong presence -- both trading and contracting -- in Britain's new acquisitions in Africa (Senegambia) and the West Indies (the ceded islands -- St Vincent, Tobago, Dominica, and Grenada). His agents and vessels in each area could handle both contracts and trade. His contracting business included providing pay and provisions to the army and navy and leasing slave labourers to the army in the ceded islands for fortification construction. In his own business he gave particular attention to obtaining slaves for sale in America and gum seneca, much in demand in England for use in dyeing cloth. To help with these complex schemes, he acquired new partners: in 1756, Gilbert Francklyn, a young gentleman from Maidstone; and in 1761 his own cousin and ward, Anthony Richardson, whom he had brought from Maryland in 1742. 
This complex network of contracts required substantial advances from the crown. To attract the necessary ministerial understanding, Bacon obtained election to the House of Commons from 1764 to 1784 from the venal and costly borough of Aylesbury, previously represented by John Wilkes. In the house he played an important part in the passage of the 'Colonial Currency Act' of 1764, a measure restricting the ability of colonial legislatures to issue paper money. Though the Board of Trade had originally favoured such a bill, the ministry hung back; but Bacon introduced the bill on his own, and, after mollifying some of the opponents by agreeing to restrict its scope, procured its passage with the support of the two members of the Board of Trade in the house. Bacon was personally interested in the bill inasmuch as he had substantial sums owing him in America, particularly in North Carolina. In parliament he consistently supported both the government of the day and parliament's full authority 'vis-a-vis' the colonies. At the same time he advised ministers that it was inexpedient to tax the colonies, even though parliament had an undeniable right to do so. 
As the American crisis developed, Bacon publicized his expediency argument in three pamphlets: 'The true interest of Great Britain, with respect to her American colonies... by a merchant of London' (1766), 'Considerations on the Present State of the North American Colonies' (1769), and 'A short address to the government, the merchants, manufacturers and the colonists in America, and the sugar islands, on the present state of affairs, by a member of parliament' (1775), though the authorship of the first is not definite. Only twenty copies of the second were printed, as Bacon intended to restrict distribution to members of the government. 
By the 1770s Bacon found his numerous contracts more trouble than they were worth, and gradually gave up those for Africa and the Antilles. At the outbreak of the American War of Independence, however, he returned to victual contracting, primarily in the British Isles, and also became heavily involved in the manufacture of cannon. He owned a coal mine in Workington, near Whitehaven, and was connected to families interested in iron furnaces and foundries thereabouts. Such links led to his acquaintance with the Cumberland ironmasters Isaac Wilkinson and his son John. It was probably through Isaac Wilkinson, then residing in Bristol, that Bacon was introduced to the iron-making potential of south Wales. In 1765 he leased lands and mining rights at Cyfarthfa, Glamorgan, where he and a cousin by marriage, Dr William Brownrigg, of Whitehaven, Cumberland, built a coke-using ironworks. The next year Bacon purchased a share in the nearby Plymouth works from Isaac Wilkinson and John Guest, its founders, and in 1780 he purchased the balance of Plymouth plus the nearby Hirwaun works. At that point Bacon owned three of the four significant coke iron furnaces in the Merthyr Tudful area. His interest in these works was heightened by the American war and by his association with John Wilkinson, who in 1773 had developed a new technique for manufacturing cannon by boring. Bacon persuaded the Board of Ordnance of the superiority of the new method and obtained large orders for such cannon. These were at first manufactured by Wilkinson at Brosely, Shropshire, but, after Wilkinson's patent was declared void by the attorney-general, Bacon abandoned his support for Wilkinson and started to make the cannon on his own in Wales. He moved his principal residence from London to Cyfarthfa to supervise his nearby furnaces and cannon foundry. The shifting of his interests from African and West Indian commerce to south Wales iron making is an extremely clear (if not necessarily common) example of the migration of capital from slave-based commerce to domestic industry. 
Neither the date of marriage nor the precise identity of Bacon's wife, Elizabeth (died 1799), is known. Their only child, Anthony Richardson Bacon, was born in 1757 but died in 1770. While his wife remained at the Cyfarthfa residence, Bacon, as a member of parliament, spent much time in the capital, where he kept a mistress, Mary Bushby, during the years 'c'.1770 to 1786. At his death, in Cyfarthfa on 21 January 1786, Mary was left with their daughter, Elizabeth, and four sons, Anthony, Thomas, Robert, and William, of whom only the first two reached adulthood. Bacon was buried in London, at St Bartholomew by the Exchange. He made generous provision in his will for Mary Bushby and for the education of her children. He left his ironworks to his sons, but the two survivors, Anthony and Thomas, when they came of age, first leased and then sold their inherited undertakings and lived as rentiers. The Cyfarthfa works, which about 1807 were the largest ironworks in the world, were operated for over a century by the Crawshay family until absorbed into Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds in 1902. The Plymouth works were acquired by Richard Hill, an employee of Bacon who had married Mary Bushby's sister. His family controlled and managed the Plymouth Iron Company until the original works were closed about 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 50612


Kyshe, James William Norton- (1855-1920), colonial official and legal writer, was probably born in Mauritius, the second son of Henry Kyshe and Esther Norton. He once described himself as 'one of the Jewish race, closely connected to the Jews of the best birth and highest standing in England' (Wesley-Smith, 285), though the latter claim seems doubtful. First employed as a clerk in Mauritius, he was appointed deputy registrar of the supreme court of Penang in 1880. His call to the bar (Lincoln's Inn) in 1888 was followed by appointments as sheriff of Singapore (1892) and registrar of the supreme court of Hong Kong (1895). He left Hong Kong in 1904 on compulsory retirement, after many disputes with colleagues and an extraordinarily cantankerous episode involving the chief justice, William Meigh Goodman (1847-1928). He had been diagnosed as suffering from nervous debility in Hong Kong and his retirement was on medical grounds: Colonial Office officials doubted his 'mental equilibrium', and in 1916 a receiver was appointed to administer his estate under the 'Lunacy Acts'. 
Intensely ambitious, arrogant, provocative, disputatious, tactless, paranoid, and utterly vain, Norton-Kyshe was described by Hong Kong civil servants and Colonial Office officials as a 'damned liar' who 'fancies he is a man with a grievance', 'an impossible' and 'bumptious man' 'with an unwarrantably good opinion of himself', and 'a liar of the first water' who 'has ability' but 'no moral foundation'. Norton-Kyshe, however, considered himself 'one of the greatest writers, if not 'the' greatest, on legal matters in the Colonial Service -- not by any means a mere compiler' (Wesley-Smith, 279). 
Norton-Kyshe's claim to fame rests, indeed, on his writings. His four volumes of Straits Settlements law reports (with extensive historical preface) and his index to Straits Settlements laws ensure that his name will forever adorn the Singapore and Malaysian legal systems. He wrote a number of rather forgettable books on such subjects as colonial attorneys-general and the law and custom relating to gloves, but his principal work is probably the two-volume 'History of the Laws and Courts of Hong Kong' (1898). This tome, reprinted in 1971, is a major contribution to the colony's legal history. It is somewhat flawed, being perilously close to 'mere compilation' of anything remotely connected to Hong Kong legal affairs, but it repays both light reading and careful study. Ironically he blamed it for causing great jealousy and animosity against him among government officials, yet both the book and its author were still referred to in late twentieth-century Hong Kong when his detractors were long forgotten. 
Norton-Kyshe died of double pneumonia on 1 March 1920, at his home, 24 Victoria Road North, Southsea, Hampshire. He was married, with at least one son, though nothing further is known of his family; since his Mauritius pension was paid until 1936 it seems likely that his wife survived him until then. 


@@@@@


doc= 50613


Godred Crovan (d. 1095), king of Man and the Isles, who may be equated with the King Gorree, or Orry, of Manx tradition, was the founder of a dynasty that ruled there for nearly two centuries. His sobriquet, Crovan, may be Gaelic 'crobh-bhan' ('white-handed'), while the Meranach of Irish sources may come from 'mear' ('a finger'). Little is known of his origins. The Manx chronicle claims that he was 'filius Haraldi nigri de ysland', which presumably refers to Iceland, but the same source says of the Manx people that he 'had been reared among them for some time'. What little else is known of his background points to Ireland. The patronymic 'mac mic Arailt' found in one Irish annal perhaps means that he was a son or nephew of the Imar mac Arailt (died 1054) who was king of Dublin ('r'. 1038-46), and whose father (died 999) was a son of Olaf Sihtricson (Amlaib Cuaran) of Dublin (died 981). 
Godred is said to have fought at the battle of Stamford Bridge and to have fled from there to Man where he was honourably received by the reigning king. Some years later, perhaps about 1079, he assembled ships and an army of Islesmen, and made three separate expeditions to Man, on the last of which, having landed at Ramsey harbour, he defeated the Manx in battle, and divided the island in two, giving the southern part to his followers and the northern part to those Manxmen who survived the battle. He is first mentioned in an Irish source in 1091, when he appears as king of Dublin. The Manx chronicle claims that he subdued Dublin and a great part of Leinster, presumably a reference to the hinterland of the Hiberno-Scandinavian town, known as Fine Gall, to which its rulers laid claim. He also retained control of the Isles and is said to have 'so tamed the Scots that no one who built a ship or boat dared use more than three iron bolts' ('Cronica regum Mannie et Insularum', fol. 33'r'). The medieval biography of the prince of Gwynedd, Gruffudd ap Cynan (died 1137), states that when the latter fled to Ireland, about 1094, and sought advice as to how best to combat the Norman advance into Wales, he was sent to Godred in the Isles, who supplied him with a fleet of sixty ships. When the king of Munster, Muirchertach O Briain, sought to re-establish authority over Dublin in 1094, Godred was able to count on the support of many of the kings from the northern half of Ireland, and, with the help of his own fleet of ninety ships, they routed O Briain and his allies, though when the latter dispersed, the Munstermen returned and banished Godred from Dublin. The Irish annals, calling him 'king of Dublin and of the Isles', report that Godred was among those who perished in an outbreak of plague in 1095, the Manx chronicle noting that he died in Islay. He left three sons, Lagman, Harald, and Olaf ['see below']. Lagman mutilated Harald and reigned for a short period before abdicating, and, after a brief period of direct Irish and Norwegian intervention, Olaf eventually succeeded. 


Olaf's son 


@@@@@


doc= 50614


Olaf (d. 1153), king of Man and the Isles, spent at least part of his youth at the court of Henry I of England, and is said to have ruled for forty years, having 'all the kings of Ireland and Scotland as confederates in such a way that no one dared disturb the kingdom of the Isles during his lifetime' ('Cronica regum Mannie et Insularum', fol. 35'r'). He founded Rushen Abbey as a daughter house of Furness in Lancashire in 1134, giving the monks of Furness the right of election to the bishopric of the Isles. He married Ingebjorg, daughter of Hakon Paulsson, earl of Orkney, and also Affreca, daughter of Fergus of Galloway, and with the latter, probably, he had his son Godred ['see below'], though it is said that with concubines he had other sons and many daughters, one of whom married Somerled of Argyll. In 1153 the three sons of his brother Harald, who had been brought up in Dublin, invaded Man demanding half the kingdom for themselves, assassinated Olaf on 29 June, and then launched an unsuccessful invasion of Galloway. 


@@@@@


doc= 50615


Godred (d. 1187) then returned, having done homage to the king of Norway, was acclaimed as king of Man and the Isles, and ruled the kingdom until his death. He faced opposition from Somerled, to whom, after defeat in battle in 1156, he was forced to cede part of the kingdom, including the Mull-Islay group of islands, retaining control only over Man and the northern Hebrides. The threat from Somerled may have forced Godred into a closer bond with Henry II since on several occasions from 1156 onwards English records reveal the expenditure of small sums on his maintenance, though Godred also maintained close links with Norway, on the journey to which he passed through England in 1158; he was in Scotland in 1159, and apparently only returned to Man from Norway in 1164 (perhaps because of Somerled's death that same year), when he had to capture and mutilate his half-brother Ragnvald before regaining control. His acceptance of the suzerainty of Norway presumably accounts for the fact that by a papal decree of 1154 the diocese of Sodor and Man was subjected to the metropolitan jurisdiction of the archdiocese of Trondheim. He married Fingola, granddaughter of Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn, king of Ireland, a marriage formalized by the papal legate, Cardinal Vivian, in the winter of 1176-7, and gained control of Dublin for a brief period some time before its seizure by Anglo-Normans in 1170. He assisted the Dubliners and their Irish allies in an unsuccessful attempt to dislodge the Anglo-Normans, though some years later he formed an alliance with the Anglo-Norman conqueror of Ulster, John de Courcy, who married his daughter Affreca ['see 'Courcy, Affreca de, 'under' Courcy, John de]. Godred granted the monks of Holmcultram in Cumberland right of entry to Man and exemption from tolls and customs, and also gave land near Douglas to the priory of St Bees in Copeland. He died on 10 November 1187 on St Patrick's Isle, Peel, and was buried on Iona in the following summer. 


@@@@@


doc= 50616


Courcy, John de (d. 1219?), conqueror of Ulster, styled by contemporaries prince of Ulster, is of uncertain parentage. He was without doubt a member of the well-known family who took their name from Courcy-sur-Dives in Calvados and who were lords of Stoke Courcy (Stogursey) in Somerset, since they were patrons of St Andrew's Benedictine priory there, and John himself founded the priory of St Andrew in Ards, Down (Black Abbey), as a dependent house of Stoke Courcy. William de Courcy (died 1171), lord of Stoke Courcy in the mid-twelfth century, had a brother Jordan, and one of his charters was witnessed by both Jordan and John de Courcy, the latter possibly the conqueror of Ulster, since he too had a brother Jordan. This would make John a son of William de Courcy ('fl'. 'c'.1125), who married Avice de Rumilly, daughter of William Meschin, lord of Copeland in Cumberland, and hence explain John's succession to part of William's estate at Middleton Cheney in Northamptonshire, though its small extent suggests his illegitimacy. 
A contemporary description of Courcy is provided by Gerald of Wales, who says: 'John was fair-haired and tall, with bony and sinewy limbs. His frame was lanky and he had a very strong physique, immense bodily strength, and an extraordinarily bold temperament'. Although brave, he was impetuous, 'and had about him the air of an ordinary soldier rather than that of a leader, yet away from the battlefield he was modest and restrained, and gave the church of Christ that honour which is its due' ('Expugnatio', 179-81). Nothing is known of Courcy's early life but the fact that most of those whom he established in Ulster appear to have come from Cumbria and its hinterland suggests that it was spent in this region. According to the 'Song of Dermot and the Earl', a 'chanson de geste' on the English invasion of Ireland, Henry II while in Ireland in 1171-2 granted Ulster to Courcy 'if by force he could conquer it' ('Song of Dermot and the Earl', ed. G. H. Orpen, 1892, 199), though there is no evidence for his presence there until the latter half of 1176 when he arrived with William fitz Aldelin, the king's representative. Courcy brought a retinue of ten knights who formed part of the Dublin garrison but, according to Gerald, he grew impatient with William's lack of initiative, and gathered together 22 knights and about 300 others and, in late January 1177, marched out of Dublin to invade Ulaid (which approximates to the modern counties of Down and Antrim); Roger Howden adds that this was done contrary to William fitz Aldelin's prohibition. 
On the morning of the fourth day, about 1 February, Courcy arrived at Down (now Downpatrick), and most accounts agree that he was initially successful, forcing Ruaidri Mac Duinn Sleibe, the king of Ulaid, to flee, taking booty from the surrounding countryside, and digging himself in in Downpatrick by building a castle and 'a dyke from sea to sea' ('Mac Carthaigh's Book', 65), though the usually reliable annals of Tigernach report an early victory by the Ulaid, with many of Courcy's followers being slain and he himself captured. However, he soon recovered his position and Gerald notes a second battle at Downpatrick on 24 June, probably that described in 'Mac Carthaigh's Book' in which Courcy's men slaughtered the Ulaid and their allies and captured the archbishop of Armagh and precious relics. 
At Downpatrick, Courcy encountered the papal legate for Ireland, Scotland, and the isles, Cardinal Vivian of St Stephen in Monte Celio, who, according to Gerald, sought to intervene between Courcy and Mac Duinn Sleibe by having the latter agree to the payment of an annual tribute, if Courcy and his men consented to leave. He failed in his mediation, however, and, according to William of Newburgh, the legate then encouraged the Irish to fight to preserve their freedom. Vivian had come to Downpatrick from the Isle of Man, where he had solemnized the marriage of King Godred ['see under 'Godred Crovan] to a daughter of Mac Lochlainn, king of Cenel nEogain, and Courcy himself married Godred's daughter, Affreca [Affreca de Courcy (d. in or after 1219)] (in 1180 according to the unreliable Dublin annals of Inisfallen). A dower charter survives granting Affreca her portion of Courcy's estates in Ulster and Northamptonshire, but two of his charters offer prayers for Beatrice de Vilers (a lady of the same name was heir to Warrington in Lancashire), who may have been a mistress. 
In his second year in Ulster, Courcy experienced a number of rebuffs, one at the hands of the men of Fir Li (a Gaelic lordship bordering the lower Bann), a defeat attributed by the Irish annals to the intervention of saints Patrick, Columba, and Brendan. Also, having raided in north Louth, he was pursued by its king, Murchad O Cerbhaill, and by Cu Uladh Mac Duinn Sleibe, and the annals record that 450 English and 100 Irish were killed. This is possibly the battle of Newry Bridge ('apud pontem Ivori') which Gerald of Wales describes as following Courcy's return from England (179), a visit not elsewhere recorded, though he was certainly in England again in 1185-6. 
In 1179 Courcy granted the monastic site at Nendrum, Down, to the monks of St Bees in Copeland so that they might establish a cell there, while the Cistercian abbey at Inch, Down, on the early church site of Inis Cumhscraidh, was made a daughter house of Furness in Lancashire. In 1183 he granted ten carucates to St Werburgh's Abbey, Chester, who sent some of their community to establish a priory in the cathedral church of Downpatrick, while a priory of Augustinian canons was set up at Toberglory near Downpatrick, as a cell of St Mary's, Carlisle, and a house of Premonstratensian canons at Carrickfergus was made subject to the abbot of Dryburgh in Berwickshire, possibly pointing towards a connection with its founders, the Morville family. The most famous religious foundation dating from this era is his wife's foundation of the Cistercian Grey Abbey (Jugum Dei), Down, in 1193, a daughter house of Holme Cultram in Cumberland (the William de Courcy who was abbot of Holme in 1216 was presumably a relative). John de Courcy also founded a priory of Crutched friars at Downpatrick, the parent house of which is unknown, and he granted lands in Down to the archbishop of Dublin, St Thomas's Abbey, and the priory of Holy Trinity, Dublin. 
Although there is no evidence that Courcy himself was responsible for changing the town's name to Downpatrick, he did alter the dedication of Down Cathedral from the Holy Trinity to St Patrick, an act for which (according to the romanticized account of his exploits in the 'Book of Howth') God later took vengeance by denying him his Ulster lordship. The life of St Patrick by Jocelin of Furness was written at his behest and was intended in part to prove the primacy of Armagh over Dublin. When John minted his own halfpence they bore, not the king's name, but 'Patricius', while it is possible, as peerage writers claim, that Patrick de Courcy, lord of Kinsale in the early thirteenth century, was his illegitimate son. 
In 1185 Courcy discovered at Downpatrick, and formally translated, what he claimed were the bodies of saints Patrick, Brigit, and Columba, an event reported by Gerald of Wales and the Scottish chronicle of Melrose. Gerald believed that Courcy's conquest of Ulster was the realization of a prophecy of Columba and claimed that 'John himself keeps this book of prophecies, which is written in Irish, by him as a kind of mirror of his own deeds'. Gerald also, in concluding his account, stated that he was leaving 'the theme of his mighty exploits to be unfolded more fully by his own historians' ('Expugnatio', 177, 181), while the 'Book of Howth' mentions that a Latin biography of Courcy was in circulation in Ulster in the sixteenth century. 
Though the archaeological evidence for the progress of John de Courcy's conquest is considerable, the documentary record is remarkably thin. The archbishop of Armagh, the bishops of Down and Connor, and the heads of the churches of Bangor and Saul, occur in Courcy charters, suggesting that he quickly gained clerical support, but it is clear too that he won the allegiance of some local secular lords. Roger Howden thought that there were Irish in his army when he launched his first assault on Downpatrick, and 'Mac Carthaigh's Book' reports for 1179 that Ulaid was laid waste 'by John de Courcy and the Irish who were along with him' (69), and that in 1196 he plundered Louth in the company of Niall Mac Mathgamna of Airgialla. In the following year Courcy's brother Jordan was killed by an Irish adherent, and when he then set about expanding his lordship to the north-west his army contained some Irish and a contingent of Gallowaymen whose lord, Duncan of Carrick, was rewarded with a grant of Ulster lands. 
Gerald states that when Henry II's son John visited the country as lord of Ireland in 1185 he 'decided to prove the worth of men who were veterans and had long experience in the conquest of that island, and entrusted the overall administration to John de Courcy', whereupon 'the kingdom immediately began to enjoy a greater measure of tranquility', adding that he then led expeditions to Cork and Connacht ('Expugnatio', 243). No evidence exists for the former, but his less than successful intervention in Connacht in 1188 in the succession war among the Ui Chonchobair is noted in the annals. Charter evidence suggests that Courcy held on to the justiciarship for some time, perhaps until 1192, when Peter Pipard had the position. When the Lord John rebelled against King Richard in 1193-4, Courcy remained loyal, and he and Walter de Lacy, lord of Meath, are found acting as Richard's representatives in Ireland in 1194-5 in opposition to Pipard, who was taken prisoner by them. In the same year the annals record that Courcy and Lacy sought 'to assume power over the English of Leinster and Munster' and intervened again in Connacht, in opposition to William de Burgh, where they made peace with Cathal Crobderg O Conchobhair ('Annals of Loch Ce', 1.191). When Cathal was ejected from Connacht in 1200 he sought refuge with Courcy in Ulster, and in the following year Courcy and Lacy's brother Hugh invaded Connacht in support of Cathal but were defeated, and sixty or more of Courcy's men slain. He himself, according to the annals of Loch Ce, was 'struck with a stone, so that he fell from his horse... and he was taken to Dublin until he gave pledges for himself that he would obey the king of the Saxons' (ibid., 1.201-3). 
At this point Courcy and the Lacys seem to have parted company and thereafter appear as firm enemies. Roger Howden claims that Hugh de Lacy treacherously captured him in 1201 but that Courcy's men secured his release. In 1203 and again in 1204 Lacy and the English of Meath defeated Courcy in battle at Downpatrick; on the first occasion he fled, on the second he was captured and, say the annals of Loch Ce, released only when he undertook to take the cross and go to Jerusalem. Government records indicate that Courcy agreed to submit to the crown and gave hostages as a pledge, but in spite of several earlier safe conducts it was only in the spring of 1205 that he went to England and had his English lands restored. However, Hugh de Lacy also went to court and was awarded the whole of Ulster on 2 May and the title of earl, which Courcy never held, on 29 May. Courcy rebelled, again forfeited his English lands, and went to the Isle of Man. There his wife's brother, King Ragnvald, supplied him with a fleet of 100 ships and they launched an invasion of Ulster but failed to capture the castle of 'Rath' (probably Dundrum) from Walter de Lacy, whereupon Courcy took refuge in Tir Eoghain with Aed O Neill. Finally, on 14 November 1207, he received a licence to go to England and, although the Dublin chronicler has a lengthy and unlikely account of his movements at this point (including, though, a more likely stay with the monks of Chester), nothing further is heard of him until the summer of 1210 when he took part in King John's overthrow of Hugh de Lacy, the latter, like his ally William (III) de Briouze, having fallen foul of the king. 
John de Courcy was never restored to his Ulster estate and seems to have lived out his days as a royal pensioner. On 30 August 1213 the Irish justiciar was ordered to provide some land by which to sustain his wife, Affreca, and on 22 September 1219 a similar order was made to provide her with her dower, from which it may be concluded that Courcy had only recently died. According to the Manx chronicle, Affreca was buried in Grey Abbey, Down, while Courcy, who had probably died in England, had expressed a wish to be buried in the Augustinian house of Canons Ashby in Northamptonshire. No legitimate children are recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 50617


Ragnvald (d. 1229), king of Man and the Isles, was the oldest but illegitimate son of Godred, son of Olaf ['see under 'Godred Crovan]. Although his father had wished to be succeeded by his legitimate son Olaf, in 1187 the Manxmen brought Ragnvald from the Western Isles to be their king, 'since he was a sturdy man and of maturer years' ('Cronica regum Mannie et Insularum', fol. 40'v'). He is said to have founded St Mary's Priory of Cistercian nuns at Douglas (Cowan and Easson, 238). The Irish author of a Gaelic poem in his honour describes him as the son of Sadb, possibly an Irishwoman, makes some exaggerated statements of his claim to the high-kingship of Ireland, and seeks patronage when Ragnvald establishes a footing in Dublin. His unnamed daughter married Rhodri ab Owain Gwynedd, who in 1193 subdued Anglesey with Ragnvald's help; after Rhodri's death Ragnvald sought unsuccessfully to secure her marriage to Rhodri's nephew, Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. It was perhaps in 1198 that William the Lion, king of Scots, granted him the earldom of Caithness for an annual rent, which Ragnvald, described in one source as 'the greatest warrior in the western lands', subdued with an army drawn from the Hebrides, Kintyre, and Ireland ('Flateyjarbok', 2.515-17). 
In 1204, when John de Courcy, married to Ragnvald's sister, Affreca, was forced from power in Ulster by Hugh de Lacy, he took refuge with Ragnvald in Man, but together they failed in an attempt to recover Ulster in the following year. In February 1205 Ragnvald was given letters of protection by King John, and was in England later that year when he was granted lands in Lancashire 'for his homage and service' (Oliver, 2.27). About 1208 Ragnvald captured his brother Olaf, who had ruled Lewis under him, and handed him over to William the Lion, in whose prison he remained until the latter's death in 1214. Ragnvald subsequently prevailed on Olaf to marry 'the daughter of a certain nobleman of Kintyre, the sister of his own wife' ('Cronica regum Mannie et Insularum', fol. 42'r'). Following a Norse attack on the Isles in 1209-10 Ragnvald and his son Godred went to Norway, swore fealty to King Inge, and paid tribute. In 1210, when King John was in Ireland in pursuit of Hugh de Lacy and the family of William (III) de Briouze, they gained temporary refuge in the Isle of Man, and John responded by sending a fleet to ravage the island in Ragnvald's absence. Two years later Ragnvald became King John's liegeman and was granted a knight's fee at Carlingford in Ireland, and an annual allowance of wheat, while the king's officials in Ireland were ordered to assist in destroying Ragnvald's enemies. In 1214 the mariners of Ireland were prohibited from entering the lands of Ragnvald. On several occasions in 1218 letters of safe conduct were granted to him to come to the English court 'to amend the excesses of his men done both in England and Ireland on the king's subjects' ('Calendar... Ireland', 1.828), and by September of the following year he is recorded as having done homage to Henry III. At the same time, however, Ragnvald declared that he held the Isle of Man, his by hereditary right, as a fief of the papal see, an offer that resulted, in 1223, in Honorius III taking Ragnvald and his realm under papal protection, in return for an annual payment of 12 marks. Ragnvald reported to Henry III in November 1220 that the king of Norway 'lays snares for him and threatens his land with evil' ('Calendar... Ireland', 1.976), whereupon the justiciar of Ireland was ordered to defend the kingdom of the Isles from Norse attack. 
In the summer of 1224 Ragnvald's brother Olaf landed his fleet at Ronaldsway and forced Ragnvald to divide the kingdom between them, Ragnvald retaining Man, some of the Isles, and the title of king, Olaf being granted the rest. In the following year Ragnvald was joined by Alan of Galloway in an attempt to recover the entire kingdom which failed because the Manxmen were unwilling to oppose Olaf. Shortly afterwards Ragnvald gave his daughter in marriage to Alan's illegitimate son Thomas, and thereby so angered the inhabitants of Man that in 1226 they sent for Olaf and made him their king. In April 1228 Henry III issued a safe conduct for Olaf to come to him to make peace with Ragnvald, but in the same year, when Olaf was absent in the Isles, Ragnvald plundered Man in the company of Alan of Galloway, so that 'the southern part of Man was practically reduced to a desert' ('Cronica regum Mannie et Insularum', fol. 43'v'). Olaf arrived, put them to flight, and regained the kingship, but in the following winter Ragnvald unexpectedly returned from Galloway, and won the allegiance of the men of the south of the island, while Olaf retained the support of those of the north. On 14 February 1229 the brothers did battle at Tynwald, during the course of which Ragnvald was assassinated. His body was brought by the monks of Rushen to St Mary's Abbey, Furness, and buried in the place he had chosen while living. He left at least one son, Godred Dond (Godred the Brown-haired) who, though mutilated by Olaf's men in 1223, briefly succeeded him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50618


Russell, William (d. 1374), abbot of Rushen and bishop of Sodor and Man, was a native Manxman. Russell was for about eighteen years abbot of the Cistercian foundation Rushen Abbey, the premier religious house on the Isle of Man. In 1348 he was elected bishop of Sodor and Man by the clergy of Man in St German's Cathedral, Peel. He cemented his position by gaining papal provision to the diocese of Sodor and Man, and was consecrated at Avignon by Bertrand, cardinal-bishop of Ostia by 6 May 1349. 
The writer of the episcopal list, which is appended to the chronicle of the kings of Sodor and Man and the Isles, states, mistakenly, that Russell was consecrated by Pope Clement VI in person and claims, again mistakenly, that all his predecessors had been confirmed and consecrated by the archbishop of Nidaros, Norway (the metropolitan). 
Unfortunately, it is impossible to evaluate the power of the Norwegian metropolitan over the diocese of Sodor and Man, because the Norwegian records have been lost. It is notable, however, that although the papal camera informed Arno, archbishop of Nidaros, of the appointment of Russell as bishop of Sodor and Man, Pope Clement VI granted Russell exemption from undertaking the perilous sea voyage to pay obedience to his metropolitan in person. 
The diocese of Sodor and Man had suffered badly during the Anglo-Scottish wars. In 1349 Pope Clement VI allowed Russell to encumber himself and the Sodor church with a mortgage of 1200 gold florins, to claim and receive the majority of the goods and debts of his predecessor, Bishop Thomas, and promised a charitable subsidy in support of his diocese. Despite these favours, Russell was late in paying his common and petty services to the apostolic chamber. In 1363 he complained to Pope Urban V that his cathedral church and its precincts had been occupied as a fortress, that the bishops had greatly suffered, and that divine services had ceased. As in 1349, he received papal dispensation to consecrate eight illiterate persons to benefices, because so few literate persons were to be found on account of the wars. 
At its fullest extent, the diocese of Sodor and Man included the Outer Hebrides, the Inner Hebrides (excluding Lismore, Kerrera, Seil, Luing, and the Cumbraes), and the Isle of Man. The scant evidence for Russell's episcopate relates mainly to his activities in Man, emphasizing the rift between the Hebrides and Man, which culminated in the division of the diocese between two bishops in 1387. 
The synodal statutes attributed to Russell in three inter-related manuscripts of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries are described as being made on 23 February 1351 by Russell and all the clergy of Man, but no mention is made of the Hebrides. The six chapters relate to keeping order in the parishes and churches, and to the duty of the clergy to expound the Catholic faith to the laity. The statutes stipulate that the laity should be persuaded to learn the apostolic creed in their mother tongue which, in the mid-fourteenth century, was probably Manx Gaelic. 
William Russell died on 21 April 1374 at Ramshead in Lancashire and was buried at the monastery of Furness, the mother house of Rushen Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 50619


Dongan, John (d. in or after 1413), bishop of Down, was appointed archdeacon of Down in 1368 by Pope Urban V, and worked as papal nuncio and collector in Ireland. On 31 May or 1 June 1374, he was elected bishop of the diocese of Sodor and Man by the clergy of Man in St German's Cathedral, Peel. He received papal provision to the diocese from Pope Gregory XI, and was consecrated at Avignon by Simon Langham, cardinal-bishop of Palestrina, on 25 or 26 November 1374. 
Dongan was imprisoned at Boulogne on his return from Avignon and only released on payment of a ransom of 500 marks. This delayed his installation at St German's Cathedral, Peel, until 25 January 1377, when he is said to have held his first pontifical mass and received many great offerings. He held a general chapter in February of the same year, when he inquired into the right of Whithorn Priory to hold land and churches in Man. In 1374 Dongan was also appointed papal nuncio and collector in his city and diocese and he may, therefore, have conducted an inquiry into the pattern of landholding in his diocese at this general chapter in 1377. 
In 1380 Urban VI commissioned an inquiry into the allegation that John Dongan and William, bishop of Emly, apostolic nuncios and collectors in Ireland, had not handed over large sums which they had collected, thereby defrauding the apostolic chamber. 
Nevertheless, Dongan must have regained Urban's trust; in the bull of 15 July 1387, the antipope, Clement VII, gives Dongan's adherence to Urban VI as the reason Dongan was removed from the diocese. In his place, Clement VII appointed Michael, formerly archbishop of Cashel, as bishop of Sodor. This appointment appears to mark the final rift between the Hebrides and the Isle of Man within the diocese of Sodor and Man, the Hebrides following a Scottish antipapal course, and the Isle of Man, a Manx, papal one. 
After 1387 Dongan continued to be recognized as bishop of the Manx part of the diocese of Sodor and Man while Michael was recognized in the Scottish part. Dongan appears to have worked for the bishop of Salisbury in 1390, and to have ordained in London in 1391 and 1392. He also appears to have been provided to the bishopric of Derry on 11 July 1391 and, from Derry, translated to the bishopric of Down on 16 September 1394, doing homage to the pope and receiving his temporalities on 26 July 1395. 
In his later years, Dongan was active in negotiations between England and the lords of the Isles. In June 1405 he was appointed keeper of the liberty of Ulster, and authorized to deal with Gaelic Irish and Scottish enemies. In September 1407 Dongan and Janico Dartas, admiral of Ireland, were appointed to negotiate a final peace with Donald, lord of the Isles. Negotiations were still continuing in May 1408, but the grant of a royal licence in 1410 for the marriages between the son and daughter of Janico Dartas and the daughter and son of John of the Isles suggests that Dartas and Dongan may have been successful in creating a certain degree of peace. 
John Dongan is said to have resigned from the bishopric of Down on 28 July 1413, and is presumed to have died soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 50624


Cleary, Thomas Stanislaus (1851-1898), journalist, was born in Dublin. The details of his early life are not known, but in 1878 he became editor of the 'Clare Independent', a paper published in Ennis, co. Clare, which claimed the support of the Roman Catholic church and advocated nationalist politics. Cleary was active in the 'land war', and in 1879 clashed with members of the Catholic clergy who had challenged his claim to local leadership. Dublin Castle believed that he was the paid secretary of the Clare Land League, and that, by the general tone of his paper and his speeches, he excited people to commit acts of violence. Despite this, his obituary in the 'Clare Journal' claimed that Cleary had friends 'among those whose political views were utterly opposed to his'. 
The 'Weekly Nation' considered Cleary to be an accomplished journalist and ballad writer who was a 'veritable encyclopaedia' of knowledge (9 July 1898). He wrote a pamphlet addressed to the Clare Tenants' Defence Association and a large number of poems on nationalist themes. His 'Songs of the Land War' (1888) was dedicated to William O'Brien. Many of his poems were printed as leaflets: his 'The Lament of Luggacurran', first published in 'United Ireland' and reprinted as a leaflet by Irish Canadians, was thrown into Lord Lansdowne's carriage on his visit to Ottawa in April 1887. Cleary also wrote 'Twitterings at Twilight' (1883), which contains a number of rather poor poems in the style of Percy French. He contributed to the 'Weekly Nation' and 'United Ireland', and also wrote for the Irish-American 'Boston Pilot', edited by Patrick Ford. In 1882 he published 'Shin-Fain, or, Ourselves Alone, a Drama of the Exhibition', the title containing a very early use of the words 'Shin-Fain' (later Sinn Fein). Cleary had two sons, but his private life is otherwise obscure. He died in Killaloe, co. Clare, on 1 July 1898, and was buried in Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin, on 3 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 50629


Baker, William Garrard (bap. 1815, d. 1902), manufacturing chemist, baptized at Chelmsford, Essex, was the eldest of five sons (there were also two daughters) of William Baker, a chemist and druggist in Chelmsford. Baker's early life and education remain obscure and it seems likely that he was educated locally before being, as he himself recalled, apprenticed to his father. When he was qualified, he went to London, occupying himself in managing 'a business in London for my father, waiting for something to turn up' ('Chemist and Druggist', 30 Jan 1897). 
In 1839 the opportunity for which Baker had been waiting appeared, when Thomas Grimwade retired from the chemical manufacturing business he and John May (1809-1893) (together with Joseph Pickett who had died in 1835) had established in Battersea. May needed a new partner and he and Baker quickly came to terms, signing a partnership agreement in 1840. Since 1834 the factory had been on rented land but in 1841 the partners were able to buy the piece of land known as Garden Wharf, thereby securing for themselves a more permanent position in Battersea, then very much an industrial area. In the event the business stayed there until 1934, well after the time of both May and Baker. On 24 April 1851 Baker married, at Battersea parish church, Elizabeth Ann (1822/3-1863), daughter of Charles Wix, deceased, of Battersea. They had at least four daughters and two sons. 
For the first two or three decades Baker took charge of the manufacturing, and the prize medals awarded to May and Baker's products -- acids and metallic salts -- at the Great Exhibition of 1851 and the Paris Exhibition of 1855 suggest that he was skilled and able at doing so. May took responsibility for the marketing of their products and both men became members of the Pharmaceutical Society, formed in 1841 to protect the interests of chemists and druggists. In the 1860s the partners took on a young man, Thomas Tyrer, as an apprentice and he stayed with the firm after he completed his apprenticeship, gradually taking over more responsibility for the manufacturing side of the business. 
In 1876 John May retired, selling his interest (two-thirds as opposed to Baker's one-third) in the firm to Richard Heath, a solicitor in Warwick, who was eager to invest in a chemical business which would provide employment for one of his two stepsons, William Blenkinsop. Although Baker was, by virtue of his age and experience, the senior partner in the new partnership with Heath, it was Tyrer, now admitted as a junior partner, who supervised the training of Blenkinsop and who, to all intents and purposes, as the surviving correspondence makes clear, was running the business. In the 1870s Baker's health was poor, with rheumatic gout and neuralgia troubling him, and he was a widower, but he refused to leave the business. Both Tyrer and Blenkinsop expressed their doubts as to his ability to make any contribution to the firm, Tyrer suggesting that he came into the office only to criticize and that his tendency had been always to wait, like Mr Micawber, for something to turn up. In 1883 Blenkinsop told his stepfather that Baker, now in his late sixties, did little except 'appear on 'Change' for the firm; the purchase of raw materials, particularly expensive ones such as quicksilver (used to make the mercurial compounds which were then the only remedy for venereal disease) was a delicate business -- one which according to Blenkinsop, Baker did not handle particularly well. 
In 1890 Heath proposed to end the partnership and incorporate the business, suggesting that both Baker and Tyrer should retire. Lengthy and by no means amicable negotiations followed resulting in the incorporation of May and Baker Ltd and the departure of Tyrer. However, despite his age, Baker refused to go and was made a director of the new company; also a director from 1891 until his death in 1893 was John May, a recognition that the names of the two men who had built up the company carried considerable weight in the industry. 
It was not until 1897, at the age of eighty-two, that Baker finally retired and went to live in Brighton. From there he still travelled up to Battersea for board meetings, a journey attended with considerable ceremony. He travelled with his invalid chair on the train from Brighton to Clapham Junction; there two May and Baker employees met him and lifted him into a brougham for the short journey to Battersea where he was carried into the office at Garden Wharf. His refusal to sever his connection with the business seems to have been driven as much by a need for remuneration -- Tyrer suggested that Baker had an expensive family and was himself a spendthrift -- as by his fondness for the company he had helped to create. 
Baker died at his home, 9 Compton Avenue, Brighton, on 16 May 1902. May and Baker passed first into the hands of the Blenkinsop family and then, in the 1920s, into the ownership of the French chemical company Rhone-Poulenc. Its discovery and development of the sulphonamide drug M & B 693 in the late 1930s gave the company a considerable place in the history of the pharmaceutical industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 50636


Briggs, William (1839-1919), chemical manufacturer, was born at East Retford, Nottinghamshire, on 25 March 1839, the eldest son of William Briggs, stage-coach proprietor, and his wife, Jemima, 'nee' Bennett. He attended the King Edward VI Grammar School in Retford, then, aged fifteen, went to Chesterfield to work for a telegraph company. He was transferred to Edinburgh in 1858, but a year later left the telegraph service and moved to Greenock to become an apprentice in a chemical works, probably that of John Poynter & Sons, which had a reputation for generating the strong smells that wafted over the town. Leaving Greenock in 1860, he joined the British Asphalte Company in Glasgow, then the most important centre of the chemical industry in Scotland. He rose to become assistant manager at the company's Port Dundas works and in his spare time attended chemistry classes at Anderson's College. Having acquired a modest amount of capital, and with the assurance of further financial backing from his future brother-in-law, Archibald Smith, Briggs moved to Arbroath in 1865 to open a coal-tar distillation plant and asphalt works. Briggs married Jane Smith on 13 September 1866; they had three sons, William, James, and Archibald. 
Arbroath was already a prosperous centre for the manufacture of linen textiles and sailcloth. Timber, pitch, and tar from the Baltic and North America, some of which was used in the local shipbuilding industry, were unloaded in its harbour. Although there was no coal in the immediate vicinity, it could readily be transported by sea from the Fife or Lothian coalfields. Moreover, Briggs contracted the local gas company to supply its waste tar, from which a wide range of products could be derived. Briggs's products were mainly used in the construction industry. He also imported, from Germany, France, and Italy, mastic rock asphalt to be laid on foundations, floors, and roofs, including those of farm buildings. Although Briggs displayed considerable energy and enterprise, the firm chiefly benefited from the Victorian building boom, notably the rapid expansion of the city of Dundee, where factory and housing construction proceeded apace during the second half of the nineteenth century. From modest beginnings the firm diversified its product range and grew to be one of the most important of its kind in the east of Scotland. 
Briggs expanded the firm beyond Arbroath and in 1890 shifted its centre of operations to Dundee, opening subsidiary works at Kirkcaldy and at Ladybank in Fife. In addition to its trade in coal-tar products, the firm also manufactured and applied bituminous anti-corrosive compounds to iron and steel structures, especially in the shipbuilding industry; here again, given the rapid expansion of steel shipbuilding on the Clyde and elsewhere, Briggs was well placed to exploit the market for his specialized products. He also took a keen interest in the manufacture and use of concrete, on which he published a study in 1891. In 1900 the firm became a limited company with Briggs as managing director. 
Briggs clearly had great skill and energy and built up a very successful enterprise in the chemical and related industries. Apart from his business interests, he was an enthusiastic amateur scientist, was actively involved in Liberal politics, and was a member of churches in Greenock, Glasgow, Arbroath, Dundee, and Pitlochry, where he served for over forty years as a sabbath school superintendent. His teaching services for the church were recognized by his appointment as a director of the Scottish National Sabbath School Union. Briggs retired in 1907 to Pitlochry, where he built a handsome villa, Torrdarach, and spent his time in church and philanthropic work. He died there on 9 May 1919, and was buried on the 12th in Arbroath. His wife had predeceased him. His estate was valued at $14,451, a sum which suggests that the bulk of his assets had earlier been transferred to other members of his family. 
The company expanded rapidly under the management of his sons, and in particular William Briggs (1869-1961) and 


@@@@@


doc= 50637


James Alexander Briggs (1871-1961), who was born at Arbroath on 18 July 1871 and educated at Arbroath high school. The brothers greatly increased the number of depots and agencies for the firm's products in major seaports at home and abroad, and formed or acquired associated companies in Germany, the Netherlands, the United States, and elsewhere. For thirteen years before the First World War, William looked after the firm's interests in Germany, supplying anti-corrosives to the shipbuilding industry. However, the firm's main driving force, after he became managing director on his father's retirement, was James. In the inter-war years he oversaw the company's greatest increase in productive capacity. Before 1930 bitumen had been imported from North America, but such was the demand for the company's products that an oil distillation and bitumen plant, the Camperdown refinery, was built near Dundee harbour. The products included diesel oil, lubricating oils, and various grades of bitumen. Clearly aware of the market potential of new developments in road transport, Briggs also initiated the manufacture of tarmacadam. As a result of these initiatives, the bulk of the company's work came from road-making products, although construction materials, such as roofing felts, damp courses, and electrical insulation compounds, remained important. Until his retirement from the chairmanship of the company in 1947, James Briggs headed one of the largest and most successful producers of road-making and construction materials in the United Kingdom. He died at 30 Farington Street, Dundee, on 12 May 1961, his wife, Lizzie Jane Logan Yule, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50638


Brock, John (1834-1916), chemical manufacturer, was born on 25 August 1834 in Manchester, the younger of two children of William Brock of Nantwich, Cheshire. He was educated privately and later sent to Chorlton Hall School. Brock's career started with Crosfield and Shanks, chemical manufacturers, in St Helens, where after ten years he had risen to be manager. He left this firm in 1867, to enter into partnership with Edward Sullivan, James Sievwright, and John Crossley. On 1 September 1867 the partnership (Sullivan & Co.) acquired a 24 acre site. The British Alkali Works, or Brock's Works as it became known, with Brock as managing partner, was soon erected. It was the last sizeable chemical concern established in the canal region of Widnes, and its main product was soda ash from the Leblanc cycle. In conjunction with the works manager, Brock devised several improvements for the manufacture of bleaching powder. 
Brock married twice, both marriages being childless. His first wife was Elizabeth Wilson (1835-1877); his second was Sarah Mowle (1855-1929), whom he married after the death of Elizabeth. In 1875-6 Brock gave evidence to a royal commission investigating the working of the 1863 and 1874 'Alkali Acts'. He was appointed a justice of the peace for Lancashire in 1881. His greatest influence came in 1883 when he was instrumental in establishing the Lancashire Bleaching Powder Manufacturers' Association. Under Brock's chairmanship this organization unsuccessfully attempted to regulate the market in bleaching powder by establishing quotas for its members and a fixed price for the sale of their products, and by intervening directly in the market to maintain that fixed price. 
Problems within the Leblanc industry were patently clear by the end of the 1880s, and Brock strongly supported calls made by Sullivan for a closer union of the alkali manufacturers and more defensive measures to protect the Leblanc manufacturers from competitors using the more efficient Solvay process. Brock was influential in the brief negotiations that led to the formation of the United Alkali Company (UAC), which was the first industrial amalgamation of its kind, save perhaps the Salt Union formed in 1888. The UAC was incorporated in February 1891 with Brock as chairman, and pioneering rationalization brought brief initial success. Profits peaked in 1892 and thereafter declined rapidly, due in part to American tariff barriers. The UAC fought back by establishing a factory in Michigan (1897) which was run by the North American Chemical Company, of which Brock was president, but this venture failed to improve the fortunes of the company. He retired as chairman of the UAC in 1913. Thirteen years later the company was amalgamated with three others to form Imperial Chemical Industries. Brock was also vice-chairman of the Power and Gas Corporation Ltd (established 1901) and a director of Holywell-Halkyn Mining and Tunnel Company Ltd. 
Brock was a man of few words and fixed opinions, a strict but effective disciplinarian, handsome in appearance, dignified, and always well groomed. He retired to Colwyn Bay, moving to The Cedars, Hoole Road, Hoole, Chester, eighteen months before his death on 20 February 1916, which followed a short illness. His funeral was on 24 February at All Saints' Church, Hoole, followed by his interment at Christ Church, Colwyn Bay. Brock's sole beneficiary was his wife, Sarah. 


@@@@@


doc= 50641


Burroughs, (Silas) Mainville (1846-1895), manufacturing chemist, was born on 24 December 1846, in Medina, New York state, United States of America. His family was influential and wealthy, his father, Silas Mainville Burroughs (1810-1860), being a lawyer and US congressman. His education was in his native state, and an uncle in Medina reportedly instilled business sense in him. After leaving school he worked in New York state, as an apprentice to the merchant store of E. T. Coann in Albion for two years and subsequently for the drug stores of T. J. Chadwick in Lockport and S. H. T. Champlin in Buffalo. About 1873 he was employed by Wyeth & Brother of Philadelphia, and evidently continued to work for them while he studied at the Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, from where he graduated in 1877. His thesis demonstrated his early interest in new methods of producing compressed medicines. 
In 1878 Burroughs went to London as Wyeths' European agent, intending to stay for about six months. He soon saw that there was much potential in the pharmaceutical industry overseas, and employed his own capital to establish a company which he intended would become a world trader in supplying pharmaceuticals. In May 1878 S. M. Burroughs & Co. was established, first in Southampton Street, Strand, London, and soon after at 92-3 Great Russell Street and in the basement of 1 Cock Lane in the City. In 1879 the company moved to 8 Snow Hill, Holborn. 
Initially Burroughs concentrated on introducing American pharmaceuticals to doctors and dentists in the UK by travelling and advertising and by making contacts with hospitals and pharmacists. He soon realized that he needed a reliable hand to manage the business while he was travelling, and in January 1879 invited Henry Solomon Wellcome, also a pharmaceutical salesman and some seven years Burroughs's junior, to join him. They probably met in the mid-1870s, although the first existing correspondence dates from 1877. During 1879 Burroughs continued to invite Wellcome, currently working for McKesson and Robbins of New York, to England. 'I think that we can make big fortunes over here if we work things right and we ought to know how to do this with our combined experience' he wrote on 30 August 1879; and again 'You are the only man I want to pull with, and we have confidence in each other's ability and straightforwardness' (20 October 1879). Wellcome arrived in England in April 1880 with agency rights for McKesson and Robbins. Subsequent negotiations by Burroughs with that company led to mutually agreed terms for the articles of partnership between Burroughs and Wellcome to be signed on 27 September for the establishment of Burroughs, Wellcome & Co. Under that deed Burroughs put up $1200 and Wellcome $800 (of which he could contribute only $400, borrowing the rest from Burroughs at 10 per cent annual interest). 
From October 1881 to March 1884, Burroughs, carrying quantities of samples, undertook a world tour of Europe, Egypt, India, Ceylon and Burma, Australia, New Zealand, and the US, promoting the firm, establishing new markets, and making valuable contacts which laid the foundation of the company's foreign markets. Early business was mostly derived from its agency sales, but the company started to manufacture certain products near Snow Hill, London, in 1882, and opened manufacturing works in Wandsworth the following year. The range of products expanded and sold well, largely because of the firm's high standard and excellent publicity; it produced medicine chests for prominent figures including W. E. Gladstone and Sir Henry Morton Stanley, the latter of whom was greatly admired by both men. Early in 1884 the firm moved into larger premises on a prominent site at Snow Hill Buildings, Holborn Viaduct, and the same year the company registered the trade mark 'tabloid'. 
The first cracks in the friendship between Burroughs and his partner surfaced in 1882, when Burroughs, an impulsive and often imprudent man, requested Wellcome to postpone his rights to increase his capital holding as specified in the partnership agreement. Further differences emerged in correspondence over Burroughs's proposed engagement to Olive Augusta Chase of western New York state, when Burroughs asked if the business prospects were such that they would warrant his marriage and Wellcome advised against a hasty move. Burroughs, however, married Olive in the USA early in 1884, returning with her to London briefly before setting out for a tour of Europe. They had a son and two daughters. Relations between the partners became increasingly strained, but a new partnership was negotiated in May 1885 after which Burroughs returned to the United States for the rest of the year. Further disputes led to litigation in 1887, 1889, and 1891. 
In spite of these strains, the company thrived: it ended the agreement with Wyeths and moved its own manufactory to Dartford in 1889. Burroughs purchased the Dartford mills and leased them to the company (the cause of legal wrangles after his death), and played a key part in introducing progressive working conditions. Strongly influenced by Henry George, the proponent of free trade and a single tax on land values, Burroughs publicized and implemented these views, introducing an eight-hour working day and a profit-sharing system, based on a fixed percentage of the profits, and encouraging social activities by the Dartford workers. Burroughs was a staunch Presbyterian, regularly attending lunchtime services at the City Temple, and believing in a society that approached socialist ideals. He wrote a short work called 'A Strange Dream', forecasting an ideal state where the principles of religion were the basis of contracts between capital and labour, and had 60,000 copies of George's 'Protection of Free Trade' printed and sent throughout Europe. He was a strong supporter of the cause of international arbitration and peace and of socialist and labour clubs, chaired the Dartford Radical and Liberal Association, was a committee member of the Tenant Tradesmen's National Union, and a member of several political pressure groups including the City Liberal ('a bit stiff'), and the United Democratic clubs. He also believed in free travel and that free railways would be a means of untying the knot of town life. Burroughs's political interests may have been one reason for his taking British nationality in May 1890, it being reported that 'he has now lived so long in this country, is so completely identified with its interests, and takes so deep a concern in its social welfare, that his adoption of its nationality is not to be wondered at' ('Chemist and Druggist', 17 May 1890). 
Burroughs, who was a teetotaller, had a reputation for boundless energy and even his recreation pursuit of cycling made demands on him. His health suffered, possibly as a result of over-zealous work, and in December 1894 he caught a severe cold and was advised by doctors to winter abroad for his health. He travelled to the Riviera and soon recovered from his cold, but on 3 February 1895, while out cycling wearing a thin jacket, he caught a chill which resulted in pleurisy and rapidly developed into pneumonia. He died on 6 February at the Hotel Windsor in Monte Carlo with his sister Mrs Riggs beside him, but before his wife, travelling from London, could reach him. He was buried in Monte Carlo two days later. A service was held at Dartford parish church with a special train laid on to bring mourners from London. 
Obituaries were unanimous in emphasizing the strong impression Burroughs made on those who met him. He had a handsome, well-dressed appearance, was of moderate height with piercing blue eyes, with an open and lively manner, considerable charm and humour; he was a good speaker, with boundless enthusiasm. He was without affectation or snobbishness and he delighted in mixing with all classes. He was generous to a fault (on his death promissory notes and IOUs in his possession amounted to more than $7000) and notoriously open-handed in supporting individuals and organizations of many different political and religious persuasions. He left one twenty-fourth of his estate to be equally divided among all employees of Burroughs, Wellcome & Co., and made many other charitable legacies. Although negotiations for a dissolution of the partnership were under way when Burroughs died, the agreement with Wellcome still stood and Olive Burroughs was obliged to sell Wellcome her interest in the company. 


@@@@@


doc= 50643


Coates, Sir William Henry (1882-1963), civil servant and businessman, was born on 31 May 1882 at Runcorn, Cheshire, the second son of T. Mallalieu Coates, a member of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Tough. Coates, who was known to his close colleagues as Billie, was educated at Loughborough grammar school. He entered the civil service in 1900, and worked in the War Office (1900-04), the tax inspectorate (1904-19), and the Inland Revenue department (1919-25), the last as director of statistics and intelligence. On 9 September 1909 he married Claire Annie (1884/5-1963), daughter of Edward Ferris, a clerk, at Canterbury. They had two daughters. During his time in the civil service Coates undertook part-time studies in law and economics at the London School of Economics, obtaining the degrees of LLB in 1916 and BSc in 1922. He received a PhD in economics in 1929. 
Coates's most important work was his involvement with the origins and growth of Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). In 1925, at the invitation of a former civil servant, Sir Josiah Stamp, he joined Nobel Industries, the explosives manufacturers, succeeding Stamp as company secretary. Nobel Industries was one of the four major firms which combined to form ICI in 1926, and Coates was active in the detailed organization of the merger. He was the first treasurer of ICI, in 1927-9, and a director on the main board of the company from 1929 until his retirement in 1950; from 1945 he was deputy chairman. He was the acknowledged expert in ICI on finance, taxation, and economic theory, a skilled administrator and the director with overall responsibility for financial affairs. Although he had neither the authority nor the force of personality of the chairman, Harry McGowan, Coates frequently acted for the company in areas requiring detailed command of argument. 
He gave evidence on behalf of ICI in the capital reconstruction case of 1935, when the company went to law to seek a reduction in its nominal issued capital; he was said to have been more than a match for Sir William Jowitt, a leading KC at the common law bar. He had extensive, though often informal, dealings with government. During the Second World War he drew up plans for transport nationalization, and in 1941 was appointed financial adviser to the high commissioner in Canada. Coates was a member of ICI's small post-war committee, which was set up in 1942 to identify needs and strategies for the future. He was the company's representative in antitrust legislation in the USA immediately after the war, and on the Federation of British Industry. He served in a variety of public roles, chairing, for example, the committee on excess profits tax refunds, from 1946 to 1956. Coates retired from ICI in 1950 and was appointed to a number of commercial positions, including that of deputy chairman of the Westminster Bank. He also served on the University of London senate from 1929 to 1933. He was knighted in 1947. 
Coates possessed a clear and analytical mind, and was prone to writing donnish papers on economic and financial matters for his fellow directors. His views were not, however, always acted on within ICI, apparently being insufficiently pragmatic for some of his colleagues. He was of austere appearance and manner, and his meticulous habits are said to have included clipping his bus tickets to his expenses claims. (At that time ICI directors were not supplied with company cars.) Coates, a keen golfer, retired from his home in London to Eastbourne, where he lived at the Burlington Hotel. He died at the Esperance Nursing Home, Hartington Place, Eastbourne, on 7 February 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 50644


Cox, Arthur Hawker (1813-1903), manufacturing chemist and local politician, was born in the Haymarket, London, in November 1813, one of a family of ten children born to Edward Treslove Cox and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Homersham. His father, a native of Northampton, was a cabinet-maker. Little is known of the family except that one brother, Edward Homersham Cox, became a successful barrister. 
Arthur Cox was apprenticed as a chemist and druggist at the age of fifteen to his uncle, a Mr Perrin, in Northampton and afterwards worked as an assistant at Dinnefords in New Bond Street. The 'Apothecaries Act' of 1815 had, 'inter alia', recognized the position of the chemist and druggist as a wholesale and retail supplier of medicines; there was no qualifying examination for the occupation, but a five-year apprenticeship was the norm. Cox's surviving notebook, perhaps dating from his apprenticeship years, indicates a wide range of remedies supplied, including recipes not only for cough linctus and purgatives but also for sheep wash, cold cream, mushroom ketchup, and furniture paste. Family tradition has it that it was during his apprenticeship that he became interested in the development of a coating for pills to disguise the unpleasant taste of the ingredients, but it was not until 1854 that he sought and was granted patent protection for his tasteless, non-metallic coating for pills. The success of the coating provided the basis for his expansion into manufacturing. 
On 21 October 1837 Cox married Mary Anne Strudwick; the couple had a son and four daughters. In 1839 they left London for Brighton where, in June that year, Cox opened his own shop at 29 Ship Street. Despite the demands of business and family, Cox soon began to participate in local politics. In the early 1840s he campaigned, as the honorary secretary of the Sussex branch, for the Anti-Corn Law League. A lifelong supporter of the Liberal Party, he was involved in the fight for the incorporation of Brighton. He was elected as one of the first councillors in 1854 and made an alderman in 1859; he remained so for more than forty years, serving three terms as mayor, in 1869, in 1882, and in 1883. The many civic events over which he presided included the opening, in August 1883, of Magnus Volk's pioneering Brighton and Rottingdean seashore electric tramroad. 
Cox's business continued to grow as an increasing and more affluent population demanded and could afford medication. In 1871 he split the business, handing over the shop, now at 32 Ship Street, to his son, Homersham Edward; the latter, more dedicated to sailing -- also his father's hobby -- than to pharmacy, ran it unenthusiastically until the 1880s. Cox senior, although approaching sixty, moved the manufacturing business to St Martin's Place. He bought a house backing on to the factory premises and, on 13 January 1870, after the death of his first wife, he married Elizabeth Frances Claxton (died 1897); the marriage produced three sons and four daughters. In the late 1880s and early 1890s the two eldest sons of his second marriage took over management of the factory. 
Cox died on 6 April 1903 at 35 Wellington Road, Brighton, and was buried in Brighton cemetery three days later. The kindly disposition and engaging personality of his public persona concealed, as with so many of his class and time, an autocrat within his family. His daughter Eliza had married against his wishes and was cut out of his will, which, more significantly, provided for the conversion of his business into a private company to be run by his sons and provide for his unmarried daughters. The pharmaceutical manufacturing business of A. H. Cox & Co. Ltd continued to be largely owned and managed by the three succeeding generations of the Cox family until the 1970s. In 1978 the company moved from Brighton to a new factory in Barnstaple, Devon, and in 1984 it was bought by Hoechst UK, the British subsidiary of the German chemicals and pharmaceuticals group. 


@@@@@


doc= 50645


Holliday, Read (1809-1889), chemical manufacturer, was born on 15 September 1809 in Bradford, the third child of Abraham Holliday (1745-1825), miller, wool spinner, and latterly a tinner, and his wife, Mary. Nothing is known of any formal education. Before he reached his teens Holliday went to work in a tannery and later at a Wakefield chemical works making ammonia products. 
When Holliday was twenty-one he left to set up his own business processing liquid gasworks waste, producing ammonia and tar. The idea of using ammonia rather than urine for scouring woollen cloth was just beginning to gain acceptance, and he was able to sell his ammonia to surrounding woollen mills. He soon needed larger premises and moved to Turnbridge, Huddersfield, in 1839. In the same year he married Emma Copley (died 1883) of Hunslet, Leeds; they had five sons and three daughters. Over the next few years he began to supply other ammonia products and acted as merchant for other makers' products needed by his customers, including natural dyes. 
This small business, one of many dealing with gasworks waste, took a significant turn in the mid-1840s when Holliday began to distil coal tar to produce naphtha, creosote, and pitch. There was a ready market for creosote to pickle wooden railway sleepers and for pitch to bind coal dust into fuel briquettes. For naphtha, in 1848 Holliday designed and patented a wickless lamp which proved a considerable commercial success, gaining a prize at the Great Exhibition of 1851. It remained in demand, mainly for outdoor lighting, for half a century, although for most purposes it was superseded by paraffin lamps within a few years. Possibly because of his work on coal tar, Holliday got to know Charles B. Mansfield (1819-1855), one of a group of brilliant students from the newly established Royal School of Chemistry working on coal tar derivatives. Mansfield showed how valuable aromatic hydrocarbons, especially benzene, might be separated for further processing; Holliday applied this empirical research in what was still a hazardous and environmentally damaging cottage industry. 
Another of the school's pupils, William Henry Perkin, began manufacture of the first 'coal tar' dye in 1857 and a couple of years later a third, Edward Chambers Nicholson, produced another aniline dye. As coal tar distillates were the starting point for these new products and demand was expanding rapidly, it was natural that Holliday should be interested. He began to produce his own magenta dye, soon to be followed by many other colours. There was an early set-back when Holliday was accused of infringing patents controlled by Nicholson; after protracted and costly litigation, the patents were ruled invalid. There was severe competition in the dye business. 
Holliday's two eldest sons, Thomas (1840-1898) and Charles (1842-1893), joined their father in the early 1860s and played a significant part in developing the fine chemical and dye business. Holliday was sufficiently confident of their abilities to send them to New York in 1864 to set up production of aniline and dyes. The branch they set up was one of America's pioneer dye makers and became one of the firm's most valuable assets. It was later managed by his younger sons, Edgar (1847-1891) and John (1845-1894), while Thomas and Charles managed the firm's various English and one French works. The business had become the UK's largest chemical manufacturer and one of the largest dye makers, though dwarfed by the giant German chemical companies. In 1868, with the patents court case out of the way and the various branches of the business flourishing, Holliday sold the business to Thomas, Charles, and Edgar so that he could follow other interests. 
Holliday was elected as a Liberal to the new Huddersfield town council but his blunt speaking and impatience with political ways made him unsuitable for a public career, and he soon resigned. He and his wife moved from their Huddersfield home, Lunn Clough Hall, to Queen's Road, Harrogate. He enjoyed building his new home so much that he went on to build virtually all the houses in Queen's Road. He was active to the end of his life, taking long cycle rides when he was well over seventy. He survived his wife by six years and died in his eightieth year, on 3 March 1889, following a stroke. He was buried in the family vault in Edgerton cemetery, Huddersfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 50646


Chadwick, Nora (1891-1972), literary scholar, was born on 28 January 1891 at Great Lever, near Bolton, Lancashire, the elder of the two children of James Kershaw (1867/8-1917), cotton manufacturer and mill owner, and his wife, Emma Clara, 'nee' Booth. She had a sister, Mabel, who became a Catholic and a Carmelite sister, eventually living at the convent at Waterbeach. 
Nora Kershaw was educated at Stoneycroft School near Southport and was admitted to Cambridge University in 1910 to read English at Newnham College. At Cambridge she became a pupil of her future husband, Hector Munro Chadwick (1870-1947), professor of Anglo-Saxon. She took a second class in part one of the old medieval and modern languages tripos (English and Old English) in 1913 and a first class in part two (English literature) in 1914. On completing her degree she was appointed lecturer in English at St Andrews University where she taught herself Russian during the war years despite a heavy workload. Her father died in an accident in the war in France and her mother married a Dr Martin and settled at Houghton near St Ives, close to Cambridge, where Nora frequently visited her. The inheritance of money after the war enabled Nora to retire from St Andrews and live as a private individual in Cambridge. 
On 4 May 1922 Nora married Hector Chadwick after a tour of Italy with him accompanied by her friend Enid Welsford; it was a happy marriage, though there were no children. Nora graduated MA from Cambridge in 1923. The Chadwicks lived initially at Paper Mills, Newmarket Road, and later in Cambridge where they entertained and educated students, and she frequently played the harp. They frequently visited archaeological sites around Britain and Ireland and co-wrote several books, including 'The Growth of Literature' (1932-40), a three-volume survey of heroic and oral literatures, in 1955 Nora produced an enlarged second edition of her husband's 'The Study of Anglo-Saxon' (first published in 1941). 
Nora Kershaw Chadwick, as she preferred to be called on the title-pages of her books (though she signed her name Nora Kershaw), wrote some fifty-nine books and articles. Her main interests were early Britain, Celtic culture, early Russian history, and oral literatures, especially oral epics in Russian and the Turkic languages of central Asia. 
Nora Chadwick was an associate of Newnham College from 1923 to 1938 and a research fellow from 1941 to 1944. In 1950 she was appointed university lecturer in the early history and culture of the British Isles at Cambridge. She contributed a pioneering study of African literatures to 'Cassell's Encyclopaedia of Literature' (1953) and published 'Poetry and Letters in Early Christian Gaul' in 1955. In 1956 she was made a fellow of the British Academy and on retirement from her university post in 1958 was made an honorary fellow of Newnham. In addition to receiving honorary doctorates from the University of St Andrews, the University of Wales, and the National University of Ireland, she was, in 1961, made a commander of the British empire. 
Nora Chadwick's survey of the vast corpus of Turkic oral literatures, 'Oral Epics of Central Asia', appeared in 1969. Most of her books and articles, however, focused on the Celtic cultures of ancient Britain where Welsh, Irish, Scottish, and Pictish were spoken before Latin, Norse, and English. 'The Celts' (1971) continues to be a valuable introduction to the subject and remains in print. The fact that Cambridge did not establish a professorship of Celtic, to which she would willingly have contributed the bulk of her private means, was a source of great disappointment. 
Nora Chadwick's warmth and generosity of character was attested at a dinner of her former students organized by Glyn Daniel on her eightieth birthday in 1971. Even in her old age, she haunted the Cambridge University Library assisted by her niece Dorothy. She died at the Hope Nursing Home, Brooklands Avenue, Cambridge, on 24 April 1972 after a series of strokes. 


@@@@@


doc= 50648


Pigeon, Anna (1832-1917), mountaineer, was born at South Side, Clapham Common, London, in July 1832, the sixth daughter of Henry Pigeon, a distiller and wine importer, of Clapham and 158 Borough High Street, Southwark. She and her sister 
From 1872 to 1876 the Pigeon sisters compiled a remarkable climbing record that included 66 peaks over 10,000 feet and 60 passes over 9000 feet, as well as more ascents at lower elevations. Their ascents included the Dom, Aletschhorn, Wetterhorn, Monte Rosa, Grand Combin, Aiguille Verte, Eiger, Schreckhorn, Jungfrau, Finsteraarhorn, and Dent d'Herens. They climbed the Matterhorn twice, including the first female traverse from Breuil to Zermatt in 1873. They privately published 'Peaks and Passes' (1885), a short book listing their mountaineering tours. Ellen Pigeon married on 27 March 1876 Bradley Abbot (died 1896), a widower, the vicar of Christ Church, Clapham. 
Despite their achievements, the Pigeon sisters were not readily accepted by male mountaineers. Ellen told W. A. B. Coolidge in 1892 that 'in days gone by many A. C.s [members of the Alpine Club] would not speak to us' (Clark, 175). Ellen Abbot died at 40 Weymouth Street, Marylebone, London, on 5 July 1902. In 1910 Anna Pigeon was elected to the Ladies' Alpine Club, founded in 1907, and became one of its vice-presidents the same year and an honorary member in 1911. She died, unmarried, on 15 March 1917 at her home, 42 South Side, Clapham Common, London. Her death certificate described her occupation as 'of independent means, property and shareholder, spinster'. A funeral service was held on 20 March at the parish church, Clapham, after which she was buried in her sister's grave at Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50649


Ellen Pigeon (1836-1902) were two of the earliest and most accomplished women mountaineers. Their parents left them well provided for financially, and they were able to maintain a substantial household in Clapham. They began climbing in the Alps in 1869, and became famous that year for their traverse of the Sesia-joch or Seserjoch, a pass between Zermatt and Alagna. The pass had been climbed only once, seven years before, and John Ball's guide to the western Alps doubted whether the ascent would ever be repeated. The Pigeon sisters were attempting to cross another pass, the Lysjoch, when their guide lost the way in the mist. As they descended, Jean Martin, the guide, led and cut steps in the ice, but their porter was so clumsy that Anna placed herself last on the rope, the position most responsible for the safety of the party, so that she could anchor the rope if anyone slipped. Only when they reached the bottom of the face after eighteen hours did they realize that they had made the first descent of the Sesia-joch. Male climbers were astonished at their feat, which challenged contemporary assumptions about gender. The 'Monte Rosa Gazzetta della Val Sesia' concluded that the absence of fatalities on the expedition was 'due to their courage, their habitude to Alpine travel, and especially to the masculine education, too little imitated by the Italians, which the English give their children' ('Alpine Journal', 369). 


@@@@@


doc= 50650


Jarmay, Sir John Gustav (1856-1944), industrial chemist, was born on 31 December 1856, the son of Gustav de Jarmay, a pharmacist of Pest, Hungary. He was educated at private schools in Hungary and at the Technische Hochschule in Zurich, where he had the good fortune to be a pupil of Georg Lunge. Although Lunge inspired many chemists who later became distinguished in theoretical fields, he was experienced in the chemical industry as well, having spent a long time in England in work connected with alkali manufacture. Jarmay followed his example and came early to England, to study for a while in Manchester. There he came to the notice of H. E. Roscoe, whom Lunge had known. Like Lunge, Roscoe saw the need to promote scientifically trained men into the chemical industry and he encouraged Jarmay to take the first step on his long industrial career with Greenall, Whitley & Co., brewers of Warrington. Two years later Jarmay began a connection with Brunner, Mond & Co. which was to last the rest of his active life. This leading enterprise had been set up by John Tomlinson Brunner and Ludwig Mond in 1873, becoming a limited company in 1881. Like other British chemical companies it had often to recruit foreign chemists; Brunner admired Roscoe's work, and encouraged his students, so Jarmay had a double virtue in his eyes. He became a manager for the company at Winnington in 1880. On 2 June 1882 Jarmay married Charlotte Elizabeth (died 1938), daughter of George Wyman, a surgeon. She was very active in the work of the Red Cross in Cheshire during the First World War and was made an OBE in 1919. They had one son, who became a farmer. 
The key to Jarmay's success was the ammonia-soda process, which had been developed to a high degree of efficiency by Solvay in Belgium, who then licensed Brunner, Mond to use it. With Brunner providing the financial acumen and Mond the chemical insight, their team was well set to advance. It was just the situation in which Jarmay could exercise his own talents and in 1884 he established himself as a leading figure in the company by patenting, with Mond, a process for purifying crude bicarbonate of soda (a main product of the ammonia-soda process). He made many inventions on his own for which he was granted more than forty patents. He rose rapidly, from a junior managerial position to chief technical manager and to membership, in 1889, of the board of directors. 
Jarmay's life revolved around the development of a number of technical processes, the most important being the manufacture of soda (sodium carbonate), a substance central to many manufactures, such as soap and glass, all of which were being made within easy reach of the Brunner, Mond factories. After Mond's death in 1909 Jarmay was largely responsible for the technical progress not only of Brunner, Mond but of other companies with which he was connected. At the outbreak of war in 1914 it became apparent that the country was seriously short of explosives, and a massive industrial effort was made to remedy this. The important Brunner, Mond contribution was led by Jarmay. He served on a government committee dealing with high explosives, to such good effect that in 1918, on the recommendation of Lord Moulton (who had been minister of munitions), he was made KBE. 
The British industrial scene changed greatly as a consequence of the war, not only because of events within the United Kingdom but also because of what was happening in Europe and the world at large. New techniques developed abroad had to be studied, and one of these was the fixation of atmospheric nitrogen in which the German chemists, Haber and Bosch, had made a revolution. Jarmay did something towards introducing the process into the UK, but younger men were now ready to lead. When the rationalization of the chemical industry led to the formation in 1926 of Imperial Chemical Industries, into which Brunner, Mond was absorbed, Jarmay might have been expected to be appointed to its board but he was not. He spent the last twenty years of his life in industrial activity but never quite at its centre. He was, however, able to enjoy the recreations which had coloured much of his life, keeping up his mountaineering and his hunting as long as he could. In the company of H. E. Roscoe, Mond, and others he took part in the discussions which led in 1881 to the foundation of the Society of Chemical Industry and maintained his connection with that and with the Institute of Chemistry and the Chemical Society. He enjoyed life and was noted for his hospitality. In group photographs of company staff he appears as an upright figure, bearded and commanding. 
Jarmay set up another home in Italy but returned to England on the outbreak of war in 1939. He died at his home, 1 Lothair Villas, Hatfield, on 22 August 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 50651


Lewkowitsch, Julius (1857-1913), industrial chemist, was born on 4 September 1857 at Ostrowo in Silesia. His father was Moritz Lewkowitsch, described as a general merchant. Julius studied chemistry at the University of Breslau, obtaining his PhD in 1879. During his time as a student, he supported himself and paid the expenses of his university education by undertaking private teaching. After graduation, he settled on an academic career of research and teaching in pure chemistry, first under Professor Victor von Richter at Breslau. Then he took a post under Professor Hans Landolt in the chemistry laboratory of the agricultural high school in Berlin. From there he moved to the University of Heidelberg, where he became assistant to Professor Victor von Meyer. 
Had Lewkowitsch continued his academic career he would undoubtedly have achieved an eminent position, but in his late twenties he decided on a complete change of direction, into chemical technology. He first worked in the coal tar distilling industry, but at the age of thirty emigrated to England and turned to the soap industry, becoming a chemist and technical manager at Joseph Watson & Sons in Leeds. In 1895 he set up as a consulting chemist in Manchester, later moving to London. He became a naturalized British subject, and on 5 May 1902, at Hampstead register office, London, he married Katherine Julia Morris. 
With his shift from pure to applied chemistry, Lewkowitsch embarked on the work that was to make him famous, the chemical technology of vegetable and animal oils, fats, and waxes. The development of this branch of the chemical industry owed much to his careful and thorough investigations, and at the time of his death 'The Times' hailed him as the leading authority in this field. In 1895 he published the first edition of his monumental 'Chemical Technology and Analysis of Oils, Fats and Waxes' in one volume. The work grew with successive editions and by the time the fifth edition appeared in 1913 it had expanded to three volumes. The final edition was brought out by his assistant in 1921. In addition the work was published in French and German. 
Lewkowitsch was robust physically and intellectually and in spite of his investigative work and a busy consultancy, he placed his great knowledge and linguistic talents freely at the disposal of professional colleagues. He served on the councils of the Chemical Society and the Society of Chemical Industry, of which he was also a vice-president. He played an active part in several meetings of the International Union of Applied Chemistry. 
Lewkowitsch was a keen mountaineer and possessed an intimate knowledge of the Alps. It was while on holiday at Chamonix that he contracted an acute respiratory infection; he died there after a short illness on 16 September 1913. He was survived by his widow, a son, and a daughter. 
Apart from his published work consisting of his great treatise and scientific papers in several learned journals, listed in Poggendorf, Lewkowitsch left copious manuscript notes recording the development of his technological ideas. These are preserved in the library of Dr Carter Litchfield in the USA. A curious feature of these notes is that there are sentences in which English and German expressions are intermingled. 


@@@@@


doc= 50652


Maplethorpe, Cyril Wheatley (1898-1983), pharmaceutical manufacturer, was born on 20 April 1898 at 68 Balfour Street, Drypool, Kingston upon Hull, the son of Jack Maplethorpe, a police constable, and his wife, Emeline Annie, 'nee' Vesiter. He was educated at Hymers College, Hull, where he held a scholarship, before going on to study pharmacy at Chelsea College, London. Towards the end of the First World War, his education was briefly interrupted by service in the Royal Engineers, but after the war he entered the School of Pharmacy, at the Pharmaceutical Society, Bloomsbury Square, London, where he qualified as a pharmaceutical chemist in 1922. On 21 September 1925 he married Margery Bessie Pearce, in Hull. There were no children of the marriage. 
After a spell in the research laboratories and museum of the Pharmaceutical Society, in 1924 Maplethorpe joined the staff of Allen and Hanburys Ltd. The modern science-based pharmaceutical industry was then in its infancy, and many British firms were still locked in the Victorian world of the chemist and druggist, with its invalid and baby foods, and various tonics, embrocations, and laxatives. Allen and Hanburys, founded by Quakers in 1715 and famous for its milk foods, cod-liver oil, and surgical instruments, typified the traditional nature of the industry in the 1920s. 
Maplethorpe joined Allen and Hanburys as a research chemist, but his organizational talents were soon recognized and in 1932 he was appointed manager at the firm's Ware factory. He was only the second technically qualified pharmacist to have worked there, so he brought with him some much needed technical expertise. In the 1930s he involved himself with research and product development and was responsible for Isogel, a traditional but profitable bulk laxative. But he was also increasingly aware that the days of the old galenicals and food products were numbered, and he slowly began to push the company towards a more scientific future. His appointment to the board as managing director in 1944 increased his influence. In the UK he enlarged the numbers of technical personnel and extended the firm's research interests; abroad he began rationalizing its wide-ranging subsidiaries. By the mid-1950s, Allen and Hanburys began to acquire a more modern look, with products that included antihistamines, antibiotics, and tranquillizers, besides more traditional items such as throat pastilles and Haliborange. In the summer of 1958 the company announced that its production of traditional drugs and galenicals would cease. 
Unfortunately, Maplethorpe's reforms took place within a family-owned firm that was still very conservative. Faced by stronger British (and overseas) rivals and with low profitability, Allen and Hanburys was vulnerable. In 1958 it was bought by Glaxo Laboratories for $633,000 and Maplethorpe's dream of running his own science-based pharmaceutical company ended. However, the take-over -- which he had helped negotiate -- involved no loss of prestige for Maplethorpe, who was elected to the Glaxo board. He and the Glaxo chairman, Sir Harry Jephcott, respected each other, and their views on the future of the industry coincided. Allen and Hanburys, therefore, entered the 1960s with a considerable degree of independence and Maplethorpe was free to pursue his plans for a research division at Ware with considerably more resources. In 1962, largely owing to his initiative, a new research director, David Jack, was appointed at Ware to spearhead a new and greatly expanded research programme. 
Meanwhile, Maplethorpe was intent on improving the professional standing of pharmacy, largely through his work at the Pharmaceutical Society. He was a member of its council from 1943 to 1967, chairman of its education committee from 1945 until 1962, and president of the society between 1963 and 1965. For services to pharmaceutical education he was awarded an honorary degree of MSc by Manchester University in 1958 and received the Pharmaceutical Society's charter gold medal in 1968. He was a founder member of the council of the School of Pharmacy and played a part in its transfer to the University of London in 1948. He was also a governor of Chelsea College. For his efforts to introduce a more rigorous pharmaceutical training in universities and elsewhere, Maplethorpe was described by David Jack as 'probably the most influential pharmacist of his generation' ('Pharmaceutical Journal', 231, 1983, 734). 
Maplethorpe retired as the managing director of Allen and Hanburys in 1965 and left the Glaxo board in 1968. The research division at Ware under David Jack and others subsequently achieved spectacular success with science-based drugs, lifting Glaxo to a position among the world leaders in the industry by the late 1980s. Fortunately, Maplethorpe lived to see something of this transformation, in which he had played such a significant part. 
Maplethorpe had considerable physical presence -- he was well over 6 feet tall -- and he could sometimes be intimidating to subordinates. However, he was a humane man, whose early Congregationalist beliefs had been replaced by a firm socialism. Unusually for a leading businessman, he was a supporter of the Labour Party. Much of his personal estate was directed into research fellowships at Chelsea College and the School of Pharmacy and, through the Margery Maplethorpe Trust, he funded old people's homes in Hertford. His estate at death was valued at $765,225. 
After a stroke at his home, Stoneyfield, St Mary's Lane, Hertingfordbury, Maplethorpe died in Hertford Hospital on 26 October 1983, and was cremated at Harlow crematorium. He was survived by his wife, who died in 1995, having been a substantial benefactor, in her husband's memory, of St Hugh's College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 50653


May, John (1809-1893), manufacturing chemist, was born in Harwich on 3 February 1809. His father was a ship's captain, working on the Harwich to Goteborg route, but he retired soon after John was born and the family moved to Ipswich. There John May was educated at a private school and apprenticed to F. J. Hooker, a local chemist and druggist. The 1815 'Apothecaries Act' had recognized the role of the chemist and druggist as a wholesale and retail supplier of medicines. 
In 1830 May moved to London, finding employment in Battersea with Charles Price, a manufacturing chemist whose business lay chiefly in the preparation of health salts (sulphate of magnesia) and mercurial remedies. At that time the distinguished pharmacologist, Jonathan Pereira (1804-1853), was lecturing in chemistry at the General Dispensary, Aldersgate Street, attached to St Bartholomew's Hospital; May attended his lectures. Medical knowledge of the causes of disease was small and pharmaceutical remedies to alleviate symptoms relied on galenical and, increasingly, chemical ingredients. 
In 1834 May left Price and established his own business as a manufacturing chemist, in partnership with Thomas Grimwade and Joseph Pickett, who are believed to have been fellow apprentices with him in Ipswich. The partnership rented premises in Battersea, then an industrial centre although in surroundings still largely rural in character. Pickett died in 1835 and four years later Grimwade decided to retire from manufacturing to take up farming. In 1839, therefore, May took a new partner, William Garrad Baker, like himself an East Anglian by birth, who had recently completed his apprenticeship as a chemist and druggist. 
May, aged thirty-one, and Baker, aged twenty-five, signed a new partnership agreement in 1840 which lasted for thirty-six years. In the following year they bought, for $200, a plot of land in Battersea known as Garden Wharf, where the firm's factory was built; it was rebuilt several times -- it remained the manufacturing premises until 1934. In the early days of the business May dealt with the sales and marketing side and Baker took charge of the manufacturing. Most of the firm's customers -- wholesale drug houses -- were in the London area and May visited them all, on foot, once a week. It was an extremely competitive business but May and Baker soon secured itself a place among the leading firms in the London chemical trade, which included Howards and Whiffens. 
In 1851 the firm's acids, metallic salts, and pharmaceutical supplies were awarded the prize medal for quality at the Great Exhibition and, four years later, similar accolades were won at the Paris Exhibition. By then the development of the railway network was enabling May and Baker to supply customers further afield than London and, although the wholesale druggists remained its major customers, it also supplied the chemicals which were increasingly used in other industries such as brewing. 
May never married and by the early 1860s was living with his unmarried sister Sarah, who was eight years his elder, at Hyde House, 41 Hyde Lane, Battersea, his home for more than thirty years. In 1862 the firm took on an apprentice, Thomas Tyrer, who recalled that May, then aged fifty-three and with completely white hair, interviewed him most searchingly. Tyrer became a great admirer of May, writing, in an obituary in the 'Chemist and Druggist' in 1893: 'Mr May was always very severe upon unveracity and anything indefinite and slipshod was to him a cause of great irritation... His immediate relatives were the recipients of his warmest solicitude, yet he preferred a loneliness which seemed painful to me. He was as unobtrusive in his religious and political views as in his life; and loved the 'old order' of things and disliked much of the new. He was eminently a man of wise caution, a hater of deceit and a lover of truth.' At the end of 1876 May retired, selling his share of the partnership to Richard Heath, a Warwick solicitor who bought it for his stepson, William Blenkinsop. Largely at May's insistence, Tyrer also became a junior partner in the business at the same time. With May's agreement, the firm continued to use the name May and Baker under which it was by then known as a respectable and steady business. Living in Battersea, May kept in touch with Tyrer and Baker and, in 1890 when the partnership was dissolved and the business incorporated, he agreed that his name should continue to be used. In January 1891, when he was nearly eighty-two, he became a director of the new company. He was already suffering from heart disease and, on 5 November 1893, at the age of eighty-four, he died of pneumonia at Hyde House. 
The business May had founded continued to grow and in the twentieth century became well known for its discovery of the drug known as M & B 693, introduced in 1938 as a cure for bacterial pneumonia. Although the company was owned, from 1927, by the French chemical company Rhone-Poulenc, it was not until the early 1990s that use of the name May and Baker ended. 


@@@@@


doc= 50654


Lutyens, Lady Emily (1874-1964), theosophist, was born on 26 December 1874 in Paris, the third surviving child among the five children of (Edward) Robert Bulwer-Lytton, first earl of Lytton (1831-1891), a diplomatist and poet, and his wife, Edith Bulwer-Lytton (1841-1936) ['see under 'Lytton, (Edward) Robert Bulwer-], daughter of Edward Villiers and his wife, Elizabeth Liddell, and a lady-in-waiting to Queen Victoria. Emily Lytton was brought up in Lisbon, where her father was British minister, and then in India (1876-80), where her father was viceroy. After leaving India the family returned to Knebworth, where she was educated by governesses, whom she despised. A voracious reader, she devoured her father's library of Walter Scott and Bulwer Lytton; reading aloud was a lifelong passion. 
In December 1887 Lord Lytton was appointed ambassador in Paris, and the thirteen-year-old Emily went to live in the embassy. She began an intimate correspondence with a 71-year-old clergyman, the Revd Whitwell Elwin. Throughout her life she wrote letters almost daily; her letters to various correspondents, especially her husband, form an extraordinarily complete record of her life. She published the correspondence with Elwin as 'A Blessed Girl' (1953). Robert Lytton died in November 1891, and Emily returned to England with her family. She did not formally 'come out', but her sister Betty, who was married to Gerald Balfour, introduced her to the circle of 'Souls'. Disapproving and priggish but also a rebel, Emily became infatuated with the 53-year-old Wilfrid Blunt, a friend of her father. This flirtation is candidly described in 'A Blessed Girl'. 
Soon after she broke with Blunt, the 21-year-old Emily, who by now considered herself 'on the shelf', met the architect Edwin Landseer Lutyens (1869-1944), who, though a coming man, was very much outside her social class. They were married in August 1897 and lived at 29 Bloomsbury Square, London. The house was also Lutyens's office and the centre of his successful country-house practice. Emily and Edwin Lutyens had five children, born between 1898 and 1908: Barbara, Robert, Ursula, Mary, and Elisabeth. Mary Lutyens (1908-1999) became a writer of some note and Elisabeth Lutyens (1906-1983) became a distinguished composer. Emily, who disliked entertaining, was unfulfilled by her role as architect's wife. She was drawn to the women's movement, joining first the Moral Education League, which campaigned for prostitutes suffering from venereal disease, and then the Women's Social and Political Union. She introduced to the movement her sister Lady Constance Georgina Bulwer-Lytton (1869-1923), who became a prominent suffragette and hunger-striker, but Emily disliked militancy and resigned from the union in 1909. 
Emily Lutyens discovered the new religion of theosophy through the Mallets, French clients of her husband who lived at Le Bois des Moutiers, Varengeville. Theosophy is an eclectic mix of Hinduism and Christianity, and Emily was converted by Annie Besant, the charismatic leader of the movement. In 1911 Mrs Besant brought to England a sixteen-year-old Indian boy, Krishnamurti, the future world teacher whose remarkable aura the clairvoyant theosophist C. W. Leadbeater had noticed on the beach at Adyar, near Madras. Waiting with the crowd of theosophists at Charing Cross station, Emily wrote, 'I had eyes for none but Krishna', an odd figure with long black hair wearing a Norfolk jacket (Lutyens, 'Candles in the Sun', 30). Emily was promoted by Mrs Besant to the esoteric section of the Theosophical Society and appointed English representative of the Order of the Star in the East. She travelled the country lecturing, acted as editor of the theosophist journal 'Herald of the Star', and introduced wealthy converts, including the American heiress Miss Mabel Dodge, whose generosity financed the society. 
Emily became a strict vegetarian, and relations with her husband grew strained. She later admitted that only her overwhelming personal love for Krishnamurti bound her to theosophy. Some questioned her emotional involvement, but her support helped to protect Krishna and his brother Nitya, who were smuggled to England in 1912 pending a lawsuit brought against Mrs Besant by their father, who alleged immoral acts by C. W. Leadbeater. In 1916 Emily established an all-India home rule movement, holding meetings in her London drawing-room. This was perhaps tactless, as her husband was then designing an imperial capital at New Delhi, but Emily was annoyed to receive a letter from Edward Hudson, editor of 'Country Life', telling her that she had a genius in her care and that looking after him should be her sole concern. 
Theosophy was very fashionable in the 1920s. Krishna, with his film-star looks, mesmerized audiences in India, California, Australia, and the Netherlands. Emily travelled the world with him, becoming convinced that he was indeed the Messiah. In 1925 Emily formed the League of Motherhood, but by now the Theosophical Society was swept by hysteria and divided over Krishna's claims to be the world teacher. Emily supported Krishna when he tried to dissolve the society, and in 1930 she followed him in resigning from theosophy. 
Emily Lutyens was in many ways ahead of her time. A fearless and outspoken critic of the casual racism of the British in India, she was a feminist, a vegetarian, and a socialist. She was twice asked to stand as a Labour candidate. Her unconventional marriage is prolifically documented in the letters she wrote to her husband, 5000 of which survive. She played little part in actively promoting his work, but in times of crisis her advice was good. Sir Edwin Lutyens died in 1944. In 1953 Lady Emily published 'A Blessed Girl', a vivid and sharply observed account of an upper-class girl growing up in late Victorian England. In 1957 followed 'Candles in the Sun', the absorbing story of her theosophical years. Written with the collaboration of her daughter Mary, this is still the best account of the movement. She also published 'The Birth of Rowland' (1956), a collection of her parents' letters. Lady Emily died at her home, 2 Hyde Park Street, Paddington, London, on 3 January 1964. 


@@@@@


doc= 50656


Nathan, Alec (1872-1954), industrialist, was born on 24 September 1872 in Wellington, New Zealand, the seventh of eight sons (there were four daughters) of Joseph Edward Nathan (1835-1912) and his wife, Dinah Marks (1838-1893). The family was Jewish. Nathan was educated at Wellington College and Lincoln Agricultural College in New Zealand. His father had founded a merchant house based in Wellington and London called Joseph Nathan & Co., in which the five eldest Nathan sons became partners. Alec Nathan and his brother Frederick (1871-1938), were dairy farming at Palmerston North in New Zealand when in 1903 the family firm bought the rights to a new process for making dried milk powder. The two brothers were enlisted in its commercial development, with Alec taking responsibility for running the new plant at Bunnythorpe which processed the milk into dried powder. This factory began operations in 1904, although it was not until 1906 that the Nathans registered a new trade name of Glaxo for their product. 
Nathan emigrated to England in 1907 and was thenceforth increasingly involved in the promotion of Glaxo milk powder. He was convinced that it should be marketed as a superior baby food; in 1908 he launched the annual 'Glaxo Babybook' as a promotional device, and in 1908-13 he superintended an energetic mail order campaign. He also controlled its press advertising, always writing copy himself: his slogan 'Glaxo builds bonnie babies' became a household phrase. He gave meticulous attention to selling to the health departments of municipal authorities. This branch of the business developed considerably during the First World War. He was also keenly involved in expanding sales in Australasia, and in many other foreign markets. The Glaxo milk department was only a small part of the Nathans' mercantile business, and relations between the partners were sometimes volatile. 
In 1919 Nathan recruited a young pharmacist, Harry Jephcott, to the Glaxo department to monitor product quality. He subsequently supported Jephcott in the commercial and scientific strategy of diversifying into vitamin foods in the 1920s. This culminated in the formation in 1935 of a pharmaceutical subsidiary of the Nathan business, Glaxo Laboratories Ltd, with a new factory at Greenford. Nathan was the first chairman of this concern, which during the Second World War became the earliest British pharmaceutical company to produce penicillin. He retired from business in June 1946. Six months later Glaxo Laboratories acquired the assets of its parent company, Joseph Nathan, and began a new phase of its development into the world's largest pharmaceutical multinational. 
On 15 April 1909 Nathan married Muriel (1881/2-1961), daughter of Wilfred Marks, formerly proprietor of the general store at Tumut in the Snowy Mountains. They had two sons and a daughter. Nathan died of cancer on 18 October 1954 at the London Clinic, and was cremated at Golders Green. He was an intelligent, benevolent man with a strong ethical sense and an aloof but unassuming manner. Many of his family were rough and quarrelsome, but he was gentle and almost innocent. He was a patriarchial employer given to many private kindnesses and charities. Methodical, determined, and a steady strategist, he believed that business life should be a form of public service, and recoiled from both sharp practice and ostentation. At British general elections he voted Liberal or Labour, but less often Conservative. He thought that nothing was too good for the British and Australasian working class but was indifferent to foreigners. In his domestic life he seemed overshadowed by his socially and culturally ambitious wife. He was awarded the Bledisloe gold medal for New Zealand agriculturalists in 1941, but declined a knighthood. 


@@@@@


doc= 50657


Nicholson, Edward Chambers (1827-1890), chemist and dye manufacturer, was born in January 1827 at Lincoln, the seventh son of Robert Nicholson. His mother died the following year and he was brought up by an aunt and, when he was ten, sent away to school in Uxbridge. He started work assisting a chemist and druggist at Andover and then went to work in a London laboratory before entering as one of the first students at the Royal College of Chemistry in 1845. Here he came under the influence of Dr A. W. Hofmann (1818-1888), who was particularly interested in the coal tar derivatives. Through teaching and supervising research, Hofmann inspired many eminent research chemists, including William Perkin. 
Nicholson, after working for a couple of years as Hofmann's research assistant, left to investigate the chemistry of iron making with a south Wales company. He was obliged to abandon this work because of an attack of typhoid fever, and returned to London. In 1853 he joined in partnership with two fellow students at the Royal College of Chemistry, as Simpson, Maule, and Nicholson, to manufacture fine chemicals. Nicholson took the lead in meticulous chemical research which he had the ability to transform into viable manufacturing processes. For example, he was credited with the first use of iron stills with mechanical stirring gear. In Hofmann's words: 'in him was united the genius of the manufacturer and the habits of a scientific investigator' (Fox, 104). 
Nicholson became very interested in the discovery in 1857 of a mauve coal tar dye by another of Hofmann's students, William Perkin. The partners were refused a licence to use Perkin's process but supplied the latter with raw materials, and soon discovered their own magenta dye process; by 1865 they were the largest producers of coal tar colours in Great Britain. The original premises in Walworth, south London, became too small for their business and in 1865 they moved to the newly built Atlas Dye Works at Hackney Wick, London. 
Nicholson's process for making magenta dye, though subject to a provisional patent, was copied and the firm sought injunctions against other makers, including Read Holliday. After long and costly proceedings, the House of Lords ruled in 1866 that, because of careless drafting, the patents on which the firm relied were invalid; they had no legal protection against imitators. Competition brought a collapse in dye prices, from $12 per gallon in 1860 to 12's'. in 1866, a 95 per cent fall. As the firm was innovative and efficient, this was not calamitous; within a few years of developing magenta aniline dyes it was offering sulphonated, alkylated, and azo dyes in a wide range of colours and for various uses. 
In 1868, when he was only forty-one, Edward Nicholson decided to retire from the business to which he had made such an enormous contribution. There are various possible reasons: his partner George Simpson had retired a couple of years earlier; Hofmann, his mentor and friend, had returned to Germany as professor at the University of Berlin and his inspiration was no doubt sorely missed; and Nicholson had already made a substantial fortune (his will was proved at $147,710). Possibly he wished to withdraw from the pressures of competitive business and, a gentle research chemist, devote himself to his interest in rosaniline dyes. The retirement of the leading British researchers coincided with a great strengthening of the German chemical industry, many of whose chemists had worked in British factories and laboratories. Despite the onset of German competition from about 1870, the firm re-formed as Brooke, Simpson, and Spiller and continued to prosper until the mid-1880s. 
Nicholson was an original member of the Society of the Chemical Industry and a fellow of the Institute of Chemistry. Little is known of his private life. His wife, Louisa, survived him and a son, John, joined him in the business in 1866. He died on 23 October 1890 from cancer at his home, Carlton House, Herne Hill, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 50658


Nicholson, Wilfred (1821-1921), paint manufacturer, was born in London on 13 September 1821, the third surviving child of Thomas Nicholson and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Coulson (died 1859). In 1810 his father had moved from co. Durham to London to find work and after various jobs joined Henry Grace, white lead manufacturer of Bethnal Green, where he later became manager. 
Nicholson left school at thirteen and started work at Graces, gaining practical knowledge of paint ingredients and colours; most decorators of the day mixed their own paints and varnishes rather than buying ready-made products. Nicholson's interests were in selling rather than manufacture, and he became the firm's commercial traveller when he was twenty-six. He was popular and within ten years had been elected to the Commercial Travellers' Association Council; there he was a strong supporter of the association's charitable work, especially with its schools. 
Nicholson met his future wife, Ann Clements (died 1892), through his work with the Sunday school and social work at St Matthew's Church, Bethnal Green, and they were married on 23 July 1843. They had ten children; the two surviving boys attended the City of London School and the two youngest girls were taught at the school newly established by Frances Mary Buss at Camden Town. Henry Grace died in 1858 but Nicholson was not offered a partnership in the firm. Instead, three years later he was invited into partnership by John Jenson, whose high class varnish business at that time was much smaller than Grace's. Jenson and Nicholson developed a range of ready-to-use paints to supplement the business in oils, colours, and varnishes. Nicholson concentrated on marketing the firm's products. He travelled widely in the United Kingdom and on the continent, exhibiting in Paris in 1869/70 and Moscow in 1872. Agencies were set up to serve the major export markets in France and Belgium; sales to Australia and New Zealand were supplied through merchant houses. 
Jenson retired from the partnership in 1874. Within a few years Nicholson was joined by two of his sons, one of whom stayed only for a short time while the other, John ('b'. 1860), became a partner in 1893. They had been sent to George Mence Smith, who had a chain of hardware and oil shops, to learn about the paint business, and to Paris to learn some French and about continental business methods, before they joined their father. After John became a partner, Nicholson gradually reduced his involvement in active management although he never formally relinquished his partnership. Instead he spent more time on outside charitable activities. He had become a liveryman in the Painter-Stainers' Company in 1860 and master in 1881-2, and was closely involved in the company's charitable work for almost fifty years. 
Nicholson was brought up in a Christian home and throughout his life was a regular worshipper, latterly in the local Congregational church. His connection with the Sunday school movement was lifelong and he first visited the continent in 1864 as a representative of the Sunday School Union. He supported the 1870 'Education Act', even though it prohibited denominational teaching in board schools. As well as his work on the management committee of the Royal Commercial Travellers' Schools, he was interested in the Reedham Orphanage and many other charities. The Nicholson family moved a number of times but their homes were close to the business in north London. In 1894 Nicholson and his old friend Smith went on a cruise through the Norwegian fjords. Nicholson remained active in his charitable work until his mid-nineties and died on 9 January 1921, a few months short of his hundredth birthday. 


@@@@@


doc= 50659


Eadburh (fl. c.716-c.746), abbess (probably of Wimborne), first appears in the historical record as the recipient of a letter from Boniface, written while he was still known by the Anglo-Saxon name of Wynfrith, recounting at her request the recent vision of a monk at Much Wenlock. The letter can be dated to 716-19. Three further letters survive from Boniface to Eadburh, written after he was established in Germany and she had been appointed abbess, and one to her from Lull while he was a deacon; the date range for these letters has been estimated as 'c'.735-746. In one of his letters Boniface commissions Eadburh to copy the epistles of St Peter in gold, and there are other general references to books that she had supplied to the mission, as well as clothing. It is usually assumed that she is the Eadburh whom Leoba identified, in a letter to her kinsman Boniface, as her teacher; this evidence makes it unlikely that the Eadburh who was Boniface's correspondent was the same person as the Eadburh (d. 751) who was abbess of Thanet. Leoba's biographer Rudolf of Fulda makes no reference to Leoba's studying in Kent and implies that she remained at Wimborne until she joined Boniface in Germany. It is also unlikely in the political climate of the first half of the eighth century that a nun would be sent from Wessex to Kent. It would appear then that Eadburh was at one time in charge of the education of the nuns at Wimborne. The form of address in Boniface's letters suggests that Eadburh had been appointed abbess by about the middle of the 730s. The natural assumption is that she was abbess of Wimborne, but the identification is not completely certain because it is not known when Abbess Tetta ceased to be in charge of the foundation, and Leoba's biographer Rudolf implies that Tetta was still abbess when Leoba left for Germany, an event which cannot be closely dated but which is also likely to belong to the mid-730s, though it could be as late as 748. The recognition of Eadburh as West Saxon is important for an appreciation of standards of learning and literacy in the West Saxon church in the first half of the eighth century, and among its nuns in particular. The reference to the epistles written in gold is especially valuable as no surviving manuscript of this calibre has yet been identified as coming from a West Saxon foundation. 


@@@@@


doc= 50660


Quig, Alexander Johnstone (1892-1962), industrialist, was born on 5 January 1892 in Glasgow, the son of Alexander Quig, mechanical engineer. He was educated at Glasgow high school, leaving in 1908 at the age of sixteen to go into Nobel's Explosives Company Ltd. During the First World War he joined first the Glasgow highlanders and London Scottish regiments to serve in France, followed by a period in India with the Highland light infantry. After five years' service he rejoined Nobel's, which later expanded into Nobel Industries Ltd. In 1925 Quig transferred to Nobel Chemical Finishes Ltd, a company jointly owned with Du Pont, and rose rapidly from general manager to managing director; in 1936 he became chairman. In 1926 Nobel Industries Ltd was one of the four major chemical companies in Britain which merged to form the giant Imperial Chemical Industries. 
Quig's managerial experience stood him in good stead and at the beginning of 1939 he was made one of five new executive managers of ICI in a reorganization aimed at alleviating the workload of the hard-pressed board of directors. A year later he joined the full board as commercial director. He was instrumental in moving ICI away from the defensive alliances -- such as that with Distillers -- which had made it more secure but at the same time limited its scope in the 1930s, and proved himself more forceful and commercially aggressive than other ICI directors. By 1948, he was one of three deputy chairmen, from which position he retired in 1956. 
Quig's background in the cut and thrust environment of the paints and lacquers industry had provided him with ample opportunity to develop a shrewd commercial expertise and in 1944 he was made a director of British Nylon Spinners Ltd, a company jointly set up in 1940 by ICI and Courtaulds. He was largely responsible for the development of BNS and the establishment during the late 1940s of spinning factories near Pontypool in Wales and close to ICI's Billingham works on Teesside. Quig felt that ICI's group chairmen tended to be involved in the chemical and technical aspects of their various businesses at the expense of the commercial side. He strongly backed the creation, after the Second World War, of a staff college for the training of incoming managerial staff. 
Quig's reputation for expert management, developed during his Nobel and ICI years, was recognized outside the industry. He acted as chairman of the Industrial Management Research Association from 1946 to 1949, as well as being one of the founder members of the British Institute of Management. In 1948-9 he acted as chairman of a committee set up by the secretary of state for air to review the structure and management of the Air Ministry. In 1952, four years before his retirement, Quig married Joan Leason, the director of a box-manufacturing company, a widow and the daughter of Ernest Johns, a shipbuilder; they had no children. His Scottish roots were maintained in his membership of the Caledonian Club in London which boasted a large Scottish membership. He was also a member of the East India Club and the Royal Thames Yacht Club. 
Quig, who listed farming as one of his hobbies, lived at and managed Combe Farm, near Bramley, Surrey, with its herd of Ayrshire cattle, for many years until his death. He died at the age of seventy in the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Marylebone, London, on 13 December 1962, and was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 18 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 50661


Ravenscroft, George (1632/3-1683), merchant and glass manufacturer, was baptized in April 1633 at Alconbury Weston, near Huntingdon, the fourth of the eleven children of James Ravenscroft (1595-1680), lawyer and merchant, and his wife, Mary Peck of Spixworth, near Norwich. His parents were Roman Catholics, 'church papists', who practised their faith privately while outwardly conforming to the Anglican rite. In June 1643 they clandestinely sent George and his elder brother, Thomas, to the English College at Douai in the Spanish Netherlands. George left in May 1651, abandoning his training for the priesthood. Little is definitely known of his activities during the next fifteen years. In October 1656 a 'George Ravenscraft, Anglus' matriculated at the University of Padua. Ravenscroft certainly lived for some years in Venice, trading with his brothers James and Francis on their father's behalf 'and brought home a considerable capital' ('CSP Venice', 38.265). 
By 1666 Ravenscroft was resident in London, importing glass, lace, and currants from Venice, and re-exporting goods to northern Europe. In 1670 or 1671 he married Hellen Appleby ('b'. 'c'.1650), daughter of Thomas Appleby of Linton upon Ouse, near York, and his wife, Hellen; her maternal grandfather, the staunchly Catholic Sir Thomas Gascoigne, had become her guardian on her mother's early death and father's remarriage. With her Ravenscroft had three children. 
Venice was the acknowledged centre of European glass making, but emigrant craftsmen had diffused its techniques across the continent. By the 1670s English glassware was of sufficiently good quality to reduce dramatically the demand for Venetian imports. To complement his increasingly vulnerable import business, in 1673 Ravenscroft established a glassworks at the Savoy, London, in conjunction with a Signor da Costa and other Italian glass makers. In March 1674, claiming to have 'attained to the art and manufacture of a particular sort of Cristaline Glasses resembling Rock Cristall', previously not made in England, Ravenscroft applied for a patent. Issued two months later, this gave him a seven-year monopoly over 'the said manufacture of cristaline glasse for drinking glasses'. Simultaneously, he contracted to deliver his entire output to the London Glass Sellers' Company for three years. In October 1674 the company agreed to his establishing a second glasshouse for one year at Henley-on-Thames, possibly in connection with attempts to resolve early technical problems. 
The reputation of Ravenscroft's new glassware was severely damaged by rapid 'crizzling' (innumerable fine cracks which made it grey and opaque). In June 1676 he certified that the problem had been resolved; in October he advertised that his new glasses would bear a raven's head seal 'for distinguishing them from the former fabrick', and offered a money-back guarantee. Sealed glasses surviving from this period contain a small quantity of lead oxide. Ravenscroft is commonly thought to have added the lead in order to remedy the crizzling, which had resulted from over-purified ingredients containing an excess of alkaline salts, in an attempt to imitate Venetian soda glass (Moody, 201-3, 207-8). Alternatively, he was possibly using lead oxide already in 1674, but insufficient to stabilize the glass: hence his claim to have produced a distinctively new type of glass, meriting a patent (MacLeod, 791-800; Watts, 'Glass Circle', 71-8). 
It seems unlikely that a wealthy merchant of Ravenscroft's standing would have involved himself closely in the technical aspects of the invention and manufacture; more probably, he contributed the financial support and marketing network for Costa or another professional glass maker. Lead crystal proved to be the ideal medium for the sturdier, plainer designs of drinking glasses then becoming fashionable in England, but it may not have been immediately popular. Ravenscroft's enterprise was probably not a commercial success. In August 1678 he gave the Glass Sellers' Company six months' notice to terminate their agreement, and there is no further reference to his manufacture of drinking glasses, although he continued to produce plate glass until at least 1680. A former employee, Hawley Bishopp, resumed production at the Savoy in 1682, and within a decade lead crystal was widely made in England. 
Ravenscroft died on 7 June 1683, from 'a palsy which seized him and continued strong upon him till his death' (Moody, 204). He was buried in the family vault in the church of St John the Baptist, Chipping Barnet, Hertfordshire, and was commemorated by a tablet. There is no known likeness. His will, made in February 1682, refers to several estates in Huntingdonshire and Monmouthshire, some recently inherited from his father and paternal uncle. It confirms a contemporary description of Ravenscroft as 'a greate moneyed man' (TNA: PRO, C5/543/74), his assets spread across trade, land, and manufacturing. His father, 'the great benefactor' of Barnet, commending in his will George's 'industry and good courses', recognized in him a responsible son and a shrewd businessman, the counsellor and mainstay of his family (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/365, fol. 113). 


@@@@@


doc= 50662


Rogers, John (1878-1975), chemist and industrialist, was born on 24 May 1878 in the Gorbals, Glasgow, the son of Richard and Sarah Rogers. He was educated at a local board school until he was fourteen and then, while working as a laboratory boy at the Royal Technical College in Glasgow, he won a scholarship giving him free tuition there. After completing his studies he continued to work at the college as assistant to the professor of chemistry until 1899, when he joined Nobel's Explosives Company where he was one of the first research chemists to be employed. The company had been formed in 1871 to manufacture the explosive products developed and patented by Alfred Nobel at its factory at Ardeer, just outside Glasgow. The business had grown by exporting to overseas markets, mainly in the colonies; the company was also part of the Nobel-Dynamite Trust, a holding company which united the companies founded by Nobel, binding them together by cross-shareholdings, profit pooling, and market-sharing agreements. 
Rogers married M. K. Allan in 1905; they had one daughter. Recognition of Rogers's scientific expertise and abilities came in 1908 when he was moved from Ardeer to the head office of Nobels in Glasgow as head of the technical department. There he became well acquainted with Harry (later Lord) McGowan, a forceful and ambitious young man, who had joined Nobels in 1889 and in 1909 was appointed the company's assistant general manager. The two became closely associated and remained so for the rest of their careers, although, according to Rogers, they were never friends. Rogers was a modest, kindly and considerate man whose conciliatory approach to problems and lack of personal ambition contrasted sharply with McGowan's aggressive determination. 
During the First World War the company's output and profits inevitably increased and for its significant contribution to the war effort Rogers was made OBE. In 1918 Explosives Trades Ltd, a merger of all the UK explosives companies, was formed, with McGowan as its chairman and managing director and Rogers as its technical manager. In 1920 when Explosives Trades became Nobel Industries, to reflect better the widening of its industrial interests, Rogers became its technical director and in 1922 he joined the board of directors. Four years later McGowan was instrumental in the merger of Nobels with three other companies to form Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd (ICI) and was rewarded with the position of president of the new company. Rogers was appointed an executive director at ICI's first board meeting on 8 December 1926, and, over the next twenty-four years, continued to work closely with McGowan, who was chairman and managing director in 1930-37 and then chairman until 1950. 
Rogers played a considerable role in the technical development of ICI between 1926 and 1939. He was appointed chairman of a new management committee for the British Dyestuffs Corporation (BDC) in 1928; one of the four merging companies, BDC's short and unhappy history reflected the failure of the UK dyestuffs industry to compete with the German industry. After it became part of ICI, BDC achieved some success in matching German innovation in dyestuffs. The surviving evidence indicates that Rogers also appreciated the potential of the organic chemical industry and endeavoured to foster its development within ICI. He was chairman of the ICI Research Council from 1927 until 1939. 
Rogers was not, however, confined to technical matters only. His moderation, common sense, and conciliatory approach were invaluable in negotiations and he played a significant part in ICI's industrial diplomacy with, for example, the Distillers Company and Courtaulds, both before and after the Second World War. In his personal life, after the death of his first wife, he married again in 1939; his second wife was Patricia Mary Katherine Garnett. 
It was a measure of the respect felt for Rogers -- and the fear of McGowan -- in ICI that in 1937 it was Rogers who was deputed by his fellow directors to question McGowan about his financial affairs. McGowan's autocratic management style had led to discontent among the directors and his financial speculations had taken him close to personal bankruptcy. The attempt to force McGowan out of ICI failed and he held on to the chairmanship; in 1940 Rogers was appointed one of three deputy chairmen, a position he held for ten years. 
During the Second World War Rogers served first as director-general of explosives and second as chairman of the ammunition board at the Ministry of Supply. It was widely believed that he refused to accept an honour at the end of the war when he returned to ICI. 
When McGowan finally (and reluctantly) retired from ICI in 1950 it was expected that Rogers would also retire, but the sudden death of Sir Frederick Bain, chosen by the board as McGowan's successor, left a gap which Rogers agreed to fill as a caretaker chairman for two years. Despite his lack of enthusiasm for leadership or action, Rogers' personal qualities -- friendliness and concern, patience, and a dry sense of humour -- won him both respect and affection. While he was chairman he also served (1951-2) as president of the Society of Chemical Industry and in 1952 he was awarded an honorary degree of LLD by St Andrews University. 
Rogers retired from ICI in 1953 to enjoy, with his wife, the pursuit of his hobbies of travelling and the collection of old silver and Chinese ivories. He died at his home, Flat C, 29 Eton Square, Westminster, on 3 August 1975. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50663


Spilman, James (bap. 1680, d. 1763), merchant, was baptized at Yarmouth on 6 December 1680, second son of the merchant Benjamin Spilman ('c'.1644-1719) and his third wife, Susan Robins. An uncle, Samuel Spilman, shipped presents from the Russia Company to Peter the Great at Yarmouth in 1693. Spilman probably went to Russia in the wake of the tsar's European recruitment drive of 1697-8, trading on his own account in 1701 or earlier. The tsar, having granted a lucrative monopoly of the Russian tobacco trade in 1698 to the London-based Tobacco Company, transferred it in 1704 to Moscow burgomasters. They signed a contract in February 1705 with Spilman and Samuel Martin, his co-factor, agents for a group of London businessmen, to supply tobacco and equipment, but the project was abandoned following an export ban. After the murder of Martin in 1709, Spilman, co-executor of his will, spent some time in England and was admitted to the freedom of the Russia Company on 8 June 1711. 
When St Petersburg became the Russian capital in 1712, Spilman replaced Henry Stiles as senior English merchant, responsible to the tsar for recruiting English naval and industrial personnel, and for training Russians in England. Simultaneously he partnered Henry Hodgkin, a factor merchant, trading with several north European countries as well as with Britain. Their intervention helped to secure the election on 29 July 1714 to the Royal Society of Prince Menshikov, Russia's second most powerful figure and its leading industrial entrepreneur. 
Although appointed to the Russia Company's court of assistants in March 1718, Spilman continued with his business concerns in Russia until 1721. On 13 April 1723 he married Hester, daughter of William Willys, a Hamburg and Russia merchant, the sister and coheir of Sir Thomas Willys (died April 1732), sixth baronet, of Fen Ditton, Cambridgeshire. Their only child, Julia, was baptized in September 1724, when they were living at Park Place, near St James's Palace. By the 1730s they had moved to Conduit Street, close to Hanover Square. 
Spilman was on the Russia Company's court of assistants for many years, becoming its auditor (1729-40) and consul (1733-5). His considerable knowledge and expertise was utilized on various committees: Baltic lightships (1725), management of the company's trade and legal affairs (1728), and briefing the Board of Trade on Russian court contracts (1736); however, his major contributions were in drawing up an Anglo-Russian treaty of commerce (1732-4) and drafting a memorial to the Treasury for importing Persian silk through Russia (1735). In 1742 he published 'A Journey through Russia into Persia', containing an account by John Elton and Mungo Graeme (or Graham) of their exploring in 1739 the prospects for British trans-Caspian trade from Astrakhan to Persia. The treatise was dedicated to Spilman's colleague, Sir John Thompson, a prominent cloth merchant, shipowner, and Russia Company governor (1740-49). Spilman received the freedom of Yarmouth in 1750. 
A long-serving director of the Bank of England (1730-62), Spilman was concurrently an active commissioner of the Royal Hospital at Greenwich (1732-62), attending its committee meetings on eighty occasions and, with Sir John Thompson, acting as trustee to the Derwentwater estates. Spilman was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 31 October 1734 and council member in 1743. When admitted on 14 November 1734, he presented the society with three items given to him by Peter the Great: a snuff-box of granadilla wood made by the tsar, a fragrant stick of golden birchwood from Samarkand, and a piece purported to be of Noah's ark, but 'undoubtedly brought from Mount Ararat'. The society's journal books and certificates (1734-49) provide evidence of Spilman's interest in Russian and general natural history, and of his significant Anglo-Russian connections. Six book subscriptions (1735-57) partly reflect the promotion of experimental philosophy, stressed as a qualification in his election certificate (4 April 1734). 
Spilman's wife, Hester, died on 23 August 1761, aged seventy-two, and his own death followed in London on 21 November 1763. He was buried at Waltham Abbey Holy Cross, Essex, commemorated by a marble monumental inscription in the north aisle wall. Their daughter, Julia, who married George Richard Carter of Chilton, Buckinghamshire, in 1753, was granted an administration in December 1763. 


@@@@@


doc= 50665


Savage, John Percival (1895-1970), industrialist, was born at 8 Watt Street, Nottingham, on 18 November 1895, the son of Robert Louther Savage, a railway guard, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Pakes, who was a Primitive Methodist. In 1911, when he was fifteen, he left Mundella secondary school, Nottingham, without qualifications and joined Boots, the retail chain and pharmaceutical manufacturers, as an office boy. At the time the founder, Jesse Boot, was trying to improve the standard of recruits by taking them from the local secondary schools; though his eyes were thought to be weak, young Savage was sent into the accounts department. 
Savage's rise through the business was undoubtedly due to his shrewdness and dedication to the company, but can be adequately understood only by reference to the internal organization of Boots during that period. In 1921, after Jesse Boot sold his controlling interest in the company to the American firm Rexall, John Greenwood was appointed expense controller and Savage became one of his assistants. It was recognized that with the rapid growth of payroll, retail branches, and manufacturing, the need for co-ordination of policy on expenditure was vital. Although the company as a whole had profit objectives, it was virtually impossible to allocate individual targets to sections within it because, with the exception of the shops, individual profit-earning units could not be defined. Central direction of expenditure was therefore inevitable, and in the course of a few years the expense control department acquired considerable executive authority. Savage allowed it to become a kind of clearing-house for numerous problems which did not easily belong elsewhere; his major assets were his earthy common sense, his easy rapport with the men he had grown up with, and his growing reputation as a mediator. On 20 April 1922 he married Beatrice Maude, daughter of Henry Hodgson, a painter. 
During the twenty years or so that Savage was his assistant, Greenwood allowed him a very free hand and he represented the finance director on various Boots committees on which Greenwood really ought to have been sitting. This delegation not only gave Greenwood more time for hunting and fishing but, in particular, saved him from having to disagree too often with Lord Trent (Jesse Boot's son and successor), who took the chair at some of these meetings. The arrangement was no doubt also congenial to Trent, who hated difficult personal encounters and found Savage an easier person to deal with. In 1936 Trent appointed Savage as his personal assistant and in 1941, when the chairman effectively moved to government service as a civil commissioner, Savage became general manager. Having been Trent's right-hand man for eighteen years, he was the only executive who knew enough of the business to succeed him. 
This career background serves to explain the main achievements of Savage's seven years as Boots' chairman and managing director (1954-61). It can fairly be regarded as a period of transition from the Trent autocracy to managerial government by committee. During the years in which Savage was administrative general manager but lacked the authority of appointment as chief executive, he had to form policy from a feeling for the consensus -- given the jealousy of his rivals there was no practical alternative. When he was finally appointed chairman, he continued to be reasonable and considerate to those whom he regarded as of similar rank and social background; in office Savage allowed the executive to argue with him and worked for agreement. He had few original ideas of his own and seldom visited the branches, so was also prepared to listen to younger men. He was a good organizer of managers in the sense that he provided the right conditions to enable them to work together as a team. One of the Boots buyers at the period recalled that he suddenly acquired so much more freedom that he hardly knew how to use it. However, the benefits were still limited; a small circle of 'buddies' gained most. 
In later years Savage was sensitive about his lack of formal education; 'superior' accents grated with him and the Boots' managers recruited at Cambridge made him feel insecure. Greenwood tried to give him some polish by taking him to his London club and to a Savile Row tailor, but he never enjoyed such surroundings or formal occasions. He was immensely proud of his achievement in climbing from the lowest rung of the ladder to the top but he was not entirely at ease there, particularly on formal occasions. He was popular in his own circle but nervous at shareholders' meetings. He had never worked for any other firm, did not join employers' organizations, would not take directorships in other firms, and knew little of the world of business outside Boots. In any situation he took his inspiration from what Lord Trent would have done. Trent had trusted him to maintain his policies and Savage was loyal to the end; his chairmanship was really an extension of Trent's. Shy and truculent, Savage too often bristled at strangers and subordinates, and his habitual swearing intimidated or alienated some of the rising generation of managers. By the time he was Boots chairman one of his family could describe him as a 'fallen Methodist', and he had a great liking for pink gins. Savage died at his home, 612 Derby Road, Nottingham, on 22 February 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 50667


Ward, Sir (Alfred) Dudley (1905-1991), army officer, was born on 27 January 1905 in Avenue Road, Wimborne, Dorset, the son of Lionel Howell Ward, accountant in poor law, and his wife, Lillie Maud ('nee' Morgan). He was educated at Wimborne grammar school, was a chorister in Wimborne Minster, and began his career as an apprentice of the Eastern Telegraph Company in Gibraltar. In 1924 he enlisted in the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire regiment and, after being selected from the ranks as a potential officer, was sent to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from which he was commissioned into the Dorset regiment in 1929. On 29 April 1933 he married Beatrice Constance Griffith (died 1962), daughter of the Revd Thomas Francis Griffith, of The Bourne, Farnham, Surrey. There was one daughter of the marriage, Jill Beatrice ('b'. 1935). Meanwhile Ward served in India and on the north-west frontier before attending the Staff College, Quetta, where he was taught by the future Field Marshal Montgomery. After graduation he transferred to the King's (Liverpool) regiment in 1937, served on the staff in military intelligence, returned to the Staff College as an instructor, served on the staff again, and then was appointed to command 43rd reconnaissance regiment. 
In 1943 Ward was promoted to command the 17th infantry brigade, which advanced from Sicily through Italy during 1943-4. The skill he demonstrated in various river crossings and pitched battles on rugged terrain led to command of the 4th (British) division. In the May 1944 offensive at Cassino he displayed outstanding leadership, for the division had the task of crossing the strongly fortified Rapido River, close to the bombed ruins of the monastery. Although at times it seemed that the task might be too difficult Ward's determination and initiative ensured that it was a success. Similar skills and determination were displayed in subsequent battles for Lake Trasimene, Florence, and the penetration of the Gothic and Rimini lines (as the German fortifications across the peninsula were called). At the end of a gruelling campaign, when his division was expecting a lengthy rest and rehabilitation in Egypt, it was switched to Greece, where the communists were rebelling against Papandreou's pro-allied government with a view to installing their own regime. Although initially it seemed that his resources were insufficient for the task, and his own headquarters was attacked by ELAS (the communist National People's Liberation Army), he eventually outfought his opponents and cleared Athens. 
After the end of the Second World War Ward was director of military operations at the War Office from 1947 to 1948, and commandant of the Staff College, Camberley, from 1948 to 1951, before becoming commander of 1st corps in Germany -- a position he held from 1951 to 1952. In 1953 he returned to England to become deputy chief of the Imperial General Staff, but he was back in Germany as commander, northern army group, and commander-in-chief of the British army of the Rhine from 1957 to 1959. His next appointment was that of commander-in-chief, British forces, Near East, where he set up the sovereign base in Cyprus. From 1962 to 1965 he was governor of Gibraltar, a vital point in NATO strategy, where he had to keep a wary eye on General Franco, who was conducting a campaign to have the Rock returned to Spain, and might have tried a military coup. Ward's combination of tact and firmness were very reassuring to the Gibraltarians. On a personal level, Ward's time in Gibraltar was marked both by tragedy and happiness. On 17 October 1962, shortly after arriving in Gibraltar, his first wife, Beatrice, died. On 28 September 1963 Ward married Joan Elspeth de Pechell Scott ('b'. 1920/21), head of the Red Cross in Gibraltar, and daughter of Colonel Donald Charles Scott, of the Royal Army Medical Corps. There were no children of this second marriage. 
One of Ward's particular skills was assessing risks. During his time as director of military operations, the Soviet Union had been testing allied resolve by interfering with road and rail access to Berlin, activities which culminated in the 1948 blockade. When subsequently commanding NATO forces in Germany, Ward had to decide what, if any, response should be made to provocative gestures by the Russians: he was only too well aware that overreaction might trigger a third world war. Ward was a soldier who thought and planned ahead realistically, and trained his men accordingly. However, he knew when to delegate. He also believed that life should be enjoyed. As a young man he had been an excellent athlete (army champion at 100 and 220 yards); later he took up sailing and golf. He was appointed DSO in 1944, and made CBE and CB in 1945, KBE in 1953, KCB in 1957, and GCB in 1959. 
Ward died of bronchopneumonia and cancer of the colon at his home, Wynneys Farmhouse, Dennington, Woodbridge, Suffolk, on 28 December 1991. He was survived by his second wife, and by the daughter of his first marriage. A memorial service was held at the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, on 25 March 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 50672


Grant, Doris Margaret Louise (1905-2003), nutritionist, was born on 23 January 1905 in North Sandlaw, Aloah, Banff, Scotland, the youngest in the family of two sons and three daughters of William Cruickshank, a businessman who had returned from China to buy a farm and settle in Scotland, and his wife, Adeline Anne Marshall, 'nee' Smith. She attended Banff Academy, moving on to the Glasgow School of Art, where she took the five-year diploma course (1922-7), and won the Rome scholarship, awarded to the top student of the year. However, when it was discovered that she was engaged to be married, she was forced to give up the scholarship. She married (William Duncan) Gordon Grant (1902-1997) in Banff on 8 November 1927. Her husband, the son of George Cowie Grant, a doctor, worked for the family firm of William Grant, distillers, and after their marriage they moved to London, where he established the London office of the firm. They had two daughters. 
As a young woman Doris Grant suffered many years of ill health, including chronic indigestion and crippling rheumatoid arthritis, but she made a rapid recovery after adopting the Hay diet, developed in the 1920s by an American, William Howard Hay. Hay's book, 'A New Health Era' (1934), set out the principles of 'food combining'. Believing that disease was mainly caused by the wrong chemical conditions in the body, created by bad eating habits, he advocated eating proteins at separate meals from carbohydrates, and thought that vegetables, salads, and fruits should make up the bulk of the diet, in order to avoid generating excess acid in the digestive system. From then on Doris Grant was a passionate believer in the Hay diet, and after writing about it in a series of weekly articles in the 'Sunday Graphic' for nine months from 1936 to 1937 she was visited by Hay, who asked her to write a book of menus and recipes for the British housewife. 'The Hay System Menu Book' was published in 1937, followed by 'Feeding the Family in Wartime, Based on the New Knowledge of Nutrition' (1942). 
Doris Grant is remembered mainly for the 'Grant loaf', made from unkneaded dough. The recipe first appeared in 'Your Daily Bread', which was published in 1944, and was subsequently printed many times in the magazine 'Housewives Today'. An advocate of wholemeal bread and home baking, Grant discovered by accident that wholemeal bread did not have to be kneaded, and that in fact it tasted better made this way, and also saved time, making it easier for housewives to bake their own bread. Her recipe called for stoneground wholemeal flour and Barbados muscovado cane sugar, and a large quantity of yeast. Despite the healthy nature of the Grant loaf, she thought one should only eat bread at one meal a day. In 'Your Daily Food' (1973) she expanded on the ill effects of eating white bread, which she described as 'murdered bread', using white flour from which the wheat germ and bran, important sources of vitamin B, had been discarded, and which had been bleached with chemicals to make it whiter. 'If you love your husbands', she declared, 'keep them away from white bread... If you don't love them, cyanide is quicker but bleached bread is just as certain, and no questions asked' ('Daily Telegraph', 29 March 2003). 
After the war Grant continued to campaign for healthy eating. In 'Dear Housewives' (1954) and 'Housewives Beware' (1958) she warned about the dangers of processed foods and food additives, and urged people to grow their own fruit and vegetables, or eat organically grown local produce, and to avoid all food that had come through a factory: 'the chemical dragon' was 'now breathing its foul breath over our food and water' ('Housewives Beware', 15). In 1984 she returned to the subject of the Hay diet in 'Food Combining for Health: a New Look at the Hay System', written with Jean Joice: it ran to five editions in ten years, selling half a million copies. This was followed by 'Food Combining for Life: the Health Success of the Century' (1995), which included some of the hundreds of letters she had received from readers who claimed to have had their lives transformed by the Hay system. She also took up other causes in her efforts to improve the health of the nation. She was a vigorous opponent of the fluoridation of the water supply, and her address to the British Housewives' League in 1979 was published as a pamphlet, 'The Fluoridation Fallacy'. She was also a founder member of the Henry Doubleday Research Association, devoted to the furtherance and improvement of organic gardening. 
Slim and energetic, Doris Grant had many other interests and talents. She took up the cello at the age of forty, in order to complete the family string quartet, and designed and made costume jewellery for the royal dress designer Norman Hartnell to sell in his boutique. When her husband retired in 1962 and they moved to Poole, Dorset, she took navigation lessons in order to help sail their motor yacht in the English Channel. Although she was regarded by many as a crank, her emphasis on healthy eating and organically grown fruit and vegetables had become widely accepted by the time of her death. She died on 27 February 2003 at the Lister Hospital, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, of heart disease, and was survived by her two daughters, her husband having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 50673


Fettiplace, Elinor, Lady Fettiplace (b. c.1570, d. in or after 1647), writer on household management, probably born at Pauntley, Gloucestershire, was the eldest daughter of Sir Henry Poole (died 1616) of Sapperton in Gloucestershire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Wroughton of Broad Hinton in Wiltshire. She married Richard Fettiplace (1564-1615) of Appleton in Berkshire in 1589. Lady Fettiplace is chiefly remembered for her household book, dated on the flyleaf 1604, which is among the earliest surviving manuscripts of its kind. It is a collection of recipes, remedies, and housekeeping tips, produced at a time when women were not normally taught to read or write, remarkable for its clear, coherent, vigorous, and intricately detailed account of Jacobean country-house life. 
The book, like its author, stood at a turning point between old and new orders in England: the Fettiplaces were an ancient Norman family hoping to revive failing fortunes by an alliance with the dynamic and innovative modern world of the Pooles. Elinor's grandfather had been a protege of Protector Somerset, and her father was one of a key group of courtiers, including Robert Cecil, many of whom stayed in the magnificent Renaissance mansion at Sapperton designed to rival the house built by Poole's brother-in-law Sir John Thynne at Longleat. One of Elinor's contributors was her cousin, Gresham Thynne. Another was Gresham's step-uncle Sir Walter Ralegh, who supplied two versions of a costly narcotic, 'Tobacca water'. Other receipts came from a network of west country friends, relations, and neighbours, such as Shakespeare's son-in-law, the surgeon John Hall. 
Lady Fettiplace inherited a tradition of lavish hospitality, catering in the relatively modest twelfth-century manor at Appleton for a 'family' of twenty or thirty members (servants, retainers, and dependants as well as her own two sons and three daughters). She could expect to feed two or three times as many people at great seasonal feasts in the winter months on the produce of her dairy, garden, orchards, and fields, all of which had to be gathered, processed, and stored in still room, kitchen, and cellar throughout the rest of the year. Apart from a few imported luxury items (gold leaf and crushed pearls, for instance, in a princely 'Spanish marmalad'), the household was self-sufficient. Lady Fettiplace produced her own ink, soap, toothpaste, cosmetics, flea powder, rat poison, and weedkiller. She described how to bleach linen, perfume gloves, and launder delicate gold or coloured silks. Her house served as surgery and dispensary for the surrounding countryside: bubonic plague was a constant threat -- 'if this Drink be taken before the markes appeare, it helpeth by the grace of god' she noted at the foot of a bitter herbal 'medicine of King Henry the eighth for the plague or pestilence' (Spurling, 17). She included thirty-six ways of dressing wounds, nearly four dozen remedies for failing eyesight, two dozen plasters or potions to relieve stomach trouble, sixteen cough mixtures, eleven cures for a bad back, and seven for insomnia. 
Lady Fettiplace's cookery recipes looked forward rather than back to the medieval past: she used no saffron or other artificial colourings; her sauces were thickened with egg yolks rather than breadcrumbs; Arab ingredients such as rosewater, dried fruit, and spices were used sparingly. For the most part her food was simple and fresh-tasting, subtly flavoured, delicate and decorative but not over-rich, a repertoire reflecting the same taste for clarity, lightness, and elegance as the architecture of Longleat or Sapperton. Dishes like her mutton with claret wine and Seville orange juice in the gravy, poached trout, spinach tart, her sweet creams, custards and cheesecakes, belong to a European tradition which nearly four centuries later was still running strong in English or French bourgeois cooking. Her recipe for meringues ('white bisket bread') predated by at least fifty years the earliest published reference in France. Preserving fruit (then only recently made possible by the first sugar refineries) was her passion. 
At some point after the death of Sir Richard Fettiplace in 1615, Lady Fettiplace married a citizen of Gloucester called Edward Rogers (died 1623). Her second husband was probably from the Rogers family of Dowdeswell, who were part of the Pooles' local circuit of Gloucestershire squires. Lady Fettiplace lived on until about 1647, in which year she left her book to her niece Anne, daughter of her brother, Sir Henry Poole the younger of Sapperton: 'Thes bock I geve to my deare nees and goddutar Mrs Anne Hornar desyring her to kepe it for my sake: 1647' (Spurling, 35). 
Lady Fettiplace had connections with leading figures of her day from Ralegh and Cecil to Francis Bacon, and her book gives a rare glimpse of their expansive, enquiring, empirical spirit at work in a domestic context. 


@@@@@


doc= 50676


La Chapelle, Vincent (fl. 1733-1736), cook and writer on cookery, was one of the most influential cooks in the early eighteenth century, but almost nothing is known about his personal life. When he published 'The Modern Cook' at his own expense in 1733, he was described as having lately been the principal cook of the fourth earl of Chesterfield. A year later an advertisement for his book described him as cook to the count of Montijo; in 1736, the title page announced that he was now chief cook to his highness the prince of Orange. Before entering the service of Lord Chesterfield, La Chapelle claimed, he travelled widely and visited, among other places, India. His book reflects a curiosity about cookery throughout the world and includes recipes for such dishes as 'Calf's head Hanover style', 'Tripe the Polish way', 'Hare the Swiss way', and 'Chicken the Jamaican way'. Not only are there numerous recipes 'a l'Anglaise', but the work manifestly indicates La Chapelle's respect for English food and cooking. His culinary philosophy is revealed in his very first pages, where he wrote that: 'A cook of genius will invent new delicasies to please the palates of those for whom he is to labour, his art, like all others, being subject to change' (Hyman and Hyman, 'La Chapelle and Massialot', 45). 
When his book was published in French, again at the author's expense, in 1735 under the title 'Le cuisinier moderne', La Chapelle warned his French readers that he was not writing solely for them. Nevertheless, his cookery fitted into the French mould -- partly because many of his recipes were reproduced (without proper acknowledgement) from Francois Massialot's 'Cuisinier royal et bourgeois' (1691) -- one of the most popular French cookery books of the time. Despite its heavy borrowings from this older treatise, La Chapelle's book was original in many respects. It is a monumental work (from three large volumes in 1733, it grew to five in the second French edition of 1742), illustrated with sixteen engravings of imposing dimensions. Virtually every branch of cookery is treated, and it was the first eighteenth-century French cookery text to announce a rupture with the past and vaunt the merits of 'cuisine moderne', claiming it to be simpler, healthier, and more elegantly served than former styles of cooking. 
La Chapelle not only introduced the French to such English dishes as 'Rosbif', 'Beef steks', and 'Potin' (pudding), but also incited French chefs to be more adventurous and to draw upon other culinary traditions for inspiration. 'Le cuisinier moderne' is no doubt one of the most influential of all the cookbooks published in the eighteenth century. Antonin Careme (1833) judged it 'digne de mon attention' ('worthy of attention'; Hyman and Hyman, 'Vincent La Chapelle', 35) and a century later Auguste Escoffier included a 'Sauce Vincent' in his classic, 'Le guide culinaire' (1921 edn), adding that 'this sauce was created by Vincent La Chapelle, one of the great master chefs of the 18th century' (p. 36). 


@@@@@


doc= 50677


Gedde, John (fl. 1647-1697), apiculturist, was born in St Andrews, Fife, the second son of Michael Geddy, bailie of St Andrews, and Catherine Avery. In 1649, two years into a four-year apprenticeship to William Henderson, writer to the signet, he was appointed steward clerk to the steward of Fife, James Murray, earl of Annandale, a post he retained when John Murray, earl of Atholl, succeeded as steward in 1661. During Charles II's campaign in Scotland in 1650/51 Gedde was clerk to the committee of war. He married Anne (died 1691), daughter of an Ayr schoolmaster, William Wallace, in 1657. Elected a bailie of Falkland in 1665, Gedde generally resided there until his death. 
Gedde's presbyterianism brought him into conflict with the crown after the Restoration. He was reported to the privy council of Scotland for attending field conventicles and entertaining outed ministers, and in 1678 refused to sign assurances to desist. Religious scruples, reflected in the precocious piety of his daughter Emelia Geddie (1665-1681), lost him his clerkship. It also undermined ten years litigation with Patrick Telfer, who in 1678 excluded the family from their property in Falkland and felled Gedde's woods, plantations, and nurseries. Telfer defended these actions by maintaining that Gedde was 'knowne to be a most seditious persone, disaffected with the government and one who for his principles and practeisses hath been inter commoned severall years' (Bryden, 205). Gedde refused to sign the 'Test Acts' introduced under James VII which 'necessitated him, his wife and family to abandon his native country until King William's accession' (Mylne, 341). Returning to Falkland, Gedde recovered part of his fortune, having taxable property valued at $330 in 1695. In 1697 his London publisher described him as 'an ancient Gentleman of the Scottish Nation' (Walker, 306). 
Gedde's apicultural interests were awakened through observation of wild bees in the royal park at Falkland. In 1672, without acknowledgement, Sir Robert Moray presented to the Royal Society 'a bee hive of a peculiar contrivance, sent out of Scotland... made up of several pieces, to take off one; whereby bees are kept from swarming, by adding a new box for every swarm' (T. Birch, ed., 'The History of the Royal Society of London', 4 vols., 1756-7, 3.60), given wider publicity by Henry Oldenburg in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for 1673. Gedde travelled to London, claimed credit for design and operating instructions, and applied for fourteen-year monopoly rights, duly granted in 1675. English partners managed the patent, selling licences to regional manufactures who marketed sets of supered hives complete with a bee colony. His book 'A New Discourse of an Excellent Method of Bee-Houses and Colonies' was published in London in 1675. 
In fact, the design for a supered hive with observation windows had been published by Samuel Hartlib during the interregnum and by 1655 such hives, credited to Gloucestershire cleric William Mew with improvements by Christopher Wren, were in use at Wadham College. In retrospect, the originality in Gedde's design lay only in the insertion of a removable frame in each super. This, with honeycomb attached, could be removed causing little disturbance to the colony. Gedde's apicultural protocols ran counter to traditional management of bees in straw skeps. Suggestions of plagiarism, together with the restrictions implicit in the patent, caused further adverse comment. Nevertheless, extended editions of his book were published in 1676, 1677, and 1697. In 1679 the hive design, openly acknowledging Gedde's patent, was central to the bee-keeping book written by Moses Rusden, successfully recommended by John Evelyn for appointment as bee master to Charles II. Gedde's apicultural ideas were further promulgated through the 1721/2 reprinting of his 1675 text as part of a composite work, in turn the source of a German translation published in Leipzig (1727, 1729, 1752, 1755). In the nineteenth century, when the life cycle of 'Apis mellifera' was better understood, the potential of the supered hive with removable frames was fully exploited to actively manage bees and optimize honey harvested. 


@@@@@


doc= 50679


Chambers, William (1724?-1777), Church of England clergyman, was probably born at Derby. He was the son of John Chambers of Derby ('b'. 'c'.1693, died 1751), who is variously described as 'Esq' and 'Gent.' (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.', 1.319; Glover, 2.469), and of his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1700, died 1785). He was educated at Derby School and, aged eighteen, matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 5 March 1743; he graduated BA in 1747 and MA three years later. At Cambridge he formed a friendship with his fellow collegian Theophilus Lindsey, whose latitudinarian, and subsequently anti-trinitarian, theological opinions Chambers came to share. He was ordained deacon in the diocese of Ely on 5 June 1748 and priest in the diocese of Peterborough on 5 November of the same year. According to Lindsey he undertook a grand tour of the Netherlands, France, and Italy. His family was both wealthy and well connected. His aunt Hannah Sophia Chambers had married Brownlow Cecil, eighth earl of Exeter, in 1724 and their son Brownlow, from 1754 the ninth earl, was a contemporary of Chambers at St John's College. The earls of Exeter owned the advowson of the rectory of the church of St John the Baptist, Achurch, Northamptonshire, and it was through their patronage that Chambers was appointed rector of Achurch in 1748. 
Chambers married Dorothy Rolleston (died 1809) probably soon after his institution at Achurch; they had two sons and a daughter. Lindsey asserts that Chambers 'was endowed with a peculiar turn for medical knowledge, which he diligently cultivated by the preliminary studies of anatomy, chemistry &c' (Ditchfield, 'The Revd William Chambers', 9) and that he ministered diligently to the health of the poor of his parish. Though he appears to have published nothing he was awarded a DD by Cambridge in 1762. The endorsements that he wrote on his surviving manuscript sermons suggest that he was a conscientious priest. He developed a close sympathy with those clergymen, among them Lindsey's father-in-law, Francis Blackburne, who objected in principle to compulsory clerical subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. At Achurch, according to Lindsey, he experimented with the liturgy on lines previously suggested by Samuel Clarke: 'he never repeated any part of the service, where Jesus Christ or the Holy Spirit were addressed and invoked, being persuaded that the God and Father of all, was the only true God and object of worship' (ibid., 4). That no disciplinary action was taken against him is a mark of the variety of liturgical practice that the eighteenth-century church tacitly accepted, as well as of the latitudinarian principles of Chambers's diocesan, John Hinchliffe, bishop of Peterborough. 
In 1771-2 Chambers gave Lindsey full support in the organization of the Feathers tavern petition for the abolition of compulsory subscription to the articles ['see also 'Feathers tavern petitioners]. The petition was rejected by the House of Commons on 6 February 1772 and, more summarily, on 5 May 1774. On the latter occasion Chambers was present in the Commons gallery with Lindsey, Richard Price, and Joseph Priestley. By then Lindsey had resigned from the church and founded his own Unitarian chapel in London. On his way to London from his former parish of Catterick he resided with Chambers at Achurch. Only a very small number of clergymen followed Lindsey out of the church. For all his identification with Unitarianism Chambers was not among them, although his death from an apoplectic stroke shortly afterwards, at Achurch on 4 September 1777, leaves open the possibility that he might have seceded at a subsequent stage. On his death Lindsey wrote a eulogistic obituary. Chambers was buried at All Saints' Church, Derby. 
Chambers bequeathed extensive real and personal estate and it is clear that his private fortune meant that he had no need to compromise his theological principles in a quest for ecclesiastical preferment. His historical significance lies in his association with a group of liberal Anglican clergymen, mostly Cambridge-educated, who helped to stimulate heterodox thought within the church and who contributed indirectly to the development of English Unitarianism. 


@@@@@


doc= 50680


Price, Joseph (1736?-1807), Church of England clergyman and diarist, was probably born in East Anglia. The nature of his early education is unknown, but he was brought up as a dissenter and maintained contact with several leading dissenters throughout his life. His father had been a successful tradesman in London. Price had two brothers, one of whom became a naval purser, and two sisters. In 1758-9 he served briefly as minister to the small Independent congregation at Southwold in Suffolk, where a local source described him as 'an ingenious young man' ('Kentish Parson', 2). After one year he conformed to the Church of England, obtaining ordination in the diocese of Norwich as deacon (1759) and priest (1762). In 1762-3 he served as curate of Rumburgh and South Elmham, and in the latter year became curate at Lowestoft. He was tutor to the son of Hill Mussenden, MP for Harwich, and through Mussenden's influence became perpetual curate of Tunstall, Norfolk, in 1765 and rector of Hellington, some 6 miles away, in 1766. 
During the 1760s Price came to the attention of Thomas Secker, archbishop of Canterbury, and, like Price, a former dissenter. Through Secker's patronage Price, in 1767, became vicar of Brabourne in east Kent, the region in which he passed the remainder of his life. In 1776 he added the rectory of Monks' Horton to the vicarage of Brabourne and his two livings in Norfolk. He had already begun to compile an intimate shorthand diary, of which only the manuscript volume 6 (1769-1773) survives, although internal evidence indicates that there were at least twelve volumes altogether. The diary is a remarkably frank, self-critical record of ambition and social climbing, with detailed accounts of the lives (and scandals) of the local clergy and gentry. Price was a correspondent of Charles Yorke (1722-1770), son of the celebrated Lord Chancellor Hardwicke (1690-1764). On Yorke's nomination as lord chancellor in January 1770 Price wrote: 'I must congratulate him and try to get something'; four days later the news of Yorke's sudden death led Price to lament: 'The breaking of a blood vessel discomforts all my glittering hopes and tells me I must die Vicar of Brabourne' ('Kentish Parson', 9). This prophecy was not fulfilled; he relinquished Brabourne and Monks' Horton in 1786 on his appointment as vicar of Herne, which he exchanged for Littlebourne, his final living, in 1794. 
Price never married and one reason for his bachelor status was his unfulfilled hope of acquiring a Cambridge fellowship. His diary reveals much knowledge of the university's politics, since he was enrolled as a 'ten-year man' at Peterhouse and obtained the BD degree in 1776. He refers frequently to the question of subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and testifies to the extent of Trinitarian heterodoxy among some of the Cambridge fellows, such as John Jebb. Another reason why he never married, however, was the failure of his pursuit of wealthy matrimonial candidates. He rejected one on the ground that she was a Presbyterian and that such an alliance 'would make an odd figure in this neighbourhood' ('Kentish Parson', 17), an indication of the distance he had moved from his dissenting origins. His chief target for marriage was Mary Lane, the widow of a London sugar merchant and twelve years Price's senior. Although Mary resisted his proposals of matrimony, she bequeathed her entire estate to him on her death in 1782. Price thus acquired a financial independence rare in a parish clergyman. He could afford to leave most of his duties at Littlebourne to a curate, to visit the hot wells at Bristol, and to lease a house in the Mint Yard, in the precincts of Canterbury Cathedral, where he died on 29 October 1807. He was buried at Littlebourne parish church in the following month. 
Price appears never to have published anything, although a manuscript version of a funeral oration written by him for the first earl of Hardwicke (died 1764) survives among the latter's papers in the British Library. While he lacked the conscientiousness (and literary flow) of his contemporary James Woodforde, the essentially private nature of his diary takes the reader far beyond the printed sermon and the begging letter to a potential patron, which are the only remaining testimonies to the character of so many clergymen of his age. 


@@@@@


doc= 50681


Fison family (per. c.1750-1985), millers and manufacturers of fertilizers and pharmaceuticals, traces its origins to James [i] Fison (1735-1806), who was born at Langham, near Bury St Edmunds, on 1 February 1735, the youngest child of Robert and Dorothy Fison. By the age of fifteen James was an orphan, and he used a small legacy from his mother to learn the baker's craft and set up in business at Barningham, some 6 miles to the north, where he reputedly built up a large trade in the surrounding area. On 25 November 1757 he married Ann Cornell, who had five children before her death in 1773. James never remarried. His business prospered and he diversified into both farming and milling, and was joined in business by his two sons, James [ii] (1761-1817) and Joseph [i] (1765-1808), and his two sons-in-law. James [i] became an ardent Methodist in the 1780s and was soon nicknamed throughout the county as the Methodist baker of Barningham. On 21 December 1784 James [ii] married Sarah (1762-1838), the daughter of John Sparham, from whom his father had rented his first mill. They had seven children, including James [iii] (1785-1844) and William Lorimer (1788-1833), all of whom helped in the business as soon as they were old enough. In 1789 James [ii] opened a 'moltons' or maltings at Barningham to supply the rapidly expanding brewing trade. James [i] Fison died in 1806, a wealthy man with property in several villages around Barningham. 
Shortly after his father's death James [ii] left two of his sons, Sparham (1786- 'c'.1850) and Thomas (1790-1846), to manage the Barningham business while he himself purchased maltings at Thetford in Norfolk, which he managed with the help of his eldest son, James [iii]. His third son, William Lorimer, moved with his uncle Joseph to Stowmarket, where the family purchased a mill, maltings, and warehouse for storing malt awaiting shipment to London. After the death of Joseph [i] in 1808 the now large family enterprise was left in the hands of James [ii], who immediately took his sons into partnership in the firm of James Fison & Sons. By 1815 the family owned five maltings in Norfolk, three in Thetford, and two 5 miles down the Little Ouse at Brandon. Guided by James [iii] it diversified into dealing in grain, seed, cattle cake, salt, wool, and coals, with business connections stretching as far as the Yorkshire woollen towns and Liverpool. 
On the death of James [ii] in 1817 the business was split between the brothers, with James Fison & Sons of Thetford being controlled by James [iii], William Lorimer, and Cornell (1793-1894). They quickly developed an enormous trade along the east coast and, using canal links, across to the west of Scotland, in linseed, rape seed, cattle cake, and grass seed imported from France, Germany, and the Low Countries. Cornell Fison, who spoke both Dutch and French, travelled regularly to the continent to negotiate contracts. By the 1820s the firm was importing large consignments of wheat from the Baltic ports for customers as far away as south Wales, and it had developed a special relationship for the supply of malt with Whitbread & Co., one of the largest London brewers. In 1826 it took the bold step of converting the Barningham mills to steam power, and in 1831 it took over the management of the Whitbread maltings at Whittington between Downham Market and Thetford. By this time the enterprise was one of the largest in East Anglia. 
James [iii], who married Mary Baker about 1815, had seven children including one son, Edward ('b'. 1820), who became a Wesleyan minister. Sparham had no children; but William Lorimer, who about 1814 married Deborah Prentice (died 1833), had eight children, including Joseph [ii] Fison (1819-1878). The next brother, Thomas, who married Mary Matthew, daughter of John Gostling of Cotton on 28 November 1811, had seventeen children. Two of their sons, Thomas Sparham and William (1820-1900), moved to Bradford to act as wool merchants for James Fison, and subsequently William went into the woollen trade in partnership with William Edward Foster. Their fourteenth son was the Revd Lorimer Fison (1832-1907). William Lorimer and his wife both died of typhoid in the spring of 1833, leaving six young sons. The second son, Joseph [ii], after his education managed his father's business and began milling on his own account at Stoke Mill at Ipswich in 1842. This new venture prospered and he soon began malting and making bricks and tiles. He built the large Eastern Union Mills in Ipswich. At the same time his relatives in James Fison & Sons were experimenting with the production of the newly discovered fertilizer superphosphate, made by mixing crushed bones and sulphuric acid. James [iii] Fison died in 1844 and from then on there was no direct relationship between James Fison & Sons and the Stowmarket and Ipswich enterprises. 
Joseph [ii] Fison started selling fertilizer in the mid-1850s and opened his own works at Bramford, outside Ipswich, in 1858. In 1864 he took his sons James Oliver Fison (1845-1920) and (Edward) Herbert (1846-1931) into partnership in the firm of Joseph Fison & Sons, by then the largest flour-milling concern in Suffolk. With British agriculture in depression, Joseph Fison & Sons began exporting fertilizer in the 1880s and also started selling fertilizers directly to farmers and nurseries at home. They stopped distributing simple superphosphates and concentrated on compounds designed to benefit specific crops. During the First World War, in common with the rest of the industry, the firm's output was controlled by the food production department and later the Ministry of Munitions. James Oliver's eldest son, (James Frederick) Lorimer Fison, after education at Charterhouse School and a brilliant undergraduate career at Christ Church, Oxford, entered the family business in 1913, bringing flair and vigour to the marketing department. During the war he distinguished himself at the front, winning the Military Cross in 1916 for 'conspicuous bravery'. He rose to the rank of captain, but died of pneumonia at Bluegates after a gas attack in 1917. James Oliver was so devastated by his death that he was forced to hand over the chairmanship of the business to his brother, (Edward) Herbert. 
James Oliver's second son, Sir (Francis Guy) Clavering Fison (1892-1985), also educated at Charterhouse and Christ Church, had intended a career in medicine, before being called up in the Suffolk yeomanry and then transferring to the Royal Air Force Training Corps for officers. Reluctantly he joined the family business, in 1920, and he quickly became effectively the managing director. As the inter-war recession took hold he ruthlessly cut costs, in 1923 closing the fertilizer plant at Bramford and buying superphosphates from the Netherlands; he also sold the flour-milling business. By the late 1920s he was convinced of the need to rationalize the whole industry, and in 1929 Joseph Fison & Co., Packard and James Fison (Thetford) Ltd, and Prentice Brothers of Stowmarket merged to form Fison, Packard, and Prentice, bringing together firms that, with the exception of Packards, had very close family links. Recognizing the threat from the newly formed Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), Clavering began rapidly to expand the business by buying up small fertilizer concerns throughout the United Kingdom; he supervised the take-over of thirty-two concerns between 1929 and 1945. His skill in making acquisitions earned him the sobriquet in the trade of the Wise Man of the East. The manufacturing base of the company was strengthened with the construction of new factories at Ipswich and Avonmouth. In 1937 Clavering took the important decision to build a synthetic-nitrogen plant at Flixborough, near Scunthorpe, to make the company independent of ICI for the supplies of nitrogen. By 1939 Fisons was supplying some 30 per cent of the UK fertilizer market. In 1942 the group was renamed simply Fisons. 
Although fertilizers continued to dominate Fisons' business, the take-over of the Anglo-Continental Guano Works Ltd in 1937 had brought with it Genatosan Ltd of Loughborough, a manufacturer of drugs, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and scientific apparatus. After the Second World War, Clavering Fison fostered diversification of the company into these areas, setting up a chemical and biological division. In 1947 Genatosan was merged with Bengers Ltd, and the following year Gland Suppliers was absorbed. Clavering also placed emphasis on product development, and in 1945 began a research and development department; in 1953 Pest Control Ltd was purchased and the Levington research station was established outside Ipswich. In 1957 Clavering retired as chairman, becoming life president, and received a knighthood for his service to agriculture. In that year the sales of the Fisons group totalled $54,512,000, on which the profit before tax was $2,710,000. Clavering was succeeded as chairman by Jim Turner, Lord Netherthorpe. 
Sir Clavering Fison's style of management during his forty years at the helm had become increasingly autocratic as he won the respect of the fertilizer industry. He had a flair for choosing businesses to buy and had the temperament and judgement to push through a policy of rationalization. He also chose his lieutenants wisely, attracting men whose administrative and technical skills could weld the companies he had purchased into a successful group. Although he saw the need to diversify after the war, his ventures in pharmaceuticals and scientific instruments provided only the foundations for later developments. 
Apart from his business activities Sir Clavering farmed 400 acres at Stutton Park, Suffolk, which gave him first-hand knowledge of the customers' side of the fertilizer business. A lifelong Conservative, he was elected MP for Woodbridge in 1929, but he resigned in 1931 owing to pressure of work. He stood again in 1945, but was defeated in the Labour landslide. He was a keen shot and salmon fisher, and an outstanding tennis player, competing at Wimbledon in 1914 and 1920. On 23 February 1922 he married Evelyn Alice Mary (1901/2-1985), daughter of Francis Lawrence Bland and a great-niece of Elizabeth Fry. They had two daughters. Sir Clavering Fison died on 13 April 1985, and his wife died a few weeks later. 
Such an enduring network of family enterprise, spanning two centuries and a variety of products, is not uncommon; but only rarely has it reached such a pinnacle of achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 50682


Fison family (per. c.1750-1985), millers and manufacturers of fertilizers and pharmaceuticals, traces its origins to James [i] Fison (1735-1806), who was born at Langham, near Bury St Edmunds, on 1 February 1735, the youngest child of Robert and Dorothy Fison. By the age of fifteen James was an orphan, and he used a small legacy from his mother to learn the baker's craft and set up in business at Barningham, some 6 miles to the north, where he reputedly built up a large trade in the surrounding area. On 25 November 1757 he married Ann Cornell, who had five children before her death in 1773. James never remarried. His business prospered and he diversified into both farming and milling, and was joined in business by his two sons, James [ii] (1761-1817) and Joseph [i] (1765-1808), and his two sons-in-law. James [i] became an ardent Methodist in the 1780s and was soon nicknamed throughout the county as the Methodist baker of Barningham. On 21 December 1784 James [ii] married Sarah (1762-1838), the daughter of John Sparham, from whom his father had rented his first mill. They had seven children, including James [iii] (1785-1844) and William Lorimer (1788-1833), all of whom helped in the business as soon as they were old enough. In 1789 James [ii] opened a 'moltons' or maltings at Barningham to supply the rapidly expanding brewing trade. James [i] Fison died in 1806, a wealthy man with property in several villages around Barningham. 
Shortly after his father's death James [ii] left two of his sons, Sparham (1786- 'c'.1850) and Thomas (1790-1846), to manage the Barningham business while he himself purchased maltings at Thetford in Norfolk, which he managed with the help of his eldest son, James [iii]. His third son, William Lorimer, moved with his uncle Joseph to Stowmarket, where the family purchased a mill, maltings, and warehouse for storing malt awaiting shipment to London. After the death of Joseph [i] in 1808 the now large family enterprise was left in the hands of James [ii], who immediately took his sons into partnership in the firm of James Fison & Sons. By 1815 the family owned five maltings in Norfolk, three in Thetford, and two 5 miles down the Little Ouse at Brandon. Guided by James [iii] it diversified into dealing in grain, seed, cattle cake, salt, wool, and coals, with business connections stretching as far as the Yorkshire woollen towns and Liverpool. 
On the death of James [ii] in 1817 the business was split between the brothers, with James Fison & Sons of Thetford being controlled by James [iii], William Lorimer, and Cornell (1793-1894). They quickly developed an enormous trade along the east coast and, using canal links, across to the west of Scotland, in linseed, rape seed, cattle cake, and grass seed imported from France, Germany, and the Low Countries. Cornell Fison, who spoke both Dutch and French, travelled regularly to the continent to negotiate contracts. By the 1820s the firm was importing large consignments of wheat from the Baltic ports for customers as far away as south Wales, and it had developed a special relationship for the supply of malt with Whitbread & Co., one of the largest London brewers. In 1826 it took the bold step of converting the Barningham mills to steam power, and in 1831 it took over the management of the Whitbread maltings at Whittington between Downham Market and Thetford. By this time the enterprise was one of the largest in East Anglia. 
James [iii], who married Mary Baker about 1815, had seven children including one son, Edward ('b'. 1820), who became a Wesleyan minister. Sparham had no children; but William Lorimer, who about 1814 married Deborah Prentice (died 1833), had eight children, including Joseph [ii] Fison (1819-1878). The next brother, Thomas, who married Mary Matthew, daughter of John Gostling of Cotton on 28 November 1811, had seventeen children. Two of their sons, Thomas Sparham and William (1820-1900), moved to Bradford to act as wool merchants for James Fison, and subsequently William went into the woollen trade in partnership with William Edward Foster. Their fourteenth son was the Revd Lorimer Fison (1832-1907). William Lorimer and his wife both died of typhoid in the spring of 1833, leaving six young sons. The second son, Joseph [ii], after his education managed his father's business and began milling on his own account at Stoke Mill at Ipswich in 1842. This new venture prospered and he soon began malting and making bricks and tiles. He built the large Eastern Union Mills in Ipswich. At the same time his relatives in James Fison & Sons were experimenting with the production of the newly discovered fertilizer superphosphate, made by mixing crushed bones and sulphuric acid. James [iii] Fison died in 1844 and from then on there was no direct relationship between James Fison & Sons and the Stowmarket and Ipswich enterprises. 
Joseph [ii] Fison started selling fertilizer in the mid-1850s and opened his own works at Bramford, outside Ipswich, in 1858. In 1864 he took his sons James Oliver Fison (1845-1920) and (Edward) Herbert (1846-1931) into partnership in the firm of Joseph Fison & Sons, by then the largest flour-milling concern in Suffolk. With British agriculture in depression, Joseph Fison & Sons began exporting fertilizer in the 1880s and also started selling fertilizers directly to farmers and nurseries at home. They stopped distributing simple superphosphates and concentrated on compounds designed to benefit specific crops. During the First World War, in common with the rest of the industry, the firm's output was controlled by the food production department and later the Ministry of Munitions. James Oliver's eldest son, (James Frederick) Lorimer Fison, after education at Charterhouse School and a brilliant undergraduate career at Christ Church, Oxford, entered the family business in 1913, bringing flair and vigour to the marketing department. During the war he distinguished himself at the front, winning the Military Cross in 1916 for 'conspicuous bravery'. He rose to the rank of captain, but died of pneumonia at Bluegates after a gas attack in 1917. James Oliver was so devastated by his death that he was forced to hand over the chairmanship of the business to his brother, (Edward) Herbert. 
James Oliver's second son, Sir (Francis Guy) Clavering Fison (1892-1985), also educated at Charterhouse and Christ Church, had intended a career in medicine, before being called up in the Suffolk yeomanry and then transferring to the Royal Air Force Training Corps for officers. Reluctantly he joined the family business, in 1920, and he quickly became effectively the managing director. As the inter-war recession took hold he ruthlessly cut costs, in 1923 closing the fertilizer plant at Bramford and buying superphosphates from the Netherlands; he also sold the flour-milling business. By the late 1920s he was convinced of the need to rationalize the whole industry, and in 1929 Joseph Fison & Co., Packard and James Fison (Thetford) Ltd, and Prentice Brothers of Stowmarket merged to form Fison, Packard, and Prentice, bringing together firms that, with the exception of Packards, had very close family links. Recognizing the threat from the newly formed Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), Clavering began rapidly to expand the business by buying up small fertilizer concerns throughout the United Kingdom; he supervised the take-over of thirty-two concerns between 1929 and 1945. His skill in making acquisitions earned him the sobriquet in the trade of the Wise Man of the East. The manufacturing base of the company was strengthened with the construction of new factories at Ipswich and Avonmouth. In 1937 Clavering took the important decision to build a synthetic-nitrogen plant at Flixborough, near Scunthorpe, to make the company independent of ICI for the supplies of nitrogen. By 1939 Fisons was supplying some 30 per cent of the UK fertilizer market. In 1942 the group was renamed simply Fisons. 
Although fertilizers continued to dominate Fisons' business, the take-over of the Anglo-Continental Guano Works Ltd in 1937 had brought with it Genatosan Ltd of Loughborough, a manufacturer of drugs, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and scientific apparatus. After the Second World War, Clavering Fison fostered diversification of the company into these areas, setting up a chemical and biological division. In 1947 Genatosan was merged with Bengers Ltd, and the following year Gland Suppliers was absorbed. Clavering also placed emphasis on product development, and in 1945 began a research and development department; in 1953 Pest Control Ltd was purchased and the Levington research station was established outside Ipswich. In 1957 Clavering retired as chairman, becoming life president, and received a knighthood for his service to agriculture. In that year the sales of the Fisons group totalled $54,512,000, on which the profit before tax was $2,710,000. Clavering was succeeded as chairman by Jim Turner, Lord Netherthorpe. 
Sir Clavering Fison's style of management during his forty years at the helm had become increasingly autocratic as he won the respect of the fertilizer industry. He had a flair for choosing businesses to buy and had the temperament and judgement to push through a policy of rationalization. He also chose his lieutenants wisely, attracting men whose administrative and technical skills could weld the companies he had purchased into a successful group. Although he saw the need to diversify after the war, his ventures in pharmaceuticals and scientific instruments provided only the foundations for later developments. 
Apart from his business activities Sir Clavering farmed 400 acres at Stutton Park, Suffolk, which gave him first-hand knowledge of the customers' side of the fertilizer business. A lifelong Conservative, he was elected MP for Woodbridge in 1929, but he resigned in 1931 owing to pressure of work. He stood again in 1945, but was defeated in the Labour landslide. He was a keen shot and salmon fisher, and an outstanding tennis player, competing at Wimbledon in 1914 and 1920. On 23 February 1922 he married Evelyn Alice Mary (1901/2-1985), daughter of Francis Lawrence Bland and a great-niece of Elizabeth Fry. They had two daughters. Sir Clavering Fison died on 13 April 1985, and his wife died a few weeks later. 
Such an enduring network of family enterprise, spanning two centuries and a variety of products, is not uncommon; but only rarely has it reached such a pinnacle of achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 50683


Fison family (per. c.1750-1985), millers and manufacturers of fertilizers and pharmaceuticals, traces its origins to James [i] Fison (1735-1806), who was born at Langham, near Bury St Edmunds, on 1 February 1735, the youngest child of Robert and Dorothy Fison. By the age of fifteen James was an orphan, and he used a small legacy from his mother to learn the baker's craft and set up in business at Barningham, some 6 miles to the north, where he reputedly built up a large trade in the surrounding area. On 25 November 1757 he married Ann Cornell, who had five children before her death in 1773. James never remarried. His business prospered and he diversified into both farming and milling, and was joined in business by his two sons, James [ii] (1761-1817) and Joseph [i] (1765-1808), and his two sons-in-law. James [i] became an ardent Methodist in the 1780s and was soon nicknamed throughout the county as the Methodist baker of Barningham. On 21 December 1784 James [ii] married Sarah (1762-1838), the daughter of John Sparham, from whom his father had rented his first mill. They had seven children, including James [iii] (1785-1844) and William Lorimer (1788-1833), all of whom helped in the business as soon as they were old enough. In 1789 James [ii] opened a 'moltons' or maltings at Barningham to supply the rapidly expanding brewing trade. James [i] Fison died in 1806, a wealthy man with property in several villages around Barningham. 
Shortly after his father's death James [ii] left two of his sons, Sparham (1786- 'c'.1850) and Thomas (1790-1846), to manage the Barningham business while he himself purchased maltings at Thetford in Norfolk, which he managed with the help of his eldest son, James [iii]. His third son, William Lorimer, moved with his uncle Joseph to Stowmarket, where the family purchased a mill, maltings, and warehouse for storing malt awaiting shipment to London. After the death of Joseph [i] in 1808 the now large family enterprise was left in the hands of James [ii], who immediately took his sons into partnership in the firm of James Fison & Sons. By 1815 the family owned five maltings in Norfolk, three in Thetford, and two 5 miles down the Little Ouse at Brandon. Guided by James [iii] it diversified into dealing in grain, seed, cattle cake, salt, wool, and coals, with business connections stretching as far as the Yorkshire woollen towns and Liverpool. 
On the death of James [ii] in 1817 the business was split between the brothers, with James Fison & Sons of Thetford being controlled by James [iii], William Lorimer, and Cornell (1793-1894). They quickly developed an enormous trade along the east coast and, using canal links, across to the west of Scotland, in linseed, rape seed, cattle cake, and grass seed imported from France, Germany, and the Low Countries. Cornell Fison, who spoke both Dutch and French, travelled regularly to the continent to negotiate contracts. By the 1820s the firm was importing large consignments of wheat from the Baltic ports for customers as far away as south Wales, and it had developed a special relationship for the supply of malt with Whitbread & Co., one of the largest London brewers. In 1826 it took the bold step of converting the Barningham mills to steam power, and in 1831 it took over the management of the Whitbread maltings at Whittington between Downham Market and Thetford. By this time the enterprise was one of the largest in East Anglia. 
James [iii], who married Mary Baker about 1815, had seven children including one son, Edward ('b'. 1820), who became a Wesleyan minister. Sparham had no children; but William Lorimer, who about 1814 married Deborah Prentice (died 1833), had eight children, including Joseph [ii] Fison (1819-1878). The next brother, Thomas, who married Mary Matthew, daughter of John Gostling of Cotton on 28 November 1811, had seventeen children. Two of their sons, Thomas Sparham and William (1820-1900), moved to Bradford to act as wool merchants for James Fison, and subsequently William went into the woollen trade in partnership with William Edward Foster. Their fourteenth son was the Revd Lorimer Fison (1832-1907). William Lorimer and his wife both died of typhoid in the spring of 1833, leaving six young sons. The second son, Joseph [ii], after his education managed his father's business and began milling on his own account at Stoke Mill at Ipswich in 1842. This new venture prospered and he soon began malting and making bricks and tiles. He built the large Eastern Union Mills in Ipswich. At the same time his relatives in James Fison & Sons were experimenting with the production of the newly discovered fertilizer superphosphate, made by mixing crushed bones and sulphuric acid. James [iii] Fison died in 1844 and from then on there was no direct relationship between James Fison & Sons and the Stowmarket and Ipswich enterprises. 
Joseph [ii] Fison started selling fertilizer in the mid-1850s and opened his own works at Bramford, outside Ipswich, in 1858. In 1864 he took his sons James Oliver Fison (1845-1920) and (Edward) Herbert (1846-1931) into partnership in the firm of Joseph Fison & Sons, by then the largest flour-milling concern in Suffolk. With British agriculture in depression, Joseph Fison & Sons began exporting fertilizer in the 1880s and also started selling fertilizers directly to farmers and nurseries at home. They stopped distributing simple superphosphates and concentrated on compounds designed to benefit specific crops. During the First World War, in common with the rest of the industry, the firm's output was controlled by the food production department and later the Ministry of Munitions. James Oliver's eldest son, (James Frederick) Lorimer Fison, after education at Charterhouse School and a brilliant undergraduate career at Christ Church, Oxford, entered the family business in 1913, bringing flair and vigour to the marketing department. During the war he distinguished himself at the front, winning the Military Cross in 1916 for 'conspicuous bravery'. He rose to the rank of captain, but died of pneumonia at Bluegates after a gas attack in 1917. James Oliver was so devastated by his death that he was forced to hand over the chairmanship of the business to his brother, (Edward) Herbert. 
James Oliver's second son, Sir (Francis Guy) Clavering Fison (1892-1985), also educated at Charterhouse and Christ Church, had intended a career in medicine, before being called up in the Suffolk yeomanry and then transferring to the Royal Air Force Training Corps for officers. Reluctantly he joined the family business, in 1920, and he quickly became effectively the managing director. As the inter-war recession took hold he ruthlessly cut costs, in 1923 closing the fertilizer plant at Bramford and buying superphosphates from the Netherlands; he also sold the flour-milling business. By the late 1920s he was convinced of the need to rationalize the whole industry, and in 1929 Joseph Fison & Co., Packard and James Fison (Thetford) Ltd, and Prentice Brothers of Stowmarket merged to form Fison, Packard, and Prentice, bringing together firms that, with the exception of Packards, had very close family links. Recognizing the threat from the newly formed Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), Clavering began rapidly to expand the business by buying up small fertilizer concerns throughout the United Kingdom; he supervised the take-over of thirty-two concerns between 1929 and 1945. His skill in making acquisitions earned him the sobriquet in the trade of the Wise Man of the East. The manufacturing base of the company was strengthened with the construction of new factories at Ipswich and Avonmouth. In 1937 Clavering took the important decision to build a synthetic-nitrogen plant at Flixborough, near Scunthorpe, to make the company independent of ICI for the supplies of nitrogen. By 1939 Fisons was supplying some 30 per cent of the UK fertilizer market. In 1942 the group was renamed simply Fisons. 
Although fertilizers continued to dominate Fisons' business, the take-over of the Anglo-Continental Guano Works Ltd in 1937 had brought with it Genatosan Ltd of Loughborough, a manufacturer of drugs, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and scientific apparatus. After the Second World War, Clavering Fison fostered diversification of the company into these areas, setting up a chemical and biological division. In 1947 Genatosan was merged with Bengers Ltd, and the following year Gland Suppliers was absorbed. Clavering also placed emphasis on product development, and in 1945 began a research and development department; in 1953 Pest Control Ltd was purchased and the Levington research station was established outside Ipswich. In 1957 Clavering retired as chairman, becoming life president, and received a knighthood for his service to agriculture. In that year the sales of the Fisons group totalled $54,512,000, on which the profit before tax was $2,710,000. Clavering was succeeded as chairman by Jim Turner, Lord Netherthorpe. 
Sir Clavering Fison's style of management during his forty years at the helm had become increasingly autocratic as he won the respect of the fertilizer industry. He had a flair for choosing businesses to buy and had the temperament and judgement to push through a policy of rationalization. He also chose his lieutenants wisely, attracting men whose administrative and technical skills could weld the companies he had purchased into a successful group. Although he saw the need to diversify after the war, his ventures in pharmaceuticals and scientific instruments provided only the foundations for later developments. 
Apart from his business activities Sir Clavering farmed 400 acres at Stutton Park, Suffolk, which gave him first-hand knowledge of the customers' side of the fertilizer business. A lifelong Conservative, he was elected MP for Woodbridge in 1929, but he resigned in 1931 owing to pressure of work. He stood again in 1945, but was defeated in the Labour landslide. He was a keen shot and salmon fisher, and an outstanding tennis player, competing at Wimbledon in 1914 and 1920. On 23 February 1922 he married Evelyn Alice Mary (1901/2-1985), daughter of Francis Lawrence Bland and a great-niece of Elizabeth Fry. They had two daughters. Sir Clavering Fison died on 13 April 1985, and his wife died a few weeks later. 
Such an enduring network of family enterprise, spanning two centuries and a variety of products, is not uncommon; but only rarely has it reached such a pinnacle of achievement. 


@@@@@


doc= 50684


Symonds, Emily Morse (1860-1936), novelist and playwright, was born on 4 September 1860 at St Mary in the Marsh, Norwich, Norfolk, the daughter of the Revd Henry Symonds, minor canon and precentor of Norwich Cathedral, and his wife, Emily Hannah Evans. Her first cousin was John Addington Symonds; she did not admire his work. After her father's death she and her mother moved to London, where they lived at 7 Thurloe Square, Kensington, and travelled for several months each year. 
Symonds's first published work -- under the pseudonym of George Paston, which she used all her life -- was a study of the Murray publishing house: 'At John Murray's: Records of a Literary Circle' (1892). She then turned to fiction, producing a number of novels with feminist themes. 'A Modern Amazon' (1894) examines marriage, but it also looks at the position of working women: 'Of late years employers have made the startling discovery that women of birth and education may be adapted for other uses than those of household ornament and domestic pet; that they may be converted, in fact, into sober, industrious, and very useful drudges. (p. 3)' 
'A Study in Prejudices' (1895) is a pointed examination of double sexual standards. The heroine of 'The Career of Candida' (1896) is brought up as a boy and moves to London to teach gymnastics and fencing, the more interesting aspect of a novel which also shows her dutifully returning to her weak husband after he is disabled. 'A Writer of Books' (1898), strong on women writers in Grub Street, firmly makes the point, in the final chapter, that 'In the life of the modern woman, blessed with an almost inexhaustible supply of strings, love is no less episodical than in the life of a man' (p. 341). 'A Bread and Butter Miss' (1895) and 'A Fair Deceiver' (1898) have more conventional romantic plots, though they still feature spirited women. 
Arnold Bennett, who knew Symonds in the 1890s, claimed that she was 'on the whole the most advanced and intellectually-fearless woman I have met' ('Journals', 17). But she thought little of most modern fiction and maintained a strong interest in previous centuries, turning to biography and writing lives of George Romney (1903), Benjamin Haydon (1905), Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (1907), and Pope (1909), in addition to other studies of the Georgian period. Her dramas, beginning with 'The Pharisee's Wife' (Duke of York's Theatre, 1904), privileged women's roles above men's parts. In the subsequent decade some of her plays dealt with suffrage and feminist issues, including 'Feed the Brute' (1909) and 'Nobody's Daughter' (1910), which ran to 185 performances. Later dramatic works, such as 'Double or Quits' (1919) and 'Clothes and the Woman' (1922), were much more light-hearted, owing a good deal to the French comedies which she also translated. 
In addition to book-length publications and plays, Symonds produced a good deal of literary journalism. She was extremely reticent about her own work: despite her productivity, she had what her 'Times' obituarist termed 'an almost fanatical dislike of self-advertisement' (12 Sept 1936, 14). This obituary, a remarkably strong anti-feminist polemic, claims that her outmoded stress on women's issues was responsible for her rapid decline in popularity. Symonds died, unmarried, of heart failure at 7 Pelham Place, Kensington, London, on 11 September 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 50686


Scragg, Thomas (1804-1886), drainpipe-machine manufacturer, was born in Monks Coppenhall, Cheshire. Scragg was a common family name in Monks Coppenhall in the early nineteenth century, and two such named families had a son baptized Thomas in 1804 (on 17 June and 23 September). The husbands in both families were recorded as working in agriculture, as a farmer, and as a farm labourer. Thomas Scragg similarly found employment in agriculture, and by 1841 was bailiff for the Calveley part of the Davenport estate in Cheshire. By that time he lived in Calveley, 6 miles west of his birthplace, and was married to Mary (1806-1884), from nearby Wardle. Employed at Calveley by Edward Davenport, Scragg developed his drainpipe-making machine in the early 1840s. In its ability to mass-produce cylindrical drainpipes, the most reliable of fills for under-drains, Scragg's invention made possible a reduction in the cost of under-draining and an improvement in its permanence and effectiveness. The machine became integral to the large-scale under-draining of waterlogged farmland that occurred in the second half of the nineteenth century and was one of the major technical advances in English agriculture between 1700 and 1900. 
Waterlogging presented considerable difficulties for the effective use of agricultural land, and contemporary estimates of the area needing draining -- 10 to 16.5 million acres -- indicated the scale of the problem. From the 1830s coherent systems of drain layout (known as deep thorough draining) were devised, initially by James Smith of Deanston but modified by Josiah Parkes, which were applicable to most conditions of soil wetness. Yet the full benefits of these draining systems were dependent on the use of a durable drain fill. Of available fills bushes, straw, and other vegetative material possessed but a limited life; stones and semi-circular, handmade tiles laid on soles, though more durable were subject to blockage and dislodgement. The cylindrical drainpipe represented a technical advance over other fills: easier to handle, with less likelihood of stoppage and displacement, and with great durability, they brought longevity, if not permanence, to the new draining systems. 
Handmade but expensive drainpipes had been reported from various parts of the country at the end of the eighteenth century: John Read recorded making 3 inch diameter drainpipes in Kent in 1795. Several simple machines producing limited numbers of pipes were noted by 1840 in Suffolk, Essex, Kent, and Sussex. To facilitate the widespread use of drainpipes, these early machines had to be redesigned to provide standardization of form and to increase output, thereby reducing costs. 
The first of these improved machines was credited to Scragg. In 1842 his machine was demonstrated to Parkes by Davenport at Capesthorne. The machine was exhibited to a wider audience at the 1845 Shrewsbury meeting of the Royal Agricultural Society of England, where it was awarded the prize for the best drainpipe-making machine. Although Scragg's invention was followed swiftly by many others, Philip Pusey could report in 1851 that Scragg's machine had come to dominate, along with those of Henry Clayton and John Whitehead. Scragg continued to exhibit his machine at the Royal Agricultural Society's annual meetings until 1859, being awarded prizes in 1846, 1849, 1852, and 1856, and at the Great Exhibition in 1851. 
With its ability to make 2500-3000 pipes per day, the machine brought considerable price reductions: in 1845, 1 inch and 2 inch diameter pipes cost respectively 12's'. and $1 5's'. per 1000. At these prices waterlogged land could be drained with the new draining systems at about $5 per acre, permanent under-draining being obtainable at nearly the same cost as traditional methods. The effective under-draining of wet agricultural land in England was now possible. 
Scragg made little attempt to develop other aspects of farm technology. Instead he diversified his occupational interests at Calveley, where he remained for the rest of his life. He added coal agency and drainpipe-machine manufacturing to land stewardship in the 1850s. After 1860 he concentrated on his commercial interests and from a 5 acre holding was described variously until 1878 as a coal merchant, a brick and tile maker and dealer, and a drainpipe manufacturer. He died on 6 November 1886 at the age of eighty-two at Edleston, in the adjacent parish of Acton. 


@@@@@


doc= 50688


Welensky, Sir Roland (1907-1991), prime minister of the federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, was born Raphael Welensky in Pioneer Street, Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia, on 20 January 1907, the thirteenth of fourteen children of Michael Welensky ('b'. 'c'.1843), boarding-house keeper, and his wife, Leah, 'nee' Ferreira ('c'.1865-1918), an Afrikaner from Willowmore, Cape Colony, who was originally named Aletta, but had taken the name Leah on her marriage and conversion to Judaism. 
Welensky's father had led a colourful if profligate life. Originally from Vilna, Lithuania, he had been an itinerant trader in Russia and a horse smuggler to both sides during the Franco-Prussian War, before roaming as a saloon keeper to the American mid-west. In 1881 he emigrated to Cape Colony. After losing another fortune in the ostrich feather trade, he and his family drifted to Southern Rhodesia, where he served in the Ndebele uprising. By 1907 he was running a hotel, effectively a doss house, in the poorest district of Salisbury, a world of white destitutes, drunkards, and prostitutes who lived cheek by jowl with Indians, 'coloureds', and Africans. 
It was into such a world that Welensky was born, and this experience profoundly conditioned his character and political outlook. He frequently had to share beds with inebriated and poverty-stricken lodgers who often failed to pay the rent. This, together with his father's fondness for alcohol, made him a lifelong if not intolerant teetotaller. He mixed with all races from an early age, and boasted that he had not slept between sheets before he was sixteen. As he later famously stated in a BBC television interview, he swam 'bare-arsed in the Makabusi with many picannins' (Freeman, 12). He soon became aware of his Jewish ancestry, for at the lower end of white society Jews were often as disliked as Indians. 'I suffered the stigma of being a Jew', he later recalled, 'which one doesn't shed lightly in this world' (Freeman, 4). He attended the Salisbury primary school barefoot, where, because of his love of history and English, he was forced to defend himself against his peers' charge of being a swot. Fortunately he was a larger-than-average child with big fists, which stood him in good stead among Salisbury's roughest urchins. 
In 1918 Welensky suffered a major blow with the death of his mother, who had been a crucial stabilizing figure. In 1921, having adopted the name Roland (though in fact he was known throughout his life as Roy), he left school to become a storeman in the farming and mining areas, in order to look after his elderly father, and also worked as a butcher, a baker, and a secondhand dealer's clerk. He was unable, however, to prevent his father's departure for an old people's home in Johannesburg, where he died alone. At seventeen Welensky moved to Bulawayo, becoming a locomotive fireman with Rhodesia Railways. He was two years under age, but the examining doctor was taken in by his 6 feet, 20 stone frame. He augmented his income by becoming a professional boxer and heavyweight champion of the Rhodesias by 1927. On 28 April 1928 he married Elizabeth Henderson ('c'.1911-1969), a Bulawayo waitress, with whom he had two children, Joan and Michael. Soon after his marriage he was transferred to the Wankie coalfields, where, after a few successful bouts, he decided to retire from the ring. 
Soon after Welensky's arrival in Wankie the railway workers' union called a strike. Impressed by serious disunity in worker ranks, he became a popular and vocal critic of the railway bosses, who came to regard him as a troublemaker. He managed to keep his job, however, in spite of the world depression that hit the Rhodesian economy in 1931, unlike his brother Dave, prominent in the miners' union in Wankie, who had once been arrested for syndicalist activity in Johannesburg. Welensky helped his brother as well as keeping his wife and two children on a meagre shunter's wage, although he soon went into debt. In 1933, by then an engine driver, he was transferred to Broken Hill in Northern Rhodesia, where he was forced to use his fists against a virulently antisemitic combination of neo-Nazi Afrikaner and Mosleyite English-speaking white workers. He became convinced that only trade unionism on the British model would counter the fear and demoralization on which fascism bred. He faced down the fascist element and reorganized the railway workers' union in the town, becoming its branch chairman. 
Acutely aware of his lack of formal education, Welensky embarked on an urgent programme of self-education, drawing eclectically on the writings of such figures as Marx, Mill, Bentham, Shakespeare, Disraeli, Conan Doyle, and Robert Service. He once described himself as 'a socialist conservative', preferring negotiations to strikes (Taylor, 178). He nevertheless came to regard himself as 'the champion of the under-dog' and organizer of the white working class against 'the boss class', at a time when the impact of the world depression was creating a growing class of poor whites in Northern Rhodesia. White worker insecurity was sharpened still further by the growing organization of African miners, who organized a significant strike on the copperbelt in 1935. Northern Rhodesia's racially divided labour practices resembled those of Southern Rhodesia and the Union of South Africa, but its white settlers lacked the self-governing institutions of their southern counterparts, resenting the vulnerability of the territory's government to Colonial Office directives and metropolitan humanitarian opinion. 
Welensky's ambitions now turned to the political sphere. In 1938 he was elected unopposed as member of the legislative council for Broken Hill. He developed an unlikely but intimate political alliance with Lieutenant-Colonel Stewart Gore-Browne, patrician leader of the unofficial members, based on their common faith in the colony's economic future and opposition to what they regarded as Colonial Office high-handedness. Gore-Browne, moreover, was aware of Welensky's great sway with the white miners and railwaymen, an influence Welensky strengthened by forming the Northern Rhodesian Labour Party in 1941. He also co-founded a newspaper, the 'Northern News', which became highly successful. The outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, moreover, further enhanced his stature. Avowedly anti-fascist, he tried to join the army but was regarded as too vital to the Northern Rhodesian war effort. He became a member of the executive council (1940-53) and in 1941 was appointed director of manpower, a pivotal position at a time when the copperbelt, crucial to the war effort, was vulnerable to strikes organized by a bizarre alliance of communist and neo-fascist white workers. He was also appointed a member of Sir John Foster's commission of inquiry into the riots on the copperbelt. He served on various railway arbitration tribunals. In these positions he did much to moderate white worker opinion during wartime. 
In 1946 Welensky succeeded Gore-Browne to the powerful position of leader of the unofficial members. He had two chief political objectives: to force the British South Africa Company to relinquish its mineral rights to the Northern Rhodesia government, and the amalgamation of the colony with self-governing Southern Rhodesia, building on close wartime inter-territorial co-operation. After years of tough negotiations, he succeeded in the first cause, resulting in huge revenues for the Northern Rhodesia government. This success strengthened his determination to gain amalgamation. At the end of the war, however, aware of the growing international mood against racism and colonialism, neither main political party at Westminster could countenance a wholesale transfer of the African population of a protectorate to the white-dominated and self-governing Southern Rhodesia, with its segregationist racial policies. The British government made clear that it would only permit a federation of the Rhodesias provided Nyasaland was added, and that the existing forms of government would continue in all three territories. Thus, ministers hoped, a pro-British dominion would eventually evolve as a counterbalance to the increasingly segregationist and republican-leaning Union of South Africa, as well as forestall any advance of communism in the region. 
Welensky played a leading part in the negotiations leading to federation, including the Victoria Falls conference of 1951, where he developed close links with the Southern Rhodesian prime minister Sir Godfrey Huggins (who had attended his mother in her last illness), becoming a leading member of his United Federal Party. In London, Labour ministers warmed to his Bevin-like working-class bluntness. The federation that came into existence in 1953 was amazingly complicated, involving five different governments. Britain dealt with the federation and Southern Rhodesia through the Commonwealth Relations Office, while the two northern territories came under the Colonial Office, which enjoyed mutually antagonistic relations with the Commonwealth Relations Office. Welensky's role in the creation of the federation was rewarded with a knighthood (1953), and cabinet rank, as minister of transport, communications, and posts (1953-6), and concurrently leader of the house and deputy prime minister (1955-6). Despite their different backgrounds, Huggins rated Welensky highly as a 'first-rate colleague [with]... a first-class brain and lots of commonsense' (Taylor, 175). 
On 1 November 1956, ominously coinciding with the Suez operation, Welensky succeeded Huggins (now Lord Malvern) as prime minister, minister of external affairs, and (until 1959) minister of defence. One of his first actions was to express the federation's support for the Anglo-French action. He declared: '[W]hatever the course of events may prove to be, our loyalty to the Crown is unquestioned. As a people whether white or black, we are British, and we are determined that this will not change, whatever our status within the Commonwealth may become. (Leys, 247)' His Britishness, in spite of his lack of British blood, was a sincere boast that he returned to again and again. 'I'm probably old fashioned', he once told the speaker of the Northern Ireland House of Commons, 'but I am not ashamed of the word Empire' (Welensky to Sir Norman Strong, 8 Feb 1955, Bodl. RH, Welensky papers 674/3). He distinguished, however, between 'the imperial mission' and the actions of British governments, likening the determination of the Rhodesians to that of the American colonists of 1776. 'I, of course, have no loyalty to your Government whatsoever', he reminded Malcolm Muggeridge. 'But I have a loyalty to the Crown. We look upon the Queen as the Queen of the Federation' (Muggeridge, 3). Welensky belonged to the old Commonwealth of white dominions, led by familiar figures such as Sir Robert Menzies, to whom Welensky seemed 'addicted to plain speech' (R. Menzies, 'Afternoon Light', 1967, 215). 
Welensky anticipated that his country would achieve dominion status following the federal review conference due in 1960, but the federation had been fatally flawed from the outset, having been driven through in the face of African opposition, particularly in the two northern territories. Northern Rhodesian Africans in particular felt, with good reason, that Southern Rhodesia was being built up with northern copper revenues. Nyasaland Africans, regarding their territory as the Cinderella of the federation, shared the belief that federation represented the northward extension of Southern Rhodesian segregationism. Both regarded federal reforms such as the removal of petty discrimination and the admission of Africans to senior positions in parliament and the civil and diplomatic services as mere tokenism, particularly as Southern Rhodesia remained a bastion of white supremacy. External factors did not favour Welensky's imperial vision. The Suez crisis was followed by the independence of Ghana, whose leader, Kwame Nkrumah, made clear that African nationalism would soon triumph throughout the continent. The rapid decolonization of much of French Africa was followed by the crisis in the former Belgian Congo, in which Welensky backed the secessionist state of Katanga. He was suspected, absurdly, of arranging the death of the UN secretary-general Dag Hammarskjold in an air crash in Northern Rhodesia in 1960. 
In 1958 Welensky won significant concessions, including greater devolution in external affairs and an undertaking not to intervene legislatively except at the request of the federal government, from the British government, which shared his fear of the right-wing Dominion Party opposition. For him the attraction of foreign investment and immigration were priorities, along with re-equipping the army and air force with sophisticated weaponry. Within the federation itself, however, he was swimming against the tide of African opinion. By 1958-9 it became clear that in all three territories this was hardening. The replacement of Garfield Todd by Sir Edgar Whitehead as Southern Rhodesian prime minister seemed to portend a rightward and anti-federation tendency in an electorate on which Welensky crucially depended. He responded to manifestations of African nationalism largely by believing that African unrest could be contained by economic rather than political progress. In Nyasaland a state of emergency, which he supported with federal troops, failed to curtail the strength of Dr Hastings Banda. The report of the Devlin commission into the disturbances, with its damning conclusion that the territory was a 'police state', combined with revelations about the Kenyan Hola camp 'massacre' of Mau Mau detainees, alienated still further metropolitan opinion. Welensky none the less enjoyed strong support within the right of the Conservative Party, led by the vociferous if declining marquess of Salisbury. 
In the closing years of the federation Welensky was diplomatically outclassed by British ministers. He was encouraged to present complicated British reforms of the Northern Rhodesian and Nyasaland electoral systems as final, only to find that these positions were soon abandoned in favour of accelerated progress towards majority rule and secession. He felt particularly deceived by the Monckton report which, though favourable to the economic aspects of federation, made major recommendations about alterations in the territorial and federal franchises and suggested that the British government clarify the territorial right to secession. He would have been reluctant to see Nyasaland withdraw, because of the precedent it set, but on the retention of Northern Rhodesia he seemed resolute. He made preparations for a federal unilateral declaration of independence, including, it was said, a plan to kidnap the Northern Rhodesian governor, but the absence of direct British military provocation, together with the difficulty of effecting a 'coup d'etat' over so vast an area, undermined his threat. First Nyasaland and then Northern Rhodesia, under Banda and Kenneth Kaunda respectively, were given the right to secede. By then the future of Welensky's federal ideal had been fatally compromised in any case by the election in Southern Rhodesia in 1962 of the white supremacist and anti-federalist Rhodesian Front. Welensky blamed Macmillan and Iain Macleod for this betrayal, when in fact Rab Butler, the minister for central Africa whom he admired, was a reluctant if resolute architect of this policy. Welensky's last-minute proposal to detach the copperbelt and 'line of rail' and amalgamate them with Southern Rhodesia, as well as British promises to maintain some sort of economic association, came to nothing. Nevertheless, he co-operated fully in the orderly winding up of the federation in 1963, transferring the bulk of the powerful federal armed forces to Southern Rhodesia, a crucial factor in the unilateral declaration of independence crisis that followed after November 1965. 
In 1964 Welensky decided to stand for the Southern Rhodesian assembly, as leader of the Rhodesia National Party (successor to the United Federal Party), but Clifford Dupont of the Rhodesian Front in a heated by-election defeated him. During the campaign extreme Rhodesian Front supporters branded him 'a bloody Jew', a 'communist', and a 'traitor' (Blake, 388). When the unilateral declaration of independence came in November 1965 he opposed it as unjustified, believing that Ian Smith made a fatal error in consulting the unenfranchised majority on the issue (by means of an indaba), thus making this a principle in any future Anglo-Rhodesian negotiations. Nevertheless he advised Rhodesians to prevent chaos by obeying their 'revolutionary government' (Joyce, 285). In 1969 he opposed Smith's moves towards a republic, but supported acceptance of the Anglo-Rhodesian settlement in the Pearce commission of 1971. 
Following the death of his first wife in 1969, Welensky married, in 1972, (Miriam) Valerie Scott, a British Conservative Party worker thirty years his junior, with whom he had two daughters. He declined offers of safe Conservative seats in Britain, just as he had refused a peerage on the dissolution of the federation. He enjoyed an extensive correspondence with such figures as Desmond Donnelly, maverick Labour MP for Pembroke, sharing Donnelly's disillusionment with post-imperial Britain. Personally incorruptible, the only public pension he drew was $9 a year as a former railwayman. In 1981, his health failing, he retired to Blandford Forum in Dorset. He died at Blandford Hospital, Blandford Forum, on 5 December 1991 following a heart attack, and was survived by his second wife, their two daughters, and the two children of his first marriage. 
Born into the direst poverty, Welensky experienced acutely the insecurities of the white minorities of central and southern Africa. Yet he enjoyed warm personal relations with individual Africans, including Kenneth Kaunda. Among his most treasured possessions was an African bust presented to him by a fellow freemason, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa. According to Margaret West, a British diplomat stationed in the federation, Welensky was 'so nearly a great man'. To have risen from grinding privation to such political influence was an achievement in itself. It is not surprising that he failed to preserve the federation, a cause that would have defeated statesmen born into far more fortunate circumstances. 


@@@@@


doc= 50692


White, Wilfrid Hyde (1903-1991), actor, was born on 12 May 1903 at the rectory in Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire, the son of William Edward White, canon of Gloucester Cathedral, and his wife, Ethel Adelaide Drought. He was educated at Marlborough College, where he decided on an acting career -- his uncle was the actor J. Fisher White. He studied at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and made his stage debut as Maitland in the Evans-Valentine hit comedy 'Tons of Money' (1922) at Ryde, Isle of Wight, and his London debut as a juror in 'Beggar on Horseback' (1925) at the Queen's. On 17 December 1927 he married Blanche Hope Aitken ('b'. 1896/7), who used the stage name Blanche Glynne; they had one son. For a decade he was a busy stage actor, although with no successes of particular note, in the provinces and in London, touring in South Africa in 1932, and briefly as part of Tom Walls's company at the Aldwych. He made his film debut in 'Josser on the Farm' (1934) and there soon followed many minor, but often telling, film roles. He appeared exclusively on screen from 1936 to 1940, sometimes billed as Hyde White, in such films as 'Rembrandt' (1936); 'The Scarab Murder Case' (1936), a rare lead role as an unlikely Philo Vance; 'Elephant Boy' (1937) as the commissioner; and 'Poison Pen' (1939) as the postman. Through the 1940s he was equally occupied on stage and in films, being well-established in West End drama and comedy and with screen roles becoming larger. He made his New York debut in 1947 as Sir Alec Dunne in 'Under the Counter' at the Shubert. But it was Carol Reed's film 'The Third Man' (1949), from Graham Greene's novella, which first got him noticed by a large audience; he played Crabbit, a bemused British cultural official in post-war Vienna. 
White's debonair, often roguish charm was instantly recognizable; 'his unfailing imperturbability and unruffled acceptance of every eventuality made him an ideal choice for light comedy of the drawing room school' ('The Times', 8 May 1991). He did, though, win further acting spurs in Olivier's Festival of Britain (1951) productions, 'Caesar and Cleopatra' and 'Antony and Cleopatra', both at the St James's and the Ziegfeld, New York. And there were other stage successes, such as 'Affairs of State' (1952) at the Cambridge, 'Hippo Dancing' (1954) at the Lyric with lifetime friend Robert Morley, and, particularly, 'The Reluctant Debutante' (1955), also at the Cambridge which, the following year in New York, earned him a Tony award nomination. He took over the part of the Marquess of Candover in 'The Jockey Club Stakes' (1972) which, when repeated at the Cort, New York, early the following year, won him a second Tony nomination. 
White was increasingly busy on screen, usually as lords, gentlemen, or conmen, often 'smallish roles which he somehow succeeded in making appear bigger' ('The Times', 8 May 1991), such as 'The Browning Version' (1951) as the headmaster, and in his own favourite role, as the bogus Reverend Fowler (alias 'Soapy' Stevens) in 'Two Way Stretch' (1960). In that year he was in Hollywood for 'Let's Make Love' with Marilyn Monroe, and many films in the film capital followed. In particular he co-starred in 'My Fair Lady' (1964) from the Lerner and Loewe musical as Colonel Pickering, the avuncular companion of Rex Harrison's Professor Higgins. It was a role which brought him international recognition. 
After the death of his wife, in 1957 White married the American actress Ethel Korenman (stage name Ethel Drew). They had a son, the actor Alex Hyde White, and a daughter. From the mid-1960s, they lived in California. There were some final stage appearances, including 'The Prodigal Daughter' (1973) in Washington and then on a UK tour, 'An Ideal Husband' (1976) at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford, 'Rolls-Royce' (1977) at the Shaftesbury, and, finally, in 'Lady Windermere's Fan' again (1978), also at the Arnaud. But it was television movies and guest appearances which were to keep him busy from the late 1960s to the early 1980s. Very few were of particular note, but he invariably radiated droll good humour with an impeccable style. That style, supplemented by conversation punctuated with many a 'ho-ho', and 'dear fellow', and a tapping of the nose with the forefinger, had been expensive to maintain in real life, exemplified by Rolls-Royces, racehorses, and mistresses, which led to his being declared bankrupt in London in 1979. His wife left him and, chastened by the experience, he managed to give up his inveterate gambling on horses for a year, becoming even busier on television. His career was somewhat revived by the television series 'The Associates' (1979), in which he played the senior partner of a New York law firm. His last film appearance was in the British/West German co-production 'Fanny Hill' (1983). 
In 1985 White became a resident of the Motion Picture and Television Hospital in Woodland Hills, Los Angeles, California, for his last few years being almost bedridden. He died on 6 May 1991 in Woodland Hills of congestive heart failure. 


@@@@@


doc= 50698


Hudson, John (1795-1869), agriculturist, was born at Grimston, Norfolk; little is known about his early life, but in 1822 he and his father took on the tenancy of Lodge Farm (788 acres) and of Manor (or Lower) Farm (653 acres), at Castle Acre, Norfolk, from Thomas William Coke of Holkham. He soon became a leading figure in the second generation of improving farmers on the Holkham estate. 
1822 was a time of agricultural depression and the previous tenant of Lodge Farm (Mr Purdey) had sold up for the benefit of creditors in that year. The farms were said to be in poor condition and had been refused by three previous prospective tenants. Yields were no more than 20 bushels of wheat and 24 bushels of barley per acre. The root crops grown had not enabled the outgoing tenant of Lodge Farm to winter more than 10 bullocks (Jenkins, 460-74). 
The background of the Hudsons is obscure, but they must have had plenty of capital. This they immediately put to use in improving the farms. According to the 1851 census John's wife, Anne Rebecca, was three years his junior and born in Warham, Norfolk, possibly the daughter of a Holkham tenant there. The Revd Armstrong, writing in 1856, described Hudson as a 'princely yeoman of Norfolk' and was told that he had been a postilion to Mr Hammard (landowner of West Acre, Norfolk), 'in which capacity he had saved $100. He married a widow of Lynn by whom he had accession to a fortune, became Lord Leicester's tenant at Castle Acre and is now worth $100,000' (Armstrong, 63). Hudson managed both farms until his father's death in 1840. Manor Farm was then run by executors until his son, Thomas, took over in 1857; Thomas Hudson remained there until his death in 1903. 
John Hudson's immediate task in 1822 was to improve the fertility of the farms, which he undertook in two ways. First he followed the traditional method of increasing stocking rates to produce more manure, which involved the expenditure of between $2000 and $3000 per annum on oil cake and other artificial feeds. He thus doubled the number of animals kept and claimed that by feeding sliced turnips and oil cake to his sheep in the fields he had increased the output of the land by a third. By 1850 there were 2500 sheep and 150 bullocks on the two farms; in 1822 there had been only 400 sheep and 40 bullocks. Second, he spent $800 to $1000 per annum on the new artificial manures such as superphosphates and guano. As a result of this extremely high investment he claimed that the barley crop had nearly doubled. In 1843 he told R. N. Bacon, author of 'The Agriculture of Norfolk', published that year, that 'with more capital and more skill, this country might be an exporting rather than importing country' (Norfolk RO, MS 4363). 
In spite of the large quantities of artificial fertilizers being used, Hudson preferred to farm by the four-course rotation system which he was said to practise 'with the greatest skill and liberality' (Jenkins, 460-74). William Keary, the Holkham agent, noted in 1851 that the farm was almost weed-free and 'that such lands produce this enormous bulk of roots and corn is truly astonishing and proves indisputably the high condition of the farm and the skill of the tenant' (Holkham MS, Keary's report). 
Hudson was also interested in mechanization. By 1843 he had erected a steam engine to drive a threshing machine and grind oil cake. Such machines were unusual in Norfolk, a county far away from coal supplies and where cheap labour was plentiful. By 1850 he had two steam engines on his farm, one stationary and one portable, as well as one threshing machine worked by horsepower. In 1866 he bought his own steam plough to overcome the need to hire steam tackle (Jenkins). 
It was Hudson's methods of 'high farming' and his enthusiasm for and promotion of this high-input, high-output system that made him famous. By 1842 he was a member of the recently formed Royal Agricultural Society of England and at that time he was portrayed in a painting of the society's meeting at Bristol. In 1850 he wrote an essay for the Royal Agricultural Society's farm prize competition and it was published that year. In it he described himself as having spent 'a life devoted to practical farming' (Hudson, 282-7). He was in addition the first chairman of the Farmers' Club in London in 1842-3, and a member of the club's tenants' rights committee in 1846. 
Hudson died on 26 July 1869 at The Beeches, Cirencester, Gloucestershire. He was survived by his wife. An obituary in the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society' described him as 'one of the first exponents and chief illustrators of the principles and practice of high farming'. Lodge Farm was then run by executors until 1878, when it was re-let. 


@@@@@


doc= 50699


Taylor, Hugh (1789-1868), land agent and estate commissioner, was born on 22 November 1789 at Shilbottle Lodge, Newburn, Northumberland, the fourth, but third surviving, son of Thomas Taylor (died 1810) of Newburn, farmer and mineral agent to Hugh Percy, duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Mary Nixon. His father established the Taylor family interest in the north-eastern coal trade, and looked to his three sons to consolidate this. The eldest son, Thomas Taylor, of Whitehill Point and later of Cramlington, Northumberland, became a leading coal owner in the newly opened and fast-expanding Tyne basin or eastern coal district on the north bank of the lower Tyne, where best-quality Wallsend house coal was found at great depth. The second son, John Taylor, of Shilbottle, became a noted mining engineer, and Hugh Taylor himself was apprenticed to a colliery owner to learn the art of winning and working coal in the deep. 
When his father died in 1810 Hugh Taylor, though no more than twenty-one years old, succeeded him as mineral agent to the second duke of Northumberland. Under the third duke, who succeeded in 1817, he quickly advanced to a more senior position in the ducal administration. At that time the Percy estates were managed by three commissioners, each of whom managed a separate territorial district, and under each commissioner were a number of bailiffs, who held farms at low rents in return for looking after a number of fellow tenants. Taylor was promoted to one of these commissionerships, while retaining the colliery agency. Experience made him highly critical of this system of divided managerial responsibilities, which tended to upset the tenantry because policies and practices varied from one commissioner's district to another; but the third duke disliked the idea of change. On his death in 1847 Taylor persuaded the fourth duke to make a clean sweep of the whole system, and a reformed and hierarchical management structure was set up, with himself as chief commissioner. He was entrusted with sole and undivided authority over all the Northumberland estates and controlled a staff of salaried agents for territorial subdistricts and specialized functions such as colliery matters, building works, and land drainage. This centralized and authoritarian regime for managing a vast estate -- over 180,000 acres in Northumberland -- may well have owed much to the example of James Loch's administration of the Sutherland estates, which undoubtedly would have been known to Taylor. 
The fourth duke, known as Algernon the Good and Algernon the Benevolent, was resolved to spend his large income liberally, but it was Taylor who acted as the channel for the duke's munificence. Much of the expenditure which he supervised was of a benevolent or philanthropic character: national schools were supported, churches were built, fishing villages were provided with barometers, and, with the example of Grace Darling on the doorstep, lifeboats were placed along the coast. Most of the expenditure, however, was designed to promote the prosperity of the estate and was to the mutual advantage of the duke and his tenantry. The agricultural expenditure was immense -- $0.5 million on field drainage and farm buildings between 1847 and 1865 -- and the estate was in the van in trying out steam ploughing and town sewage irrigation. By the 1860s it had the reputation of being one of the best-run estates in the country, much visited by agricultural tourists. But it was in industrial affairs that Taylor excelled, and his most important services to the Percy fortunes were in the protection and promotion of the duke's colliery and wayleave interests in the manor of Tynemouth; he had a major role in securing the establishment of the Tyne commissioners and the building of the Northumberland Dock. He was himself a colliery owner at Earsdon in the manor of Tynemouth, where he purchased a farm in 1824 and built himself a house, paying both royalty and wayleave rents to the duke, but apparently feeling no conflict of interests. He was a respected authority on the coal trade, an important witness before the 1829 select committee of the House of Lords on the coal trade, and for many years chairman of the Coal Trade Association of Northumberland and Durham. 
Hugh Taylor was much helped in colliery matters by his nephew, Thomas John Taylor (1810-1861), eldest of the four sons of John Taylor of Shilbottle, the mining engineer, and his wife, Margaret Darling of Ford, Northumberland. Thomas John was educated at Ponteland School and Edinburgh University, and he then trained as a colliery viewer and soon became manager of Haswell colliery, in which his uncle Hugh was a partner. In 1847 he was appointed colliery agent to the fourth duke of Northumberland, and with the professional support of John Buddle, the leading colliery viewer of the previous generation, he rose to eminence as a mining engineer and was one of the founders of the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers in 1852, and its first vice-president. He was one of the expert witnesses consulted by the select committee on the rating of mines in 1857. He devised a scheme for rescuing the sixteen to eighteen waterlogged collieries of the Tyne basin, on both banks of the river, which had been abandoned through flooding, leaving the seams below the High Main unwrought; however, the common drainage company which he suggested was only set up after his death. He investigated the behaviour of tidal rivers and estuaries, and in 1851 published a pamphlet on the improvement of the River Tyne, which enunciated the principles on which the improvement of several other tidal harbours was based. He was involved in the planning and construction of the Border Counties Railway, farther up the north Tyne from Hexham, which was intended originally to open out a small field of inferior coal at Plashetts but which became a pawn in high-level railway politics as a key section of the 'Waverley route' to Edinburgh avoiding use of both north British and North Eastern rails. In 1839 he married his first cousin Eliza Taylor, who died in 1840, presumably in giving birth to their only child, Eliza Anne. Thomas John Taylor died on 2 April 1861 while preparing for a meeting of Border Counties directors, at Bellingham, on the north Tyne. His youngest brother, John Taylor (1820-1879), of Earsdon, was also a leading mining engineer, specializing in the lead mines of Northumberland and Durham, while his second brother, Charles Taylor (1812-1856), of Sunderland, was also in the coal trade. The most successful of all the family, in worldly terms, was his third brother, another Hugh Taylor (1817-1900), coal owner and partner in several collieries in Durham as well as in Northumberland, MP for Tynemouth (1852-4 and 1859-61), who purchased Chipchase Castle and its estate, on the north Tyne, in 1862, from another coal owner, R. W. Grey, and there established a landed family. 
Hugh Taylor senior purchased a second farm in Earsdon in 1852 to add to the one he had bought in 1824, and when the duke's business did not keep him in Alnwick Castle he lived in Earsdon and was much attached to the village. He never married, and on his death on 30 August 1868 at Earsdon he left $1600 to endow a charity -- one third of the income to go to the aged poor of Earsdon, and the rest to the local voluntary school; his land went to his nephew John Taylor for life, and then to another nephew, Hugh Taylor, rector of Wark, Northumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 50701


Wilson, Sir Angus Frank Johnstone (1913-1991), novelist and biographer, was born on 11 August 1913 at Dunscore, Dorset Road, Bexhill-on-Sea, Sussex, the sixth son of William Thomas Frank Johnstone-Wilson (1865-1938), and Maud Ellen, 'nee' Caney (1867-1929), daughter of a wealthy jeweller in Durban, South Africa. His father was from a border Scots landowning family and liked to call himself 'a gentleman of no occupation'. By the time of Wilson's birth the family lived in half-raffish 'rentier' poverty in the hotels of the English south coast. According to Wilson's memoir, 'Bexhill and after' ('Spectator', 1958), it was an unhappy life for a lonely, late child, yet productive for storytelling; fantasy served to replace past glories. In 1922 his parents returned to Durban, where Wilson attended the Beres Road infants' school, witnessed the fading empire, and came under the influence of Kipling's Mowgli and Kim (he later wrote a fine book on Kipling). Dionysian recollections of this episode are found in an early story, 'Union Reunion'. 
Two years later the family returned to the hotels of Kensington and Wilson attended Ashampstead preparatory school in Seaford, owned and headmastered by his much older brother Winn. In 1927 he became a day-boy at Westminster School, London. His high-voiced manner and scruffy unconventional appearance were redeemed by skills of mimicry and story-telling, which had always been, he said, his histrionic family's stock-in-trade. Like Charles Dickens, the subject of another fine Wilson biography, he saw himself as odd, 'declasse', ever seeking out surrogate families. By the time he went to Merton College, Oxford, to read medieval history (1932-5), he was well aware of his flamboyance, homosexuality (two older brothers were members of the gay community), and left-wing opinions. After a second-class degree and various odd jobs including working in a brother's restaurant, he joined the department of printed books at the British Museum as a cataloguer. If this was boring, he was also part of a camp, bohemian, left-wing scene. When the Second World War came, he was concerned in efforts to protect the library, until called for service in 1941. Like many academics and museologists, he was recruited for the codebreaking unit of the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park (now world famous for decoding the Enigma machine) to work on Italian intercepts. He disliked the discipline and the place's intense competitive atmosphere, and an abortive love affair helped precipitate a breakdown. Writing was advised as therapy, so he experimented a little with fiction. In 1945 he returned to the British Museum, becoming assistant keeper, replacing the books destroyed in wartime bombing. There he met a young attendant, Anthony Charles Garrett ('b'. 1929), who became his lifelong partner. 
In November 1946, at a house at Little Hadham which he shared with male friends, Wilson wrote 'Raspberry Jam', a story about two old ladies who kill a bullfinch. 'I sat down, as they say in the faith-healing testimonies, and 'just wrote a story one Sunday'', he said in 'The Wild Garden' (p. 21). Another story, 'Mother's Sense of Fun', appeared in 'Horizon' in November 1947, under his pen-name Angus Wilson. In March 1949 Fred Warburg, on a hunch, published a collection of twelve stories, 'The Wrong Set', which included 'Raspberry Jam'; a year later Secker and Warburg published another collection, 'Such Darling Dodos'. Wilson's late fictional start represented a striking debut. Post-war British fiction was recovering from war and the social transformations of the Labour government, and his stories were socially vivid, with a Waugh-like satirical edge, and a liberal reforming bite. They caught the post-war welfare state atmosphere of austerity, anxiety, dispossession, social unease and, end-of-empire bitterness; as privilege died, progressive hope rose, and fears of left-wing totalitarianism grew. 
In 1949 Wilson was appointed deputy superintendent of the reading room, acquired a flat in Dolphin Square, and became known as a brilliant, distinguished literary figure. In 1952 he followed a study of Emile Zola's novels with his own first novel, 'Hemlock and After', reputedly written in four weeks. As its Socratic title suggests, it is about the intellectual man of letters the middle-aged Bernard Sands, who attempts to found a writers' centre in welfare state Britain, but whose liberal-progressive ideas conceal moral confusions and hypocrisies, cruelties, and sadisms. The book was acclaimed as a portrait of post-war society and a vivid moral analysis; Britain now found itself with an important new novelist, successor to Evelyn Waugh or E. M. Forster, both of whom seemed to influence him. Such was its success that Wilson felt able to risk becoming a freelance writer. He also had a favourable contract from Secker and Warburg and, in March 1955 resigned from the museum and, with Tony Garrett, moved to Felsham Woodside, a cottage amid woods and a much-loved wild garden near Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, with the plan for a yet more ambitious novel, 'Anglo-Saxon Attitudes'. 
If 'Hemlock and After' is a fine work about the modern liberal dilemma, 'Anglo-Saxon Attitudes' (1956) proved to be more than that: a sharply-observed and remarkable, panoramic portrait of a whole society. It is set around an archaeological fraud, the plot drawing on the Piltdown skull hoax of 1953; the deliberate falsification of history echoes the hypocrisy of modern British society and the moral illusions that prosper within it. A humanistic novel with a troubled academic hero, Gerald Middleton, it is also a vivid, satirical, wide-ranging portrait of striking, often self-corrupting communities from the academic world to the political, from bourgeois home life to homosexual underworlds. Its list of dramatic personae is long; as one critic observed, few novelists since Dickens had attempted work of such scale. Wilson was now a lively figure in the 1950s literary revolution. His play 'The Mulberry Tree' (1956) was staged at the Royal Court Theatre in the same season as 'Look Back in Anger'. He helped younger writers, including his namesake Colin Wilson, who dedicated 'The Outsider' (1956) to him. A writer frankly exploring homosexuality, he gave evidence to the Wolfenden committee; and publicly urged action upon its recommendations about homosexuality ('The Times', 7 March 1958). He began to travel extensively, performing brilliantly as a vivid impromptu speaker at many international events, including the PEN Club conference in Tokyo in 1957. 
In 1957 Wilson published another story collection, 'A Bit off the Map'; a year later came a new novel, the moving 'The Middle Age of Mrs Eliot'. This story of a middle-aged woman, suddenly widowed in a senseless incident at a foreign airport, struggling to reconstruct her realities and make a new life, was an unexpected book. The heroine is ordinary yet powerfully present, the novel compassionate yet with satirical sparkle; it won a large audience. It represented a contribution to the socio-moral tradition of the English novel (the titular link with George Eliot is hardly accidental). After this novel David Farrer took over from Fred Warburg as Wilson's editor, and became a close friend. His next book, 'The Old Men at the Zoo' (1961), revealed different qualities. Set in a future Britain as a new European war breaks out, it shows national collapse within a large institution, the London Zoo (a cross between the British Museum and Bletchley Park). The old men who run it are forlorn figures, obstinate, unable to face change, animals resembling the animals themselves. Reviewers were divided, some finding it a brilliant dystopian portrait of the British establishment, others an unsympathetic fantasy. Wilson was well aware of the contrast; he acknowledged (in 'The house of fiction', an interview with Frank Kermode) the double face of his writing, which displayed a George Eliot quality and 'mixed with it... a great lump of Dickensianism... I have got this... grand guignol side' (p. 122). The complex sources of fiction are the theme of the Ewing lectures he delivered at the University of California that year, expanded into a splendid psychological study of his writing process, 'The Wild Garden'. As he reveals here his garden at Felsham Woodside was not only his 'principal pleasure' (p. 57), but also a 'prelapsarian' refuge which provided him with a series of 'moral symbols' which informed his work (p. 62). 
By now Wilson was probably Britain's most distinguished novelist and one of the most extensively travelled, regularly visiting Japan, India, Ceylon, the Mediterranean, the USA. Brilliant, witty, a splendid critic with a taste for the unusual or neglected (Samuel Richardson to J. C. Powys), he was in 1962 appointed part-time senior lecturer in English at the brand new University of East Anglia, Norwich, still choosing its first students. Many of these were attracted by the original academic programme, the emphasis on contemporary writing, and by Wilson himself. A charismatic teacher, he encouraged many aspiring writers, including Rose Tremain. In 1970 he founded the MA programme in creative writing with Malcolm Bradbury; Ian McEwan was the sole student in the first year of the programme. Appointed professor in 1967, Wilson served as public orator, and retired as emeritus in 1978. Many issues concerned him: support for public lending right, the interests of writers and writing, and homosexual law reform. He attended the Campaign for Homosexual Equality conference in Sheffield in 1975 with Tony Garrett and spoke publicly of their twenty-five-year relationship. He had made his homosexuality known at a time when very few public figures did so, although he was often distressed by the consequences (Garrett was forced to resign his position as a probation officer in 1960). He was deputy chair, then chair, of the Arts Council literature panel. He wrote extensive journalism, appeared on television, and lectured globally for the British Council. In 1969 he was made a CBE. 
Two key novels of the 1960s repeated the pattern of alternating a traditional with an experimental novel. Though part written in Morocco, 'Late Call' (1964) was a portrait of contemporary Britain, set in a new town in the era of planners, the comprehensive school, tower blocks, and the television soap. Again it centred on a striking heroine, Sylvia Calvert, a former servant whose life runs from the deferential rural England of Edwardian days to the planned new age. A large, humane social novel, it was widely acclaimed. 'No Laughing Matter' (1968), remarkably different, has claim to being his most autobiographical, experimental, socially elaborate book. The story of the six children of the histrionic, dysfunctional Matthews family from 1912 to 1967, it makes fundamental use of techniques of parody and pastiche, travesty, self-mimicry; a polyphonic tale about the collapse of British bourgeois life into the world of modernity, it is also about the collapse of the solid bourgeois novel. Wilson became chairman of the National Book League, president of the Royal Society of Literature, and in 1975 chaired the Booker prize. Two notable literary biographies -- 'The World of Charles Dickens' (1970) and 'The Strange Ride of Rudyard Kipling' (1977) -- were separated by publication of 'As If By Magic' (1973), an extraordinary 'global novel' about the new generation of the 1960s, with a strong homosexual theme. 
In 1980 Wilson was knighted, and he published his final novel, 'Setting the World on Fire', a social fable set around a great house in the heart of London, and a celebration of the fires of the imagination. Late in 1985, dismayed by Thatcher's Britain and its neglect of literature, he moved with Tony Garrett to an apartment in St Remy-de-Provence, France. He was diagnosed with a brain illness (hydrocephalus) which prevented him from writing. It brought extended mental and physical deterioration and severe financial difficulties as his reputation slipped in a fast-changing literary climate. In 1989 he came back to a nursing home, Pinfold End House, Hawstead, near Bury St Edmunds, where he died on 31 May 1991; he was cremated on 6 June at Risby crematorium, Suffolk. Over four decades his work had given contemporary fiction the scope, moral energy, historical and social curiosity, comic flamboyance of the classic British novel. Like himself, it was both very central and splendidly marginal: his fiction -- radical, satirical, polyvalent, sexually courageous, global -- extended the mainstream novel, and led it somewhere else. Still not fully recognized, he was one of Britain's greatest late-twentieth-century writers. 


@@@@@


doc= 50702


Wilson, Charles Henry (1914-1991), historian, was born at 4 Kilnwell Road, Market Rasen, Lincolnshire on 16 April 1914, the son of Joseph Edwin Wilson and his wife, Louisa Maria, 'nee' Berridge. His family were modest in means: his father was a master tailor and his mother, the youngest of eleven children in a farming family near Peterborough, had spent twelve years at an orphanage in London. Charles Wilson owed much to his mother -- in particular his interest in music. 
Wilson went first to the local Methodist elementary school, then to De Aston Grammar School, leaving Market Rasen for Jesus College, Cambridge, as an undergraduate in 1933, having won an open exhibition. It was a hard route to Cambridge, where he took first-class honours in both parts of the historical tripos, and then subsequently in the English tripos (1937). He also became president of the university music club and an accomplished viola player. Staying on for a fourth year at Cambridge was originally designed to improve Wilson's chances in the civil service examination but this ambition was quickly overtaken by longer-term academic plans. In these he was encouraged particularly by Edward Welbourne, senior tutor of Emmanuel College (later master), an economic historian of inspired (or maverick) views, who came from Market Rasen, having been a friend of the Wilson family and also a pupil at the grammar school. Welbourne's lectures and deep interest in the historic presence of the Dutch in East Anglia induced Charles Wilson to learn Dutch and commit himself to Dutch economic history. He spent his two initial postgraduate years in the Netherlands laying the basis for his first major research project (nominally supervised by J. H. Clapham). A research fellowship at Jesus in 1938 enabled him hastily to complete the manuscript of 'Anglo Dutch Commerce and Finance in the Eighteenth Century' before the outbreak of war (it was published in 1941). He married, on 21 October 1939, Angela Marshman, a solicitor's secretary, the daughter of John Opie Marshman, engineer. They had one daughter. 
Wilson served for a short time in the navy before Whitehall claimed him for the Admiralty, where he learned much about the relations between bureaucracy, policy making, and government. He wrote much of the charming vignette 'Holland and Britain' (1946) in the intervals of work. In 1945 he returned to Cambridge as bursar of Jesus and he was appointed university lecturer in modern history. 
In 1947 G. N. Clark, regius professor of modern history in Cambridge, was asked by Geoffrey Heyworth, chairman of Unilever, for advice about a possible history of this major Anglo-Dutch business. Clark declined Heyworth's invitation for himself but brought Charles Wilson, now with established status in Anglo-Dutch history, into the discussions. Wilson was then invited to write the history of Unilever, conceived as a large-scale, professional, independent, academic study with appropriate research assistance -- the first of its kind in Britain for a major industrial company and multinational business. The result was a highly successful and influential pioneer work in modern British business history. A consistent historical philosophy lay behind the study, which was to characterize all Wilson's subsequent works. As he observed: 'Historians have often written as if growth and material progress were a natural and inevitable process needing no propulsion from human enterprise... In economic history, as elsewhere, a man is limited by circumstances, yet at the heart of the economic progress there is human intelligence, human character, ingenuity and enterprise... but of the men who organised the great industries, who studied the application of invention on a large scale, raised the capital, followed on, created the markets and -- above all -- shouldered the risk, we heard little.' In the early 1950s this carried with it a strong political message. He concluded: 'It is my hope that this study... will do something to redress the balance of our history and focus attention on the process by which wealth was created as well as on those by which it was shared out' (C. H. Wilson, 'History of Unilever', 1954, preface, 1.vi). When the two volumes were published (at publisher's risk) by Cassell in 1954, their reception immediately demonstrated that Wilson had set new levels of expectation in business history, the implications of which remained for long after. No other book did more to legitimize business history in Britain as a subspecies of main-line history -- and economic history. The first print run (of 10,000 copies) sold out and the edition was reprinted. A Dutch translation was also published. Commitments in business history continued with the history of Robert Napier, the Scottish engineering business, published as 'Men and Machines' (1959), written jointly with W. J. Reader, his principal research assistant for the history of Unilever, followed by a study of the multiple stationers, W. H. Smith, 1792-1972, 'First with the News' (1985). 
In his 'History of Unilever', Wilson effectively identified business history with entrepreneurial history. Firmly based narratives of growth and change, strategies, products, and markets, analysed with great perception and intelligence, were the hallmarks of his work in this field. He did not deploy specific analytical frameworks, or specific economic theory (explicit or implicit). He was a sympathetic visitor to the Research Center in Entrepreneurial History at Harvard in 1954 where the heritage of J. A. Schumpeter was being actively developed. From this visit came his article 'The entrepreneur in the Industrial Revolution' ('History', 42, 1957), much reprinted subsequently, which opened up the debate in the more empirical terms of exploring actual business roles. His insight there retained its importance, linking issues of production to those of markets: one of the basic skills of the entrepreneur, he considered to be the possession of 'a sense of market opportunity combined with the capacity needed to exploit it' (p. 103). As a historian he had an appreciation for those -- whether politicians, administrators, or businessmen in history -- who wrestled with practical endeavour. Another source of such awareness was Wilson's own experience (which gave him great satisfaction) as bursar of Jesus from 1945 to 1955 -- a critical decade in the evolution of his views and values -- because as bursar he was responsible for the varied financial commitments of a relatively wealthy Cambridge college. 
Wilson came to prominence internationally in 1949 with an important reinterpretation of established views on mercantilism (an orthodoxy centred on the work of the eminent Swedish economic historian Eli Heckscher): 'Treasure and trade balances: the mercantilist problem' ('Economic History Review', 2nd ser., 2, 1949). His concern with the political issues which underlay mercantilist policies made him distrust the historical reality of the disembodied, conceptualized entity dubbed mercantilism. More directly, he was aware of the contemporary economic crisis from 1947, following the temporary commitment to the convertibility of sterling, the dollar gap, and the intractable problem of the sterling area needing to offset regional deficits in hard-currency trading areas. His argument was that British policy makers in the seventeenth century were not so stupid, given the intractable deficits they faced in the Baltic trade, in their concern with precious-metal flows, whatever classical economists might assume about the self-adjusting mechanisms of a multilateral trading system. This new idea about mercantilism set off lively controversies and re-energized even the aged Heckscher, who asserted once more the misapprehensions of the mercantilists. 
Wilson's deep knowledge of the interplay of economic and political forces in Anglo-Dutch affairs in the seventeenth century was next illuminated in 'Profit and Power' (1957), which surveyed the complex web of relations which brought about the first two wars between England and the Netherlands. In both 'Profit and Power' and 'Mercantilism', as well as in his textbook 'England's Apprenticeship, 1603-1763' (1965), he presented the reign of mercantilism as belonging primarily to the century from 1660 to 1760, but in the much more wide-ranging study of European mercantilism, 'Trade, society and the state', for the 'Cambridge Economic History of Europe', he pushed its beginnings back into the sixteenth century, if not to medieval times. 
Some years later a similar insight to that about mercantilism produced an influential countervailing view about late Victorian England. Historical debate about the 'great depression' of 1873-96 had concentrated on the economic ills of falling profits, sagging export values, higher unemployment, and evidence of failures to compete and innovate in certain industries. But Wilson knew a significantly different story about the same decades. On the basis of a resilient home market enhanced by falling prices, great expansion, much innovation, and economies of scale came to sectors of the economy such as brewing, distilling, mass-production confectionery, biscuits, bakery, and other food-processing industries such as margarine; newspapers and printing, soap, cheap drugs and pharmaceuticals -- the newly commercialized pleasures of the urban masses. All these showed another face of Britain. This article, 'Economy and society in late Victorian Britain' ('Economic History Review', 2nd ser., 18, 1965), stimulated much reassessment of the complex trends of that period. 
Wilson often did not capitalize upon these insights by following up his original articles with more substantial research. His style was to make bridgeheads of great originality into such themes: a characteristic of the sort of stimulus he could give at other levels in discussion, whether to colleagues or to students. The paradox of his eminence as an economic and business historian was that he did not regard himself as identified with such specific -- or limited -- historical roles. 'Queen Elizabeth and the Revolt of the Netherlands' (1970), which originated in the Ford lectures in Oxford (1968-9), showed him at once relaxed and self-confident in judgement, writing political history with great vigour. The theme was clear and consistent. 'As so often in history what looks like economic interests powerful enough to swing politics in their wake turn out in reality to be a puny thing, politically vulnerable to the slings and arrows of outrageous politics' (p. 17). 
The wider vision of history also characterized Wilson's textbooks: 'England's Apprenticeship, 1603-1763' (1965, 1988); 'The Age of Expansion: Europe and the World, 1559-1660' (ed. H. Trevor Roper, 1968); 'The Dutch Republic and the Civilisation of the Seventeenth Century' (1968); 'The Transformation of Europe, 1558-1648' (1976); and 'Introduction to the Sources of European Economic History, 1500-1800' (with G. Parker, 1977). At the same time he had been an editor (with E. E. Rich) and contributor for the 'Cambridge Economic History of Europe', vols. 4 and 5 (1967, 1977) and the 'New Cambridge Modern History', vols. 7 and 11 (1957, 1962), and co-editor (with R. M. Hartwell) of the 'Economic History Review' (1960-67). 
Within Cambridge and beyond Charles Wilson had a distinctive, robust intellectual style which put him out of sympathy with certain dominant trends, both local and international, at least until the latter years of his career. His chief mentors as a young man, the Jesus College tutors Bernard Manning and Kenneth Pickthorn, and Edward Welbourne (none of them main-line Cambridge historians) set his course, but his own local roots in the conservative and comparatively impoverished society of rural Lincolnshire remained strong in his consciousness. Jesus College was, in his generation, a conservative institution in the Cambridge kaleidoscope, in general as well as in historiographical terms: it was neither high church, ideological tory nor professed liberal and whig -- least of all radical, as some other parts of the town, but a traditional, Anglican, rather rural conservatism prevailed. 
During the post-war years, as bursar of Jesus, Wilson became a political Conservative, although he never moved in professional party circles. He reacted against prevailing liberal trends in the 1930s, agreeing with Edward Welbourne that the historical tripos at Cambridge was an exercise to keep the whigs of Trinity College in the true faith, although he had a personal admiration for G. M. Trevelyan. He had no sympathy with the Fabian left-wing orthodoxies of economic and social history in the ascendant before and immediately after the war and was also sceptical of the Manchester free-trade school represented by George Unwin, almost as much as he distrusted the Christian socialism of Toynbee or Tawney, although he became a supporter of the Institute of Economic Affairs and the University of Buckingham, both institutions in their different ways embodying the principles of the free market. He became independent, empirical, traditionalist, increasingly sceptical of the efficiencies of the state, and doubtful about the formulation of policies in accordance with grand conceptual (and usually 'soi-disant' Marxist) interpretations of the historical process. 
Wilson's two main credos for history are to be found in his inaugural lecture in Cambridge as professor of modern history, to which he was appointed in 1964 in succession to Herbert Butterfield ('History in Special and in General', 1964), and in an even less restrained coda which he offered a decade later in Brussels, after he had left Cambridge on secondment to the European University Institute in Florence ('The relevance of history', 'Mededelingen van de Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen', 36, 1975). He showed a strong preference for large books rather than short articles. He inveighed against the fate of social and economic history being taken over to guard the historical flank of the eternal truths of Fabian socialism. He saw social history's attempt to rescue history from its 'sterile preoccupation with mere politics' through invoking the lives of real people as being threatened by the advance of theory (as with economic history). He could never accept a monolithic conceptual schema nor a methodology which sought explanation in one type of variable, least of all the economic. 
Wilson's own work always saw interconnections and counterpoints between religion and business, politics and economics, men and circumstances. Having written so much about seventeenth-century European conflicts he was always conscious of how present-day assumptions downgraded the importance of religion, whether in present reality or historical conflict, despite his own lack of any religious conviction. He reacted -- too strongly -- against what he saw as the progressive takeover of economic history by such quantitative techniques and a conceptual apparatus which hid the simplified assumption of neo-classical economics behind obscurantist econometric expertise. The interplay between men and their context was of the essence, and increasingly he found it more congenial to concentrate on the human actors in the story. For this reason, among others, he welcomed his appointment to the modern history chair in Cambridge, whereas he was seen by his colleagues as the natural successor to M. M. Postan (who was to retire in 1966) in the chair of economic history. 
With such resonant views of what he saw as false gods, Wilson's affirmations as well as his scepticism became more specific with time. His eclectic vision of history was research based, dependent on primary sources, and certainly not without analytical vigour. Historical research could not produce definitive, value-free, objective, non-timebound, scientific certainties. Nor was history a cumulative revelation of progress. Material progress he undoubtedly affirmed -- in this sense he reversed accusations of progressive immizeration with the evolution of capitalism, whether commercial or industrial. Rather it was the intellectual and cultural trends of the 'political nation' which gave him doubts about progress, more specifically for the twentieth century. This was an age of 'instant news and instant amnesia'. Far from being an era of disbelief it was, on the contrary, doubtful whether there had ever been an age when there was wider or looser propensity to believe. Hence the importance he attributed to an awareness of history: it could provide a particular and sceptical perspective that comes from studying social phenomena in relation to time. 
Wilson's views on university teaching remained firmly elitist and traditional. At the centre of undergraduate intellectual development he saw the tutorial / supervision, with its twin and complementary disciplines of writing in relatively short compass about a major historical topic every week of term and then defending the essay in dialogue with one's college supervisor. For lectures he had greater doubts, seeing the imparting of information as a fundamentally uncritical process. This was his dark response to university expansion (where more, for him, meant worse) and the radical interlude of 1968-73. His views grew more extreme with age in these respects. 
After eleven years in the Cambridge chair, moving increasingly away from economic history, Charles Wilson was appointed to the European University Institute in Florence from 1975 to 1981. As the first professor of history and civilization, and the first head of the department, he played an initiating role. He was always a committed European, in the English political sense. His appointment in the institute coincided with a certain disenchantment with Cambridge; he felt (perhaps exaggeratedly) that he had become rather marginalized in the faculty, and he twice failed to be elected master of Jesus. Cambridge had become socially a rather claustrophobic village in the aftermath of divorce from his first wife, Angela, and his second marriage. On 23 March 1972 he married Alena Emilie Horesovska, a school teacher and translator from Czechoslovakia, whose previous marriage had been dissolved. She was the daughter of Vladimir Kouril, a barrister. Wilson eagerly took the opportunity of a fresh commitment in a different country to a new institution of which he greatly approved. His position at the institute endorsed his standing as a historian of Europe in the widest sense. He had been for many years a governor of the British Institute of Florence and an enthusiastic member of the comitato scientifico of the Istituto Internazionale 'F. Datini' at Prato (1971-84, then a member of the comitato d'onore) almost from its inception. 
Many honours came to Wilson: a fellowship of the British Academy in 1966; LittD at Cambridge; CBE in 1981. The Festschrift presented to him in 1984 included contributions from England, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, Italy, and the United States. He was elected a corresponding fellow of the Royal Danish Academy (1970) and the Royal Academy of Belgium (1973), and he was a vice-president of the Royal Historical Society (1981-6); he received honorary degrees at the University of Groningen (1964) and at Louvain (1977). His services to Dutch history were recognized in his appointment as commander, order of Orange Nassau (1974). He also served on many advisory committees, nationally and internationally. 
Wilson was the most approachable and informal of persons, never standing on his dignity; genial, gregarious, and congenial as a companion, with a gift of mimicry which much enhanced his skill as a raconteur. The diversity of his interests and talents -- he was chairman of the board of the Carl Rosa Opera Company in the 1960s -- was one of the secrets of his personal charm. 
Wilson's final years were not tranquil. To pessimism about trends in academic life and his chosen discipline was added an accumulation of personal difficulties. In the early 1980s he began to visit Australia to work on Australian history and renewed his links with Marion Raymond, whom he had known well in Cambridge before the war. He found happiness in Sydney and retained his zest for writing, despite failing health. The early settlements in Australia formed the initial focus of his interest; he contributed an article on this to a Festschrift in 1986, before the last book 'Australia, 1788-1988: the Creation of a Nation' (1987). His life came full circle: at his death in Sydney on 1 August 1991 he left instructions that his ashes should be scattered on the shore near Sydney, where settlers from Market Rasen had arrived in 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 50705


Wolfson, Sir Isaac, first baronet (1897-1991), businessman and philanthropist, was born on 1 October 1897 at 12 Kidston Street, Glasgow, the second of three sons and one of nine children of Solomon Wolfson (1868-1941), a poor Orthodox Jewish immigrant from Russian Poland, who worked in Glasgow as a maker of picture frames and later became a JP, and his wife, Necho or Naelia, 'nee' Wilemson or Williamovsky (died 1943). Isaac Wolfson's parents had emigrated from BiaLystok, Russian Poland, in the 1890s. Wolfson's recorded formal education was slight; he left Queen's Park School, Glasgow, as soon as possible, at the age of fourteen, to augment the family income. But he also had the advantages of a strong religious home life and upbringing, which instilled in him the virtues of thrift, self-help, and charity; these characteristics helped him to rise above and to overcome the social deprivation which surrounded him, and they stayed with him all his life. 
Wolfson's first job was to assist in his father's workshop. Later he took to the road as a salesman, first on his father's behalf but subsequently on his own account, selling clocks and mirrors. On 14 February 1926, at the Central Synagogue, London, he married Edith (1906-1981), daughter of Ralph Specterman, a cinema proprietor; they had one son, Leonard Gordon Wolfson (1927-2010). It was also in 1926, in Manchester, that he met and impressed the head of an undistinguished mail-order company, who engaged him as a buyer. The firm -- Universal Stores -- specialized in what was known as 'club trading'. Its agents formed clubs into which members paid small amounts of money; when these totalled $1, the member was entitled to select goods from the company's catalogue. In 1930 the company was renamed Great Universal Stores (GUS); Wolfson became its merchandise controller in 1932 and (having purchased a majority share in the company) its joint managing director in 1933. In 1946 he became chairman of GUS, and he remained its sole chairman until 1981. From then until 1986 the chairmanship was divided between himself and his son, Leonard. 
Wolfson did not make the mistake of permitting GUS to depend solely on its mail-order foundations, nor did he display the merchandising complacency which characterized so many family-owned mail-order companies at this time. He bought new companies in the mail-order and 'tallyman' businesses, and diversified into other retail markets, seizing the opportunity presented by the wartime and post-war financial weakness of rival companies to buy them out. His use of class 'A' ordinary shares -- which lacked voting rights -- to fund many of these endeavours later proved controversial. Use of these shares, which were at the time highly popular on account of the profitability of GUS, enabled Wolfson to retain family control of the company, and to avoid paying cash for his business acquisitions. Through a series of take-overs during and immediately after the Second World War, GUS had by the 1950s become the largest mail-order business outside the USA, and it was estimated that a quarter of the population of Britain were customers. Wolfson also controlled 2 per cent of Britain's shoe shops, 5 per cent of its furniture business, a number of fashion stores, a supermarket chain, a housing construction company, and a travel agency. In 1968 Wolfson made a successful bid of $12.5 million in cash and shares for the Times Furnishing-Willerby group, thus adding 170 shops to the GUS empire, in menswear retailing and furnishing. At the time of his death Wolfson had turned GUS into the fifth wealthiest retail undertaking in the country, enjoying profits of more than $400 million annually and a stock-market value of some $3 billion; about half its profits still came from mail order, while almost 30 per cent came from finance. 
Wolfson's leadership of the company was characterized by an unfailing appreciation of changes in consumer tastes -- specifically the tastes of GUS's clientele, which was mainly working and lower-middle class -- and by an instinctive grasp of the potential for lending money, the significance of property values, and the realizable potential of company assets. But it was underpinned by the belief that the acquisition of wealth could be justified only if it contributed to the public good -- a reflection of the Orthodox Jewish ethos in which he had been brought up. Wolfson was a prodigious maker of charitable donations, beyond as well as within the Jewish world. Through the Wolfson Foundation which he established with his wife and son, and of which he was trustee from 1955 to 1991, he helped to establish the two postgraduate colleges which bear his family name, in 1966 at Oxford and in 1977 at Cambridge, while the foundation continued to support a wide variety of other grant-giving activities, more especially in the fields of health and education. By the time of his death the foundation -- of which he was chairman from 1963 to 1972, president from 1972 to 1986, and honorary life president from 1986 to 1991 -- had disbursed some $130 million, making its founder Britain's biggest private benefactor since Lord Nuffield. 
Wolfson became an avid collector of art. But he himself was a shy man, who lived without ostentation and who neither smoked nor drank. His major personal interests sprang from his Jewish upbringing. An enthusiastic and unapologetic exponent of Orthodoxy, he was a regular synagogue attender and was conscientious in his observance of Jewish dietary laws. He quickly rose through the ranks of the London-based United Synagogue, established by act of parliament in 1870, whose religious leader was the chief rabbi. The United Synagogue had been dominated first by the Rothschilds and then by the male heads of other wealthy semi-aristocratic titled Anglo-Jewish families, who had for the most part abandoned their Orthodox roots. In 1962 Wolfson was elected president of the United Synagogue -- the first practising Orthodox holder of that office -- and by virtue of holding this office he also became the chairman of the chief rabbinate council. His accession to these positions symbolized the transfer of power within Anglo-Jewry from the old, Anglicized families to the children of the eastern-European immigrants of the late nineteenth century. Wolfson did not regard these posts as mere sinecures, however. In 1964 he took the initiative in persuading the United Synagogue to dismiss the entire board of management of the New West End Synagogue, London, following that board's decision to appoint as their minister Rabbi Dr Louis Jacobs, whom the then chief rabbi, Sir Israel Brodie, had branded a heretic. Two years later Wolfson was primarily responsible for the election of Dr Immanuel Jakobovits as the United Synagogue's chief rabbi in succession to Brodie. 
Wolfson was also -- again, unlike previous lay heads of the United Synagogue -- a committed Zionist. He owned many companies in Israel, including Paz Oil, the profits from which were applied exclusively to charitable causes. He paid for the building, in Jerusalem, of the Hechal Shlomo -- the Sanctuary of Solomon, named in memory of his father -- which houses the offices of the chief rabbinate of Israel. Wolfson's money also built fifty synagogues in Israel and supported a number of important housing developments in Jerusalem and Acre, as well as the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the Weizmann Institute of Science at Rehovot. Wolfson and his family lived in London, but also in Rehovot, near the Weizmann Institute, and it was to Rehovot that he retired to live out his final years. 
In 1986 Wolfson stepped down from the joint chairmanship of GUS, which had come in for criticism on account of its perceived lack of initiative and innovation and its over-reliance on cash holdings. Wolfson adamantly refused to support the enfranchisement of non-voting shareholders, and it was suggested at the time that 'his influence was largely responsible for' the company's 'lacklustre though financially solid performance in the early 1980s' ('The Times'). In 1986 an agreement concerning business credit was reached with Harris Queensway, whose chairman, Sir Philip Harris, joined the board of GUS. Wolfson's son and heir, Leonard Wolfson, became sole chairman; Isaac Wolfson himself became its honorary life president. 
During his lifetime Wolfson amassed many honours, including a string of honorary degrees, and in 1963 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society; he was also a freeman of the city of Glasgow (1971), founder fellow of Wolfson College, Oxford, and honorary fellow of the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. On 19 February 1962 he was created baronet, as Sir Isaac Wolfson of St Marylebone, but the expected peerage eluded him. Wolfson died in Rehovot on 20 June 1991, and was buried in Israel. He was succeeded as second baronet by his son, Leonard, who had been created a life peer in 1985. 


@@@@@


doc= 50707


Wroth, (Charles) Peter (1929-1991), civil engineer and soil mechanic, was born on 2 June 1929 at Alndyke, Russells Crescent, Horley, Surrey, the son of Charles Wroth, physician, and his wife, Violet Beynon Jenour. He was educated at Marlborough College and, after national service in the Royal Artillery, went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he read mathematics and mechanical sciences. 
After a brief spell of teaching at Felsted School, Wroth returned to Cambridge, as a research student, in 1954. He married on 11 December of that year Mary Parlane Weller (1927-1988), daughter of Christopher Harold Weller, a minister of religion. His Cambridge supervisor was the charismatic Ken Roscoe, who was building up a group working in soil mechanics, a branch of civil engineering. Roscoe's group was bringing a new scientific rigour to the subject, and Wroth's doctoral research, which involved both laboratory tests and theory, was central to this programme. On completing his research he joined the civil engineering consultants G. Maunsell & Partners, where he worked on the design and construction of the innovative pre-stressed concrete flyover at Hammersmith, in west London. He returned to Cambridge as a lecturer in 1961 and soon became a fellow of Churchill College. As tutor for advanced students at Churchill he had responsibility for graduates there, a role he clearly relished. The following years were busy with teaching and research, and with family life, which now included twin daughters, Rachel and Helen, and two sons, Richard and Christopher. 
The book that Wroth co-authored with Andrew Schofield, 'Critical State Soil Mechanics' (1968), represented a fundamental change in the approach to the subject, one that many readers found hard to grasp. Gradually, however, the ideas became established, and now form the core understanding of how soils behave as engineering materials. Much of this acceptance was due to Wroth's clear exposition of the subject in lectures and courses. His lecturing style was a model of precision, often supported by multi-coloured diagrams neatly drawn on the overhead projector during his talk. 
In 1970 Roscoe died in a car crash, and Wroth stepped in to lead the soil mechanics group. The professorship, however, went to his friend and rival Schofield, who was at that time at Manchester. With Wroth and Schofield both at the peak of their careers the Cambridge soil mechanics group went from strength to strength, carrying out first-class experimental and theoretical work. It was at this time that Wroth developed the 'self-boring pressuremeter', an ingenious device for measuring the properties of soils. One of its attractions for him was that it offered scope for elegant analyses that could be used to convert measured data to useful soil properties. He travelled widely, taking his sabbatical leave at Cornell and Duke universities in the USA, and establishing links with a number of groups worldwide, especially in Australia. 
In 1979 Wroth moved to Oxford University, as professor of engineering science and fellow of Brasenose College. For the next ten years, as head of the department of engineering science, he developed it as a broad-based engineering school. During his tenure the department expanded enormously in terms of buildings, staff, and students. At the same time he built up a substantial research group in soil mechanics and played a central role in the geotechnical community in the UK and internationally, as chairman of the British Geotechnical Society, editor of the academic journal 'Geotechnique', and, in 1984, as the Rankine lecturer. Although a busy man he was particularly generous with the support that he gave to his students and junior colleagues, whom he encouraged to develop their own careers by participating at conferences and meeting the leading academics in the field. He was a talented sportsman; at hockey he was a Cambridge blue, and he went on to captain Wales for several seasons. He had played for the Cambridge second cricket eleven, and enjoyed his golf. He had a lifelong enthusiasm for the more esoteric sport of real tennis, no doubt because it offered an intellectual as well as a physical challenge. 
Following the protracted illness and death from cancer of his wife, Mary, in 1988, Wroth married on 8 July 1989 Rachel Anne ('b'. 1943), daughter of the retired professor Denis King Britton and herself a fellow of St Catharine's College, Cambridge. The following year they spent principally on sabbatical leave in Australia and New Zealand. During this time Wroth was elected master of Emmanuel, his old undergraduate college. He took up the mastership in Michaelmas term 1990, but his return to Cambridge was all too brief. He became unwell in mid-December, suffering from myeloma. The cancer developed very rapidly, and he died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 3 February 1991. His wife survived him. 


