@@@@@


doc= 50708


Scott, Sir Terence Charles Stuart Morrison- (1908-1991), zoologist and museum director, was born on 24 October 1908 in Paris, the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Charles Stuart Morrison-Scott (died 1938), barrister, and his wife, Amy A. Mosselmans. After Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford, he entered the Royal College of Science, London, in 1931 to study zoology, where he graduated BSc with first-class honours in 1935 and proceeded MSc in 1939. For a short while he researched bird behaviour at London Zoo, and he was briefly an assistant master at Eton. He married on 19 December 1935 Rita Layton ('b'. 1905), daughter of Edwin James Layton; they had no children. 
On 1 October 1936 Morrison-Scott was appointed to the scientific staff of the British Museum (Natural History), as assistant keeper (second class), and assigned to the mammal room. His scientific papers of 1937-9 reported on his work at the zoo, and subsequent studies on material in the museum's mammal collections. In pursuit of a detailed investigation of elephant molars, in March 1938 he visited the Zoological Museum, Berlin, where he measured some sixty African elephant skulls; he also observed curatorial and exhibition techniques there and at the Hamburg Museum. 
With the outbreak of war, as an officer of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, Morrison-Scott was called up on 6 October 1939. After leading a mixed fleet of private yachts hurriedly mustered to protect the Solent, he served two years as signals officer at Dartmouth. In 1944, with the rank of lieutenant-commander, he was given command of the 12th flotilla of tank landing craft. He was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for gallantry during the invasion of Normandy. 
In September 1945 the director of the British Museum (Natural History) made an urgent plea to the Admiralty for the return of Morrison-Scott to take charge of the mammal galleries. He was released on 24 December, initially as assistant keeper (first class), but was promoted to senior scientific officer on 1 January 1948 and to principal scientific officer on 1 November 1948. He became an active member of the Scientific Officers' Association, formed in 1949. His scientific productivity was now channelled into preparing three definitive reference works in collaboration with Sir John Reeves Ellerman, bt: first, the massive 'Checklist of Palaearctic and Indian Mammals' (1951, second edition 1966), then 'Southern African Mammals: a Reclassification' (1953), which also involved R. W. Hayman, a colleague at the museum, and finally 'Supplement to F. N. Chasen (1940): Handlist of Malaysian Mammals' (1955). This taxonomic research concentrated his attention on the need for stability in systematic names. At the 1958 London meeting of the International Congress of Zoology, the successful ratification of the definitive text of the 'International Rules of Zoological Nomenclature' was attributed to his perseverance as chairman of the relevant section. All but one of his fifteen scientific papers from 1954 to 1965 (his last) were devoted to nomenclatural issues. 
Elected to the council of the Zoological Society of London in 1947, Morrison-Scott served as honorary treasurer from 1950 until 1976. During these years he also became a trustee of the Imperial War Museum (1956-60) and a governor of the Imperial College of Science and Technology (1956-72). In 1952 he was awarded the degree of DSc (London). 
In May 1956, after the death of Frank Sherwood Taylor, director of the Science Museum, Morrison-Scott was chosen to succeed him. He carried forward existing plans to develop the new centre block, and to enhance education facilities for children. He managed to retain substantial financial support from industry, but struggled with the parsimony of government funding. Finally, in 1960, the annual purchase grant (static since 1945) was raised from $2000 to $8000, but Morrison-Scott was frustrated in his wish to improve the status (and pay) of skilled craftsmen at the museum. 
In 1960, on the retirement of Sir Gavin de Beer, Morrison-Scott returned to the British Museum (Natural History) as director on 1 May. Here he faced entrenched compartmentalism, with each departmental keeper defending his own fief. In addition he inherited a staff disciplinary problem which became protracted and public, ultimately being debated on four separate occasions in parliament. His decision to dismiss the scientist in question was endorsed by all ministers concerned, including three successive chancellors of the exchequer. He also managed the complex legislative and administrative process, culminating in the 'British Museum Act' of 1963, which finally severed the outmoded historic connection with Bloomsbury. 
In 1963, for the guidance of the museum's trustees, Morrison-Scott presented a policy paper on the functions of the British Museum (Natural History) -- he was adamant in retaining the name, which was later replaced by the name Natural History Museum. He recognized the significance of the museum's roles in education and exhibition, but placed greater weight on the science performed, unseen by the public. His highest priority was for new building to house the vast and increasing collections and to provide working space for staff and visitors. Over the next decade, this aspiration was progressively advanced. In 1965 he was knighted. 
Initially the museum was in competition with the other national museums for Treasury funds allocated on the advice of the Museums and Galleries Commission. In 1966, however, Morrison-Scott obtained transfer to the Department of Education and Science, and comparability with the research councils. Thenceforward (until 1987) the council for scientific policy and its successors became the arbiter of the museum's objectives and the resources needed to achieve them. The construction of a new north-east tower within the South Kensington site was agreed (formally opened in 1973), as was the removal of the bird room to a purpose-built wing of the Rothschild Museum at Tring, Hertfordshire, completed in 1971. Thus, when Morrison-Scott retired at the end of November 1968, he had negotiated significant new resources for the attainment of the museum's scientific objectives. 
A tall, handsome man, a natural leader and administrator, a lover of the classics, and a craftsman in stone (who learned lettering from David Gill), Morrison-Scott had been a successful oarsman at school and university, and he enjoyed sailing, skiing, shooting, and flying, achieving his solo licence in 1975. He was a deputy lieutenant for West Sussex, and was a fellow of the Zoological Society of London, the Linnean Society, and the Institute of Biology. In retirement he served on the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries (1973-6), and as a National Trust council member (1968-83). 
Morrison-Scott died at his home, Upperfold House, Fernhurst, Sussex, near Haslemere, on 25 November 1991, and was cremated at Chichester crematorium; his wife survived him. A circular plaque in the cloisters of Chichester Cathedral records the restoration of one bay in his memory; so, too, does a plaque on the restored console table in the Stone Hall of Uppark, a National Trust property. 


@@@@@


doc= 50710


Janes, Emily (1846-1928), women's welfare activist, was born on 14 February 1846 at Tring, Hertfordshire, the eldest daughter of George Janes and Martha Stevens, the daughter of William Stevens of Cheddington, Buckinghamshire. She was educated at a private school at Chesham, Buckinghamshire, and began philanthropic work in Apsley, Bedfordshire, by undertaking voluntary parish duties including the management of clubs. From 1877 to 1878 she was diocesan secretary of the St Albans branch of the Girls Friendly Society, and for a year from 1880 she was matron at the Magdalen Hospital in Streatham. Up to this point she worked on a voluntary basis. 
In 1882 Emily Janes was introduced by Louisa Hubbard (1836-1906) to (Jane) Ellice Hopkins (1836-1904), and for the next four years she worked as Ellice Hopkins's private secretary, campaigning for the amendment of laws relating to the protection of girls. This work led to the formation of Ladies' Associations for the Care of Friendless Girls: groups of women united by an awareness of a need to help and support young women and girls. From 1886 to 1895 Emily Janes worked as the honorary organizing secretary for the association. She was also a member of the National Vigilance Association, formed in 1885 'to repress criminal vice and public immorality'. 
From 1886 onwards Emily Janes was funded by a group of friends who were keen to help her continue what they saw as her valuable and strenuous work. Her workload for 1891 was described in her obituary: 'In a year of 365 days, to speak at 170 meetings at most of which she was forced to undertake the whole burden and responsibility (no other speaker being provided), to attend committees, to spend on an average not less than three hours daily in correspondence, to travel hundreds of miles to and fro over a network of railways and upon every kind of road, in almost every sort of conveyance, and to be constantly called upon for advice in almost every kind of difficulty and distress, means a strain on heart, voice and brain which only exceptional devotion could carry on. ('National Council of Women News')' Aware that the great deal of philanthropic work being undertaken by women was unco-ordinated, Louisa Hubbard in 1890 wrote and circulated a suggestion for the formation of a Central Conference Council (CCC) to establish co-ordinating conferences of women workers. It was set up in 1891 with Emily Janes as its honorary organizing secretary, lecturer, and editor of its quarterly journal, the 'Threefold Chord'. At a conference held in Nottingham in 1895, the CCC reformed as the National Union of Women Workers (NUWW), again with Emily Janes as its organizing secretary and editor of its journal, initially titled 'An Occasional Paper'. From that time until 1917 Emily Janes worked tirelessly for the NUWW. 
Emily Janes was clearly effective in her role of organizing secretary: in 1895 there were 10 branches of the NUWW, by 1918 there were 130. Throughout her working life she played a pivotal role in the organization of women undertaking philanthropic work, inspiring those who worked with her by her abilities and energy. Her success was felt to be due 'to her thorough grasp of the social questions of the day, and the practical common sense with which she discussed them'. She had: 'a tact and a quiet force of character that drew people towards her and was to be of the highest value in bringing about the formation of those local associations which were for years the chief object of her travels through the country. (Pratt, 106)' Emily Janes described the world in which she worked in her paper 'On the associated work of women in religion and philanthropy', which appeared in 1893 in Angela Burdett-Coutts's publication 'Woman's Mission'. In 1898 she took over from Louisa Hubbard as editor of the 'Englishwoman's Yearbook and Directory'. 
In 1917 age and ill health compelled Emily Janes to resign as organizing secretary of the NUWW, but she continued to attend meetings and remained on the executive committee as a vice-president. Emily Janes never married. In 1910 she described her interests as reading, music, and conversation. She was living at 31 Tanza Road, Hampstead, London, in 1910, moving later to 90 Hampstead Way, Hendon, Hertfordshire, and then, towards the end of her life, to Hastings in Sussex. 
Some time before her death Emily Janes had become completely paralysed. She died on 26 October 1928 at her home, Dunclutha, Hastings; a memorial service was held at Christ Church, Westminster, on 16 November 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 50711


Stevenson, Louisa (1835-1908), campaigner for women's rights, was born in Glasgow on 15 July 1835, one of the numerous children of James Stevenson (1786-1866), who became senior partner of the Jarrow Chemical Company of South Shields, and his wife, Jane Stewart Shannan. James Cochran Stevenson, who took over the chemical business, was her eldest brother; another brother was John James Stevenson. In 1854, when James Stevenson retired from business, the family moved to Edinburgh, where he became an elder in St George's Free Church and regularly entertained ministers visiting the city during meetings of the general assembly. His wife, an invalid, died soon after the move to Edinburgh, and in 1859 he set up house at 13 Randolph Crescent. This was to be the home of the four unmarried Stevenson sisters for most of the rest of their lives. 
The Stevenson sisters, who were left financially well provided for by their father, have been identified, along with the McLaren and Mair families, as one of the three Edinburgh households that played a crucial role in the women's movement in mid-Victorian Scotland (Leneman, 11). Alone of the sisters, the eldest, Jane (1828-1904), never attended public meetings, though she was a dominant influence in the household. The second unmarried sister, Elisa Carlile Stevenson (1829-1904), who suffered depression later in life, was one of the earliest members of the Edinburgh National Society for Women's Suffrage, founded in November 1867 under the presidency of Priscilla McLaren. Louisa Stevenson was a member of the Ladies' Edinburgh Essay Society and through this became involved in the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association, which organized university classes for women. Both she and her younger sister Flora Clift Stevenson attended David Masson's first course of lectures to women in 1868. She was one of the honorary treasurers of the committee that raised funds to pay for Sophie Jex-Blake's legal costs in her campaign to open medical education to women. 
In 1875 Louisa Stevenson, who was a qualified needlework teacher, was one of the founders of the Edinburgh School of Cookery, and was honorary treasurer until 1891, when it became the Edinburgh School of Cookery and Domestic Economy. The school started as a series of lectures, demonstrations, and practical classes given by an instructress trained at the National School of Cookery, South Kensington. Louisa Stevenson encouraged the establishment of other local cookery schools, and in 1876 visited Newcastle where she successfully persuaded local women to set up a school. 
Louisa Stevenson was the first woman to be elected a poor-law guardian in Edinburgh. She was particularly concerned about improving the standard of nursing in the city poorhouse, and sometimes paid surprise visits late in the evening to check that the inmates were being properly cared for. One such inspection, in the company of another woman guardian, led to the discovery of the governor in a state of inebriation and brought about his dismissal. She helped in the running of the Scottish branch of the Jubilee Nurses' Institution and the colonial nursing scheme. She was elected a member of the board of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, as one of the first women to serve on a hospital board. A male colleague on the board, initially hostile to women members, was compelled by her example to change his mind, 'as Miss Stevenson was the most useful Member the Board had had all the twenty years he had been a Manager' (McLaren, 15). She described her work on the board at the 1900 conference of the National Union of Women Workers, commenting that 'The general qualifications of women to serve on hospital or other boards are precisely the same as those of men, although each has a valuable special experience which the other has not and which would be lost without the services of both' (National Council of Women of Great Britain, 'Women Workers: the Papers Read at the Conference Held at Brighton', 1900). 
Louisa Stevenson was one of the moving spirits in the Edinburgh Association for the University Education of Women, which achieved its goal in 1892 when Scottish universities were finally opened to women. She donated $1000 to the appeal to raise funds for a hall of residence for women students in Edinburgh. Masson Hall, named after Professor Masson, a supporter of the women's campaign, opened in November 1897, with Louisa Stevenson as its first honorary secretary and Sarah Mair as treasurer. In 1906 Edinburgh University conferred on her the honorary degree of LLD in recognition of her struggles for women's higher education, and although extremely frail from a painful illness she was present at the graduation ceremony to hear Sir Ludovic Grant's tribute to her as 'strenuous in action, tenacious of purpose, and of high courage' (McLaren, 11). 
Louisa Stevenson was a lifelong supporter of the women's suffrage cause, and in the 1890s was on the executive committee of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. In May 1906 she was an Edinburgh representative on the deputation of women's suffragists to the prime minister, Henry Campbell-Bannerman. A close friend referred to her work for women's causes as 'in very truth a religion, though of an inarticulate and unconventional type' (McLaren, 20). Her knowledge of business and her administrative talent made her a good organizer. Confident in a public role, she made effective use of what contemporaries described as a beautiful speaking voice. She was by all accounts a determined woman who 'brooked no opposition'; her 'intellectual and moral energy supplied the dynamite which hurled away obstacles' (McLaren, 18). Louisa Stevenson died at 13 Randolph Crescent, Edinburgh, on 13 May 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 50712


Lyttelton, Mary Kathleen (1856-1907), women's activist, was the second daughter of George Clive (1805-1880) of Ballycrog, co. Mayo, and Perrystone Court, Herefordshire, and his wife, Ann Sybella Martha (died 1907), second daughter of Sir Thomas Harvie Farquhar. Mary's father was for many years chairman of Herefordshire quarter sessions, a Metropolitan Police magistrate, and, from 1852 to 1862, under-secretary of state for the Home Office. 
On 3 August 1880 Mary married the Revd Arthur Temple Lyttelton (1852-1903), then tutor at Keble College, Oxford. In 1882, when her husband was appointed master of Selwyn College, they moved to Cambridge, where 'the early generations of Selwyn men were conscious of Mrs Lyttelton's influence as the hostess at the lodge' ('The Times'). Lyttelton later became bishop of Southampton (1898). 
Mary Lyttelton devoted much of her life to fighting for the improvement of women's lives in general, and for the extension of the suffrage to women in particular. Three years after the formation of the National Union of Women Workers (NUWW) in 1895 she was among the vice-presidents; she also served on the executive committee before taking over the post of president of the NUWW. Believing firmly that 'the withholding of the franchise is very prejudicial to the right development of women, and that the education given by the vote is essential to their true progress' (Mrs A. T. Lyttelton, 'Women and their Work', 1901, 10), Mrs Lyttelton also sat on the executive committee of the Central Society for Women's Suffrage, formed in 1888 when the women's movement split over its relationship with the main political parties, before it reformed in 1897 as the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. 
Mrs Lyttelton's views were succinctly set out in her book 'Women and their Work', which she published in 1901. Including chapters on 'the family', 'the household', and 'philanthropic and social work', the book was a manual advising women on modes of behaviour, duties, and goals. She believed that such a manual was required because, at the beginning of the twentieth century, society, and particularly the position of women in society, was in a state of transition and 'it is with women at this moment that the power to advance and the power to convince lies' ('Women and their Work', 11). 'Women and their Work' was permeated with her deep religious beliefs: she held that each sex should strive for the 'Christian ideal' of 'preserving its own special characteristics' while attempting 'to acquire the highest qualities of the other' (ibid., 25). A woman, she argued, would never be able to advise or be useful to men unless the 'inspiring motive' of her life was 'to glorify God, and to enjoy Him for ever' (ibid., 4). 
Mary Lyttelton's approach to social activism was a practical one. She had spent three years as a poor-law guardian and had found the experience invaluable: 'The value of knowing that you are working so to speak, before the public, and that if you make a mistake it will be known, is immense' (Hollis, 17). She was an impressive and intelligent public speaker: her obituary writer in the 'Englishwoman's Review' opined that 'Few who heard it will forget the brilliant paper, touched with delightful humour, which she read so recently as last October at the Women's Suffrage meetings of the NUWW at Tunbridge Wells.' 'A considerable student of literature' ('The Times', 15 Jan 1907), she worked for many years as a journalist, writing reviews and eventually becoming editor of the women's section of the high-church paper, 'The Guardian'. She died on 13 January 1907 at Perrystone Court, Herefordshire, from influenza and weakness of the heart, and was survived by a daughter and two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 50713


Ridding, Lady Laura Elizabeth (1849-1939), suffragist and philanthropist, was born on 26 March 1849 at Harley Street, London, the daughter of Roundell Palmer (1812-1895), later the first earl of Selborne, and his wife, Lady Laura Waldegrave (1821-1885), the second daughter of William Waldegrave, eighth Earl Waldegrave. On 26 October 1876 she married the Revd Dr George Ridding (1828-1904), who had been a widower for seventeen years. At that time he was headmaster of Winchester College; in 1884 he became the first bishop of Southwell. Their marriage was childless. 
Laura Ridding was an advocate of women's suffrage for many years and was also involved in rescue work, temperance work, and nursing. In 1885 she and her husband founded Southwell House, a temporary rescue home for young women. She was also a member of a variety of committees and organizations: from 1895 to 1904 she was a poor-law guardian and rural district councillor for the Southwell union. In 1902 she was a member of the Nottinghamshire county education committee and in 1913 she joined the Hampshire county insurance committee. During the First World War she was active in a number of organizations: the Soldiers' and Sailors' Families Association; the Women's War Agricultural Committee; the YWCA Girls' Patriotic Club; and the Winchester Patrols. 
One of Lady Laura's greatest achievements, however, was to establish, with Louise Creighton (1850-1936) and Emily Janes (1846-1928), among others, the National Union of Women Workers (NUWW) in 1895. This was an essentially conservative organization designed to co-ordinate women's philanthropic and charitable efforts throughout the country. From 1899 to 1910 Lady Laura was chair of the NUWW legislative committee. She also served on the executive committee and was vice-president before taking over as president in 1910. Her commitment to the NUWW was lifelong: although she did not attend London meetings after the First World War she was involved in her local Winchester branch up to her death in 1939. 
All commentators on Lady Laura stress her intellectual ability: the writer of her obituary in 'Women in Council', who had worked with her on the NUWW legislative committee, felt that she 'had inherited her father's legal mind and brought a sound judgement to bear on all the problems that came before us. She had a delightful sense of humour and guided the Council with great skill, yet without imposing her will upon it'. In addition, 'No point was too small to be of interest and her thoroughness was realised by all who worked with her'. According to a piece in 'The Times', published the day after her funeral, she had 'a quick and ardent mind, full of interest and enthusiasm' ('The Times', 27 May 1939). Lady Laura clearly had a lighter side -- 'The Times' described her as 'a charming companion, an adoring wife, and a source of perpetual amusement' to her husband. She had an artistic ability, which was demonstrated by her skill in painting and 'the taste with which she arranged and adorned her three homes'. Despite a keen mind, she was decidedly emotional: her obituarist recalls 'her sympathy, her spontaneous gaiety, her affection for people and animals, her ready tears, her exaggerated apprehensions'. She was also held to have 'exhibited unaccountable foibles, which seemed to enhance rather than disfigure an essentially kind and really interesting and powerful personality, as occasional grotesqueness enhances some of the greatest classical art'. All her activities and characteristics were underpinned by a strong religious faith. 
Lady Laura listed her recreations as gardening, the microscope, painting, the study of birds, and writing, and she was a member of the Ladies' Club in Winchester. Her publications included three biographies: of her husband, 'George Ridding, schoolmaster and bishop, 43rd head of Winchester, 1866-1884, first bishop of Southwell, 1884-1904' (1908); of her nephew, Robert Palmer, who died in Mesopotamia in 1916, 'The Life of Robert Palmer, 1888-1916' (1921); and of her sister, Lady Sophia Palmer, who married the comte de Franqueville in 1903 and died in 1915. She was also an occasional contributor to 'The Times'. After her husband's death in 1904, she bought the Old Rectory at Wonston, Sutton Scotney, Hampshire. It was there that she died on 22 May 1939 at the age of ninety. Although troubled by deafness, 'she retained her powers of mind unimpaired to the end' ('The Times', 27 May 1939). She was buried in Southwell Minster on 26 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 50714


Benn, Margaret Eadie Wedgwood, Viscountess Stansgate (1897-1991), religious campaigner, was born on 7 June 1897 in Paisley, the elder daughter of Daniel Turner Holmes (1863-1955), the son of a tailor and steeplejack and himself a schoolmaster, lecturer, and Liberal MP for Govan (1911-18), and his wife, Margaret (died 1953), daughter of Peter Eadie, sometime provost of Paisley. Religion and politics were the two themes running through her life. Rejecting her parents' agnosticism -- her father had left the Irvingites -- as a girl of six or seven she became an Episcopalian, attending church alone and finding religion a 'great comfort' (Stansgate, 22). Still unschooled and illiterate at the age of seven, she was belatedly educated at St Columba's School, Kilmalcolm, and, after her family moved to London following the 1911 election, at St Mary's, Lancaster Gate -- which she left because its high-church headmistress made the girls pray against disestablishment -- and at a school in Holland Park. She developed a passion for learning. She followed her father's Liberalism and by the age of twelve was a feminist. She and her mother were non-militant suffragist members of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies. She rode in Hyde Park, 'came out' shortly before the First World War, left school in 1915, took a secretarial course, worked in the new Ministry of Labour, and was confirmed an Anglican. After the war her parents refused her request to study for a theology diploma at St Hugh's College, Oxford, and she considered becoming a nun. Instead, on 17 November 1920 she married William Wedgwood Benn (1877-1960). They had four sons, one of whom died at birth. 
Following her marriage -- she wrote later that they were strongly mutually attracted but not in love -- Margaret Wedgwood Benn loyally supported her husband's political career and also, following his example, became teetotal. They sent their sons to public school so that they should be able to 'deal with the Tories' (Stansgate, 58). She later wrote in her autobiography, 'My main interest was, and is, theology' (ibid., 70), and while a young mother she studied the subject as an external non-examination student at King's College, London, learning Greek and Hebrew, and she met and formed a lasting friendship with the Congregationalist Elsie Dorothea Chamberlain. She long campaigned for the ordination of women, in 1922 clashing with Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury, and in 1928 she was a founder of the interdenominational Society for the Ministry of Women. In 1927 with her husband she joined the Labour Party, and in the 1920s and 1930s they travelled extensively, visiting the USSR, the Near East, and the United States, where she met Henry Ford. During the Second World War she worked under the chaplain's department with servicewomen. She influenced her husband (created Viscount Stansgate in 1942), who was air secretary in the 1945 Labour government, to appoint in 1946 Elsie Chamberlain, who had become a Congregational minister, as the first female RAF chaplain. Long 'deeply ecumenical' (ibid., 50), Lady Stansgate in 1948 attended as an Anglican delegate the inaugural assembly of the World Council of Churches in Amsterdam. She protested against the limitation of the Anglican communion and Archbishop Fisher's refusal to allow Anglicans to participate in the conference communion, celebrated according to the reformed rite. This led her to join the Congregationalists, whose puritan principle of local church autonomy she continued to defend. She travelled with Stansgate, attending conferences of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, of which he was president, and met foreign leaders including Eisenhower, Ben Gurion, Ho Chi Minh, and Zhou Enlai. 
After her husband's death in 1960 Lady Stansgate considered entering the ministry. With Elsie Chamberlain she refused to compromise and agree to the formation of the United Reformed church (Congregationalists and Presbyterians, 1972) and together they led the Nottingham-based 'rump', the Congregational Federation, of about 300 churches. Lady Stansgate was its first president. Like many keen Christians, she was fascinated by and sympathetic to Judaism and Jews, and was a Zionist. She was a vice-president of the Council of Christians and Jews. Her Hebrew studies reinforced her faith, and she was appreciated by Hebrew scholars. She helped raise funds in Britain for the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. In 1975 the library at Mount Scopus was named after her, and in 1982 she was made an honorary fellow of the Hebrew University. She was formidable, kind, charming, and committed. Her sight failed, she suffered a series of strokes, and she died on 21 October 1991 at Goldsborough Nursing Home, 40-42 Goldsborough Road, London. Her autobiography, 'My Exit Visa', was published posthumously with a postscript appreciation by her son the Labour politician Tony Benn. 


@@@@@


doc= 50715


Amos, Sarah Maclardie (1840/41-1908), political activist, was born in Manchester, the youngest daughter of Thomas Percival Bunting, a Manchester solicitor and third son of prominent Wesleyan Methodist Jabez Bunting (1779-1858), and of Eliza Bealey of Ratcliffe, near Manchester. Sarah had two sisters, Mary, later Belsher, and Eliza, later Chubb. Her brother, Percy William Bunting (1836-1911), editor of the 'Contemporary Review' from 1882 until his death, shared many of his sister's more ardent political commitments. 
Sarah Bunting moved to London in 1865 and took up the post of lady superintendent at the Working Women's College in Queen Square. It was through her work there that she met her future husband, Sheldon Amos (1835-1886), an old friend of her brother. He was the fourth son of Andrew Amos and his wife, Margaret Lax. Amos was a volunteer lecturer in law at the Working Men's College in Camden Town, professor of jurisprudence at University College, London, and reader in jurisprudence and Roman law at the Temple. They married on 24 December 1870 and lived at first in a poor central London neighbourhood, near Theobald's Row, in order not to segregate themselves from the poor. After the birth of their son, they moved to a house in New Barnet. The couple had two children, (Percy) Maurice Maclardie Amos (1872-1940), a lawyer, and Bonte, later Elgood (1874- 'c'.1961), an early woman doctor. Both children were educated at home. 
Sarah and Sheldon Amos were greatly involved in the campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts', and Sarah was a member of the Ladies' National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts. Her interest in the meeting point between morals and politics was to be long-standing. Later in life she was active in the National Vigilance Association, as well as the Social Purity Association, the British Women's Temperance Association, the London Morality Council, and the British committee of the Abolitionist Federation, pledged to fight the regulation of prostitution wherever it appeared. She spoke at the first White Slave Traffic Congress, held in London in 1899, and her article in support of women's suffrage appeared in the 'Contemporary Review' in June 1892. 
Sheldon Amos's health was much compromised by severe asthma, and in 1879, on the advice of his doctors, the family left Britain for warmer climes. They settled first in Australia, at Manly Beach, Sydney. In 1880, finding Australia uncongenial, they set sail once again for Britain, but both Sarah and Sheldon caught dengue fever and stopped to recuperate in Cairo. They liked Egypt so much that the family settled there in 1880, remaining until Sheldon's death. Sarah Amos founded and managed a home for emancipated women slaves in Cairo, while her husband set about revitalizing his legal career, in which pursuit he was aided by the imposition of British rule in 1882. 
Widowed in January 1886, Sarah Amos and her children embarked on a lengthy European tour and in late 1887 arrived back in London, taking a house in Upper Woburn Place, Bloomsbury. She resumed those political activities in which she had earlier been involved, though she now also travelled widely, visiting India, Japan, and China before her death. She sat on the executive committee of the Women's Liberal Federation, was active in music-hall reform, the National Union of Women Workers, and the Salvation Army, took up the cause of the Boers, and served briefly on the Marylebone vestry before the reorganization of local government in the 1890s. At the time of the Armenian massacres she spent some months (probably in 1896) in Cyprus organizing a refuge for Armenian women and children. 
Among her friends Sarah Amos numbered the journalist and social reformer William Stead, Cardinal Manning, George Bernard Shaw, Mandell and Louise Creighton, and the archaeologist Flinders Petrie. She met, though never became friends with, the Indian activist Cornelia Sorabji, during the latter's years in London in the early 1890s. 
A lifelong supporter of women's suffrage, Sarah Amos was deeply influenced by the work of John Stuart Mill and Frederick Denison Maurice. The political activities in which she partook were concerned largely, though not exclusively, with improvements in the material and political conditions of women. She never wavered from a devout low-church Christianity nor from a radical Liberalism. She died at her son's house in Cairo on 21 January 1908. 


@@@@@


doc= 50716


Ree, Harry Alfred (1914-1991), resistance fighter and educationist, was born on 15 October 1914 at 15 Mauldeth Road, Withington, Manchester, the youngest of eight children of Alfred Ree, chemical manufacturer, and his wife, Lavinia Elizabeth, 'nee' Dimmick, an American and a member of the Dupont family. His father's family was Jewish and settled in Denmark and Germany; Alfred spent much of his youth in Germany before Harry's grandfather moved to England in the 1870s. Harry was educated at Shrewsbury School and St John's College, Cambridge, where he read modern languages and economics. He spoke fluent French, though with a marked accent which later obliged his fellow resistance fighters in the Second World War to pass him off as a visiting cousin from Alsace; in the opinion of the historian Richard Cobb, he had the best mastery of spoken French by an Englishman. At university he met Henry Morris, Cambridgeshire's visionary chief education officer, who converted him to community education. He began his career as a teacher in 1937 at Penge grammar school, London -- a lively, idealistic, civilized, and not untypical young grammar-school master of that time. A former pupil remembered him as 'full of high spirits, sharp iconoclastic informality, and kindliness' ('The Independent', 8 June 1991). In July 1940 he married Hetty Vine (died 1961). 
Ree began the Second World War as a conscientious objector. But Hitler's invasion of the Low Countries and of Norway changed his mind and he joined the army, initially as a gunner. He joined the independent French (F) section of the special operations executive (SOE) in 1942. Early in the following year he was dropped out of a Lysander to join the Maquis. From his landing his exploits read as if lifted from 'The Magnet' or Bulldog Drummond: a near-capture on landing; escape from Burgundy just before the Gestapo arrested the leaders of the 'Acrobat' circuit; numerous acts of sabotage in the foothills of the Jura Mountains; a bold approach to one of the Peugeot brothers offering internal sabotage to the tank factory near Montbeliard in exchange for a promise by the RAF not to bomb it; and a hand-to-hand struggle with a German security sergeant from which he escaped to Switzerland in November 1943, badly wounded, to send a telegram to his wife saying 'Skiing here marvellous'. He never lost his admiration for the French peasants and workers who protected him, fought by his side, and saved his life. For his exploits he was awarded the DSO and the Croix de Guerre, and was made an OBE. The birth of his daughter was announced to him in code by the BBC while he was in France; two sons followed. 
After the war Ree returned to schoolteaching, at Bradford grammar school. While there he made 'School for Danger' for the RAF Film Unit (later retitled 'Now it can be Told' and currently shown on a loop at the Imperial War Museum, London), as well as broadcasts for the BBC's 'Children's Hour'. In 1951 he was appointed as the relatively young headmaster of Watford grammar school. For a while he remained an enthusiast for the grammar school, seeing it as the successor to the public school and writing 'The Essential Grammar School' (1956) as a lively exposition of his ideas and beliefs. 
In 1961 Ree was approached to become professor of education at the University of York, then being planned under the leadership of Eric James, the founding vice-chancellor. Ree took up the position in 1963 and, despite some misgivings about entering what he saw as the privileged university sector, he relished his new teaching role and became an influential and much respected lecturer, as well as provost of Derwent College. While at York he underwent another ideological transformation, from champion of the grammar school to fervent supporter of the comprehensive school. From this new vision of learning he never afterwards wavered. As an assiduous member of the York education committee he advocated a comprehensive solution for the city. His first wife having died in late 1961, Ree married on 23 March 1966 Petronella Ann (Peta) Garrett ('b'. 1929/30), daughter of Brigadier-General Osmond Luxmoore Jones, army officer; the couple separated in the early 1970s. 
As a believer in planned demotion before retirement, Ree resigned his chair at York in 1974 and determinedly descended the upward escalator to teach modern languages at Woodberry Down, a London comprehensive. The move was no momentary gesture but a characteristic and sustained defiance of conventional hierarchy which lasted until his retirement in 1979. He finally settled in the Yorkshire dales at Colt Park, in Ribblehead, in a large stone-built farmhouse at a remote spot among the limestone scenery of the upper Ribble valley, whence he tramped the vast surrounding wilderness and where he was visited by his many friends, to be entertained to delicious French food and enlivening conversation. His book, 'The Three Peaks of Yorkshire' (1983), remains popular with walkers in the area. All this was interspersed with frequent forays to London, Coventry, France, and beyond. In retirement he was closely involved with the Community Education Development Centre, editing its journal, 'Network'. He had already published a biography of Henry Morris, 'Educator Extraordinary', in 1973, and a selection of Morris's writings and speeches, 'The Henry Morris Collection' (1984). 
Ree was forever arriving somewhere and always eager to listen to the latest news. Somewhere on his travels he left behind the conventional religion of his childhood. But he retained and developed a deep spirituality, disguised by frequent laughter and punctuated by an irreverence towards the pomposities of this world. He was a hugely refreshing inspiration for students of all ages and one of the best loved men of his generation. He died at his home, Colt Park, Ribblehead, of heart failure, on 17 May 1991, and was survived by the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 50717


Townsend, Lucy (1781-1847), slavery abolitionist, was born on 25 July 1781, the daughter of William Jesse, a Church of England clergyman in West Bromwich, Staffordshire. On 6 July 1807 she married the Revd Charles Townsend (1780-1865), rector of Calstone, Wiltshire, and perpetual curate of West Bromwich, Staffordshire; they had at least three daughters and three sons. 
Charles Townsend was an anti-slavery campaigner, and his wife too became active in the movement. The Ladies' Society for the Relief of Negro Slaves (later the Female Society for Birmingham [etc.] for the Relief of British Negro Slaves, then the Ladies' Negro's Friend Society) was founded at a meeting held at her home in West Bromwich on 8 April 1825. Lucy Townsend and Mary Lloyd, whom she had met at meetings of the Bible Society, became joint secretaries of the society which was, from its foundation, independent of both the national Anti-Slavery Society and of the local men's anti-slavery society. It acted as the hub of a developing national network of female anti-slavery societies, rather than as a local auxiliary. It also had important international connections, and publicity on its activities in Benjamin Lundy's abolitionist periodical 'The Genius of Universal Emancipation' influenced the formation of the first female anti-slavery societies in America. 
Under Lucy Townsend's and Mary Lloyd's leadership the society developed the distinctive forms of female anti-slavery activity, involving an emphasis on the sufferings of women under slavery, systematic promotion of abstention from slave-grown sugar through door-to-door canvassing, and the production of innovative forms of propaganda, such as albums containing tracts, poems, and illustrations, embroidered anti-slavery workbags, and seals bearing the motto 'Am I not a woman and a sister?'. The society was at the height of its influence during the 1823-33 campaign against British colonial slavery, which culminated in the passage of the 'Emancipation Act' in 1833. From 1839 it aligned itself with the newly formed British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, and combined support for the universal abolition movement with support for educational work among freed slaves; the society continued to be active until 1919. Lucy Townsend acted as joint secretary of the society until 1836, resigning this post when she moved with her husband to Thorpe, Nottinghamshire, but continuing as a committee member until at least 1845. She was the author of an anti-slavery pamphlet 'To the Law and to the Testimony' (1832). 
While anti-slavery was her main concern Lucy Townsend was also involved in a variety of other voluntary activities. With Mary Lloyd she established the Juvenile Association for West Bromwich and Wednesbury in Aid of Uninstructed Deaf Mutes in 1834, and she was also involved in Dorcas meetings, in the Ladies' Bible Association, and, with her husband, in campaigns to abolish bull baiting and other cruel sports. 
Lucy Townsend was founder and co-secretary of the first women's anti-slavery society in Britain. Women's contributions to the anti-slavery movement in Britain received little attention from historians until the late 1980s, but their national significance and distinctive contributions to both the ideology and campaigning methods of the movement are now apparent. There are no known portraits of Lucy Townsend, despite the attempt by her friend and fellow campaigner Anne Knight to persuade her that, as 'the person who established woman agency' in the movement and 'the chief lady' of the anti-slavery campaign, she should 'in justice to history and posterity' put herself forward for inclusion in B. R. Haydon's commemorative group portrait of the 1840 World Anti-Slavery Convention (A. Knight to L. Townsend, 20 Sept 1840; Townsend, 'Autographs', MSS Brit. Emp.s., vol. 5, 102). She was described by her fellow anti-slavery campaigners as skilful in devising plans and prompt in their execution, as energetic and persistent, and as successful in stimulating others to action. Lucy Townsend died on 20 April 1847 at the rectory at Thorpe, near Southwell, in Nottinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50718


Lloyd, Mary (1795-1865), slavery abolitionist, was born on 12 March 1795 in Falmouth, the younger of the two daughters of Joseph Honeychurch (1735?-1818), a cooper, and his wife, Jane (1753?-1803), daughter of Samuel and Elizabeth Treffry of Beerferris, Devon. Her parents were Quakers and her mother was a minister in the Society of Friends. 
Mary's mother died when she was only eight, and a few years later her father became ill and she spent ten lonely years nursing him. After her father's death she stayed with a succession of relatives (at Camp Hill near Birmingham, Neath in Wales, and then Plymouth) before her marriage on 12 November 1823 to Samuel Lloyd (1795-1862). Samuel was a member of a prominent midlands Quaker family and was head of the firm of Lloyds, Foster & Co., which owned an iron foundry and a colliery at Wednesbury in Staffordshire. The couple initially lived at The Crescent, Birmingham, but soon settled in Wood Green, near Wednesbury. Mary Lloyd gave birth to nine children between 1824 and 1839, of whom one died aged only thirteen. 
Mary Lloyd is best known as co-secretary of the first women's anti-slavery society in Britain. Women's contributions to the anti-slavery movement in Britain received little attention from historians until the late 1980s, being generally dismissed as small in scale, local in impact, and merely supportive in function, but since this date studies have demonstrated the distinctiveness and national significance of the activities of female anti-slavery societies. The Ladies Society for the Relief of Negro Slaves (later the Female Society for Birmingham [etc.] for the Relief of British Negro Slaves, then the Ladies' Negro's Friend Society) was founded on 8 April 1825 and Mary Lloyd joined her friend Lucy Townsend (died 1847) as joint secretary of the new society. The society was from its foundation independent of both the national Anti-Slavery Society and of the local men's anti-slavery society, in which Mary's husband, Samuel, was involved. It acted as the hub of a developing national network of female anti-slavery societies, rather than as a local auxiliary. It also had important international connections, and, through links with Benjamin Lundy, editor of the 'Genius of Universal Emancipation', it influenced the formation of the first female anti-slavery societies in America. Under Mary Lloyd's and Lucy Townsend's leadership, the society developed the distinctive forms of female anti-slavery activity, involving an emphasis on the sufferings of women under slavery, systematic promotion of abstention from slave-grown sugar through door-to-door canvassing, and the production of innovative forms of propaganda, such as albums containing anti-slavery poems, engravings, and tracts, and work bags embroidered with anti-slavery emblems. The society was at the height of its influence during the 1823-33 campaign against British colonial slavery. From 1839 it aligned itself with the newly formed British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society and combined support for the universal abolition movement with support for educational work among freed slaves. The society continued to be active until 1919, at which time its secretary was Mary Lloyd's daughter Sara Wilson Sturge. 
Mary Lloyd maintained her commitment to the anti-slavery cause until her death, acting as secretary of the society into the 1830s, and as treasurer from the 1840s to 1861, and continuing to collect funds and preside at annual meetings until her death. She was also active in many other organizations. She set up a benevolent society, a mothers' meeting, and a provident society to help the local poor, and in 1834 she and Lucy Townsend set up a Juvenile Association in Aid of Uninstructed Deaf Mutes. In 1841 she was recorded as a minister in the Society of Friends and over the next twenty years she travelled to Quaker meetings throughout the United Kingdom as well as addressing local public meetings. 
Supported emotionally and financially by her husband, Mary Lloyd thus successfully combined raising a large family with demanding religious and philanthropic commitments requiring leadership qualities, organizational skills, and a facility for public speaking. A portrait of her in her forties shows a woman with angular facial features wearing typical Quaker attire and holding a book inscribed 'The Chain is broken Africa is free Aug 21st 1839'. Mary Lloyd died on 25 January 1865 at Wood Green, near Wednesbury, Staffordshire, and she was buried on 1 February in Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 50720


Luard, (David) Evan Trant (1926-1991), politician and writer on international affairs, was born on 31 October 1926 at Park Cottage, Addington, Kent. He was the third child and second son of Colonel Trant Bramston Luard (1873-1976) of the Royal Marines, and his wife, Helen Anne Frances (1893-1981), 'nee' Evans. His father served in many countries and was awarded the DSO for service in the Middle East in the First World War; after his retirement he published a number of philosophical articles, in the 'Hibbert Journal' and elsewhere. Luard grew up in Kent, and from 1934 in Cambridgeshire. In 1934-40 he attended (not as a chorister) King's College choir school, Cambridge, and in 1940-45 Felsted School, which had been evacuated from Essex to near Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire. Towards the end of the Second World War, while still at school, he volunteered for the Fleet Air Arm, serving in it for a few days before the war ended, when his services were no longer needed. He arranged to take up, in 1946, a scholarship he had been awarded at King's College, Cambridge. In the meantime he worked at Miller's music shop in Cambridge, and learned to play the piano, remaining an enthusiastic pianist thereafter. In 1947 he achieved a first in part one in modern languages (doing French and German). He then switched to music, doing another part one examination in 1949, in which he got a disappointing third. Passing two part one examinations allowed the candidate to graduate with an ordinary BA, that is a pass degree, without honours. An active sportsman, he was president of the King's College Athletics Club in 1948-9. 
When he left Cambridge in 1949, Luard expected to do national service -- only to be told that his three days' service in 1945 sufficed. He applied to the Foreign Office, but had to wait a year before he could take an entry examination. In the meantime, to broaden his outlook, he worked in a factory in Shepherd's Bush, London. In October 1950 he entered the foreign service, learned Chinese in London and Hong Kong, and was then posted to Beijing (Peking), from September 1952 to August 1954. During the Suez crisis he was serving in London. On 5 November 1956, when the Anglo-French military action against Egypt was running into heavy criticism inside the Foreign Office as well as at the United Nations and elsewhere, he submitted a letter of resignation, stating 'I belong to a generation which was brought up in the belief that for one nation to undertake the use of armed force against another in order to promote its own interests is morally wrong. I grew up during a war which, I understood, was fought for the establishment of that principle. When I joined the Foreign Service I was conscious that this country was a member of the United Nations and had entered into a solemn undertaking to act in accordance with the Charter of that Organisation.... Here it is a question of an action of the Government that I serve which in my eyes seems to have betrayed everything for which I had believed that this country stood... (Luard to Henniker-Major, 5 Nov 1956)' Luard was one of a very few members of the diplomatic service who resigned over Suez. Others were persuaded not to do so by, among others, Anthony Nutting, the junior minister at the Foreign Office whose own resignation was announced on 3 November. 
Having left the foreign service at the age of thirty, Luard turned to research and writing on international relations. In 1957 he was appointed to a research fellowship at St Antony's College, Oxford. He was to retain an association with the college, and to live in Oxford, for the rest of his life. His research on China was funded for two years by the Eastern Metals and Mining Company, and then by a grant from the Leverhulme Trust for a book, 'Britain and China' (1962). St Antony's was not always able to find funding for him thereafter, but it provided accommodation for him until 1980, when he bought his own small terraced house nearby in Observatory Street. He did occasional teaching at Oxford, mainly in the earlier years, but never held a university post. It was at Oxford that he wrote his books, embarked on a political career first on the city council (1958-61) and then in parliament, and performed many services for Oxfam (for which he worked from 1980 to 1983). 
In 1966-70 and 1974-9 Luard served as the first (and, as it transpired, only) Labour MP for the Oxford constituency, subsequently dissolved in boundary revisions. Characteristically active and conscientious as an MP, at the same time he continued writing and took on other responsibilities. He was a member of the UK delegation to the UN general assembly in 1967 and 1968; and in 1975 he was appointed by the UN secretary-general to the ad hoc committee on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the UN system. In violation of the unwritten rule that ministers should be lay figures unburdened by professional expertise, he had two spells (from October 1969 to June 1970 and from April 1976 to May 1979) as under-secretary of state at the Foreign Office. In this situation, where irritation or offence might easily have been caused -- both on account of his knowledge, and on account of his earlier resignation -- he earned the affection and respect of both the diplomats and the ministers with whom he worked. David Owen, foreign secretary from February 1977 to May 1979, later wrote: 'He was an unassuming, quiet person but of firm determination and tenacious will... I found Evan's specialised knowledge immensely valuable when we both served together in the FCO. He brought to United Nations matters and all aspects of international law an attractive mix of enthusiasm and calculation. ('Daily Telegraph')' Luard's political position, reflected in all his work, can be crudely summarized as right-wing Labour, but with an exceptionally strong admixture of belief in the centrality of moral principle, international organization, and overseas aid. In the early 1980s he joined the newly formed Social Democratic Party, which was at that time the party that most closely reflected his political philosophy. His last parliamentary campaign was fought unsuccessfully in June 1983 under its colours for the new Oxford West and Abingdon constituency. 
Between 1959 and his death Luard wrote no fewer than eighteen books, co-authored one, and edited seven. Of these twenty-six books, five were reissued in revised editions. All these works, as well as numerous articles and pamphlets, were in the field of international relations broadly conceived. Following the concentration on China in the first two works, his 'Peace and Opinion' (1962) staked out a number of themes which were to remain central to his world vision: man is more adaptable than other species, though not perhaps enough for the dangers he now faces; it is of limited use to set up systems of authority called states, if between them there is still murderous anarchy; nuclear weapons, horrific as they are, may have reduced the likelihood of war; general and complete disarmament is not going to be achieved; a more peaceful world must be sought by reforming the behaviour of states; and international society is slowly becoming more law-abiding. Of his subsequent works, 'The Control of the Sea-Bed' (1974; rev. 1977) was a notably well-timed call for international regulation of under-sea resources, appearing as it did early in the negotiations (1973-82) which led to the adoption of the UN convention on the law of the sea. One book sold particularly well: the comparatively short 'The United Nations: How it Works and What it Does' (1979). Luard also embarked on a multi-volume 'History of the United Nations', and by the time of his death had published the first two volumes (1982, 1989), covering the years 1945-65. 
In his substantial writings Luard did not claim to be an academic historian working on original documents. He was not a discoverer of new facts, or an inventor of new theories. He covered a vast canvas, the world; and a huge time span, centuries past, present, and future. He often wrote prescriptively, especially in calling for redistribution between richer and poorer countries. In the age of the specialist it was impossible to do these things without risking criticism. Yet his works had solid merits. He was knowledgeable on all the subjects he tackled. Eschewing rhetoric, he wrote elegantly and clearly. He was less interested in addressing topical issues of the day, whether Vietnam or nuclear weapons deployments, than deeper and longer-term questions. His books tackled subjects -- including human rights and the internationalization of civil wars -- which were often neglected during the cold war, but which later proved to be of enduring importance. The fact that certain themes were repeated was a reflection of his moral concern about them. Above all, he sought to make sense of the times through which he lived. Towards the end of his life the crumbling of communist regimes and the growing role of the UN suggested that his cautious belief in progress was not misplaced. 
A slim, wiry figure of medium height, Luard's manner was unassuming. His performance at public meetings, including political ones, was judicious, reasonable, and understated. Generous with his time in helping others, he combined friendliness, charm, and clarity of mind. He lived unostentatiously in Oxford, often on a modest income. The disciplined austerity of his life was tempered by a love of gardening as well as of the piano. He never married, but had many friends. Although he cut down on public speaking when (about five years before his death) he lost his larynx, he worked hard to recover a natural articulation, and was proud that he could still give the occasional talk. He died of lung cancer on 8 February 1991 at his sister's home, 1 St Mary's Grove, Putney, London, and was cremated at Mortlake crematorium. A memorial meeting was held at St Antony's College, Oxford, on 1 June 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 50721


Estlin, Mary Anne (1820-1902), slavery abolitionist and campaigner for women's rights, was born in Bristol, the only child of Dr John Bishop Estlin (1785-1855), a pioneer ophthalmologist, and his wife (died 'c'.1822), daughter of the Bagehots of Langport. Her father was the son of a Unitarian minister and she adhered to Unitarianism throughout her life. Mrs Estlin died when Mary was about three years old, and her father did not remarry. In 1832-3 her father spent six months in St Vincent in the West Indies and Mary Estlin accompanied him, seeing at first hand the colonial slave system to which her father was morally opposed. She herself never married, living with her father until his death when she was in her mid-thirties, and thereafter continuing to live in the family home in Park Street, Bristol. 
Mary Estlin became a leading British supporter of the radical wing of the American abolitionist movement, which, under the leadership of William Lloyd Garrison, had taken control of the American Anti-Slavery Society in 1839. Both Mary and her father conducted an extensive correspondence with the American abolitionists from 1844 onwards, as well as fostering support for Garrison in the west of England and acting as hosts for visiting American anti-slavery lecturers and fund-raisers. In addition Mary co-ordinated British contributions to the Boston Anti-Slavery Bazaar. In 1851 she was appointed a member of the committee of the Bristol and Clifton Ladies' Anti-Slavery Society. She was largely responsible for persuading the committee to take the unprecedented step of publicly severing links with the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society on policy grounds -- in particular, the national society's failure to support the American Anti-Slavery Society. The launch of the Bristol society as an independent organization marked the beginning of a period of intense national propaganda by the group under Mary Estlin's direction. She became very influential in transatlantic anti-slavery circles: her advice was increasingly sought by the male leaders of the movement and she acted as a mediator between the rival anti-slavery factions. She maintained her links with American campaigners following abolition, visiting the Garrison family in Boston in 1867-8. 
Mary Estlin was also a leading feminist campaigner. She was a member of the executive committee of the Ladies' National Association (1870-86), which co-ordinated the feminist campaign for the repeal of the 'Contagious Diseases Acts'. Josephine Butler, the leader of this campaign, described Mary Estlin and her three Bristol co-workers (the Priestman sisters and Margaret Tanner) as 'a kind of body-guard, a 'corps d'elite' on whose prompt aid, singleness of purpose, prudence and unwearying industry, I could and can rely at all times' (Butler, 188-9). Mary was also one of the founding members of the Bristol Women's Suffrage Society (established in 1867), acting as treasurer in its early years. In addition she aided her fellow Unitarian Mary Carpenter's work in the education of destitute girls in Bristol and assisted in the establishment of a hospital for women. 
Mary Estlin was described in her obituary by her feminist colleagues as a 'warmly sympathetic and lovable' woman who was 'a staunch Liberal, with advanced views, strongly advocating the rights of her own sex' ('Englishwoman's Review', 61-3). She was one of a number of prominent female anti-slavery campaigners who became leading feminist activists during the 1860s and 1870s. Mary Estlin died on 14 November 1902 at her home at 36 Upper Belgrave Road, Clifton, near Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 50724


Richardson, Anna (1806-1892), slavery abolitionist and peace campaigner, was born in Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, on 5 January 1806, the fourth of the eight children of Samuel Atkins (1772?-1821), mealman, of Chipping Norton and his wife, Esther (1776-1833), daughter of John Millard, silversmith, of Tewkesbury and his wife, Anna. Her parents were members of the Society of Friends and her mother was a supporter of the anti-slavery campaign. Anna Atkins spent from 1817 to 1819 as a pupil at Ackworth, a leading Quaker school in Yorkshire. On her father's death in 1821, her widowed mother had to bring up a large family in difficult financial circumstances. 
On 5 July 1833 Anna Atkins married another Quaker, 
Anna Richardson was even more prominent as an activist than her husband. During the 1840s and 1850s she was the leader of the British free produce movement, an arm of the anti-slavery campaign which aimed to discourage the use in Britain of American slave-grown cotton. In 1846 she founded the Newcastle Ladies' Free Produce Association, and issued a circular encouraging women nationwide to form similar groups. In 1850 she persuaded the American former slave Revd Henry Highland Garnet to come to Britain to promote the cause; as a result, about twenty-six free labour associations were rapidly formed, progress that was recorded in 'The Slave', a periodical promoting the free produce movement which she edited between 1851 and 1854. She was recognized by the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society as the national co-ordinator of the free produce movement. She also promoted the anti-slavery cause by assisting her sister-in-law, Ellen Richardson, in raising funds to purchase the freedom of the African-American abolitionist Frederick Douglass, and by compiling monthly 'Illustrations of American slavery', which she distributed free to newspaper editors throughout Britain from 1847 onwards. 
Anna Richardson's promotion of the free produce movement was closely linked to her second major preoccupation: the peace movement. Anna and Henry Richardson both attended the 1849 Paris Peace Congress, and between 1844 and 1857 Anna edited the 'Olive Leaf', a peace magazine for children. She belonged to the network of Ladies' Olive Leaf circles, which were linked to the League of Universal Brotherhood. The league had been founded by an American, Elihu Burritt, who came to live in Britain in 1846, and it combined promotion of international peace with support for the free labour movement. 
Anna Richardson was also involved in a wide variety of other philanthropic and reform activities in Newcastle. She was secretary and district visitor for the Ladies' Branch Bible Society and set up a Bible women's mission to spread religious knowledge to working-class homes, and she was an active member of the Society of Friends. In 1834, at the suggestion of Elizabeth Fry, she became a visitor of Newcastle prison. She became a teetotaller, and she and her husband established temperance refreshment rooms in 1853. Anna was also involved in aid to European immigrants into Britain: in 1839 she produced a book to raise funds in support of Lutheran refugees from Prussia. 
Henry Richardson suffered from poor health from 1840 onwards, but lived to the age of seventy-eight, dying on 24 April 1885 at their home, 116 Park Road. He was buried on 28 April at Elswick general cemetery, Newcastle. Anna Richardson died on 27 March 1892 at 116 Park Road, and was buried on 30 March, also in Elswick cemetery. Surviving portraits show a large-featured woman, neatly attired and wearing a Quaker bonnet. She was clearly a serious and religious woman, with a lifelong commitment to philanthropy and reform, and considerable organizational abilities and leadership skills. 


@@@@@


doc= 50725


Jackson, Sir Robert Gillman Allen (1911-1991), international administrator, was born on 8 November 1911 in Hawksburn, a suburb of Melbourne, Australia, the second son of Archibald Jackson (1858-1928), Scottish engineer and businessman, and his second wife, Kathleen Crooke (1872-1943), a nurse, daughter of Peter Williams, an Anglo-Irish farmer and vet, and his wife, Minnie Elizabeth, 'nee' Allen. He was given the names Wilbur Kenneth (after the doctor who delivered him) but changed them by deed poll in 1937 before he married. After attending Cheltenham state school from 1918 he went in 1922 to Mentone grammar school, which his father had helped to found. He excelled at work and games and became school captain. His father's death in 1928 deprived him of a university education, so he entered the Royal Australian Navy in 1929 as a paymaster-cadet, having won a cadetship, beating 180 candidates. Admiral Sir Wilbraham Ford, British commander of the Australian naval squadron, recognized his ability and in 1938 took him to Malta. British policy at that time was that Malta could not be defended. Paymaster-Lieutenant Jackson wrote a paper showing that it could, provided that the civilian population was protected and supplied with essentials, since its co-operation would be vital, particularly in maintaining the naval dockyard. Existing tunnels should be extended, and shelters, stores, and vital services put underground. Ford submitted Jackson's paper to the Admiralty; the arrival of their signal 'all proposals approved, proceed with all despatch' was one of the greatest moments of his life. But the RAF was not persuaded, and it was not until July 1939 that the British government accepted the navy's view and reversed its policy. Jackson spent the next two years organizing supplies and supervising the loading of convoys in England and Alexandria. Malta narrowly avoided starvation; its survival as an operational base played a crucial part in the allies' victory in north Africa. For his part, Jackson was appointed OBE in 1941. 
In November 1941 the government posted Paymaster-Commander Jackson to Cairo -- but as a civil servant. The Middle East Supply Centre (MESC) had been set up to develop local production of food and materials, so as to leave shipping space available for military supplies. MESC's operations extended over the Middle East and much of Africa. Jackson was appointed director in January 1942. He worked closely with the military authorities, introduced import licensing, and won the confidence of governments; given the variety of problems in the different territories this called for diplomacy and expertise. He inaugurated a long-term anti-locust campaign (for which he was appointed CMG in 1944). When the USA entered the war, he invited Americans to join the MESC team; this partnership flourished for two years. Jackson saw MESC as a model for future international co-operation, but as wartime pressures abated nations wanted independence. MESC was nevertheless the precursor of the regional economic commissions later set up by the United Nations. 
In 1943 the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) was created to bring relief and supplies to the peoples of nations devastated by war and to assist the millions of displaced persons. By the end of 1944 it was in difficulties, and in February 1945 the British government appointed Jackson senior deputy director-general -- effectively chief executive (the director-general being the American Herbert Lehman). Jackson fired and hired on a large scale, recruiting generals as they were demobilized. After reorganizing the London office he was based in Washington, where he kept pressure on political leaders to provide financial support. UNRRA eventually sent relief to much of Europe and part of China. Some of these areas were under communist control and in 1946 the USA refused to provide further funds. Altogether UNRRA supplied $3 billion worth of food and equipment and dealt with 8.5 million displaced persons. It was the biggest UN relief operation ever mounted. When Jackson left UNRRA in August 1947 he had three major achievements to his credit. He was still only thirty-six, but after working non-stop for ten years was exhausted. His marriage to Una Margaret Dick ('b'. 1911), only daughter of Ronald Dick of Hobart, Australia, in 1937 had failed. He had fallen for Barbara Mary Ward (1914-1981), the economist and leading Catholic, and had joined the Roman church. 
In November 1947 Trygve Lie, secretary-general of the United Nations, offered Jackson a post as an additional assistant secretary-general for co-ordination. The British government agreed that he should go there provided the conditions were satisfactory. In the event they were not, but he took the job, maintaining that he was acting under orders. By mid-April 1948 he was in post; in mid-August he was fired. Lie had found him 'too strong'; some of the assistant secretaries-general also felt threatened. The post had, in Lie's view, proved unsatisfactory and was abolished. Jackson was shattered. He later claimed that the main reason for his dismissal was a disagreement with Lie concerning Israel. The British government then kept him occupied for two years; he spent the next two in Australia setting up a new ministry of national development, returning to England to marry Barbara Ward on 16 November 1950, having been granted a papal dispensation. During 1952 he advised the governments of India and Pakistan on their development plans. 
In 1953 the British government appointed Jackson special commissioner in charge of the preparatory commission for the Volta River aluminium scheme in the Gold Coast. He reported in 1956 that the project -- to build a dam, power station, aluminium smelter, and bauxite mine -- was sound, provided that the aluminium companies could operate their smelter profitably; that would depend on the government's price for electricity. Nothing came of the project at that stage, partly because the Gold Coast was about to be granted independence as Ghana. Once again uncertain of his future, Jackson agreed to stay on as chairman of the Development Commission and adviser to President Nkrumah. In 1958 the American government became interested; the firm of Henry J. Kaiser then recommended major changes to the scheme (relocating the dam and using imported bauxite); in January 1962 the two governments and the World Bank agreed to provide the loans. The dam was inaugurated in 1966. Jackson was made KB in 1956 and KCVO in 1961 after organizing arrangements for the queen's visit to Ghana. 
In 1962 Jackson returned to the UN as consultant to Paul Hoffman, then managing director of the special fund and later administrator of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). He advised on technical assistance and pre-investment aid to developing countries, inspecting projects in many parts of the world. Multi-purpose river projects (including the Mekong) were his particular interest. In 1968 Hoffman asked him to undertake a study of the capacity of the UN development system (then rapidly expanding), on the assumption that its funding would double in five years. He asked Margaret Joan Anstee ('b'. 1926), an experienced resident representative of UNDP, to be his chief assistant. This marked the start of a close and enduring personal and professional partnership. His marriage to Barbara Ward had failed; their son, aged twelve, was at school in England, under his father's caring eye. The 'Capacity Study' was published in November 1969. One of its main conclusions was that many of UNDP's projects were not in the best interests of the nations they were intended to assist, being the result of selling pressure by the specialized agencies. It recommended that projects should be related to a country's own development plan. 'Country programming' required a new administrative structure: maximum devolution of responsibility to country level, where governments and 'resreps' could decide what should be provided by UNDP, combined with maximum central control of the agencies through UNDP's power of the purse as sole funding organization for technical assistance. The concept was simple but the study was exhaustive, covering all aspects of the system. Though welcomed by many, it was strongly opposed by the senior officials of UNDP and the agencies; its likening of the system to a dinosaur caused offence, particularly to Hoffman. Its recommendations were broadly accepted by the governing council, but somewhat watered down; the resulting 'consensus' was formally adopted in December 1970. In the event, over the next few years donor governments' support for UNDP declined sharply. Subsequent attempts to improve the system recognized that Jackson's analysis was right and was still relevant. 
Hoffman dispensed with Jackson's services at the end of 1971; in March 1972 the new secretary-general, Kurt Waldheim, asked him to take charge of the UN relief operation in Bangladesh, then suffering from the aftermath of devastating floods and civil war. Millions of refugees were returning from India and there was a danger of widespread starvation. The main ports were blocked by sunken ships, the monsoon was approaching, and the UN relief operation had not been going well. 'At long last in Bangladesh we switched from quixotic amateurism to large-scale professionalism. Jackson's enormous experience was coupled with imagination, drive, a world view, and a comprehensive approach which covered politics, finance, availability of supplies, shipping, transport and communications, the weather, crop prospects, grain futures, and the morale of all the people he was dealing with. (Urquhart, 231)' Not in good health, Jackson gave his all, saw what had to be done and what could wait, insisted that the UN system spoke with one voice, and briefed donor governments in his hard-hitting yet breezy style. He had a tiny office in New York and travelled frequently to Dacca. This was the most successful UN operation since UNRRA, handling $5 billion of aid, and a model of how these things could be done. Other appointments followed as co-ordinator of UN assistance, including that to Zambia, suffering as a result of UN sanctions against Rhodesia (1973-7), to Indo-China in the aftermath of the Vietnam War (1975-7), and finally to Kampuchea (1979-84). When Pol Pot was driven out by Vietnamese forces many thousands of Khmers (including Khmers Rouges) fled to the border with Thailand. Humanitarian aid was urgently needed within Kampuchea and on the border. The UN general assembly voted to give Kampuchea's seat to the Khmer Rouge, not to the new regime in Phnom Penh. In 1981 Western governments confined their support to the border relief operation, leaving Kampuchea dependent on the USSR and its allies. In this frustrating political minefield Jackson never put a foot wrong, with the result that hundreds of thousands of lives were saved within Kampuchea and on the border. In 1986 Jackson was made a companion of the Order of Australia. After suffering a severe stroke in New York in December 1987 he returned to England, where he died at his home, at Fairacres, Roehampton, Surrey, on 12 January 1991. He was cremated at Putney Vale on 21 January, and his ashes were taken to Australia for burial at Cheltenham, Victoria. He was survived by Dame Margaret Anstee and by the son of his second marriage. 
Jacko (as he was nicknamed) was a world citizen, yet remained resolutely Australian with a sense of humour to match; he spoke no foreign languages, yet could communicate with ease. An imposing figure, with an air of authority, he was a natural leader who inspired the loyalty of his staff, of whom he expected much and to whom he was considerate and generous when they had personal problems. He did not suffer fools gladly, nor did he court popularity. He was held in great affection by many, yet remained a very private person. The 'Capacity Study' was a landmark; nevertheless Jackson's greatest achievements were in actions not words, in Malta, UNRRA, and Bangladesh. As a relief operator and master of logistics he was unsurpassed. 


@@@@@


doc= 50726


Henry Richardson (1806-1885), whom she had met at Ackworth (where Henry was a pupil from 1818 to 1820). Born on 18 September 1806, he was the third of the seven children of George Richardson (1773-1862) of Newcastle upon Tyne, a grocer, philanthropist, reformer, and travelling minister in the Society of Friends, and his wife, Eleanor (1778-1846), daughter of John and Rachel Watson, also of Newcastle. Henry and Anna Richardson settled in Newcastle and had a long and happy marriage, although they had no children, and they devoted their energies to philanthropic and reform activities in the town. Henry Richardson took over his father's grocery shop, but retired from the business in 1858. He became an elder in the Society of Friends, and he was the founder of the Boys' ragged school, superintendent of the Friends' Sabbath School, leader of the Newcastle Bible Society, editor of the periodical the 'Peace Advocate' (1843-51), and an active member of Newcastle Peace Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 50730


Bayley, Mary (b. 1816, d. in or after 1892), temperance activist and writer, was born in Market Lavington, Wiltshire. Nothing is known of her early life. Her husband, George Bayley (1807-1888), was born in Rotherhithe, served in the merchant navy between the ages of sixteen and forty-four, and was an elder brother of the Trinity House for thirty-one years. Presumably influenced by his wife, who was already active in the temperance movement, Bayley became an abstainer at the age of fifty-three. Mary and George Bayley had five daughters, the first of whom was born in 1846; only one, the novelist and writer Elizabeth Boyd Bayley, outlived her parents. After a period abroad (the eldest Bayley daughter was born in Calcutta), the family settled in London, first at 8 Lansdowne Crescent in Kensington. They moved to Barnet in 1864, for the sake of the children's health, and latterly lived in Kempshott Road, Streatham Common. Mary Bayley also suffered from poor health: in the autumn of 1860 she suffered a long and severe illness which struck her again in 1882, and from about 1887 until her death she regarded herself as an invalid. 
An Anglican hostile to Roman Catholicism, Mrs Bayley's principal concern was the effect of alcohol abuse on the working classes. She believed that 'this dreadful vice' was responsible for filling England with 'moral wrecks' and caused the deaths of 60,000 people a year. Her aim was to eliminate male drunkenness through the domestic influence of wives and mothers, explaining that 'long experience had taught me that all real, healthy, permanent, domestic reform must begin with the mother' (M. Bayley, 'Mended Homes and what Repaired Them', 1861, 26, 5). In 1853 Mary Bayley began her mothers' meetings in the notorious Kensington potteries area, offering working-class women religious and domestic education, and bringing women of different social classes together so that the rich could exercise a good influence over the poor. 
Mary Bayley doubted that it was wise for poor women to be employed outside the home. In her pamphlets she argued that if poor women went out to work, they would have less time to make their homes attractive to their husbands and sons; if their homes were uncomfortable, the men would go to the public house and waste their money on drink. This would mean that the household needed more money to survive, thus driving women out to work and producing a vicious circle of drinking and decline. Mrs Bayley particularly attacked laundry work for women -- an occupation much associated with female drunkenness -- arguing in 'Mended Homes' that washing machines operated by men should be introduced to allow poor women to go back to their proper places by the domestic fireside. 
Having concentrated at first on the failings of working-class wives and mothers, Mary Bayley turned her attention in 1860 to the position of the men themselves. With her husband and other sympathizers she established a model Workmen's Temperance Hall in Portland Road, Notting Hill. The hall was opened on 12 March 1861 by Samuel Gurney before a large ecumenical gathering attended by the bishop of London. The object of the hall was to provide working men with a place to meet which would be a real alternative both to the warmth and congeniality of the public house and to their impoverished homes: it was to be a self-financing coffee house, offering working men non-alcoholic refreshments and bathing facilities in pleasant surroundings. The attached 'Bible' mission provided non-sectarian religious teaching to reinforce the temperance message. The Bayleys had great plans for the hall and the temperance society which supported it, but their experiment was short-lived. They moved away from the area in 1864, and without their constant support the hall's fortunes declined. In 1866 a problem arose over the title to the hall and it closed its doors. However, Elizabeth Boyd Bayley later claimed that the hall had been of considerable significance as an influence on the work of Ellice Hopkins, the purity campaigner, and Louisa Daniells, the founder of the Soldiers' Homes. 
Mary Bayley was a prolific writer of pamphlets championing temperance and female domesticity, including 'Ragged Homes and how to Mend them' (1860), 'Danger Signals: how to Use them Wisely' (1887), and 'Home Weal and Home Woe' (1892), which was written in collaboration with her daughter Elizabeth. She died in or after 1892. 


@@@@@


doc= 50731


Rochford family (per. 1840-1932), horticulturists, was founded by Michael Rochford (1819-1883), who was born in Clandulla, co. Clare, Ireland, into a close-knit Roman Catholic family whose ancestors had lived in the Clandulla area for many generations. Little is known of his childhood but in keeping with the family tradition of emigration he moved to England in 1840 and found work as a gardener for Lord Nugent in Buckinghamshire, before becoming a steward for Lord Feversham in Yorkshire. At this stage he pioneered a number of improvements in glasshouse design, in particular the idea of glazing only the underside of the glass to save weight. On 16 July 1848 he married Sarah (died 1906), daughter of Joseph Henry and Charlotte Mumford. Thomas Rochford (1849-1901), their first son, was born on 15 April 1849. Then followed John Rochford (1851-1919), born on 14 February 1851; Mary, born on 10 November 1852; Edmund, born on 16 November 1854; and Joseph Rochford (1856-1932), born on 3 December 1856. In 1857 the family moved to Tottenham, Middlesex, to run a 2 acre market garden, where Michael became a specialist grower of early grapes. Five more children were born: twins, Michael and George (14 May 1859); Elizabeth (10 July 1861); Charlotte Catherine (29 September 1863); Lucy (28 September 1865); and George (14 August 1867), named in memory of George, one of the twins, who had died at the age of four. 
Michael Rochford continued to build up a prosperous business, growing plants and flowers for a wealthy clientele. He was instrumental in raising the efficiency of glasshouse production with the aid of the 'Rochford boiler' developed by his son Thomas, and through improvements in the ventilation system. When cheap imported grapes reduced the demand for his more expensive home-produced crop, Michael diversified into more popular indoor plants which were distributed through London agents. He continued to expand his business empire and was an eminent nurseryman in his own right. He died at his home, Stamford Road, Tottenham, on 29 January 1883, leaving the business in the capable hands of his son John. Thomas and John later became more famous than their father as nurserymen. 
Thomas Rochford, the most renowned of all the family, left his father's nursery and went to work as a trainee gardener for James Sweet. In August 1876 he married Mary Ann Agnes (1854-1932), daughter of Samuel Straight, ivory cutter, and his wife, Agnes, and moved to nearby Northumberland Park, where he established a nursery in 1882. In 1884 he acquired from his brother Joseph 4 acres of the Turnford Hall estate, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire; in 1887 he purchased Turnford Hall itself. Expansion rapidly followed with the buying of more land and glasshouses at Turnford. Thomas also played a key role in pioneering the use of refrigeration to retard the growth of plants and thus achieve out-of-season flowering. 
By 1900 the glasshouses covered 22 acres, of which approximately half were devoted to growing grapes; the rest grew hothouse pot plants -- in particular lilies, orchids, and ferns. By the time of the marriage of Thomas's own son Thomas, he was one of the largest greenhouse growers in England, and his importance was recognized in 1901 with eight awards including two gold medals by the Royal Horticultural Society. His success was marred, however, by the discovery that he was suffering from Bright's disease, an incurable illness at that time, from which he died at Turnford Hall on 12 October 1901. 
Joseph Rochford, although nationally less well known than his brother Thomas, had worked in conjunction with him until the latter's death. In 1881, following his marriage to Mary Margaret Leech, he had purchased the 8 acres at Turnford Hall estate, 4 acres of which he subsequently sold to his brother Thomas. He pioneered tomato growing in the Lea valley, and he also became wealthy as a result of astute property deals, buying land which was subsequently sold for housing. In 1902, on the death of his brother, he became chairman of Thomas Rochford & Sons; he retained the position until his resignation in 1916. After the First World War he played a key role in helping to revitalize the fortunes of the firm. He died at Turnford on 29 June 1932. 
John Rochford's career initially took a different path from that of his two brothers Thomas and Joseph. Following his father's illness and the move of his two brothers to the Lea valley, he remained in charge of the family nursery and rapidly became a well-known nurseryman in his own right. His first marriage was to Diana Benson, and after her death in 1892 he married Blanche Hindley. On the death of his brother Thomas, like his brothers Edmund and Joseph he became a director of Thomas Rochford & Sons. He died at his home, Cedrus Lodge, Turkey Street, Enfield, Middlesex, on 15 December 1919. 
One of Michael Rochford's other sons, Edmund, ran his own successful nursery at Cranbrook Street, Cheshunt, specializing in the production of hothouse plants. This unit was, however, considerably smaller and less well known than the Lea valley enterprises organized by his other brothers. Edmund was also involved as a director of the family firm. Following the death of his first wife, May Norwood, on 7 March 1911, he subsequently married Louisa Cudlipp. Another brother, Michael, named after his father, maintained his own nursery at The Ride, Ponders End, for several years prior to his death at the age of twenty-seven. 
Michael Rochford senior was, in his youth, described as a tall lanky fellow with piercing eyes, a trait which became less noticeable in later years. Michael and his sons were rotund in appearance. The main branch of the family, associated with the Lea valley area, were large-scale employers who were widely regarded not only as nurserymen but also as committed to their workforce. In the late nineteenth century they were one of the largest glasshouse growers in Britain. In spite of experiencing mixed fortunes in the twentieth century, the firm of Thomas Rochford & Sons, still run by the family, was internationally famous in the post-war period, particularly for the exhibitions it staged at the Chelsea flower show. 


@@@@@


doc= 50732


Rochford family (per. 1840-1932), horticulturists, was founded by Michael Rochford (1819-1883), who was born in Clandulla, co. Clare, Ireland, into a close-knit Roman Catholic family whose ancestors had lived in the Clandulla area for many generations. Little is known of his childhood but in keeping with the family tradition of emigration he moved to England in 1840 and found work as a gardener for Lord Nugent in Buckinghamshire, before becoming a steward for Lord Feversham in Yorkshire. At this stage he pioneered a number of improvements in glasshouse design, in particular the idea of glazing only the underside of the glass to save weight. On 16 July 1848 he married Sarah (died 1906), daughter of Joseph Henry and Charlotte Mumford. Thomas Rochford (1849-1901), their first son, was born on 15 April 1849. Then followed John Rochford (1851-1919), born on 14 February 1851; Mary, born on 10 November 1852; Edmund, born on 16 November 1854; and Joseph Rochford (1856-1932), born on 3 December 1856. In 1857 the family moved to Tottenham, Middlesex, to run a 2 acre market garden, where Michael became a specialist grower of early grapes. Five more children were born: twins, Michael and George (14 May 1859); Elizabeth (10 July 1861); Charlotte Catherine (29 September 1863); Lucy (28 September 1865); and George (14 August 1867), named in memory of George, one of the twins, who had died at the age of four. 
Michael Rochford continued to build up a prosperous business, growing plants and flowers for a wealthy clientele. He was instrumental in raising the efficiency of glasshouse production with the aid of the 'Rochford boiler' developed by his son Thomas, and through improvements in the ventilation system. When cheap imported grapes reduced the demand for his more expensive home-produced crop, Michael diversified into more popular indoor plants which were distributed through London agents. He continued to expand his business empire and was an eminent nurseryman in his own right. He died at his home, Stamford Road, Tottenham, on 29 January 1883, leaving the business in the capable hands of his son John. Thomas and John later became more famous than their father as nurserymen. 
Thomas Rochford, the most renowned of all the family, left his father's nursery and went to work as a trainee gardener for James Sweet. In August 1876 he married Mary Ann Agnes (1854-1932), daughter of Samuel Straight, ivory cutter, and his wife, Agnes, and moved to nearby Northumberland Park, where he established a nursery in 1882. In 1884 he acquired from his brother Joseph 4 acres of the Turnford Hall estate, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire; in 1887 he purchased Turnford Hall itself. Expansion rapidly followed with the buying of more land and glasshouses at Turnford. Thomas also played a key role in pioneering the use of refrigeration to retard the growth of plants and thus achieve out-of-season flowering. 
By 1900 the glasshouses covered 22 acres, of which approximately half were devoted to growing grapes; the rest grew hothouse pot plants -- in particular lilies, orchids, and ferns. By the time of the marriage of Thomas's own son Thomas, he was one of the largest greenhouse growers in England, and his importance was recognized in 1901 with eight awards including two gold medals by the Royal Horticultural Society. His success was marred, however, by the discovery that he was suffering from Bright's disease, an incurable illness at that time, from which he died at Turnford Hall on 12 October 1901. 
Joseph Rochford, although nationally less well known than his brother Thomas, had worked in conjunction with him until the latter's death. In 1881, following his marriage to Mary Margaret Leech, he had purchased the 8 acres at Turnford Hall estate, 4 acres of which he subsequently sold to his brother Thomas. He pioneered tomato growing in the Lea valley, and he also became wealthy as a result of astute property deals, buying land which was subsequently sold for housing. In 1902, on the death of his brother, he became chairman of Thomas Rochford & Sons; he retained the position until his resignation in 1916. After the First World War he played a key role in helping to revitalize the fortunes of the firm. He died at Turnford on 29 June 1932. 
John Rochford's career initially took a different path from that of his two brothers Thomas and Joseph. Following his father's illness and the move of his two brothers to the Lea valley, he remained in charge of the family nursery and rapidly became a well-known nurseryman in his own right. His first marriage was to Diana Benson, and after her death in 1892 he married Blanche Hindley. On the death of his brother Thomas, like his brothers Edmund and Joseph he became a director of Thomas Rochford & Sons. He died at his home, Cedrus Lodge, Turkey Street, Enfield, Middlesex, on 15 December 1919. 
One of Michael Rochford's other sons, Edmund, ran his own successful nursery at Cranbrook Street, Cheshunt, specializing in the production of hothouse plants. This unit was, however, considerably smaller and less well known than the Lea valley enterprises organized by his other brothers. Edmund was also involved as a director of the family firm. Following the death of his first wife, May Norwood, on 7 March 1911, he subsequently married Louisa Cudlipp. Another brother, Michael, named after his father, maintained his own nursery at The Ride, Ponders End, for several years prior to his death at the age of twenty-seven. 
Michael Rochford senior was, in his youth, described as a tall lanky fellow with piercing eyes, a trait which became less noticeable in later years. Michael and his sons were rotund in appearance. The main branch of the family, associated with the Lea valley area, were large-scale employers who were widely regarded not only as nurserymen but also as committed to their workforce. In the late nineteenth century they were one of the largest glasshouse growers in Britain. In spite of experiencing mixed fortunes in the twentieth century, the firm of Thomas Rochford & Sons, still run by the family, was internationally famous in the post-war period, particularly for the exhibitions it staged at the Chelsea flower show. 


@@@@@


doc= 50733


Rochford family (per. 1840-1932), horticulturists, was founded by Michael Rochford (1819-1883), who was born in Clandulla, co. Clare, Ireland, into a close-knit Roman Catholic family whose ancestors had lived in the Clandulla area for many generations. Little is known of his childhood but in keeping with the family tradition of emigration he moved to England in 1840 and found work as a gardener for Lord Nugent in Buckinghamshire, before becoming a steward for Lord Feversham in Yorkshire. At this stage he pioneered a number of improvements in glasshouse design, in particular the idea of glazing only the underside of the glass to save weight. On 16 July 1848 he married Sarah (died 1906), daughter of Joseph Henry and Charlotte Mumford. Thomas Rochford (1849-1901), their first son, was born on 15 April 1849. Then followed John Rochford (1851-1919), born on 14 February 1851; Mary, born on 10 November 1852; Edmund, born on 16 November 1854; and Joseph Rochford (1856-1932), born on 3 December 1856. In 1857 the family moved to Tottenham, Middlesex, to run a 2 acre market garden, where Michael became a specialist grower of early grapes. Five more children were born: twins, Michael and George (14 May 1859); Elizabeth (10 July 1861); Charlotte Catherine (29 September 1863); Lucy (28 September 1865); and George (14 August 1867), named in memory of George, one of the twins, who had died at the age of four. 
Michael Rochford continued to build up a prosperous business, growing plants and flowers for a wealthy clientele. He was instrumental in raising the efficiency of glasshouse production with the aid of the 'Rochford boiler' developed by his son Thomas, and through improvements in the ventilation system. When cheap imported grapes reduced the demand for his more expensive home-produced crop, Michael diversified into more popular indoor plants which were distributed through London agents. He continued to expand his business empire and was an eminent nurseryman in his own right. He died at his home, Stamford Road, Tottenham, on 29 January 1883, leaving the business in the capable hands of his son John. Thomas and John later became more famous than their father as nurserymen. 
Thomas Rochford, the most renowned of all the family, left his father's nursery and went to work as a trainee gardener for James Sweet. In August 1876 he married Mary Ann Agnes (1854-1932), daughter of Samuel Straight, ivory cutter, and his wife, Agnes, and moved to nearby Northumberland Park, where he established a nursery in 1882. In 1884 he acquired from his brother Joseph 4 acres of the Turnford Hall estate, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire; in 1887 he purchased Turnford Hall itself. Expansion rapidly followed with the buying of more land and glasshouses at Turnford. Thomas also played a key role in pioneering the use of refrigeration to retard the growth of plants and thus achieve out-of-season flowering. 
By 1900 the glasshouses covered 22 acres, of which approximately half were devoted to growing grapes; the rest grew hothouse pot plants -- in particular lilies, orchids, and ferns. By the time of the marriage of Thomas's own son Thomas, he was one of the largest greenhouse growers in England, and his importance was recognized in 1901 with eight awards including two gold medals by the Royal Horticultural Society. His success was marred, however, by the discovery that he was suffering from Bright's disease, an incurable illness at that time, from which he died at Turnford Hall on 12 October 1901. 
Joseph Rochford, although nationally less well known than his brother Thomas, had worked in conjunction with him until the latter's death. In 1881, following his marriage to Mary Margaret Leech, he had purchased the 8 acres at Turnford Hall estate, 4 acres of which he subsequently sold to his brother Thomas. He pioneered tomato growing in the Lea valley, and he also became wealthy as a result of astute property deals, buying land which was subsequently sold for housing. In 1902, on the death of his brother, he became chairman of Thomas Rochford & Sons; he retained the position until his resignation in 1916. After the First World War he played a key role in helping to revitalize the fortunes of the firm. He died at Turnford on 29 June 1932. 
John Rochford's career initially took a different path from that of his two brothers Thomas and Joseph. Following his father's illness and the move of his two brothers to the Lea valley, he remained in charge of the family nursery and rapidly became a well-known nurseryman in his own right. His first marriage was to Diana Benson, and after her death in 1892 he married Blanche Hindley. On the death of his brother Thomas, like his brothers Edmund and Joseph he became a director of Thomas Rochford & Sons. He died at his home, Cedrus Lodge, Turkey Street, Enfield, Middlesex, on 15 December 1919. 
One of Michael Rochford's other sons, Edmund, ran his own successful nursery at Cranbrook Street, Cheshunt, specializing in the production of hothouse plants. This unit was, however, considerably smaller and less well known than the Lea valley enterprises organized by his other brothers. Edmund was also involved as a director of the family firm. Following the death of his first wife, May Norwood, on 7 March 1911, he subsequently married Louisa Cudlipp. Another brother, Michael, named after his father, maintained his own nursery at The Ride, Ponders End, for several years prior to his death at the age of twenty-seven. 
Michael Rochford senior was, in his youth, described as a tall lanky fellow with piercing eyes, a trait which became less noticeable in later years. Michael and his sons were rotund in appearance. The main branch of the family, associated with the Lea valley area, were large-scale employers who were widely regarded not only as nurserymen but also as committed to their workforce. In the late nineteenth century they were one of the largest glasshouse growers in Britain. In spite of experiencing mixed fortunes in the twentieth century, the firm of Thomas Rochford & Sons, still run by the family, was internationally famous in the post-war period, particularly for the exhibitions it staged at the Chelsea flower show. 


@@@@@


doc= 50734


Rochford family (per. 1840-1932), horticulturists, was founded by Michael Rochford (1819-1883), who was born in Clandulla, co. Clare, Ireland, into a close-knit Roman Catholic family whose ancestors had lived in the Clandulla area for many generations. Little is known of his childhood but in keeping with the family tradition of emigration he moved to England in 1840 and found work as a gardener for Lord Nugent in Buckinghamshire, before becoming a steward for Lord Feversham in Yorkshire. At this stage he pioneered a number of improvements in glasshouse design, in particular the idea of glazing only the underside of the glass to save weight. On 16 July 1848 he married Sarah (died 1906), daughter of Joseph Henry and Charlotte Mumford. Thomas Rochford (1849-1901), their first son, was born on 15 April 1849. Then followed John Rochford (1851-1919), born on 14 February 1851; Mary, born on 10 November 1852; Edmund, born on 16 November 1854; and Joseph Rochford (1856-1932), born on 3 December 1856. In 1857 the family moved to Tottenham, Middlesex, to run a 2 acre market garden, where Michael became a specialist grower of early grapes. Five more children were born: twins, Michael and George (14 May 1859); Elizabeth (10 July 1861); Charlotte Catherine (29 September 1863); Lucy (28 September 1865); and George (14 August 1867), named in memory of George, one of the twins, who had died at the age of four. 
Michael Rochford continued to build up a prosperous business, growing plants and flowers for a wealthy clientele. He was instrumental in raising the efficiency of glasshouse production with the aid of the 'Rochford boiler' developed by his son Thomas, and through improvements in the ventilation system. When cheap imported grapes reduced the demand for his more expensive home-produced crop, Michael diversified into more popular indoor plants which were distributed through London agents. He continued to expand his business empire and was an eminent nurseryman in his own right. He died at his home, Stamford Road, Tottenham, on 29 January 1883, leaving the business in the capable hands of his son John. Thomas and John later became more famous than their father as nurserymen. 
Thomas Rochford, the most renowned of all the family, left his father's nursery and went to work as a trainee gardener for James Sweet. In August 1876 he married Mary Ann Agnes (1854-1932), daughter of Samuel Straight, ivory cutter, and his wife, Agnes, and moved to nearby Northumberland Park, where he established a nursery in 1882. In 1884 he acquired from his brother Joseph 4 acres of the Turnford Hall estate, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire; in 1887 he purchased Turnford Hall itself. Expansion rapidly followed with the buying of more land and glasshouses at Turnford. Thomas also played a key role in pioneering the use of refrigeration to retard the growth of plants and thus achieve out-of-season flowering. 
By 1900 the glasshouses covered 22 acres, of which approximately half were devoted to growing grapes; the rest grew hothouse pot plants -- in particular lilies, orchids, and ferns. By the time of the marriage of Thomas's own son Thomas, he was one of the largest greenhouse growers in England, and his importance was recognized in 1901 with eight awards including two gold medals by the Royal Horticultural Society. His success was marred, however, by the discovery that he was suffering from Bright's disease, an incurable illness at that time, from which he died at Turnford Hall on 12 October 1901. 
Joseph Rochford, although nationally less well known than his brother Thomas, had worked in conjunction with him until the latter's death. In 1881, following his marriage to Mary Margaret Leech, he had purchased the 8 acres at Turnford Hall estate, 4 acres of which he subsequently sold to his brother Thomas. He pioneered tomato growing in the Lea valley, and he also became wealthy as a result of astute property deals, buying land which was subsequently sold for housing. In 1902, on the death of his brother, he became chairman of Thomas Rochford & Sons; he retained the position until his resignation in 1916. After the First World War he played a key role in helping to revitalize the fortunes of the firm. He died at Turnford on 29 June 1932. 
John Rochford's career initially took a different path from that of his two brothers Thomas and Joseph. Following his father's illness and the move of his two brothers to the Lea valley, he remained in charge of the family nursery and rapidly became a well-known nurseryman in his own right. His first marriage was to Diana Benson, and after her death in 1892 he married Blanche Hindley. On the death of his brother Thomas, like his brothers Edmund and Joseph he became a director of Thomas Rochford & Sons. He died at his home, Cedrus Lodge, Turkey Street, Enfield, Middlesex, on 15 December 1919. 
One of Michael Rochford's other sons, Edmund, ran his own successful nursery at Cranbrook Street, Cheshunt, specializing in the production of hothouse plants. This unit was, however, considerably smaller and less well known than the Lea valley enterprises organized by his other brothers. Edmund was also involved as a director of the family firm. Following the death of his first wife, May Norwood, on 7 March 1911, he subsequently married Louisa Cudlipp. Another brother, Michael, named after his father, maintained his own nursery at The Ride, Ponders End, for several years prior to his death at the age of twenty-seven. 
Michael Rochford senior was, in his youth, described as a tall lanky fellow with piercing eyes, a trait which became less noticeable in later years. Michael and his sons were rotund in appearance. The main branch of the family, associated with the Lea valley area, were large-scale employers who were widely regarded not only as nurserymen but also as committed to their workforce. In the late nineteenth century they were one of the largest glasshouse growers in Britain. In spite of experiencing mixed fortunes in the twentieth century, the firm of Thomas Rochford & Sons, still run by the family, was internationally famous in the post-war period, particularly for the exhibitions it staged at the Chelsea flower show. 


@@@@@


doc= 50735


Senhouse, Humphrey (1705-1770), landowner and port founder, was born on 2 July 1705 at Millom Castle, Cumberland, the fourth child of Humphrey Senhouse (died 1738) and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of William Kirkby of Ashlack, Lancashire. Humphrey Senhouse senior was a scion of an old gentry family in west Cumberland and had his roots in Whitehaven. He was agent at Millom Castle for his aunt until her death in 1715. The following year he moved his wife and children to the family property at Netherhall and Ellenborough, on the west Cumberland coast north of Workington, which he had purchased from his brother's heirs. His son subsequently built his town here and thus gained his reputation. 
Senhouse was educated at a school at Lowther, Westmorland, from 1720 to 1723, and went to Queen's College, Oxford, in 1724. He returned home to Netherhall on the death of his younger brother in 1727. On 16 February 1731 at Carlisle Cathedral he married Mary, daughter and ultimately coheir of Sir George Fleming of Rydal, Westmorland, dean (and later bishop) of Carlisle, a marriage which strengthened his standing and eased his entry into the close-knit hub of county society at Carlisle. They had three sons and a daughter. Their eldest son, Humphrey (1731-1814), confirmed the family's ascent into the cluster of gentry dynasties which dominated political life in Cumberland by serving as MP first for Cockermouth and then for the county. 
His elder brother also having died young, Senhouse inherited the estate at Netherhall and Ellenborough on his father's death in 1738. He was soon to transform the trade of the northern part of the west Cumberland coalfield by founding a new town and port on his property. In the early eighteenth century there was a small harbour at Ellenfoot, from which coal was shipped, and in 1740 a Whitehaven merchant named Walter Lutwidge proposed the establishment of a new industrial settlement there. In 1749 Senhouse promoted a parliamentary bill to improve the harbour at Ellenfoot, with a view to obtaining a share of the coal trade, at that time dominated by Whitehaven and the Lowther family. Harbour work commenced in May 1749 and by the middle of the following year the new harbour was handling thirteen or fourteen ships at any one time. 
From the very beginning Senhouse had planned to develop a new town at Ellenfoot, which he renamed 'Mary Port' in honour of his wife. More than one hundred rectangular plots in the town were sold between 1749 and 1769, almost half of the sales being in the years 1752 to 1754. Nearly all the purchasers were local. By the mid-1770s Maryport contained about 340 families and the port was home to 70-80 vessels, engaged principally in shipping coal to Ireland and the Isle of Man, but also in trading with the Baltic. Unlike Whitehaven, Maryport was not heavily involved in trade with North America. An iron furnace, established in 1754 on Senhouse's property beside the River Ellen by a consortium of Whitehaven merchants, provided for a secondary trade to supplement the export of coal. By the time of Senhouse's death, the port and town at Maryport yielded an annual return of over $150, out of a total rental income of over $600. 
Senhouse retained a close personal interest in Maryport, playing the leading role in founding the town's church, St Mary's, which was consecrated in 1763. Although he and his family continued to worship at the parish church at Crosscanonby, he bore most of the expense of establishing the new church, providing all the stone for the building and the churchyard wall, paying for the furnishings, and negotiating a contribution to the curate's salary from the governors of Queen Anne's bounty. Patronage of the church was vested in Senhouse and his successors and a measure of independence from the mother church at Crosscanonby was achieved in 1766, when the churchwardens agreed no longer to collect contributions for communion wine from the inhabitants of Maryport. 
Senhouse also took an active part in developing the coalmining industry on which his new port depended. In 1736 his father had agreed with Sir James Lowther of Whitehaven to refrain from mining, but Senhouse obtained a relaxation of that constraint and, in 1755, took a lease of Broughton colliery with his neighbour, John Christian of Ewanrigg, and four other partners, a move which helped to prevent Lowther from securing a monopoly over the west Cumberland coal trade. A waggonway, built across Senhouse's estate, carried coals from Broughton to the harbour at Maryport. 
Humphrey Senhouse died at Bath in late June or early July 1770 and was buried in the family vault at Crosscanonby church on 26 July. The words on his monument in Maryport church, written by one of his sons, record his foremost achievement: 'the town of Maryport founded and flourishing through his auspicious patronage'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50738


Wilkinson, Jeannette Gaury (1841-1886), trade unionist and suffragist, was born on 19 March 1841 at 40 Long Lane, Bermondsey, London, the daughter of George Henry Wilkinson, a foreman clerk in a large merchant's warehouse, and his wife Jane ('nee' Lane). She had several brothers, one of whom was blind. Jeannette Wilkinson was educated at a private school in Queen Street, City of London, and from the age of seventeen earned her own living as an upholsteress. 
Jeannette Wilkinson was determined to improve her education and attended evening classes at the Birkbeck Institute where she studied economics, history, and English literature. It was here that she became close friends with one of the tutors, J. H. Levy, who recalled that she was hampered in her scholastic achievements by poor handwriting which resulted from years of heavy upholstery work, in particular carpet sewing. He 'could not but admire the patience with which she fought against the stiffness her former occupation had induced in the joints of her fingers' ('Women's Union Journal', 83). Levy helped her to improve her handwriting and a string of prizes followed, including first prize of the Society of Arts for political economy in 1873. 
In 1875 Jeannette Wilkinson became involved in the women's trade union movement. She was elected as secretary of the London Upholsteresses' Society which was affiliated to the Women's Protective and Provident League, an organization formed by Emma Paterson in 1874 to promote female trade unionism. Jeannette Wilkinson attended the Trades Union Congress nine times as a delegate from the society. Her speeches demonstrated a detailed, first-hand knowledge of women's work conditions and were well received, although her opposition to protective legislation for women, a view shared by other feminists within the league, was not acceptable to the majority of male delegates. 
Jeannette Wilkinson had always been determined to be a schoolteacher. After passing the queen's scholar examination of the education department at Birkbeck she was helped by Helen Taylor, a member of the London school board, to gain a position as an assistant mistress. In 1876 she became a certificated teacher and a year later obtained employment in the Westcott Street board school at Southwark. Two years of teaching in a very poor neighbourhood, however, took its toll of Jeannette Wilkinson's health and she left Westcott Street to take up other teaching posts. These were only short-lived and by 1882 she was thinking of returning to her old trade when J. H. Levy found her a position as a clerk with the Vigilance Association for the Defence of Personal Rights. A secularist in religion and a radical individualist in politics, Jeannette Wilkinson agreed with the aims of the association, but in Levy's opinion she was not a very good clerk. 
It was fortunate, therefore, that an opportunity soon arose for Jeannette Wilkinson to take up employment with the women's suffrage movement. She had long taken an interest in women's emancipation and the claim for the vote. In 1884 she was asked to support a resolution in favour of women's suffrage at a meeting at St James's Hall. She was an impressive speaker, 'saying what she wanted to say in short, pithy sentences, and never lulling her audience to sleep with musical platitudes. Every sentence was needed in the chain of logical argument' (Orme, 389-90). On the strength of her speaking skills Jeannette Wilkinson was asked to become an organizing secretary and lecturer for the Bristol Society for Women's Suffrage where she worked closely with the secretary, Helen Blackburn. Early in 1885 she was transferred to London and helped to organize meetings in the area for the National Society for Women's Suffrage. In the same year she moved an amendment at the Trades Union Congress which called for the direct representation of women in parliament. Despite bitter opposition from a small group of delegates the amendment was supported by a majority of seventy to ten. 
Jeannette Wilkinson firmly believed that women should have opinions on all the political questions of the day and her support for home rule for Ireland led her to join her local Liberal Association in 1885. She was elected to the executive council and during the general election campaign addressed numerous meetings in favour of Liberal candidates. During this period she continued to be active in the trade union movement, attending meetings of the Women's Trade Council, the Upholsteresses' Society, and the committee of the Women's Protective and Provident League. She also found time to write letters and short pieces for the 'Women's Union Journal' and to complete an article for the 'Charity Organisation Review' entitled 'The inspection of workshops in London'. 
Jeannette Wilkinson was one of a small minority of working-class women who became active as organizers and speakers in the trade union movement in the 1870s and 1880s and who also held strong feminist beliefs. As Helen Blackburn noted: 'instances of working men who have forged their way, through hard study, high up the ladder of achievement are frequent... but the instances in which women have done so are comparatively rare. Jeannette Gaury Wilkinson was one of these... Truly of her it might be said, 'She loved her fellow- 'women''. (Blackburn, 166)' Jeannette Wilkinson was always earnest in promoting reforms, but was judicious in her treatment of opponents who, even when they disagreed with her views, appreciated the accuracy of her statements and her open-mindedness. 'Her manner was pleasant and cheery at all times. Her small body never seemed strong enough for the tasks she set it to do, but the bright eye and determined mouth showed where the strength came from to supply physical deficiencies. (Orme, 389)' Ill health cut short Jeannette Wilkinson's political and trade union activities. She died after a severe attack of asthmatic bronchitis on 22 August 1886 at 115 Westmoreland Road, Walworth, London, the home she shared with her brother and his wife. She was buried in Forest Hill cemetery, London, on 27 August. A memorial fund was established by members of the women's suffrage movement to pay for a marble slab to mark her grave and to provide assistance for the education of a niece. 


@@@@@


doc= 50739


Tait, Catharine (1819-1878), philanthropist, was born on 9 December 1819 at Elmdon, near Rugby, Warwickshire, the youngest daughter of Anna Maria and William Spooner (1778?-1857), rector of Elmdon and archdeacon of Coventry. Catharine Spooner was baptized by her father on 12 December 1819. Described as enthusiastic and earnest in her youth, she was brought up in the quiet surroundings of a country environment with few friends beyond her family circle. She was always to have a special love of the countryside. She read widely in English literature, history, and religion, and began to care for the sick and aged of the area. Evangelical by upbringing and religious habit, she was greatly influenced by her brother-in-law's Tractarianism, and retained a love of ceremonial and a sympathy for high-church devotion. In the first flush of her Tractarian commitment she heard that Archibald Campbell Tait (1811-1882), one of the Oxford tutors who had protested against Newman's 'Tract 90', had applied for the headmastership of Rugby School, and expressed the hope that he would not succeed. 
Despite this apparent theological incompatibility, on 22 June 1843 Catharine Spooner married Tait, who had been appointed headmaster in 1842. Their relationship was extremely close and their religious life together mutually supportive. At Rugby Catharine Tait got to know the boys, helped her husband with his history lessons, learned German, ministered to the poor in the town, and established a school for girls. She also supervised the school accounts, demonstrating considerable business acumen in a role which she was to continue to fulfil in all her husband's subsequent posts, as well as in her own philanthropic work. Her life was very busy, but, according to her husband, 'She used to say that the Rugby time was the happiest of her life' (Benham, 30). 
In 1849 Tait was appointed dean of Carlisle. In Carlisle Catharine Tait visited the local workhouse, taught in the school, and invited the poor to the deanery. The stay at Carlisle was marked by personal tragedy. In the spring of 1856 five daughters died from scarlet fever within six weeks; a son and daughter survived. (Two daughters were born later.) This was a devastating series of blows, but she found the strength to accept it as God's will even as she was going through the experience. She wrote a 139-page memorial account of the deaths of her daughters, intended originally for her family and friends. This was published at her request after her death. It was one of the most widely read Victorian books of consolation literature, and many bereaved parents wrote in gratitude to her widowed husband, one commenting on the way in which 'your sainted wife is fulfilling so precious a 'ministry of consolation' still on earth' (W. H. Jellie to A. C. Tait, 27 Sept 1881; Jalland, 141-2). 
On moving to London in late 1856, when Tait was appointed bishop, Catharine Tait adapted her philanthropic and church work to the metropolitan context. She was particularly involved in the parishes of St James's and Fulham, although she tried to meet as many as possible of the London clergy. A wide range of clergy, statesmen, literary figures, and charity workers, together with their children, attended her summer garden parties at Fulham Palace. She read to people at workhouses and visited almshouses and hospitals. She was instrumental in the erection of a penitentiary, St James's House, on part of the episcopal estate at Fulham. Recognizing the need to systematize the organization of women's charitable work, she established the Ladies' Diocesan Association to bring together women involved in Christian social work. The organization gave women, including those of status and influence, an opportunity to work among the sick, outcast, and lonely in hospitals, penitentiaries, and workhouses. During the 1866 cholera epidemic she visited hospitals and provided temporary shelter for the victims, and also worked with Catherine Gladstone (1812-1900) and Catherine Marsh (1818-1912) to set up homes for the orphans of the epidemic. She established St Peter's Orphanage for the girls, based for five years at Fulham and then in a larger house built by her on of the Isle of Thanet, raising all the necessary funds herself. To the latter she added a convalescent home for women and children. In order to secure the future of the orphanage, she set up a scheme of Children's Associates, an organization of upper-class women who each contributed towards the maintenance of an individual orphan while at the orphanage, thereafter continuing to be a personal mentor to the child in later life. She herself visited the orphanage as often as possible, and the sisters of St Peter's, Kilburn, helped to run it. The girls were taught by a qualified schoolteacher and were also trained in domestic service; some later went into nursing or schoolteaching. After 1869, when her husband became archbishop of Canterbury, Catharine Tait continued to work on these projects, as well as ministering to the poor in Lambeth: she sent them gifts of food, contributed funds to charities, and held a yearly garden party for them. 
Another family tragedy struck in 1878, when the Taits' only son, the Revd Craufurd Tait, died on 29 May after a protracted illness. Catharine Tait never really recovered from the shock of losing her beloved son and companion, to whom she was especially devoted. She visited Scotland with her husband and three daughters to regain her health, but she suffered a bilious attack and died a week later, on 1 December 1878, in Great Stuart Street, Edinburgh, with her husband at her bedside. She was buried at Addington parish church, Surrey, on 7 December. Her husband pronounced the benediction. In his memoirs Archbishop Tait wrote, 'Thus ended her earthly life of fifty-nine years -- refreshed from her childhood onwards, through the grace of God, by a wellspring of joy within, which poured forth in acts of kindliness to all whom she could reach' (Benham, 196). 
Catharine Tait believed that wealth and influence carried responsibilities, and as the wife of a prominent churchman she used her position to support and to organize more effectively a traditional style of philanthropic work among the less fortunate and orphans. An attractive woman of great charm, she clearly inspired devotion, and was memorialized in reverential tones. Immediately following her death a resolution from the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge praised her valuable contributions to the church, and she was later included in J. Johnson's 'Noble Women of our Time' (1882). 


@@@@@


doc= 50740


Clugston, Beatrice (1827-1888), philanthropist, was born in Barony parish, Glasgow, on 19 September 1827, the eldest of five children of John Clugston and his wife, Mary Mackenzie. John Clugston was apparently by profession an accountant but he was also the owner of the firm John Clugston & Co. (Bleachers) of Avonbank, Larkhall, south-east of Glasgow. 
Beatrice Clugston became the doyenne of Glasgow philanthropists. Her achievement as a supporter of charities and a fund-raiser was the more remarkable because she was not from a wealthy family: she wrote that she had spent the first nine years of her life 'in the midst of the working classes and when too young to understand sorrow herself, her heart was trained to sympathy by parents whose delight it was to minister to the poor and afflicted' (Morrison, 83). From these early years she seems to have derived a deep spring of sympathy for the poor. Possibly by 1860 Beatrice Clugston, resident in Glasgow again after the death of her father, at the age of thirty-two started her 'professional' career as a prison visitor. This work taught her the importance of convalescence for those who were recovering from illness and who, after discharge from hospital, had no option but to return to the inner wynds and closes of Glasgow. 
Miss Clugston was the major sponsor of the Glasgow Convalescent Home (originally opened in Bothwell in 1866, but transferred to new premises in Lenzie in 1873), the Scottish National Institution for the Relief of Incurables (at Broomhill and Lanfine hospitals, Kirkintilloch, opened in 1876), and Dunoon Convalescent Home (opened in 1869). Other charities with which she was associated, and for which she raised money, included Lochburn House (the Glasgow Magdalene Institution, in Maryhill), the Dorcas Society of the Glasgow Royal Infirmary (1864), the Samaritan Society of the Western Infirmary, and the Sick Children's Hospital, Glasgow. 
Of all her contemporaries, Beatrice Clugston was the one who could marshal the aristocracy to her cause and persuade them to patronize the grandest of grand bazaars held in aid of her various charities. In the City Hall, Glasgow, on 1-4 November 1871, at the pre-Christmas bazaar in aid of the West of Scotland Convalescent Homes, Dunoon, Miss Clugston had no less than thirty-one patrons, headed by Princess Louise, Queen Victoria's daughter, who had married the marquess of Lorne, the heir to the duke of Argyll. Of the patrons, more than twenty were titled; they included the duke and duchess of Argyll and the duke and duchess of Roxburghe. 
In 1876 Miss Clugston held a bazaar in the Kibble Palace which raised $14,000; with further donations this was increased to $24,000, and enabled the Broomhill estate, Kirkintilloch, to be bought. The success of her fund-raising enabled her to launch bigger schemes which gave Glasgow and the west of Scotland a range of large-scale facilities which were second to none. 
Beatrice Clugston impoverished herself by her charitable projects: in 1876 she had no option but to accept a gift of money, and later friends provided her with an annuity. She moved, with her mother, to Lenzie (which was convenient for the Incurables Home at Kirkintilloch) in her later years. Her mother was, she said, pleased with the removal out of Glasgow, for in Glasgow 'her daughter Beatrice was constantly bringing in the halt, the lame, and the blind to be fed and clothed with the consequence that her cupboards were kept bare and her carpets lasted no time' (Morrison, 84). 
Beatrice Clugston, who never married, died suddenly, on holiday, intestate, on 5 June 1888, at 3 Arran Place, Ardrossan, Ayrshire, and was buried in the Auld Aisle cemetery, Kirkintilloch, where an elaborate tombstone bears a bas-relief depicting charity, mercy, and humility. The legend 'Dunoon Homes, Glasgow Convalescent Home and Broomhill Home' is carved around the edge of the memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 50741


Paterson, Mary Muirhead (1864-1941), factory inspector and philanthropist, was born in Glasgow on 23 June 1864, the daughter of Gavin and Annie Paterson. Her father was an affluent businessman; her mother came from a well-known Glasgow family, the Muirheads. Mary Paterson was described as having a gracious personality and great charm. She received her early education at Glasgow Ladies' College; later she was one of the first women students at Queen Margaret College, Glasgow, although the college did not at that time award degrees to women. She had an early and long-standing interest in industrial employment, informing herself of conditions in Scotland, Canada, and the United States of America. While undertaking charitable work in Scotland she gained much knowledge of working-class women's working conditions. 
In 1893 Mary Paterson was appointed one of the first two female factory inspectors, together with May Tennant, and she was, therefore, one of the first women to exercise any real authority in industry or power over employers. Her appointment was the direct result of a recommendation of the royal commission on labour (1891-3) for the appointment of women factory inspectors; it was indirectly the result of years of campaigning among trade unionists for the appointment of (working-class) women inspectors, and by middle-class women for greater employment opportunities. In some ways Mary Paterson was pioneering a new kind of work for middle-class women, for -- unlike many of the openings for women -- factory inspection had no religious links, it was paid, it could not be seen as an extension of domestic work, and it did not fit in with Victorian notions of feminine respectability. There was, however, a link with women's philanthropic interest in the industrial working class. From the outset she drew attention in her reports, extracts of which were published annually, to the appalling conditions and long hours she unearthed in her investigations. Enormous praise was heaped on Paterson and the other early women inspectors, although what they were able to achieve in practice was severely limited; they dealt with the working conditions of all women and girls who came under the 'Factory and Workshop Acts'. At first she was based in Glasgow and travelled around Scotland and the north of England undertaking inspections. In 1903 she was promoted to senior lady inspector and in 1908 to deputy principal lady inspector, with a transfer to London. 
In 1912, as a result of the 1911 'National Insurance Act', Paterson became one of the first national health insurance commissioners for Scotland, a post she held until 1919. Just as she had played a pioneering role in women's entry into the factory inspectorate, so too she now took on a newly created administrative role. Based in Edinburgh, she became widely known throughout Scotland as a progressively minded official, who was especially keen to bring women, most of whom were excluded from national health insurance, into the scheme. National health insurance commissioners formed a chain linking central government with local insurance committees and approved societies, to which they distributed money to meet insurance claims. Mary Paterson was well placed to play this bridging role: she was well known in influential London policy-making circles and she made a point of developing close contacts across Scotland. In 1920 she was appointed a CBE. 
After her retirement Mary Paterson was heavily involved in philanthropic and civic activities. She again acted as a bridge, this time a symbolic one, between those women active in associational life, who in the nineteenth century and early twentieth century had been largely preoccupied with philanthropic work and local civic life, and a growing body of middle-class professional women, many of whose occupations grew out of this earlier voluntary tradition; the two now continued alongside one another. In the course of the 1920s and 1930s Paterson was variously a JP in Edinburgh, vice-chair of the Scottish Justices and Magistrates Association, chair of the District Nursing Association, honorary member of the British Federation of University Women, and a member of both the League of Nations Union and the Edinburgh Citizens' Association. In her later years she was interested in hospital work and became honorary secretary of the Edinburgh Hospital for Women and Children and a supporter of the Elsie Inglis Maternity Hospital in Edinburgh. She was a well-known speaker in various societies in Glasgow and Edinburgh. Mary Paterson died unmarried on 10 June 1941 at her home in Craufurd, Lasswade, Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 50742


Hodgkinson, William (1661/2-1731), merchant and landowner, was probably born at Overton in the parish of Ashover, Derbyshire, where he was baptized on 2 April 1662; he was the second son of George Hodgkinson (died 1692) of Overton and his wife, Anne. George Hodgkinson's ancestor Richard Hodgkinson had acquired Overton in 1556, although it was later sold, and George himself repurchased the estate in 1641. From at least the mid-sixteenth century, the Hodgkinsons had established themselves in Ashover as parish gentry. Like virtually every north Derbyshire family of the same class in this period, they were involved in the lead trade, sending shipments from Hull (where George Hodgkinson lived for a time) both to London and directly overseas, chiefly to Amsterdam. In common with most Hull merchants, the Hodgkinsons also engaged in trade with Baltic countries, importing iron and, to a lesser extent, tar, flax, timber, and hemp from Sweden, to which they exported small quantities of woollen goods. 
William Hodgkinson is unusual in that, alone of provincial Baltic merchants of his generation, a large proportion of his accounts survive, making it possible to amplify through a case study what is known in general about Hull's overseas trade. Fragmentary records exist from 1678, when George Hodgkinson was living in Hull, but the bulk of the material begins in 1684, when William, aged twenty-two, was in Stockholm, working as his father's factor, a conventional training for merchants' sons. He was to remain there until 1689, and in 1687, the year for which his Swedish accounts are best preserved, he shipped approximately 570 tons of bar iron to Hull on behalf of some twenty merchants, including his father and younger brother Obadiah (1666-1732). He also dealt on a smaller scale in other Baltic goods. 
On his return to England, William Hodgkinson lived at Hull for about a year but he moved to Overton at the start of 1691. His father, whose heir he became on the death of his elder brother, George, in 1687, died in June 1692. Shortly afterwards William almost completely rebuilt Overton, which remained his home for the rest of his life. His accounts show that he continued to trade through Hull, exporting lead and importing iron and other commodities from Sweden. Most of the iron was consigned to Hull merchants for distribution throughout the adjoining region, but Hodgkinson sold small quantities direct to blacksmiths and nailers in Ashover and the surrounding district. Like most Derbyshire lead merchants, he also had interests in the mining and smelting of lead in several local parishes. Although it cannot be demonstrated from his accounts, William evidently continued his father's practice of acquiring land adjoining Overton and by the beginning of the eighteenth century the Hodgkinsons were probably the most substantial of the various minor gentry families resident in Ashover. They did not appear at Sir William Dugdale's visitation of Derbyshire in 1662, but they were using arms by 1687, if not before. In 1704 William Hodgkinson built and endowed a school at Ashover. 
Hodgkinson was married to Elizabeth (died 1732), the daughter of Robert Ferne of Bonsall, Derbyshire. They had been married for more than thirty (possibly forty) years when he died on 6 December 1731, probably at Overton, his wife surviving him. Although in his will he asked merely to be buried in the churchyard at Ashover, he was interred on 9 December in the church itself, where a monument describes him as one who was 'bred a merchant and added considerably to his paternal estate by his industry and frugality, virtues which he practised himself and greatly encouraged in others'. Subject to his wife's life interest, he left his whole estate, including lead mines as well as land, to his grandson William (1719-1761), the second son of his daughter and sole heir, Ann (died 1730). In 1714 Ann had married Joseph Banks (died 1741) of Revesby Abbey, Lincolnshire. Under the terms of the bequest, William Banks took the additional surname Hodgkinson, but he gave up both surname and Overton on inheriting Revesby Abbey in 1741. Overton then passed to his younger brother Robert (died 1792), who also took the Hodgkinson name. On Robert's death Overton was inherited by William's son, the explorer and naturalist Sir Joseph Banks (1743-1820). 


@@@@@


doc= 50743


Smyly, Ellen (1815-1901), philanthropist, was probably born in Dublin, the third daughter of Matthew Franks of Merrion Square, Dublin, and Jerpoint Hill, Thomastown, co. Kilkenny. Little is known of her early life. In 1834 she married Josiah Smyly (1804-1864), a surgeon at the Meath Hospital in Dublin and later vice-president of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. The couple had twelve children, four sons, including Philip Crampton Smyly, and eight daughters, of whom two died in infancy. 
Smyly is best known for her philanthropic work with children. When she was seventeen she engaged in home and hospital visitation of the poor in Dublin, inspired by religious idealism. Her granddaughter later claimed that Smyly 'seemed to hear a voice insistently saying to her 'Take these children and nurse them for Me'' (Smyly, 4). She opened her first 'Bible' school in a disused forge in Harmony Row, near Grand Canal Street, about 1850. Smyly was active at a time when the evangelical missionary movement had been revitalized in Ireland, particularly in Dublin, and she became a close friend of Alexander Dallas, founder of the Irish Church Missions. The Irish Church Missions, which aimed to 'communicate the gospel to the Roman Catholics and Converts of Ireland', was a highly organized society which claimed fifty-one local committees in Ireland by 1854. Proselytizing activities made the mission controversial and aroused the ire of Catholics, both clerical and lay. Nevertheless, it was in conjunction with Dallas that Smyly began her day schools in Dublin, which operated in Townsend Street, Grand Canal Street, The Coombe, Lurgan Street, and Luke Street. Each school had its own committee but the same members sat on several of the committees. Smyly and her daughters Ellen, Annie, and Harriet taught in the schools, and, in order to raise money for them, Smyly addressed meetings all over England and Ireland. She also wrote numerous letters and appeals which appeared in newspapers. Thomas Barnardo (1845-1905) became a close friend and was very much influenced by Smyly's work, going on to establish a chain of homes for destitute children in England from 1870. 
Once the day schools had been established Smyly opened residential homes in the same areas of Dublin. Working closely with the Irish Church Missions she targeted the very poorest Catholics. She opened an orphanage called the Bird's Nest in 1859 in Kingstown. Here the children were supported from public subscriptions but the teachers were paid by the Irish Church Missions. Smyly also founded the magazine 'Erin's Hope', which was published monthly. She experienced considerable opposition to her enterprises from the Catholic community, and very public battles for 'the souls of children' raged between Catholic and protestant from the pulpits, through the press, and on the street. Ellen Smyly died on 16 May 1901 at her home, 8 Merrion Square, Dublin. She left seven homes and four day schools which were carried on by members of her family. 


@@@@@


doc= 50744


Macpherson, Annie Parlane (1825-1904), promoter of child emigration, was born on 2 June 1825 in Campsie, by Milton, Stirlingshire, and baptized there on 26 June 1825, the eldest of the seven children of James Macpherson (died 1851), a shoemaker, teacher, and member of the Society of Friends, and his wife, Helen Edwards. She was educated in Glasgow and trained in Froebel's educational methods at the Home and Colonial Training College, London. When her father was appointed superintendent of the Ockham Industrial Schools, Surrey, she acted as his secretary. At the age of nineteen she experienced a religious conversion, possibly connected to the tragic death of her fiance. Influenced by the revivalist Reginald Radcliffe, she was inspired to undertake evangelical work among the coprolite diggers in Eversden, Cambridgeshire, where she lived from 1858. In 1865 she moved to London. Here she met Clara Lowe and Lady Rowley, who introduced her to mission work in the East End among the young female matchbox makers, whose plight she highlighted in 'The Little Matchbox-Makers' (1866). Following an invitation from the Society of Friends to give lectures at the Bedford Institute, she included boys in her rescue mission. She opened a series of 'Revival Homes', named after the evangelical newspaper whose readers supported them, and in 1868 the Home of Industry, at 60 Commercial Street, was acquired to offer work, food and shelter, and basic education and religious instruction. 
By 1869 Annie Macpherson had become convinced that emigration was the answer to chronic unemployment, and the Home of Industry assisted 500 people to emigrate to Canada. On a visit to the United States in 1866 she had met charity workers who assisted destitute New York children to move out west, and she adopted a similar plan to send children to homes in rural Canada, a project she outlined in 'The Christian'. Sufficient funds were raised for 100 boys to leave for Canada in May 1870. They were accompanied by Annie Macpherson and by Ellen Bilborough, who remained in charge of the Canadian home established at Marchmont, Belleville, Ontario. In 1871 further homes were opened in Ontario at Galt and Knowlton. 
Annie Macpherson's homes acted as distributing homes for several other charities, including those of Dr Thomas Barnardo, who had worked with the children at the Home of Industry in its earliest years, and William Quarrier, whom she encouraged to open children's homes in Scotland. When the emigration of poor-law children was approved in 1871 she was also invited by boards of guardians to place pauper children. By 1893, 5730 boys and girls had emigrated through her homes. 
Pauper emigration was suspended in 1875 following a critical report by Andrew Doyle to the Local Government Board. It revealed shortcomings in the training and supervision of the children placed by Annie Macpherson and Maria Rye, another important figure involved in the emigration of children. Their organizations operated in parallel, but their approach was very different and they never co-operated. Maria Rye had the ear of establishment figures and appealed for funds through 'The Times'; Annie Macpherson believed in the power of prayer and received donations in response to letters and reports published in 'The Christian'. Of the two, Annie Macpherson was the less controversial figure, and her operation was larger, more efficient, and more sympathetic to the children in her care. Although she was less well known in her day, Annie Macpherson's contribution to the history of juvenile emigration was arguably more influential. 
An important element of Annie Macpherson's evangelical mission was the training of young Christian workers who helped at the Home of Industry and preached in the East End on Sundays. She established the Bridge of Hope refuge for women, was involved in many other missions, and for more than twenty-five years held a weekly sewing meeting for poor widows. Her sisters were closely involved in her work; Rachel Merry and her family were associated with the Canadian homes, and Louisa Birt ran the Liverpool Sheltering Home. The Macpherson homes were ultimately absorbed into Dr Barnardo's. 
Annie Macpherson was a good-looking, warm-hearted woman with a magnetic personality and the power to inspire others. She also 'had her sting and used it, not always wisely, and sometimes too well' (Lowe, 235). She retired in 1902 to Hove, Sussex, where she died at her home, 9 Sackville Road, on 27 November 1904 from bronchitis. A service was held at the Home of Industry, 29 Bethnal Green Road, and she was buried on 3 December 1904 in the City of London cemetery, Ilford, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 50746


Georgiana Fanny Shipley Daniell (1836-1894), philanthropist, born on 20 May 1836 in India, was sent to a school in Brighton. Distressed by the sight of so many vagrants (reportedly 14,000 a year) passing through Rugby, Louisa Daniell established missions for the destitute in the neighbourhood. Over five years she established five village missions, often with financial endowments from local noblemen: reading rooms were opened, religious tracts distributed, and 'Bible' reading and sewing classes held. Her basic aims were to save souls and counteract the spread of Roman Catholicism. 


@@@@@


doc= 50747


Garnett, Elizabeth (1839-1921), missionary to navvies and author, was born on 23 September 1839 in Otley, Yorkshire. The first and apparently only child of Joshua Hart, vicar of Otley from 1837 until his death in 1867, and his wife, Hannah, she was educated at home. A strong Anglican as a result, she claimed that her interest in the navvies began when her father consecrated a memorial to those killed while building the nearby Bramhope railway tunnel. She married an Anglican clergyman, Charles Garnett (1834-1862), the son of Peter Garnett, paper manufacturer in Otley, on 13 November 1861, but he died within a year of the marriage, on 13 October 1862, apparently while the couple were still on their honeymoon. 
Nearly ten years later Garnett found a 'new vista of interest in a lonely life' (Garnett, 'Navvy Mission Society', 94) after a friend took her to see the navvy settlement at Lindley Wood, in Wharfedale, a few miles above Otley, where a reservoir was being built for the city of Leeds. After running a Sunday school for navvy lads there for nearly a year, Garnett moved to the settlement, despite family opposition. In 1874 Lewis Moule Evans, newly appointed vicar of nearby Leathley, also began missionary work at Lindley Wood. The Christian Excavators' Union (popularly known as the Navvies' Mission) was established in November 1877 after Evans, along with the eight teachers of the Navvy Sunday School, including Garnett, sent out some 400 letters of appeal to high-placed Anglicans throughout the nation. As a result Evans is recorded on his grave in Leathley parish churchyard as being the union's founder, but Garnett must be considered its co-founder, both because of her earlier work and because it was the royalties from her first publication, a 'navvy novel' entitled 'Little Rainbow' (1877), that provided the financial support for this appeal. Through her missionary work, a further eight navvy novels, and her lively reports on the mission in 'Our Navvies', 'Women's Mission', and the 'Quarterly Letter to the Navvies', which she edited from 1878 until 1917, Elizabeth Garnett was the spirit of the union from Evans's premature death in 1878 until her own in 1921. 
While Garnett held no official role within the union save that of a lady section head, her zeal brought much support to it. Commencing with a membership of thirty-seven, including seven navvies, in 1877, the union boasted a total of 700 supporters by 1917. Of course its first aim was that of evangelizing the navvies and their families. This was accomplished not just through the provision of some thirty-nine mission rooms and missionaries, these often being navvies who had come to faith through the union, but in the day and night schools and libraries which the union established in these isolated settlements. It also introduced various welfare measures such as sick clubs and savings banks, while harsh winters prompted it to provide soup kitchens, first for navvy children, then for the families, and, during one outbreak of smallpox, a hospital and attendant nurse. Few navvies may have become Christians through all this work, but the union did make a significant improvement in navvies' working and living conditions and in their moral outlook. 
It was in the union's subsidiary but highly necessary role of gaining publicity and support for its work that Garnett proved most successful. Through her writings she gained a huge audience, some 155,000 copies of the 'Letter' being distributed during every quarter of 1904 when the publication was at its height. More significantly, her readers gained a sympathy for the navvies, and a 'strong-jawed and strong-willed little woman' (Sullivan, 204) accused of possessing a 'mingy sanctity' by Sullivan found a great deal of love among 'her navvy family'. Garnett died at 6 Canning Road, Croydon, Surrey, on 22 March 1921. A memorial was erected in her honour in Ripon Cathedral in 1926. 


@@@@@


doc= 50748


Drakoules, Alice Marie (c.1850-1933), humanitarian and campaigner for animal welfare, was born near Brussels, the daughter of Henry Lambe. In 1876 she married William Burrows Lewis ('b'. 1820/21), the managing director of the Union Assurance Company. They adopted a daughter. After Lewis's death, on 9 October 1907 she married Platon Eustathios Drakoules ('b'. 1857/8), a journalist, sociologist, and former member of the Greek parliament. Like her, he lived his life according to humanitarian principles, and was a founder of the Greek Anti-Carnivore Society. 
Alice Drakoules was a lifelong humanitarian, vegetarian, and campaigner for animals. As Mrs Lewis in 1887 in Weybridge in Surrey she founded the Band of Mercy, the children's group within the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA). In 1891 her London home by Regent's Park became a meeting place for representatives of intellectual and spiritual movements. She played a key role in establishing the Humanitarian League, founded by Henry Salt, to 'prevent the perpetration of cruelty and wrong -- to redress the suffering, as far as is possible, of all sentient life' (Henry Salt, 'Humanitarianism', 1893, 15). She hosted its inaugural meeting in her fashionable London home and was treasurer of the league at its inception and at its demise in 1919. Although she was known primarily neither for her writing nor for her public eloquence she co-ordinated the work of the league, and was a member of its executive committee for most of its history. When former members of the Humanitarian League regrouped in the 1920s to organize the League for the Prohibition of Cruel Sports (which still exists as the League against Cruel Sports) she was one of its earliest supporters. 
Alice Drakoules was also a founder member of the executive council of the Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society, initiated by Louise Lind af Hageby in 1906 to campaign against all forms of cruelty to animals, and remained a member until her death nearly thirty years later. According to her colleague Nina, duchess of Hamilton, in her twenty-seven years of service she scarcely missed a meeting. She was particularly active in the society's campaigns for humane slaughter and the establishment of municipal slaughterhouses, and for legislation to prohibit the use of performing animals. 
Alice Drakoules was known for her unswerving commitment to principled, but often unpopular, causes. Her circle of friends and acquaintances included the leading animal rights' activists of her day and the spiritualists Edward Maitland and Anna Kingsford. She subsequently joined the circle of Nina, duchess of Hamilton, and Louise Lind af Hageby with whom she campaigned for many years. 
Through her behind the scenes work and steady influence Alice Drakoules was seen as a 'spiritual mother' of the humanitarian movement. She died on 15 January 1933 at her London home, 14 Park Square East, Regent's Park. Four years after her death her friends erected an appropriate memorial to her in St John's Wood churchyard, near where she had lived most of her life. As the inscription on it tells, she was 'for forty years a devoted and generous worker in London for animal welfare' (memorial inscription, St John's Wood churchyard gardens). The bird-bath memorial depicts a range of animals -- fox, stag, squirrel, horse, bird, cat, dog, and heron -- which appropriately epitomizes her concern for the broad spectrum of animals and her opposition to all forms of hunting and experimentation on animals. Alice Drakoules is less well known than many of her Humanitarian League colleagues, but the work and influence of the organization owed much to her commitment and unflinching support. 


@@@@@


doc= 50749


Loat, Lily (1879/80-1958), anti-vaccination activist, was the daughter of John Loat. Her ancestors were Dutch weavers who moved to London at some time in the seventeenth century; Loats Road in Clapham Park, London, is named after them. Lily Loat attended Tiffin Girls' School in Surrey and became head pupil. The exact dates of her school attendance are unknown, but she joined the staff of the National Anti-Vaccination League in London shortly after leaving, in January 1898. The league had been formed two years before; the secretary answered an advertisement placed by Loat's shorthand teacher, and employed her to assist in answering correspondence. Loat did not oppose vaccination when taken on, but was quickly converted to the cause. The secretary resigned in 1908, and Loat was appointed titular secretary in January 1909; in the following month the council unanimously appointed her secretary. 
Loat proceeded to dedicate herself wholeheartedly to the anti-vaccination cause and acquired a vast knowledge of the subject. Besides writing many of the league's pamphlets and leaflets, she edited its journal, the 'Vaccination Inquirer and Health Review', from 1932, and published a small book, 'The Truth about Vaccination and Immunization', in 1951. Her prose was concise, intelligent, and forcefully argued; she did not shrink from criticism but welcomed it, often engaging in correspondence with opponents. In addition to giving speeches at numerous British anti-vaccination meetings throughout her life (and addressing crowds in Hyde Park), she was invited several times to speak at meetings in Europe and America in the 1920s and 1930s. It is not known what caused Loat originally to alter her opinion about vaccination, but she employed a variety of arguments against treatment throughout her career. The most prominent of these were that vaccination caused disease -- either those diseases it intended to prevent, or others -- and that it was unsafe, ineffective, or unnecessary, and that to be forced by law to submit to it violated 'medical freedom'. 
Other objections expressed by Loat reveal her interest in related movements. She became an ardent anti-vivisectionist and animal welfare activist, and frequently condemned the cruelty involved in the production of lymph, and the testing of vaccines and inoculations on animals, in the pages of the league's journal and in speeches to anti-vivisection meetings. She also supported alternative medical treatments, particularly naturopathy; she believed that all illnesses were nature's attempt to rid the body of 'impurities' which had accumulated as a result of heredity, bad habits, or environmental pollution. Hence she advocated sanitation as a way of preventing disease, and credited any statistical decrease in disease to public-health reforms. To her mind, vaccination failed to address the true causes of disease, and so was no defence against it; further, vaccination was offensive because it introduced impurities into a healthy body. Loat also opposed war, and wrote in 1932 that vaccination, vivisection, and war were inspired by the same 'motives'. 
Loat was indefatigable; memoirists recalled her prodigious memory, intellectual abilities, and devotion to the cause. She was also remembered for her warm personality and friendliness. She was in effect the public voice of the movement: a contemporary explained that 'when one thought of the Anti-Vaccination cause the name of Lily Loat automatically arose in one's mind' (Beddow-Bayly). She never married, and remained secretary of the league and editor of its journal until her death in 1958, continuing to work even when hospitalized by her last illness. Indeed, the centrality of Loat's role was such that a search for a replacement proved fruitless, which was said to have caused her great distress. She died in St Philip's Hospital, Westminster, London, on 16 August 1958, aged seventy-eight. The National Anti-Vaccination League published the last issue of its journal in the autumn of 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 50752


Phillips, Eliza (1822/3-1916), a founder of the (Royal) Society for the Protection of Birds (SPB), was the daughter of George Barron (1763?-1852). Little is known about her early life apart from a story noted in her only obituary ('Bird Notes and News', 7, 1916, 33-4) that Eliza Barron met Samuel Taylor Coleridge when she was a young girl living in Highgate. However, given this fact and what is known about her through her two marriages and her writings, it can be assumed she was well educated, of strong religious sensibilities, and reasonably well connected. According to her obituary she had 'a bent of mind perhaps somewhat masculine, and a deep sincerity of purpose' (ibid.). On 11 November 1847 she married Robert Montgomery Martin (1800x02-1868), the author, whose first marriage was dissolved by act of parliament to facilitate their union. It was after she was widowed in 1868 that her interest in animal welfare began, inspired by witnessing the sufferings of cattle on a sea journey. On 16 May 1874 she married the Revd Edward Phillips (1807-1885), author of a number of books on ecclesiastical matters, with whom she lived at Culverdon Castle, Tunbridge Wells, where she became the central figure in the local branch of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA). After the loss of her second husband in 1885 Mrs Phillips left Kent to live in Croydon and it was there that she made a central contribution to the history of the protection of bird life in Britain. The Society for the Protection of Birds (the prefix Royal was added by charter in 1904) came into being as a national organization in 1891. An amalgam of different groups and societies had been coalescing in the second half of the 1880s, such as the Plumage League and the Selbourne Society for the Protection of Birds, Plants, and Pleasant Places. The central focus of these groups was opposition to the use of bird feathers in ladies' fashions and the plumage trade. The founding of the SPB specifically brought together an anti-plumage group based in Didsbury, Manchester, run by Mrs Robert Williamson and the 'Fur, Fin and Feather' afternoons that were held at Mrs Phillips's house in Croydon. These groups were mainly composed of women, although the natural history writer W. H. Hudson frequently attended Mrs Phillips's afternoon meetings. Mrs Phillips was the first vice-president of the SPB and was also the first to chair the governing committee during the first year after the society was publicly launched in 1893. It was during the early days of the society that Mrs Phillips's work was most influential. She took charge of publications and wrote the annual reports and the society's first leaflet entitled 'Destruction of Ornamental-Plumaged Birds' (1890). The success of this work by both her and others can be measured by the fact that by 1897 the society had a full-time office in London and during that year distributed 50,000 leaflets and over 16,000 letters; by 1898 it had 20,000 members. Mrs Phillips wrote five pamphlets in all, including 'Bird Food in Winter' (1897) which recommended the use of artificial berries for Christmas decorations instead of taking them from the wild. This would also have the added advantage that their manufacture would provide employment for poor women. Her strong religious sensibilities are reflected in her remarks as recorded in the minutes of the society's annual meetings and in a co-authored poem on caring for the animals and birds in God's creation, published in F. H. Suckling's 'Humane Educator' (1891) entitled 'Take courage, all!' Mrs. Phillips's last recorded contribution at the annual meeting of the SPB was in 1902, but she evidently kept up a long correspondence with W. H. Hudson, although only his letters have survived. To a large extent she typifies the articulate and strong-minded middle- and upper-class women who made such an important, and often forgotten, contribution to the animal and bird welfare groups of the later nineteenth century. Eliza Phillips died aged ninety-three at her home, Vaughan House, 22 Morland Road, Croydon, on 18 August 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 50753


Smithies, Thomas Bywater (1817-1883), campaigner for temperance and for animal welfare, was born on 27 August 1817 in York, the second of ten children of James Smithies and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Bywater. Little is known of his parents other than that they were respectable, and were married at St Peter's Church, Leeds, on 23 June 1812 ('IGI'). 
Little is known of Smithies's childhood, beyond that as a toddler he would hand out tracts in church; that he was educated at York and Doncaster; and that he was praised for the 'singular beauty of this handwriting' (Rowe, 7). After working as a clerk for the Yorkshire Fire and Life Insurance Company from the age of sixteen, Smithies moved to London in 1849 to join the Gutta Percha Company as a manager. During the intervening years, however, he had worked tirelessly as a Sunday school teacher, a prison visitor, and education reformer. Later he joined the British Temperance League, and became a total abstainer and an ardent supporter of the Band of Hope. By 1850 he had published his first pamphlet on the consequences of intemperance. In January 1851 he issued the 'Band of Hope Review', beginning his lifelong involvement with illustrated temperance publications. 
On 1 February 1855 Smithies's major publication, the 'British Workman, and Friend of the Sons of Toil', a monthly 'improving' paper, was launched. The 'British Workman' became a highly successful penny paper with a circulation in excess of 200,000 copies per month, recognized for the consistency of its editorial position and the superior quality of its illustrations. The success of the 'British Workman' was almost entirely due to the efforts and personality of Smithies who had, through his philanthropic work in the capital, come into close association with, and earned the respect of, a number of influential individuals and organizations. His circle of friends included Charles Dickens, Angela, Baroness Burdett-Coutts, and Lord Shaftesbury, and his continuing religious work brought him into intimate contact with prominent members of the established church, the Society of Friends, and noted political figures such as Samuel Gurney MP. He was also acquainted with eminent artists and engravers such as John Gilbert, Robert Barnes, Harrison Weir, and John Knight, all of whom contributed significantly to the success of the 'British Workman', some coming out of retirement so to do. Smithies edited the 'Workman' for the next twenty-eight years, along with several other prominent periodicals including the 'Children's Friend' and the 'Family Friend', as well as producing numerous tracts, pamphlets, almanacs, and overseeing the publication of many illustrated books for children. 
On moving to London Smithies intended that his parents should join him, but his father died before he was able to make the move. However his mother, Catherine Smithies (1791-1878), herself a campaigner for animal welfare, did live with him in his house at Earlham Grove, Wood Green, until her death in 1878. Smithies was devoted to his mother and shared her passion for the well-being of animals, directing his energies and resources in support of the Band of Mercy movement in the foundation of which she had been heavily involved, and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA) to whom the rights to the 'Band of Mercy' journal (and other properties) eventually transferred ('Animal World', 1 Sept 1883, 137). 
Smithies never married, but devoted his life to his numerous publications and, through them, to furthering his many causes. Despite his many business commitments, he still managed to find the time and energy to undertake lecture tours; to serve on the first London school board (1870), representing Hackney; and to take an active interest in the Drinking Fountains Association, as well as numerous other issues. Not only did he show concern for affairs within the United Kingdom, but also in the condition of black people in America, and that of the people of Ireland. 
By all accounts Smithies grew up to be a generous and compassionate man, a lifelong Wesleyan Methodist, a total abstainer, and a vigorous campaigner on behalf of the working classes. Pictorial representations depict him as an elderly gentleman with an earnest countenance, sporting a goatee beard and wearing a skull-cap, seated at his desk. He was a totally committed member of the Lord's Day Observance Society, and was known to chastise others for using public transport on a Sunday in order to 'listen to a sermon' (Keefe, 29). He supported the Early Closing Movement. 
On 20 July 1883 at Earlham Grove Thomas Smithies, whose health had for a number of years been gradually deteriorating with a serious heart disease, slipped uncomplainingly into unconsciousness, and died. At his bedside were his five sisters. News of his death was widely announced in the press and at his funeral in Abney Park cemetery on 26 July more than 1000 people gathered to pay their respects. The mourners included officers of the RSPCA and his old friend the earl of Shaftesbury. Smithies left the bulk of his estate to his youngest invalid sister, Elisa, his 'Sunbeam in life' (will); it comprised mainly ownership of periodical titles and properties, but very little money. He had never intended to profit from his business, even though he had opportunities to do so. Such resources as were made available to him through his good fortune, and the blessing of God, he shared with others. An obituarist denominated him 'a gentle guide, a wise counsellor, a true friend' to his fellow man ('British Workman', 346, October 1883, 182). 


@@@@@


doc= 50755


Hunt, Violet Edith Gwynllyn Brooke- (1870-1910), writer, social worker, and political activist, was born at The Court, Tibberton, Gloucestershire, on 18 June 1870, the eldest daughter of Charles George Hunt, afterwards Brooke-Hunt, who had retired as a lieutenant in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Gertrude, 'nee' Price. Brooke-Hunt was educated privately and then attended Cheltenham Ladies' College until the age of seventeen, when she became actively involved in the education of working-class boys and young men. This work began with the formation of a reading-room for the servants and labourers living on the family estate, and the opening of a club for the artisans of Gloucester. After moving to London in the early 1890s, her work was continued among the soldiers of the Knightsbridge barracks. Her pamphlet 'Clubs for Boys and Young Men' (1897), read as a paper to the National Union of Women Workers in October 1896, argued strongly for the importance of clubs in raising 'the bodies and minds and spirits of their members' (Brooke-Hunt, 'Clubs', 6). It envisaged clubs equipping members with practical skills, offering non-compulsory religious instruction, and encouraging participation in athletics and games. The latter was understood to be essential if boys and young men were to be attracted away from the 'degrading' influences of the public house and the music-hall. A devout Anglican, Brooke-Hunt also published a number of homilies during the 1890s, including 'Goals and Tries' (1897) and 'Egerton's Brother' (1899). These fictional works, written in simple, sometimes rather patronizing, language, were published under the auspices of the Society For Promoting Christian Knowledge. They were aimed at young male readers, who were exhorted to self-improvement under the inspiration and example of Christ. 
With the encouragement of Florence Nightingale, Brooke-Hunt set sail for South Africa at the beginning of the South African War (1899-1902) to help care for British soldiers. Beginning in Naauwport, she played an important role in improving the facilities, and in particular the food, of the station hospital and the convalescent camp. She then travelled to Bloemfontein and to Pretoria to set up soldiers' institutes, the latter specifically at the request of Lord Roberts. The institutes proved popular with soldiers, providing cheap meals and entertainments, reading-rooms, and a place to worship on Sundays. Brooke-Hunt was later awarded a war medal and the order of Lady of Grace of St John of Jerusalem for her services in South Africa. 
Brooke-Hunt returned to Britain in time to organize the Colonial Troops Club at the coronation of Edward VII in August 1902. She then immersed herself in the organization of various extra-parliamentary associations, including the Union Jack Club, the Navy League, and the Tariff Reform League. Her role as secretary of the Women's Unionist and Tariff Reform Association established her as one of the more prominent Edwardian female political activists. Displaying formidable energy and organizational zeal, Brooke-Hunt helped to form over forty women's branches of the Tariff Reform League. She also showed herself to be a gifted public speaker, and regularly took to the platform to publicize her views on the fiscal question and the navy. Despite this self-assertiveness, Brooke-Hunt does not appear to have been connected with the suffragette movement, although neither is there any evidence to suggest that she was an anti-suffragist. In fact, the issue of the vote for women was not central to her political concerns. Her contribution to female emancipation proved more subtle, taking the form of broadening and politicizing the public role of women, and of acclimatizing some men to women's political activism. 
Brooke-Hunt died unmarried on 9 June 1910 at the Gabled House, the home of her brother-in-law at The Holt, in Alverstoke, Hampshire. She was buried at Brompton cemetery. Her early death, at the age of thirty-nine (from infective enteritis and exhaustion), came as a shock to many political friends, particularly those associated with the tariff reform movement, whom she had greatly impressed with her drive and determination. In an obituary in the 'Morning Post', Mary Maxse, erstwhile chairman of the Women's Tariff Reform League, described her as one of the most vivid personalities of her day, who was 'able to a remarkable degree to inspire with her own enthusiasm those with whom she worked'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50756


Bernard, Agnes Morrogh (1842-1932), Roman Catholic nun, was born on 24 February 1842 at Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, the only child of John Morrogh (died 1866), landowner, who changed his name to John Morrogh Bernard on inheriting the Bernard estates in co. Kerry in 1849, and his wife, Frances Mary Blount (died 1888). After her birth the family moved to Cork, where they lived until 1849, when they went to live at Sheheree House on her father's inherited estate. 
Agnes Morrogh Bernard was educated at home by her mother until 1854, when she was sent to Laurel Hill convent in Limerick, where she spent three years. She returned to Sheheree House for a year before finishing her education in the Convent of Dames Anglaises in Paris. While still a student she had felt herself drawn to religious life; her father, who was opposed to her joining a religious community, finally allowed her to enter a convent when she reached the age of twenty-one. 
On 2 July 1863 Agnes Morrogh Bernard entered the noviciate of the Sisters of Charity in Dublin. She took as her religious name Mary Joseph Arsenius, and was known as Sister (later Mother) Mary Arsenius. After her profession in 1866 she took up teaching posts in Gardiner Street in Dublin, and later in King's Inns Street School. She was appointed to the Mountjoy Street convent in 1869 and subsequently to Lakelands Orphanage, where she remained in charge until 1877. Her various convent experiences included managing budgets, overseeing the laundry work of the Magdalen Asylum, and supervising building works within the convents -- skills which were to be beneficial in her later work. On 24 April 1877 she was appointed reverend mother of a new convent in Ballaghaderreen in co. Mayo. In 1879 the convent borrowed money to build a national school in the convent grounds and from 1886 it also ran an industrial school. 
In April 1891 Mother Mary Arsenius, with four other nuns, opened a convent in Foxford, co. Mayo, an area racked by poverty. The convent initially took over the local national school and, to provide some employment for the local people, she decided to set up a woollen mill, the Providence Woollen Mill. She received a loan of $7000 from the newly formed congested districts board, the function of which was to support projects that aimed to alleviate poverty in areas along the western seaboard of Ireland. Another loan was received in 1893 to provide training for workers. By 1899 the convent had received a further $7000 for technical training. This was spent not only on the factory workers but also on the instruction of local cottiers in gardening, poultry breeding, and improved farming methods. All her projects were carefully planned and skilfully managed. 
Mother Mary Arsenius declared herself to be apolitical. During the months following the fall of Charles Stewart Parnell a number of the mill workers derided the parish priest for his anti-Parnellite stand. She was informed by the local hierarchy that these workers had to apologize for their behaviour or an interdict would be inflicted on those concerned. Mother Mary Arsenius made a public apology on the workers' behalf. Her other foray into public politics came during the war of independence when some of the mill workers became the victims of the Black and Tans in 1921: she had the culprits brought to justice despite threats of retaliation. 
In 1898 Mother Mary Arsenius undertook the task of building roads in the area; through her scheme cart roads were built to the doors of 118 houses. In addition, she encouraged the local authorities to build labourers' cottages. She was also interested in the social and cultural life of the area, and supported the efforts of the Gaelic League to revive Irish language and culture. 
In 1869 Mother Mary Arsenius had suffered a bout of eczema which developed into erysipelas; she was to endure ill health for the rest of her life. However, she remained active in her various projects up to her death. She died at the convent at Foxford on 20 April 1932, from a flu-related illness, and was buried in the graveyard there on 23 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 50758


Peckover, Priscilla Hannah (1833-1931), peace campaigner, was born on 27 October 1833 in Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, third of the eight children of Algernon Peckover (1803-1893) and his wife, Priscilla (1803-1883). The Peckovers were a wealthy banking family, well established in the region; Priscilla's brother Alexander Peckover, first baronet (1830-1910), of Wisbech, was the first Quaker peer. Priscilla Peckover's education was predominantly private and included the mastering of several European languages. She devoted her youth and early middle age to raising the three daughters of the widowed Alexander, though she also worked among the poor, organized a 'Bible' class for girls, and was active in the cause of temperance. 
From a family who were long-time supporters of the Peace Society, Peckover began her own peace activities following the yearly meeting of the Society of Friends in 1875 when she discovered that the Quaker testimony against all war was to be addressed to women as well as men. She was put in touch with the Ladies' Auxiliary of the Peace Society and, finding that it had only two hundred members, went from door to door in her 'Bible' district, adapting the technique developed from her temperance work to secure peace pledges from women. Her activism seems also to have been provoked by the Anglo-Afghan and Anglo-Zulu wars in which Britain was engaged in the late 1870s. The result was the founding by Peckover in 1879 of the Women's Local Peace Association (later renamed the Peace Union), which became the central association of a network of more than thirty local groups run mostly by Quaker women and which had affiliated groups in thirty-one foreign countries. In 1881 Peckover also founded the Wisbech Local Peace Association, the annual subscription of which was a penny so as to attract the widest possible membership. It has been cited as having 8000 members by 1914, though a large majority of these were associate members comprising all those involved in affiliated bodies such as chapels, Sunday schools, Primitive Methodist colleges, and railway missions. (The number of full members according to the 1900 report was 942, when the total membership was given as 6429.) As a means of communicating between branches of the Women's Local Peace Association, Peckover began in 1882 to edit and publish a quarterly journal, 'Peace and Goodwill', which combined her own Christian peace message with relevant excerpts from other publications. 
Both the Peace Union and the Wisbech Local Peace Association were opposed to 'all war', as being 'contrary to the mind of Christ'. This stance was more explicit in its absolute pacifism than that of the Peace Society which, while reserving membership of its executive committee for absolute pacifists, asked its ordinary members simply to declare Christian opposition to war. Links between Peckover's organizations and the Peace Society -- to which she was a generous contributor -- were nevertheless strong. 
Like other female Quaker peace activists of the period, including Ellen Robinson (1840-1912) and Mary Lamley Cooke (1841-1916), Peckover emphasized the importance of women to the peace cause, in particular their influence on children (for example, in her pamphlet 'An Earnest Appeal to All Women, Everywhere'). The internationalism of the peace movement was also central to Peckover's activity: she financed continental peace groups, translated European peace literature into English (she learnt Danish for the specific purpose of translating peace pamphlets), and conducted correspondence with European peace activists. Peckover was also a regular attender at gatherings of the Universal Peace Congress, which took place most of the years between 1889 and 1913 having first been held in the mid-nineteenth century. She tended to view the familiar privileged social circle which met at these congresses as a microcosm of a wider internationalism, and was consequently convinced of the growing influence of the peace cause. Although she argued for international arbitration and disarmament, Peckover embodied an evangelical and educational rather than a political or pressure-group form of activism. Her greatest influence in the peace movement, alongside her financial input, was to represent Christian absolute pacifism at the Universal Peace Congress, which was often dominated by continental, secular, and non-absolutist peace views. The First World War did nothing to shake Peckover's pacifism, though it reduced the membership of the Wisbech Local Peace Association by a half, and adherents continued to fall away during the 1920s. 
Peckover was a minister and elder of her local Quaker meeting, known for her tolerance and her quiet sense of humour as well as for her thorough knowledge of the 'Bible'. As president of the local Esperanto Society she was instrumental in having the 'Bible' translated into Esperanto. She died a spinster at her home, Wistaria House, Wisbech, on 8 September 1931, while putting together what was to be the last edition of 'Peace and Goodwill'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50759


Graham, Gerald Sandford (1903-1988), imperial and naval historian, was born on 27 April 1903 in Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, the son of Henry Sandford Graham (1868-1951), Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Florence Marion, 'nee' Chambers (1873-1961). The father, though born in Monmouth, was of Scottish descent, and the mother was an Irish Protestant. 
An outstanding student, Gerald Graham took his BA at Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, in 1924, and his MA a year after, winning a scholarship to Harvard for his AM (1927), and another to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he completed his PhD in 1929, with the thesis which became his first book, 'British Policy and Canada, 1774-1791', published in 1930 and still cited by scholars. A Rockefeller fellowship for 1929-30 allowed him to spend the year in Germany before beginning his teaching career as an instructor at Harvard in 1930. 
The 1930s were a formative period of Graham's life. At Harvard he made a number of lifelong friends, including T. S. Eliot. In 1936 Queen's University received him back, and rapidly promoted him to full professor. In Canada he became part of a circle of able historians, including A. L. Burt, Donald Creighton, George V. Ferguson, and Harold Innis, whom Graham revered as the most brilliant historian Canada had produced. He also began a close friendship with the philosopher George Grant, and was deeply influenced by his ideas. 
The Second World War helped to shape Graham's future academic life. A Guggenheim fellowship in 1941 took him back to the USA, where his book 'Sea Power and British North America, 1783-1820' (1941) showed the shift of his interests to naval power and its relationship to empire. Late in 1941 he joined the Canadian army but was soon shifted to the Canadian navy's officer training school at Royal Roads in British Columbia as an instructor with the rank of lieutenant-commander. Anxious to experience the battle of the Atlantic at first hand, he wangled his way into service on Canadian destroyers during the college vacations, and spent some time on torpedo boats based in Dover. After D-day he was moved back into the historical section of the Canadian Army Overseas in London with the rank of major. 
The move proved to be permanent. In 1946 Graham was appointed lecturer, and in 1947 reader in history at Birkbeck College, London. In 1949 he was appointed Rhodes professor of imperial history at the University of London, King's College, and began publishing a magisterial series of deeply researched books analysing the links between sea power and imperial policy in all the oceans, 'Empire of the North Atlantic' (1950), 'The Politics of Naval Supremacy' (1965), 'Great Britain in the Indian Ocean' (1967), and, after his retirement, 'The China Station: War and Diplomacy, 1830-1860' (1978), as well as a steady yearly output of articles, chapters in joint works, documentary editions, and published lectures on themes from Canadian history, imperial finance and trade, and imperial constitutional history. 
Graham's tenure of the Rhodes chair coincided with the explosions of Asian and African nationalism and the transfers of power to independent states in Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean. His seminar at the Institute of Historical Research became an engine for the decolonization of imperial history, influencing the profession in every country of the Commonwealth. It was a miniature commonwealth in itself, attracting students from the old dominions and the USA, and increasingly from Africa and the Caribbean, many of whom laid the basis for 'national' schools of historical research in their own countries. After his retirement a list of his former postgraduate students occupying university positions contained over two hundred names. They taught in every province of Canada, most states of Australia, in New Zealand, South Africa, Uganda, Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone, India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, and Hong Kong, as well as in Britain and the USA. Many of them rose to senior positions in their own countries, and as a group they played an important role in the foundation and development of the new post-war colonial universities which became the national universities of independent states. 
Yet there was no 'Graham school' of imperial history. Graham shared George Grant's pessimistic conservatism and the sense that mankind was losing its humanity in the face of technology and materialism. He did not share in the euphoria of most of his students, eager for the brave new world of colonial independence, but held the gloomy view that, in Africa especially, independence was premature, and would usher in decay and corruption. Yet he had a special kind of scholarly integrity which allowed him to act as midwife to major nationalist revisionism such as that of his students like Kenneth Dike, Jacob Ajayi, and West Indian scholars, by emphasizing their freedom to propound any thesis, provided it could work as an explanation of evidence and was written with clarity and elegance. 
In 1929 Graham married Winifred Emily Ware (1907-1990), with whom he had a son, John Ware Graham. The marriage was dissolved in 1950. In that year he married Constance Mary, 'nee' Greey, with whom he had two daughters, Laura and Constance, and a son, James. Graham died at the Sussex Clinic, St Leonards, Sussex, on 5 July 1988 from bronchial pneumonia in the aftermath of major surgery. He was buried at St Leonard's Church, Beckley, Sussex, on the 9th. 


@@@@@


doc= 50761


Soskice, David Vladimirovich (1866-1941), journalist and campaigner for freedom in Russia, was born on 27 March 1866 in Berdichev, near Kiev in Ukraine, the son of Wolf Soskis, merchant, and his wife, Bassia Liuba Soskis (1844-1923). His parents were Jewish but he did not follow their religious faith. He first encountered tsarist oppression at school in Kiev in 1880: 'in the gymnasium I heard of three young students being hanged for distributing socialist literature... [then] considered myself a socialist -- or a revolutionist, which is the same thing'. In 1881 he witnessed an anti-Jewish pogrom and hid 'revolutionists who were trying to escape... took part in meetings of secret circles... was constantly watched by spies and [his] rooms repeatedly searched'. Police harassment continued and Soskice led a forced peripatetic university life at Kiev, St Petersburg, and Odessa, where he graduated in law. He practised in Kazan but his continuing revolutionary activities led to his arrest in 1890 and imprisonment for three years without trial (Perris, 266-73). After his release he was warned of re-arrest and escaped to France. 
Soskice settled in England in 1898 and on 1 November 1899 married Anna Sophia Johansen, daughter of a Russian judge of Norwegian descent, with whom he had been living; they had a son, Victor (1895-1986). They were divorced in August 1902. Soskice's friendships with Russian refugees and their English sympathizers brought him into contact with Edward and Constance Garnett and their circle, where he met Juliet Catherine Emma Hueffer (1881-1944), a musician and later a writer, whom he married on 20 September 1902. He was fifteen years older and according to David Garnett was 'squarely built... with a curly black beard and a square forehead but with a literal mind and no imagination' while she was 'a ravishingly beautiful blonde... with golden hair', highly intelligent and gifted in languages and music (D. Garnett, 37-9). She was fresh and lively, he earnest and serious and said to be without humour, although Perris says that he had 'wide culture and fine spirit and [was] as unlike the conventional conspirator as possible' (Perris, 267-77). Their backgrounds, too, could not have been more different. Her father, Francis Hueffer, was a noted music critic; her mother, Catherine, was the daughter of Ford Madox Brown; her aunt, Lucy Madox, to whom she was close, was married to Michael Rossetti; Ford Madox Ford was her brother. Their union was happy and they had three sons of whom the first, Frank Soskice, was born on 23 July 1902 before their marriage in September. Their home became a meeting place for writers, artists, refugees, and politicians. Later in life Juliet translated Nekrasov and wrote five novels; her autobiographical 'Chapters from Childhood' (1921) is a minor classic. 
In London, Soskice contributed, under pseudonyms, to Russian newspapers and journals on British affairs and wrote on Russian affairs in English publications. He joined the Agrarian Socialist League and the Socialist Revolutionary Party and was particularly active in the Society for Friends of Russian Freedom, whose aims were to publicize the evils of the tsar's regime and to encourage peaceful democratic change in Russia. (Although publicly for peaceful change, some figures engaged in such activities as gun-running, in which Soskice may have taken some part.) The society published a monthly journal, 'Free Russia', to which Soskice contributed; he became editor in 1904 and through his contacts was able to provide full accounts of the events of 1905 in Russia. In January 1905 Father Gapon, the leader of the 'bloody Sunday' march in St Petersburg, escaped to England and lived secretly, mainly with the Soskices, in Hammersmith. While in London, Soskice and G. H. Perris combined to write, from Gapon's dictation, his 'The Story of my Life' (1905). 
Late in 1905 Soskice was appointed St Petersburg correspondent for the short-lived Liberal daily newspaper 'The Tribune'. Perris was foreign editor and they arranged such a comprehensive and accurate coverage of Russian affairs that Benckendorff, the Russian ambassador in London, described the newspaper as his 'bete noire' and its St Petersburg correspondent as 'execrable' (Hollingsworth, 'Benckendorff', 107). He was particularly irritated over the episode of the memorial to the Russian Duma of 1906 which 'Tribune' journalists initiated. It was drawn up immediately after the Duma's dissolution as a statement of support from many public figures in British life, with Soskice making arrangements for its reception in St Petersburg. 
In 1908 Soskice returned to England and resumed a busy life in journalism and lecturing, developed business interests in Russia, and established a Russian Law Bureau. In 1908-9 he worked in support of the Parliamentary Russian Committee. In 1909 he took part in an attempt to save the 'English Review' (to which he himself was a contributor), which was in financial difficulties after an auspicious start under Ford's editorship. 
After the collapse of the tsar's government in March 1917 Soskice promoted support for the new regime and in May was appointed a second St Petersburg correspondent for the 'Manchester Guardian'. He participated vigorously in political debate and action and in August joined Kerensky's secretariat. He was thus able to report and analyse events as they unfolded. He was present during the Kornilov affair, when he feared for his life, and was in the winter palace in November when it was besieged by Bolshevik red guards but managed to escape. He remained loyal to Kerensky and, on his return to London, wrote about the events surrounding Kerensky's fall. 
After the triumph of the communist regime Soskice lost hope of any immediate change in the government of Russia, and his final years were spent in Britain on his business affairs and in writing, although he and Juliet remained lively hosts. He was naturalized in 1924 and died at his home, 5 Woodlands Road, Barnes, Surrey, on 28 June 1941 of a duodenal ulcer. He was cremated at Golders Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 50762


Platt family (per. c.1815-1930), textile machinery manufacturers, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 50763


Huxley, Margaret Rachel (1854-1940), nurse and promoter of nurses' training, was born on 21 December 1854 at Thornton Heath, Croydon, Surrey, the daughter of William Thomas Huxley, clerk at the Brighton railway, and his wife, Esther Hopkins. Margaret was a niece of Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895). At an early age she was influenced by the work of Florence Nightingale, and, in spite of strenuous opposition from her family, she decided to take up nursing. Miss Huxley began her training in 1880 at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, shortly before Ethel Manson, the future Mrs Bedford Fenwick, was appointed matron of the hospital. Miss Manson was passionate about the development of nursing as a profession for women and Miss Huxley was influenced by her ideas. The two young women became friends, and for the rest of their lives they worked to promote the professional development of nurses and nursing. 
On completing her two years' training Miss Huxley was appointed matron of the National Eye and Ear Infirmary in Dublin. Her talents were soon recognized and within a year she was invited to take up the position of matron of Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital, a small general hospital serving a working-class area of Dublin. As matron and lady superintendent with responsibility for training the nurses, she was able to introduce a 'modern' training scheme with lectures and a final examination. The standard of nursing improved so much that Miss Huxley proposed the establishment of a central school that would extend the benefits of theoretical instruction to nurses in the many small hospitals in Dublin. The Dublin Metropolitan Technical School for Nurses opened in 1894, with the support of the medical establishment, and it operated successfully for over sixty years. 
Miss Huxley retired from Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital in 1902 but continued to be involved in nursing work through her private nursing home Elpis, in Lower Mount Street, Dublin. This nursing home, which opened in 1890, was the first of its kind in Ireland, providing private patients drawn from Dublin's middle-class protestant community with medical and surgical nursing care. The nursing staff were trained at Sir Patrick Dun's and the reputation of the nursing home brought credit to the hospital. Miss Huxley was honoured by the hospital when she was appointed the first woman governor in 1912. 
After her retirement Miss Huxley became more involved in the professional side of nursing. Through her London contacts she was a founder member of the British Nurses' Association (later the Royal British Nurses' Association) in 1887, of the Matrons' Council in 1894, and of the International Council of Nurses (ICN) in 1899. In Ireland she was the prime mover behind the founding of the Irish Matrons' Association in 1903 and the Irish Nurses' Association (INA) in 1904. The priority of all these organizations was to achieve state registration for nurses. As vice-president of the National Council of Nurses of Great Britain and Ireland (NCN) she attended the international conferences of the ICN over many years, meeting the leading personalities in the nursing field. In 1913, during her term as president of the INA, she hosted the annual conference of the NCN, bringing a professional nurses' conference to Dublin for the first time. 
Throughout the long campaign for state registration Miss Huxley represented Irish nurses at a national level, giving evidence to the House of Commons select committee on registration for nurses in 1904, as the representative of the INA on the central committee for the state registration of nurses, and as vice-president of the Society for the State Registration of Trained Nurses in 1914. By the time the British government passed the 'Nurses' Registration Acts' in 1919, introducing state registration in England and Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, Ireland was seeking independence and Irish nurses were forming their own organizations. Miss Huxley was not sympathetic to Irish nationalism, believing more in the international aims of professional nurses. Although she was a member of the first General Nursing Council for Ireland, from 1920 to 1923, and also acted as an examiner for the council for several years, her role as a leader of Irish nurses was over. 
Miss Huxley took a special interest in public health and the housing of the poor, a subject with which she was familiar through her work at Sir Patrick Dun's. She devoted time and money to improving housing conditions in Dublin, advocating that better living conditions would improve the hygiene and health of the poor. She set up the Huxley Trust Fund, through which well-planned cottages were built in the Coombe area of the city. During the First World War she worked on behalf of the Red Cross Society and as the matron of Dublin University Voluntary Aid Detachment Hospital. After the war she served for many years on the committee of the Nation's Tribute to Nurses, a fund to assist nurses whose health had been broken by war service. She played an active role in the politics of her profession until she was over eighty years old. She died at Elpis on 10 January 1940 after a short illness. Her funeral was held on 13 January at the Unitarian church, Dublin, and she was buried in the city's Mount Jerome cemetery. She was unmarried. 
Miss Huxley was a woman of simple tastes who preferred deeds to words. When she retired as matron from Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital she inaugurated the Margaret Huxley memorial medal for the best nurse in training. She disliked publicity and honours and refused to accept the Royal Red Cross for her work during the First World War, though she accepted honorary membership of the Finnish Nurses' Association in 1925 and an honorary MA degree from Dublin University in 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 50766


Abercrombie, David (1909-1992), phonetician, was born in Birkenhead on 19 December 1909, the eldest of the three sons and a daughter of the poet and critic Lascelles Abercrombie (1881-1938) and Catherine, 'nee' Gwatkin (1881-1968). One of his brothers was the biologist Michael Abercrombie (1912-1979). His early years were spent in Ryton, Gloucestershire, in a comfortable home often visited by two family friends of his parents, Robert Frost and Rupert Brooke. 
On the outbreak of the First World War the family returned to Merseyside, where Abercrombie was educated at Liverpool College. From 1922 to 1929 his father occupied the chair of English literature at Leeds University, and Abercrombie became a student at Leeds in his father's department. It was here that Eric Gordon lectured on Old Norse, and Abercrombie was thanked in print by him for his 'illuminating comments on the description of Old Norse sounds' (E. V. Gordon, 'An Introduction to Old Norse', 1927); Abercrombie was just seventeen. He graduated BA in English in 1930 with third-class honours. Immediately he began an MA at Leeds on the phonetic basis of i-mutation. It was never completed, but it carried forward his undergraduate interest in the pronunciation of Old Norse, and foreshadowed a later one, namely prosodic phonology. 
Through his father, who was a member of the BBC's advisory committee on spoken English, Abercrombie met Daniel Jones, professor of phonetics at University College, London. An unexpected consequence was that he was able to spend two years, from 1931 to 1933, as a teaching 'assistant' at the Lycee Louis-le-Grand in Paris, at the same time as learning French, attending classes in phonetics at the Institut de Phonetique at the Sorbonne (the University of Paris), and sitting the examination of the International Phonetic Association. From 1933 to 1937 he was back in England as an assistant lecturer in English to non-native speakers of English, and also contributing to the teaching of French, at the London School of Economics (LSE). 
From 1938 to 1940 Abercrombie worked for the British Council in Athens as director of studies at the Institute of English Studies. From 1940 to 1945 he lectured on English at Cairo University, also acting as an assistant censor in control headquarters of Anglo-Egyptian censorship. His compatriots in Cairo included the novelists Lawrence Durrell and Olivia Manning, and the cookery writer Elizabeth David. In 1944 he married Mary Henderson 'nee' Marble (died 1998), of Illinois and California, the mother of Mortimer Henderson and Mary Brown ('nee' Henderson). 
After the Second World War, Abercrombie returned to the LSE for two years until his appointment to a lectureship in phonetics at the University of Leeds (1947-8). In the following year he moved to Edinburgh University, where he established not only a department of phonetics with a distinctively different approach to the subject, but also his own reputation as one of the twentieth century's leading phoneticians. Up until then phonetics had often been regarded as a practical, ancillary discipline in the study of modern languages, which had as its aim the teaching of a native-like reproduction of the sounds of a language. Abercrombie, drawing on his knowledge of the work of particular phoneticians from the seventeenth century onwards, held that the role of phonetics in an undergraduate curriculum was to determine and exemplify a general theory of speech production, with its properties and possibilities. Speech as a worldwide phenomenon, not the speech of a particular language or group of languages, should be the salient characteristic of phonetics at the undergraduate level. With the help of a small group of colleagues, including J. C. (Ian) Catford, he made this a guiding principle in his development of courses at Edinburgh. He is rightly credited with establishing phonetics as an autonomous discipline in the British university system. He was promoted to senior lecturer in 1951, to reader in 1957, and to a personal professorship in 1964; the established chair was created for him in 1967. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1991. Abercrombie's published work ranges over not only questions of general phonetics, but also aspects of the history of phonetics, of writing systems (particularly shorthand), and the contributions of phonetics to the teaching of English as a foreign language. 
Lascelles Abercrombie inspired in his son a love of poetry but also a curiosity about the mechanics of poetry, particularly rhythm -- see Lascelles Abercrombie's 'Principles of English Prosody' (1923). This led David to investigate the relationships between rhythm in poetry and the far more complex forms of rhythm in speech. Again thanks to his father he came to know Robert Bridges, for whom he devised a reformed system of English spelling used in the publication of Bridges' collected essays. He also devised the phonetic script used by C. K. Ogden in his 'General Basic Dictionary' (1942). 
Abercrombie was an inspired and inspiring teacher. He was as lucid in speaking about phonetics as in writing about it. He asked high standards of his students, but in return the hospitality and sociability that he and his wife, Mary, extended to them, as well as to colleagues and visitors, was legendary. At heart he was a wise and gentle person. Abercrombie died on 4 July 1992 in Edinburgh. Mary died in London on 28 April 1998. 


@@@@@


doc= 50769


Deyville, Sir John de (c.1234-1290/91), rebel, was the son of Robert de Deyville and his wife, Denise Fitzwilliam, of Sprotborough. The Deyvilles, who took their name from Deville (Seine-Maritime) in north-east Normandy, were established in Nottinghamshire and north Yorkshire during the twelfth century, above all through their links with the Mowbrays. John de Deyville was probably born 'c'.1234, and was still a minor when his father died. His wardship was entrusted to Roger (II) de Mowbray, who may have abused his trust, or at any rate neglected it, since when Deyville attained his majority in 1254 he found it necessary to sell lands at Adlingfleet valued at $400. Resentment at the exploitation of his assets during his minority, perhaps combined with the economic effects of the loss of his family's Norman possessions in 1204, may help to explain the subsequent course of his career. Nevertheless he was made keeper of the forests north of the Trent for three years in 1257 and was summoned for service in Scotland in 1258. 
Deyville was among the supporters of Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester (to whom he had sold his Adlingfleet lands), a member of the baronial regency council, when Gloucester (died 1262) made an alliance with Henry III in February 1259. He was not then so prominent a supporter of Simon de Montfort to be omitted from the king's summons of his tenants-in-chief and their knights to London in March or April 1260, and he was reappointed keeper of the forests in the north that May. However, he was identified sufficiently closely with the baronial cause to be dismissed in June 1261 in the king's general purge of local officials during his resumption of power at the centre. Thereafter, Deyville became the unofficial baronial keeper ('custos') for Yorkshire, during a period of largely unco-ordinated local dissent; that November he led disturbances in York. Following Montfort's initial victory and conclusion of peace with the king in July 1263, Deyville was formally appointed keeper and sheriff of Yorkshire. From December 1263, when Henry III regained control of the central government, to April 1264 he held York Castle in defiance of royal edicts, after which he briefly occupied Carlisle Castle. Deyville reaped the benefits of Montfort's victory at the battle of Lewes in May, being made keeper of Yorkshire once more in June, and receiving licence to crenellate his home at Hood, near Kilburn, in August. In September he was reappointed keeper of the forests in the north and in December he was summoned as a baron to the famous parliament that met the following January. He was among those magnates whom Montfort banned from holding a tournament at Dunstable in February 1265, for fear that it would exacerbate tensions with the new earl of Gloucester, Gilbert de Clare (died 1295). But he remained a firm Montfortian, and in March was deputed to wrest Richmond Castle, Yorkshire, from royalist control. 
After Montfort's defeat and death at the battle of Evesham on 4 August 1265 Deyville's lands were confiscated and granted to Queen Eleanor. He led those who continued in rebellion in the Isle of Axholme, Lincolnshire (a Mowbray estate). Although, along with Simon de Montfort the younger, he was forced to submit to the Lord Edward at Bycarr's Dyke, on the border of Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire, in December 1265, he remained one of the leading 'disinherited' rebels. After sacking Sheffield early in 1266, he joined Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby, and other rebels in May at Chesterfield, where they were surprised and beaten in battle by a royalist force. He was by then heavily in debt to Jewish moneylenders, which may explain why he specifically killed Jews and destroyed charters when he sacked Lincoln after fleeing that defeat. He proceeded to give new heart to the rebel cause by occupying the Isle of Ely, whence he mounted raids on Cambridge and Norwich. Despite negotiations with the committee of twelve magnates who met at Coventry in September and October to agree rules for the redemption of the rebels' lands, Deyville and his men would not accept the dictum of Kenilworth proclaimed on 31 October. According to Robert of Gloucester they replied to the papal legate's overtures with Montfortian demands for the maintenance of the provisions of Oxford and the reversal of their excommunication by the legate. The young and disaffected earl of Gloucester then put himself forward as their champion, and Deyville joined him in his occupation of London in April 1267. 'For two months the city was a rebel camp' (Powicke, 'Henry III and the Lord Edward', 543), and the excommunication of Deyville, who had perhaps been responsible for some pillaging in the city, was renewed at St Paul's at Easter. 
Although Deyville was excluded from the treaty made between the king and Gloucester at Stratford in June, his long rebellion came to an end on 1 July 1267 when he was formally pardoned at St Paul's and given immediate seisin of his lands, the redemption fine for which was granted to Queen Eleanor at a lenient four-yearly valuation of $600, to be paid by instalments. Like the other disinherited, he was to benefit from financial aid from the clergy. In 1268 the king granted relief from repayment of his Jewish debts until he had settled his redemption fine, but he incurred other penalties, including one for unlicensed marriage to Maud, the widow of James Audley junior (interestingly, a staunch royalist), in 1275, and still owed 380 of his 900 marks fine in 1272. He finally settled his debt to the queen in September 1276, but sold some pledged lands, and remained in debt until his death. Meanwhile, he was restored to favour, served in Wales in 1277 and the 1280s, was a royal banneret by 1285-6, and attended parliament at Shrewsbury in 1283 and the military council at Gloucester in 1287. At an unknown date he had married Alice, and he died in either 1290 or 1291. 


@@@@@


doc= 50770


Adelstein, Abraham Manie (1916-1992), occupational physician and medical statistician, was born on 28 March 1916 at Trichard, eastern Transvaal, South Africa, the fourth of five children (four boys and one girl) of Nathan Adelstein, miller in Trichard, and Rosie Cohen, both Jewish immigrants from Latvia. Educated at the Marist Brothers College in Johannesburg, where he became head prefect, he studied medicine at the University of Witwatersrand and qualified MB BS in 1940. After a brief spell as intern at the Johannesburg General Hospital he volunteered for the South African Medical Corps as a medical officer and served in South Africa until 1945. In 1942 he married Cynthia Gladys Miller ('b'. 1921) of Ladybird, also a former Witwatersrand student, who subsequently obtained an MSc in psychology at Cape Town and worked as a psychologist. 
On demobilization Abe (as he was always known to his friends) returned to Witwatersrand for postgraduate studies in public health and obtained a DPH in 1947 before joining South Africa Railways as health officer for Transvaal province later that year. In 1951 he was seconded to work in Professor Austin Bradford Hill's department of medical statistics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. While there he published what became a classic paper showing that 'accident proneness' in the railways was a product of the conditions of work rather than a characteristic of the individual. On returning to South Africa he became director of medical research and statistics in South Africa Railways, but his antipathy to apartheid made him anxious to leave the country, and in 1961 he accepted a post as senior lecturer in medical statistics in the department of social and preventative medicine in the University of Manchester. 
Adelstein's years at Manchester were marred by recurrent illness, but he published useful papers on the mortality from coronary disease in South African railway workers -- which showed the striking difference between the high rate in white people (then the highest in the world) and the low rate in black people -- and (with Zena Stein and Mervyn Susser) on the incidence of mental disease in the general population, a category of disease that was just beginning to be studied epidemiologically. It was, however, in his subsequent post as chief medical statistician in the General Register Office (1967-81), a government department later subsumed into the office of population censuses and surveys and then the office of national statistics, that he made his mark on British medicine. Ever since the days of William Farr the registrar-general's medical publications had provided mortality data of prime importance to public health, which highlighted the geographical, socio-economic, and temporal differences in mortality by sex and age. These had pointed to potential causes of disease and had monitored the health effects of national policies, whether active in the control of infectious disease or 'laissez-faire' in relation to economic development, and the practice had grown up of collaborating with selected research workers in providing unpublished data for their use and analysis. 
During Adelstein's tenure of the post, the information available in the registrar's office was made available to all bona fide research workers and the chief medical statistician was at their service to help them decide what material would be most useful and how it could be analysed most effectively. Within the department he recognized the need for establishing a cohort based on a random sample of the population, defined at a national census, and for following its members up within the department; for by law the personal information obtained at a census was confidential to the department and it was only by analysis within that department that the information could be made of medical use. He consequently initiated the longitudinal study of a 1 per cent sample of the population which began to bear fruit only after his death. 
With his background in South Africa, Adelstein could be especially helpful to the World Health Organization, with which he worked extensively in developing health-information systems in developing countries. These were important in enabling comparisons to be made between countries with different cultures, health-care systems, and facilities for recording information and hence for assessing their relative needs. 
After formal retirement Adelstein became an honorary professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, where he continued to undertake research into the role of social factors in disease. From 1956 on he was plagued by a series of disabling and life-threatening diseases, which necessitated multiple operations, but he never allowed this to distort his outward tranquillity. He combined throughout, according to Alwyn Smith, a Manchester colleague, 'a sometimes breathtaking honesty with a gentle kindness and an ability to recognise the good points of others. He never appeared even to think unkindly of anyone, and a gentle smile was never far away, whatever the folly or obtuseness of those around him' ('The Independent'). He died at his home, 21 Dunstan Road, Golders Green, London, on 18 October 1992, survived by his wife, son, and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 50777


Powell, Dame Muriel Betty (1914-1978), nurse, was born on 30 October 1914 at Ruspidge, East Dean, Gloucestershire, the third child of Wallace George Powell (1878-1969), a stonemason, and his wife, Annie Elizabeth Harriet Florence Jones, 'nee' Stewart (1889-1959). She was one of seven children, the second of four daughters. At her first school she was remembered as a quiet, sensitive child who found pleasure in music and in literature. At East Dean grammar school in Cinderford she was determined to become a missionary and, in preparation for the Universities' Mission to Central Africa, she started Swahili lessons; her decision to become a nurse instead astonished her family. She embarked on her career by training as a probationer nurse at St George's Hospital, London (1934?-1937). In 1947 she was to return, aged thirty-two, as its matron. She was qualified as a staff nurse then ward sister by 1939. Her pacifism prevented her joining the forces, but while a nurse tutor at Ipswich she worked on the land in the evenings and at weekends. In 1942 she took a diploma in nursing at London University. From a post at Manchester Royal Infirmary, where she was principal tutor, she returned in 1947 to St George's, where she remained for twenty-three years, for the last three as chief nursing officer. She was appointed CBE in 1962 and DBE in 1968. 
Powell was a slight, good-looking, charismatic woman, who deeply believed in the value and dignity of each person. As Dame Muriel she became the most famous nurse in Britain since the First World War. To the general public she was the matron who enabled patients to remain, unawakened, in bed in hospital until seven o'clock in the morning. This simple concession for the sick in hospital, from her manual on nursing, caught the public imagination through the popular press. She became well known throughout the 1960s and 1970s to national radio audiences for her wise and sensible responses to enquiries from broadcasters and journalists about the various news items concerning sickness and the National Health Service. Her successor said 'she really made an impact on the public and not just on the nursing profession' by changing the general practice of nursing (Joan Clague, 'Nursing Times', 2039). A deeply committed Christian, she also regularly spoke in religious broadcasts; her contributions were always infused with dedication to caring and to her beliefs, yet she had a lightness of touch that enabled her to impart these to listeners with gentle humour. Her name and opinions became bywords to the public. During this time she wrote, with her co-author, the Revd Paul Gliddon, a former chaplain at St George's, 'Called to Serve', 'a book for all who care for the sick and who must face the problem of suffering'. 
Recognized by her professional colleagues as 'primus inter pares', Powell became the president of the Association of Hospital Matrons from 1958 to 1963, and deputy president of the Royal College of Nursing, which latter office may be considered as recognition by the 'other ranks' organization. In 1963 and 1964 she also served on the Nurses and Midwives Whitley Council that determined the salaries and conditions of employment. For eleven years, from 1958 to 1969, she served on the Central Health Services Advisory Council as chairman of the standing nursing advisory committee of the Ministry of Health. She was also on the council of the King's Fund, the University of London's advisers panel on nursing. With a high national profile it was natural that she should move onto the international stage as a member of the World Health Assembly's expert advisory committee on nursing. She was also a director of the International Council of Nurses, and she travelled the world both officially and by invitation. 
Nationally Powell was a member of the committee chaired by Sir Harry Platt that produced 'A Reform of Nursing Education', and of the committee under the chairmanship of Sir Brian Salmon on senior nursing staff structure. With her background in teaching she maintained that education was the key to better nursing. She introduced into St George's a shortened programme for university graduates, sponsored by the Ministry of Health. This enabled her hospital to form a partnership with the University of Surrey, combining an honours degree in biology with a nursing training. 
By 1970 plans were advanced for the transfer of St George's from Hyde Park Corner to the suburb of Tooting. At fifty-five Powell could have sought retirement, but she elected to apply for the post of chief nursing officer for Scotland. She was appointed and moved north. Life as a senior civil servant was vastly different from her previous experience. She missed the contact with patients -- she had always carried out unaccompanied ward rounds -- but with her small team of nursing officers in Edinburgh she set about new tasks. Music continued to be her recreation. 
Sadly, there is little doubt that, from the time of her acceptance of this last appointment, she was already experiencing the first symptoms of Alzheimer's disease in small ways that were detectable to her closest nursing colleagues. The decision seems to have been made in the Scottish Office that she should be supported until her retirement date, despite increasingly obvious signs of her waning powers. 
When, in 1976, she finally retired to the family home in her beloved Gloucestershire, it became increasingly obvious that she needed both help and support in her daily living. These were gallantly provided by a former colleague, John Greene, who had succeeded her as president of the Association of Nurse Administrators (the former Association of Hospital Matrons). He was then the chief nursing officer of the nearby Coney Hill Hospital, where, lovingly cared for and cherished, she died on 8 December 1978. She was buried at Cinderford. The service of thanksgiving for her life, held at St Paul's, Knightsbridge, London, on 2 February 1979, attracted a huge congregation of citizens from all walks of life, as well as her numerous professional colleagues. 


@@@@@


doc= 50780


Baring, Louisa Caroline, Lady Ashburton (1827-1903), art collector and philanthropist, was born at Seaforth Lodge, Stornoway, Isle of Lewis, in the Outer Hebrides, on 5 March 1827, the third daughter and sixth child of James Alexander Stewart-Mackenzie (died 1843), and Mary Frederica Elizabeth Stewart-Mackenzie (1783-1862), eldest daughter of Francis Humberston Mackenzie, Baron Seaforth and Mackenzie of Kintail, and widow of Sir Samuel Hood. Many of her earliest years were spent on the grim moorland island inherited by her mother through the Seaforths, at Brahan Castle, Ross-shire, which remained her deeply loved home until her marriage. Several of her adolescent years were spent in Ceylon, where her father served as governor, and in Corfu, where he was appointed lord high commissioner in 1841. After his return, he died in 1843; Louisa Stewart-Mackenzie now lived at Brahan with her mother, who had been Walter Scott's prototype for Ellen in 'The Lady of the Lake'. 
At eighteen years old Louisa Stewart-Mackenzie was tall, with a superb posture; her brilliant dark eyes beneath firm brows were an inheritance from her Portuguese Sephardi paternal grandmother. So faithful were her strong, well-defined features to those of classical nobility that the art historian and critic Anna Jameson credited her with a resemblance to the head of Juno in Rome, the 'Ludovisi goddess'. Yet, despite her attractions, a streak of pushiness, of ambition, was all too apparent; her emotions were uncontrolled, her capriciousness uncircumscribed, her restlessness inexhaustible. She was romantically inclined, and a readiness to fall in love flourished in conjunction with her eagerness for marriage. Ruskin, while giving her drawing lessons at Wallington Hall, Sir Walter Trevelyan's house in Northumberland, saw her as 'a romantic young lady -- just on the edge of downhill' (V. Surtees, 'Reflections of a Friendship', 1979, 35). Her unreciprocated adoration for Sir William Maxwell-Stirling (in fact he scarcely knew her) took her nearly four years to conquer. Fervent female friendships were also a constant feature of her life. Letters eloquent of devotion to Florence Nightingale and Harriet Hosmer, the American sculptor in Rome, reflect her warmth of heart as well as her emotional effusiveness. Her most enduring and uncomplicated friendship was with Pauline, Lady Trevelyan, whom she first met in Corfu and loved dearly throughout her life. Louisa was hard-up and restless, with no suitors to hand other than Edwin Landseer (whom she was inclined to accept), when an invitation came from the highland shooting lodge, at Loch Luichart, of (William) Bingham Baring, second Baron Ashburton (1799-1864) ['see under 'Baring, Harriet Mary]. Lately left a widower at fifty-nine, extremely wealthy, and enfeebled by gout, he missed the stimulus of his magnificently brilliant and witty wife. Louisa Stewart-Mackenzie played her cards with dexterity and, with what Thomas Carlyle called 'a stroke of artful dodging', she married him and his material advantages at Bath House, Piccadilly, on 17 November 1858. 
This happy marriage, fulfilled by the birth of a daughter, ended on 23 March 1864 with Lord Ashburton's death and, with it, the surrendering of Bath House and The Grange, a great neo-classical house in Hampshire. In her widowhood Lady Ashburton's manic collecting of magnificent paintings and modern sculpture gave an outlet for her 'locomotive energy'. No inventory of her art collection has been found: when she died her finances were in chaos and nearly everything was sold. However, it is known that she had sketches by Rubens, possibly Veronese cartoons, a Mantegna, a Rossetti watercolour, several watercolours by W. L. Leitch, many works by Harriet Hosmer, Edward Lear, G. F. Watts, and Marochetti, three sketches by Titian, and several examples of old master drawings. These works were housed in her multiplying residences: Seaforth Lodge, Devon, completed at the end of 1864, was followed by palatial Melchet Court, Hampshire, finished in 1868. Her final project, Kent House, Knightsbridge, was completed about 1873. 
Socially ambitious, Lady Ashburton surrounded herself with well-known names. The Carlyles, Ruskin, the duke of Argyll, the Walter Trevelyans, Lear, W. W. Story, Robert Browning, Samuel Wilberforce (the bishop of Oxford), Lord Houghton, Millais, Professor John Tyndall, Charles Kingsley -- all these and many more she gathered under her roof during her hectic career. In later life Carlyle was her great new objective, a pursuit apprehensively accepted by the aged widower. The epic controversy regarding her marriage proposal, probably made in August 1869, to Robert Browning and her fury at his rejection remains unresolved, though quite in character with her ambitions. Extravagance and an ever-changing scene were the stimulants of Lady Ashburton's final years; when her energies for building and art collecting began to flag, she devoted herself to philanthropy. In the last fifteen years of her life the mission to seamen in Canning Town, together with the Ashburton Home of Rest, played the largest part, but she supported many other charitable causes, including the Tower Hamlets mission, the Metropolitan Tabernacle at Islington, the Metropolitan Drinking Fountain and Cattle Trough Association, and the Holy Trinity Mission Fund, Bethnal Green; advocacy for temperance was integral to all. Distressed by her daughter's early death in 1902, Lady Ashburton died of cancer at Kent House, Knightsbridge, on 2 February 1903, the 'wandering meteor' being laid to rest in the soil of a highland glen. 


@@@@@


doc= 50782


Agneta Olivia Kinnaird (1850-1940), 


@@@@@


doc= 50783


Emily Cecilia Kinnaird (1855-1947). The daughters were all educated at home and started taking 'Bible' classes and mothers' meetings when they were very young, and they acted as secretaries to their parents. They became especially involved with their mother's principal concerns, and the three sisters who did not marry -- Louisa, Gertrude, and Emily -- were frequent collaborators. Louisa worked alongside her mother in the London Bible and Domestic Mission. Louisa and Emily lived together throughout their lives, and, although Louisa was less dynamic, in the 1880s she represented the YWCA in Plaistow, south-east London. Emily and Gertrude acted as representatives for Rossie Priory. Gertrude worked for the Zenana Bible and Medical Missionary Society, both in London and in India. 


@@@@@


doc= 50787


Sybil Andrews (1898-1992), whom he had met the year before. Born in Bury St Edmunds on 19 April 1898, she was the daughter of Charles Andrews (1861-1922), ironmonger, and Beatrice Martha Trigg (1868-1929). Andrews did war work as an oxy-acetylene welder on aeroplanes in Bristol and began her art education in 1918 with John Hassall's correspondence course. Power helped the young Andrews with compositional drawing and design; they held a joint exhibition of their watercolours and pastels inspired by local subjects at the Crescent House, Angel Hill, in Bury St Edmunds in December 1921. 


@@@@@


doc= 50791


Ashby, Eric, Baron Ashby (1904-1992), botanist and university administrator, was born on 24 August 1904 at 12 Fairlop Road, north Leyton, London, the eldest of three sons of Herbert Charles Ashby, commercial clerk (and later accountant), and his wife, Helena Maria, 'nee' Chater. 
Ashby was educated at the City of London School, 1916-23, and initially he studied principally English and the classics. His grounding in English was to stand him in good stead in later life. Despite his obvious ability in some of the arts subjects he moved to the sciences, where he found the rigour and logic of mathematics much more to his liking. As with his proficiency in English, the firm grounding in mathematics that he acquired was to prove valuable in his subsequent career, and particularly in his effective use of statistics. From school he moved to Imperial College, London. At that time the college had a group of outstanding botanists noted for their enthusiastic and stimulating teaching. This attracted Ashby and he switched his main interest from chemistry to botany, but he continued with chemistry and particularly with mathematics. He also took geology as a subsidiary subject. He was most influenced by Vernon Herbert Blackman, one of the leading plant physiologists. In 1926 he graduated with a BSc, gaining first-class honours in botany and geology, and was awarded the Forbes medal. He spent the following summer staying with a family in Germany and gained a most useful knowledge of German; he subsequently prepared a translation of Henrik Lundergardh's much valued book 'Klima und Boden in ihrer Wirkung auf das Pflanzenleben', published as 'Environment and Plant Development' (1931), and later a vocabulary of German botanical terms with his wife, Helen. 
On his return from Germany, Ashby was appointed a demonstrator at Imperial College, in 1926. This enabled him to begin his research on plant growth and development. To avoid some of the difficulties faced by previous workers he was determined to design experiments which could be subjected to rigorous critical analysis, and his close contacts with the John Innes Institute helped him greatly in carrying out experiments in a way which provided results suitable for careful statistical analysis. His outstanding contribution in this field was his work with 'Lemna', a water plant only a few millimetres in size. The smallness of the plant enabled him to grow sufficiently large numbers of individuals to permit statistically valued results and to grow them in carefully controlled conditions of temperature, light, and nutrition. The equipment which he designed was a forerunner of the much more complex and expensive phytotrons. 
In 1929 Ashby was awarded a Commonwealth Fund fellowship and he worked at the University of Chicago and the Desert Research Laboratory of the Carnegie Foundation. There he met many of the leading American botanists and acquired a firm grasp of genetics. He returned to Imperial College in 1931 and was appointed as a lecturer. On 26 December the same year he married (Elizabeth) Helen Margaret Farries ('b'. 1902/3), lecturer, daughter of Francis Farries, farmer, of Risk, Castle Douglas, Scotland, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Lindsay. Helen Farries was a graduate of Glasgow University who had won a scholarship to Imperial College to work for a PhD on fungal physiology under Professor William Brown. She and Ashby had met when collaborating on the development of an incinerating system for determining the carbon content of tissues. They had two sons: Michael Farries ('b'. 1935) and Peter Harries Chater ('b'. 1937). 
Ashby's work on growth physiology soon attracted considerable interest and students. At that time there were widespread discussions in ecological centres on how to develop methods of describing and defining plant communities. The leading figure on the continent was Christen Raunkiaer, who developed a percentage frequency method designed to enable a rapid and objective way of describing a particular community and the abundance and importance of the individual species in it. This was widely adopted on the continent but was regarded by British ecologists as not very satisfactory. Ashby became interested in the problem and examined Raunkiaer's published results critically from a statistical and logical viewpoint. His paper in 1935 in the 'Annals of Botany' virtually destroyed Raunkiaer's proposals and clearly established Ashby as a coming leader in plant physiology and other aspects of botany as well. 
In 1935 Ashby moved to the University of Bristol as a reader in botany, where his teaching was mainly in genetics. His interest in hybrid vigour (heterosis) had been aroused earlier, and his stay in Chicago had broadened his outlook and given him a good insight into the genetics of maize. The 1930s were a period in which genetics was developing rapidly and one in which many curious and surprising results were becoming comprehensible as they were fitted into the basic framework of genetics. Among these was the phenomenon of hybrid vigour, where some hybrids were found to grow more vigorously and bigger than either of the parents. Ashby was fascinated by this, but when he examined the published results of other workers he was surprised to find how little careful quantitative work had been done. With helpful advice from Ronald Aylmer Fisher, the leading biological statistician at the time, Ashby began further work on hybrid vigour. His findings led him to conclude that the increased vigour was due to the increased size of the embryos rather than to any genetic feature. His published results on this, like his earlier paper on plant communities, caused considerable interest and his conclusions were vigorously attacked, particularly in the USA. Subsequent research indicated that the problem was much more complex than he envisaged and that his conclusion that hybrid vigour was due solely to embryo size was an oversimplification. 
In 1938 Ashby was appointed to the professorship of botany in the University of Sydney (having also been offered a chair at the University of Manitoba, in Canada). At Sydney he found a department strong in the Scottish tradition of anatomy, morphology, and systematics, but almost devoid of any modern physiology, which he rapidly set about rectifying. During the Second World War state and federal governments relied on him increasingly. In 1940-41 he served as a member of the power alcohol committee of inquiry set up to investigate the feasibility of producing power alcohol from surplus cereals and sugar cane. In 1940-42 he was chairman of the Australian National Research Council, and in 1942 he conducted an inquiry into the enlistment of scientific resources in war, at the request of the Australian prime minister, John Curtin. Ashby was then responsible for establishing and directing the scientific liaison bureau, which was charged with identifying and allocating Australian scientific resources. 
Ashby's wartime work for the Australian government led directly to his appointment by the Australian ministry of external affairs as scientific counsellor and charge d'affaires at the Australian legation in Moscow at the end of 1944. There he met many of the leading figures in the USSR, including Stalin, Molotov, Vishinsky, and Lysenko. He recorded his experiences, and his assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the Soviet regime, in 'Scientist in Russia', published by Penguin in 1947. Returning to Sydney in February 1946, and declining to become Australian minister in Moscow, he was closely, although briefly, involved in the work of the planning committee for the new graduate university in Canberra, which became the Australian National University. However, his major contribution was in the development of the University of Sydney, in the changes needed to meet the obvious expansion required to provide for the large numbers of returning ex-servicemen, and how the university should contribute to developments nationwide. 
Numerous attempts were made to entice Ashby to accept major administrative positions in Australia, including the vice-chancellorship of the University of Sydney; but he yearned to return to research, and in 1946 he accepted an invitation to become Harrison professor of botany in the University of Manchester. He spent three years there, during which his enthusiasm and flair for botany made Manchester one of the leading botanical schools in the United Kingdom. Unlike in Sydney, he was given considerable time for his own scientific research, although he served as a member of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy under Sir Henry Tizard and on a Foreign Office committee on science in Germany. 
In trying to assess Ashby's overall contribution to botany stress must be placed on his ability to stimulate others and to provide them with the facilities needed. His major ability was to point the way the subject could develop and to encourage others to develop his ideas. Perhaps the most telling judgement of his work was expressed by Professor Heslop-Harrison: 'Surveying his contribution as a whole leaves one with a feeling of regret that he was unable to carry some of his work further: so many of his projects were just at their peak when for one reason or another he came to abandon them' (Heslop-Harrison, 16). Despite this he must be ranked as one of the outstanding professors of botany in the twentieth century. 
Ashby's decision to accept an invitation to succeed David Lindsay Keir as president and vice-chancellor of Queen's University, Belfast, from 1950, surprised many of his colleagues: he had already declined a number of similar invitations to become a full-time educational administrator. Nevertheless, as he later explained, 'I decided... that I was more interested in people than ideas; in teaching and educational issues than in pure science, and in solving problems about people rather than problems about plants' (Heslop-Harrison, 3). The following nine years provided ample opportunity for Ashby to pursue these interests, and to exercise his formidable talents for leadership and organization. 
When Ashby arrived at Queen's the university still had something of a reputation for sleepiness and provincialism; it was in no small part thanks to his leadership that in the course of the 1950s it was established as an energetic and forward-looking centre of academic excellence. He was fortunate in having the full backing of the Northern Irish government, based at Stormont, which provided funds for a massive building programme. He later recalled that only once did he have to apply for extra funds for running costs: the Northern Irish minister for education agreed to provide the full amount requested immediately. Thus provided with the funds to expand and develop the university Ashby was able to devote considerable care to the recruitment of high-quality academic staff: 'persons in their thirties who would be likely to be leaders themselves in ten or more years time' (Heslop-Harrison, 8). It is a measure of his success in this regard that of the five professorial appointments in science made in his time all five appointees later became fellows of the Royal Society (as Ashby himself did, in 1963). He also did much to improve the quality of staff lower down the ladder by providing them with greater job security and better prospects for promotion. 
It was said of Ashby at Queen's that 'He is the only Vice-Chancellor who doesn't give orders; he doesn't need to' ('The Independent', 28 Oct 1992). His mastery of the business of the numerous university committees which he was called upon to chair was complete. He always got his way, although he rarely had to resort to the use of his authority to force matters through. Sir Peter Froggatt, one of Ashby's successors as vice-chancellor, later recalled: 'He was a skilful exponent of the 'planted' idea, content to wait patiently for it to resurface through the committee systems as someone else's' (ibid.). During his time at Queen's, and without impairing his own ability to push through measures which he regarded as necessary, Ashby made the decision making process both more transparent and more reflective of the various currents of opinion and constituencies in the university, initiating open staff meetings prior to meetings of the academic council, and encouraging individual members of staff and representatives of the students to make their views known to him. He continued throughout this time to be involved in a wide range of activities outside the university, both in Northern Ireland (including as chairman of the Northern Ireland Advisory Council for Education, and vice-president of the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts) and in the United Kingdom more generally (including as chairman of the scientific grants committee and then of the postgraduate grants committee of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and as an active member of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals). 
In autumn 1957, on becoming a candidate for the mastership of Clare College, Cambridge, Ashby remarked that 'he had no more thought of becoming a Master of a Cambridge College than of succeeding to the Papacy' (personal knowledge). Part serious and part irreverent, this was typical of Ashby, though rarely revealed so directly. He was pre-elected master of Clare College in spring 1958, the first master from outside Cambridge -- indeed such an election would have been forbidden by the college statutes had he not first been elected to a fellowship so that he could obtain a Cambridge degree by incorporation. After a year completing their duties in Belfast the Ashbys took up residence in the master's lodge at Clare in April 1959. The lodge soon became a home for chamber music by dons and students, including performances by a string quartet in which Ashby played the viola. His fostering of music in the college extended to the chapel choir which, with the inclusion of women students, contributed to Clare's growing reputation for distinction in music. 
Ashby's predecessor, Sir Henry Thirkill, was senior tutor before becoming master, and had for nearly forty years managed admissions to Clare by focusing on a number of traditional public schools. The senior tutor, John Northam, was already moving towards a more diverse intake with stricter criteria for academic merit -- changes that would inevitably have radical long-term effects. Ashby had no role in deciding which individual students to admit but gave his support through encouragement to new schools and in helping to calm those alumni whose sons no longer received preferential admission. 
In the university Ashby's advice was sought on a problem that had been a feature of discussions throughout the 1950s -- that nearly half the academic staff did not have college fellowships. It was feared that this was undermining the much valued collegiate character of the university. A syndicate was set up with the former head of the civil service, Lord Bridges, as chairman and Ashby as deputy chairman, with membership drawn from representative groups of faculties and colleges. The university accepted a proposal of the syndicate to build a university centre which would provide dining and meeting facilities for graduate students and senior members, but their main proposals for new institutional relations between the university and the colleges were rejected since (it was said) they had failed to understand the nature of the colleges. However, their report concentrated minds in the colleges, which began to solve the problem in their own ways -- by increasing the number of fellowships and by founding three graduate colleges: University College, later renamed Wolfson, was founded by the university following a suggestion from two members of the syndicate; Darwin College was founded jointly by Trinity, St John's, and Gonville and Caius colleges; Clare Hall was founded by Clare College. 
The foundation of Clare Hall was initiated in May 1962. It was Ashby who set in progress Clare College's response to the needs of the university when a committee was asked to examine the consequences of expanding the fellowship by a considerable number. By November 1963 this had led to two conflicting proposals on which Ashby exhorted the governing body to reach a decision at a special meeting on 11 January 1964. Two days before that meeting Ashby received a new proposal from one of the fellows to which he gave his immediate support. Richard Eden's paper proposed founding a Clare centre for advanced study, which would provide fellowships for visiting professors, mainly from overseas, and for members of the Cambridge faculties, and would include also research fellows and graduate students. The proposed centre would include both men and women and provide accommodation for families of visitors in new college buildings to be located in Herschel Road (a short distance from the university library). The proposal was unanimously approved by the governing body, which later decided that the new centre should be called Clare Hall; the basic costs would be met by the college and additional support would be sought from foundations. 
Ashby was on leave during Easter term 1964 in the United States, where he had discussions with Paul Mellon, a former student at Clare College, and with the Ford Foundation. This resulted in a substantial endowment from the Old Dominion Foundation (later the Andrew Mellon Foundation) to be used for visiting and research fellowships, and a five-year grant from the Ford Foundation for visiting fellowships. Meanwhile in Clare College a working committee on Clare Hall had suggested Ralph Erskine as architect for the new buildings, and identified five possible foundation fellows. The committee's recommendations were approved on Ashby's return, and the following day, by bicycle, he visited each of the five prospective fellows, all of whom consented to accept nomination. 
During summer 1964 it became apparent that university statutes would limit the status of fellows of Clare Hall if it were to remain a part of Clare College, and in 1965 Ashby negotiated with the university council of the senate for Clare Hall to become an approved foundation with Clare College as its sole trustee, a status that could change at the request of either party after fourteen years. Its legal status was established on 7 February 1966 with Brian Pippard as its first president. Three years later Ashby formally opened the new buildings on the last day of his two years as vice-chancellor of the university. In 1984 Clare Hall received a royal charter from Elizabeth II and became an independent college in the university, while still retaining close informal relations with Clare College. 
One week after the legal foundation of Clare Hall a study group chaired by Ashby was set up 'to consider as widely as it sees proper the implications of admitting women members to Clare College and to report, without recommendations, back to the Governing Body' (Eden, 295). The study group reported in November 1968 and, after a lengthy period of discussion, in May 1970 the governing body repealed the statute that prevented the admission of women. The following year the first two women fellows were admitted and in 1972 Clare admitted thirty women undergraduates; by the 1990s about half of the Clare undergraduates were women. 
During Ashby's time as vice-chancellor (1967-9) he steered the university towards the establishment of its own medical school at Addenbrooke's Hospital. But more than anything else this period was marked by the arrival in Cambridge of the wave of student unrest that had swept round the world in the 1960s. It was typical of Ashby that he had a coherent philosophy of the university as an institution, and his actions were inspired by this instead of being solely a pragmatic response to events. He set up a joint committee of senior and junior members whose regular meetings were supplemented by his willingness to meet informally with all comers to his lodge -- student radicals and moderates, concerned and outraged staff. Ashby's stamina, coupled with his guile and patience, avoided serious unrest and set the university on a path to new codes of practice and more carefully structured staff-student relationships. His experience at this time led to three lectures published in 1970, entitled 'Masters and Scholars', and two books covering a wider canvas, 'The Rise of the Student Estate' (written jointly with Mary Anderson, 1970) and 'Any Person, Any Study' (1971). 
Ashby was meticulous in his attention to college and university affairs, but managed to combine these with numerous engagements elsewhere. It helped that he was a very early riser and for an hour or two before breakfast would work in his study dictating or writing. Other activities included membership of the University Grants Committee, 1959-67, when the university system in the United Kingdom was undergoing rapid change and growth; the chairmanship of the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in 1960-69; and the presidency of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1963. 
In 1954, when still vice-chancellor in Belfast, Ashby had joined a group commissioned by the Inter-University Council to report on higher education in east Africa. Between 1954 and 1966 he spent ten periods in Africa and visited more than a dozen countries, serving on commissions, visiting groups, and governing bodies, and acting as consultant and lecturer. He was critical of the approach of the council during the 1950s, which he thought lacked understanding of the higher education needs of Africa, but he was able to develop his own ideas during 1959-61 when he became chairman of a commission sponsored by the Carnegie Corporation to advise on the development of universities in Nigeria. This led to a report, 'Investment in Education' (1960), which was accepted by the new Nigerian government and led to the founding of four new universities and a permanent Nigerian universities commission. His experiences there led to two scholarly books, 'African Universities and Western Tradition' (1964) and (with Mary Anderson) 'Universities: British, Indian, African' (1966). 
Two of the major public concerns that developed during the 1960s were environmental pollution and the possible risks from the use of genetic engineering in agriculture. In 1971-3 Ashby was the first chairman of the standing royal commission on environmental pollution, which led to new standards for the control of toxic waste disposal in estuaries. He also oversaw a submission to the 1972 Stockholm Conference on the Environment that helped establish the principle that the 'polluter pays'. In 1973 he was made a life peer (having been knighted in 1956), and in the same year he became president and chancellor of the Queen's University of Belfast. In 1974 he chaired a working party jointly set up by the agricultural and medical research councils to examine the possible hazards for the environment from genetically engineered organisms. Their main proposals led to legislation that allowed the continuation of research while providing a new regulatory regime to enhance environmental protection. Ashby examined the historical background of British research and higher education in his study of R. B. Haldane, 'Portrait of Haldane at Work on Education', written with Mary Anderson (1974). 
On his retirement in 1975 Ashby continued his work on environmental matters, which included membership of a House of Lords select committee scrutinizing proposals from the Commission of the European Community. His collaboration with Mary Anderson turned to environmental history, and further publications included 'The Politics of Clean Air' (1981). He lectured widely in America and in 1976 and 1977 was visiting professor in the University of Michigan, giving a series of seminars, 'Politics for the environment'. He helped Obert Tanner of Salt Lake City set up the Tanner lectures on human values in a number of leading universities, including Oxford and Cambridge, and in 1978 Ashby himself gave the first of these lectures in Utah, entitled 'The search for an environmental ethic'. In 1975 he and his wife had moved to a small house in Newnham, Cambridge, and -- no longer having a secretary -- he learned to type for his own writings and for his extensive correspondence. In later years he took over the weekly shopping, going by car each Saturday morning to the supermarket when it opened at 8 a.m., and he and Helen went weekly to lunch in Clare Hall, where he was an honorary fellow and their son Michael was a professorial fellow. He died at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, of heart failure, on 22 October 1992, and was survived by his wife and two sons. A memorial service was held at Great St Mary's, Cambridge, on 6 February 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 50800


Bacon, Francis (1909-1992), painter, was born on 28 October 1909 at 63 Lower Baggot Street, Dublin, the second of five children of English parents, Edward Anthony Mortimer Bacon, army officer, and his wife, Christina Winifred Firth. Bacon's father moved his family to Westbourne Terrace, London, during the First World War, when he worked in the ministry of war. After the war the family moved between England and Ireland and Bacon himself went to Dean Close School in Cheltenham, where he boarded from 1924 to 1926, frequently running away, before moving to London on an allowance provided by his mother. 
In 1927 Bacon travelled to Berlin with a male friend of his father, who was entrusted with educating the young man. There Bacon was plunged into the decadent night-life of Weimar Germany, which after the puritanism of his Irish upbringing had a permanent impact. No less important were the subsequent months Bacon spent in Paris, where, in the summer of 1927, at the Galerie Pierre Rosenberg, he discovered Picasso's recent drawings. Picasso's depictions of figures on the beach at Dinard had a profound effect on Bacon. 
In 1928 Bacon returned to London, where from 1929 to 1932 he lived in Queensberry Mews in South Kensington. There he worked designing modernist rugs and furniture, stylistically indebted to Le Corbusier and Eileen Gray. He rapidly established a reputation as a designer, being featured in a double-page spread in 'Studio' in 1930 and receiving celebrated commissions including furniture for the kitchen of the politician R. A. Butler and a desk for the writer Patrick White. He also began to paint in oils for the first time, producing works that owed much to surrealism and cubism. Influenced by his friend and mentor, the Australian painter Roy de Maistre, in 1930 Bacon held an exhibition of five paintings and four rugs at his studio. Thereafter he turned increasingly to painting but it was another three years before his first significant paintings were exhibited, in two group shows at the Mayor Gallery, London, in 1933. One of these works, 'Crucifixion' (1933; priv. coll.), was prestigiously illustrated in Herbert Read's 'Art Now' (1933), opposite one of Picasso's paintings of a bather. 
In February 1934 Bacon staged an unsuccessful exhibition of thirteen works in a cellar in Curzon Street in Mayfair. Visiting Paris again in 1935, Bacon purchased a book illustrated with colour plates entitled 'Diseases of the Mouth' and this, together with seeing for the first time Sergey Eisenstein's film 'Battleship Potemkin', had a profound effect on him. Not only did he use stills from the film as source material but it also encouraged a tougher figurative dimension. Bacon's path was set and in the years that followed his painful vision of man and his predicament became one of the most recognizable, if horrific, bodies of work of the second half of the twentieth century. 
Bacon's work was proposed for inclusion in the celebrated International Surrealist Exhibition, of 1936, being organized for London by Roland Penrose, Herbert Read, and Andre Breton, but he was famously judged by the Englishmen to be insufficiently surrealist. It was, however, a fortuitous rejection since subsequently it was Bacon's 'realism' that was at the centre of the claims made for him. 
In January 1937 Thomas Agnew & Sons staged an exhibition, 'Young British Painters', which included a painting that Bacon had only just completed but which he subsequently destroyed. Entitled 'Abstraction from the Human Form', it depicted a semi-human figure and demonstrated that even before the Second World War Bacon had not only formulated but also was publicly exhibiting his tormented vision of the world. Already he was using photographs of contemporary events; drawing attention to the mouth; and presenting metonymic segments of the body, which is shown as bulbous and swollen. 
A chronic asthmatic from childhood, Bacon was declared unfit for military service, and spent the Second World War in London, where with the aid of his former nanny he held gambling parties. By 1942 Bacon was living in Cromwell Place, South Kensington, where he began to build on his pre-war imagery to produce his first major paintings, including a work that did more than any other to establish his reputation as one of the most powerful and horrifying painters of the twentieth century: 'Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion' (1944; Tate collection). Against a fiery orange background three barely human figures provide a compendium of injuries: torsos are swollen and deformed, ribs scarred and dirtied, heads wounded and bandaged, and each mouth strains at the end of a taut spinal column. The exhibition of this triptych at a group show at the Lefevre Gallery in 1945 established Bacon's post-war reputation. Subsequently Bacon claimed this as his first mature work, even going so far as to destroy as much earlier work as he could. The result of this was to identify Bacon's work with the Second World War and to provide it with roots in the 1940s, not the 1930s. This had profound implications for readings of the artist's work, not as late flowering surrealism but as contemporary realism. 
In November 1949 the Hanover Gallery, London, staged the first one-man exhibition of Francis Bacon. One of the seminal events in post-war British culture, this show was a revelation. The exhibition included full-length figures as well as a series of tormented heads culminating in one of Bacon's most confident early paintings, 'Head VI' (1949; Arts Council collection, Hayward Gallery, London). A half-length portrait, this was the first painting in the most celebrated series that Bacon ever produced: a series from 1949 showing a boxed, screaming pope which established Bacon's international reputation. Bacon developed this theme during the early 1950s, taking as a starting point Velazquez's 'Portrait of Pope Innocent X' (1650; Palazzo Doria Pamphilj, Rome). Bacon's pope, enthroned and enclosed by a box, drew attention to the discrepancy between the belief systems present at the time of Velazquez and modern discrediting of religious authority. Their contemporary resonance gained potency through the publication of photographs showing the Nuremberg trials of Nazi war criminals, boxed behind glass for their own protection. Although the origins of Bacon's vision lay with paintings of oppressors, including Nazi leaders, the subsequent status of these paintings depended on reading the tormented individuals as Everyman figures: a conflation of oppressor and victim. 
The first major essays on Francis Bacon established readings which remain largely in place. The two most important were by Robert Melville in the British publication 'Horizon' in 1949 and Sam Hunter in the American 'Magazine of Art' in 1952. The former became the basis for subsequent European responses to the artist, most pervasively that of David Sylvester, who became one of the artist's greatest champions, while the latter criticism was almost entirely neglected by all subsequent critics except Lawrence Alloway. Although both pioneering essays derived from conversations with Bacon, their emphasis was fundamentally different. Hunter provided an emphatically British context, including references to Wyndham Lewis, William Blake, Gainsborough, Turner, Sickert, and even Beardsley, and wrote of the importance of London to the artist. Melville, in contrast, developed a European context for Bacon's tormented vision through references to Dostoyevsky and Kafka, to Dali and Bunuel's film 'Un chien andalou', Picasso's 'air of extreme hazard', and Eisenstein's film 'Battleship Potemkin'. 
Both authors also emphasized the contemporary resonance of Bacon's work, a feature that helped him assume pre-eminence in the London art scene of the 1950s. However, while Hunter's text and accompanying photograph of Bacon's source material made a direct link between Bacon's paintings and his collecting of photographs of major international events and political leaders, including photographs of Goebbels and of Moscow at the time of the Russian Revolution, Melville instead gave a more elevated reading. This lacked such direct references and instead argued that 'Modern Painting has suddenly been humanised', proposing that ''Un Chien Andalou' has greater visual force and lucidity than anything achieved in the art of painting between the two wars... only the recent paintings of Francis Bacon have discovered a comparable means of disclosing the human condition' (Melville). 
In keeping with his belief that the image should act as an assault on the nervous system rather than a stimulus for the intellect, Bacon denied that he made preparatory studies for his paintings, preferring to emphasize the immediacy of chance to generate his images. This denial did much to discourage writers from pinning specific sources to his imagery and instead to stress a conflation of sources that extracts his work from being mere story-telling or illustration: a painting may be a portrait of an individual, but rarely is he, or occasionally she, identified. Only after his death were drawings by, and attributed to, Bacon publicized, published, and exhibited. Generally scrappy and weak, they were clearly personal notations that he did not consider worthy of exhibition but which none the less provide a revealing insight into his studio procedure and indicate a greater degree of planning than interviews with Bacon had suggested. 
Bacon's international reputation grew dramatically. As early as 1948 the Museum of Modern Art in New York bought his important early work 'Painting, 1946'. Then in 1953 he had his first one-man show at Durlacher Bros. in New York and in 1957 at the Galeries Rive Droite in Paris. In 1954 he also received major official recognition, representing Britain at the Venice Biennale together with Lucian Freud and Ben Nicholson. 
Such events provided an international context for Bacon and consolidated existentialist readings of his work. Indeed, from as early as his first one-man show in 1949, he was associated with existentialism, as in a review by Nevile Wallis: 'Bacon's work is the most profoundly disquieting manifestation I have yet seen of that malaise, which since the last war, has inspired the philosophy of Sartre [There is] a literary parallel in Kafka's nightmares of frustration, which largely owed their inspiration to Kierkegaard's philosophy of despair. (N. Wallis, 'Nightmares', 'The Observer', 26 Nov 1949)' Sylvester, too, provided just such a context for Bacon. In 1952, in his first major essay on the artist, an article for 'The Listener', he referred to Bacon's enclosed spaces with direct reference to Sartre's 'Huis clos', quoting Garcin's 'Eh bien, continuons' and asserting that 'life is hell and we had better get used to the idea' (D. Sylvester, 'The paintings of Francis Bacon', 'The Listener', 47, 3 Jan 1952, 28-9). 
In 1955 the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London held the first retrospective exhibition of Bacon's work, presenting thirteen paintings. In that same year an Arts Council retrospective of the work of Alberto Giacometti was also held in London. These two retrospectives did much to stimulate figurative art in Britain and to encourage supportive critics to discern an element of torment within their presentation of the human condition. Certainly Bacon paralleled Giacometti, in whose sculptures movement, whether potential or actual, suggests vulnerability and fear. Bacon's decisive, transitional group of paintings of a head that he began in 1948 has striking formal and conceptual links with Giacometti's caged nose, 'The Nose' (Centre Pompidou, Paris) of the previous year. Both are concerned with movement: Giacometti allows actual movement while Bacon suggests twisting. Both use boxing to draw attention to the space in which the subject moves: Giacometti provides a box and Bacon an armature. Both emphasize a single element of the face as a metonym of the whole: Giacometti emphasizes the nose and mouth, Bacon simply the gaping mouth. Both, too, concentrated on the single figure and sought to deny narrative readings of their work. 
Bacon became notorious for his social life. An inveterate drinker and gambler, he loved chance, risk, and danger in his life. A focus in London was the Colony Room drinking club in Soho, which opened in 1949 and whose founder, Muriel Belcher, later one of the artist's subjects, employed Bacon to bring in people. Other regulars included a circle of Bacon's artist friends, among them the figurative painters Lucian Freud, Michael Andrews, and Frank Auerbach. Bacon's day began early and despite the incorporation of chance effects in his painting he followed a disciplined routine. Exhausting mornings of work in his small studio gave way to the release of life as a drinker and gambler in Soho when he mixed as freely with East End criminals as he did with the landed aristocracy. His extraordinary appearance -- with his moon face and leather jacket -- and his life of immense highs and lows contributed much to his status as the leading British artist of the last half-century: an extremist in both art and life. 
Bacon was celebrated for the emotional impact of his work and for his desire to connect directly 'with the nervous system' rather than the intellect. He wanted, he explained, to show the effect, but not its cause, for example preferring to paint the anguished figures at the base of the crucifixion rather than the crucifixion itself. This allusiveness was praised for facilitating the metaphoric potential of his work as a revelation of the human condition, although this indirectness may also have had a more personal resonance that was fuelled by the artist's own anxiety. Indeed in one of Bacon's most powerful early works there is an intimation of why the painter's anxiety might have been so acute. 

'Two Figures' (1953; priv. coll.) presents a darkened room in which two men, himself and Peter Lacey, make love on a bed. The vertical lines that run down the picture veil the figures and suggest a view glimpsed through a curtain, thereby placing the viewer outside the room, as if spying on the men. In this way the painting embodies the clandestine nature of an action at a time when homosexuality was still illegal in Britain. In 'Two Figures' anxiety about the state monitoring and constraining the individual was expressed at a time of acute insecurity for homosexuals. A manifesto painting, 'Two Figures' remained unexhibited until the Tate Gallery's retrospective exhibition of Bacon's work in 1962. 
Whereas in Bacon's pre-war and wartime paintings the range of colours had been wide, and paintings of the mid-1940s had used a strong, dominant orange, from the later 1940s until 1956-7 Bacon instead presented a dark realism of dust and shadows in which man is alone in a void. 
Colour returned to Bacon's work in the Hanover Gallery's dramatic exhibition in 1957 of his recent paintings. However, this was a show that suggested a crisis of direction for the artist. While American abstract expressionism was resurgent in Europe, Bacon presented some of the least convincing and most uncharacteristic paintings of his career. The exhibition was dominated by a series of paintings based on a photographic reproduction of Van Gogh's 'Painter on the Road to Tarascon', which had been destroyed in the Second World War. The dark and dusty paintings upon which Bacon's reputation rested were replaced by heightened colour and the recent use of thin stained grounds and dusty smearings gave way to thick, free, all-over painting. Despite their suggested movement, Bacon's earlier paintings had coherence; these latest pictures seemed uncomfortably hurried. The application of paint is slapdash rather than exhilarating, and the picture surface a dead end, not a space to be explored. Fortunately for his reputation, this moment was short-lived and Bacon subsequently derided most of these paintings. However, the lessons he learned about colour dramatically transformed his work through a series of paintings heralded by Bacon's triptych 'Three Studies for a Crucifixion' (1962; Guggenheim Museum, New York), which formed the climax of his Tate Gallery retrospective in 1962. 
By the time of this exhibition Bacon had moved from the Hanover Gallery to the Marlborough Gallery where he stayed from 1958 until his death. The devoted support and understanding he received there, above all from Valerie Beston, together with the Tate Gallery's retrospective, did much to consolidate Bacon's reputation. 
From the early 1960s Bacon created some of his most ambitious multi-figure compositions in which, for the first time, he placed at the centre of his efforts the exploration of his themes through the use of a large-scale triptych format, first used in 1944, to produce some of his most ambitious paintings. In 1961 he found a new studio at Reece Mews where he remained until his death. Although he had other studios, it was here that he did the majority of his paintings for the next thirty years. During the 1960s his range of colours widened and Bacon developed the interior settings that had previously been so stark, and introduced an ambiguous psychological dimension to his work. The possibilities of the triptych, using three canvases, each separately framed, allowed Bacon to show his figures to be at the same time related and separated. Several of these figures were based on Bacon's partner, George Dyer, with whom he became involved in 1963. Controversially, in one of the most powerful of all these triptychs, 'Crucifixion' (1965; Staatsgalerie Moderner Kunst, Munich) one of the onlookers wears an armband bearing a swastika to suggest a more specific contemporary resonance than Bacon usually allowed. During 1965-6 he gave increasing attention to painting small triptychs of heads. He had painted the first of these, 'Three Studies of the Human Head' (priv. coll.), in 1953, but now followed this early precedent in a memorable series of portraits of friends, including Isabel Rawsthorne, Muriel Belcher, and Lucian Freud. Reviewers likened this use of three views of the same subject to police mugshots of full-face and profile. This interpretation was encouraged by knowledge of Bacon's own use of public photo machines to provide him with source material. 
By the late 1960s the settings of Bacon's paintings had become more sophisticated, with spatial distortion often turning rectangular boxes into spheres to suggest subjects trapped in a paperweight. Mirrors also began to play a central part in allowing Bacon to combine more than one view of the subject and to chart different forms of fragmentation and dissolution. An immensely cultured man, Bacon drew inspiration from multifarious sources, sometimes making these explicit through his use of titles, as in 'Triptych Inspired by T. S. Eliot's Poem 'Sweeney Agonistes'' (1967; Hirshhorn Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC) and 'Triptych Inspired by the 'Oresteia' of Aeschylus' (1981; priv. coll.). 
In October 1971 the Grand Palais in Paris staged a major Francis Bacon retrospective that was dominated by his triptychs. Sadly the event, which should have been one of the triumphs of Bacon's life, was marred by tragedy: on the eve of the opening, Bacon's partner, George Dyer, committed suicide in their Paris hotel room. Bacon commemorated Dyer's death in ensuing paintings, including a triptych entitled 'Triptych in Memory of George Dyer' (November-December 1971; Foundation Beyeler collection, Switzerland). From 1974 Bacon had an apartment in Paris, such was his love for the city and its culture. He did little work there but established deep friendships, and the leading French intellectual Michel Leiris became one of his most articulate champions. In 1974 Bacon met John Edwards (1950-2003), with whom he formed a close paternal relationship, and Edwards was later named as his sole heir. 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art's exhibition 'Francis Bacon: Recent Paintings, 1968-74', in 1975, was the first time that works by a contemporary British artist had been shown by the museum. In the same year David Sylvester's interviews with Francis Bacon were published. Immensely revealing, the interviews provide insights not only into Bacon's art and times but also the art of the past. By the 1980s Bacon received major accolades, exhibitions, and tributes. In 1983 a first retrospective of Bacon's work was held in Japan, travelling to Tokyo, Kyoto, and Nagoya. Two years later the Tate Gallery held its second Bacon retrospective, an exhibition that travelled to the Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart and the Nationalgalerie in Berlin. In 1988 even the Soviet Union staged a Bacon retrospective, an almost unprecedented honour for a Western artist that was balanced by transatlantic acclaim the following year, when a major exhibition was held in America, travelling to the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington, the Los Angeles County Museum, and the Museum of Modern Art in New York. 
By this time one of the striking features of Bacon's 'oeuvre' had become the consistency of his vision and the rigour with which he focused on his themes. He occasionally also made surprising, powerful statements on subjects that were otherwise peripheral to his concerns. In the 1950s Bacon had painted memorable depictions of animals, most movingly in paintings of 1952 and 1953 of a prowling dog, and in the early and mid-1950s of a caged chimpanzee. Although landscapes are virtually absent from his 'oeuvre', Bacon did produce a turbulently evocative painting of dusty ground and windswept trees entitled 'Landscape near Malabata, Tangier' (1963; priv. coll.). Two extraordinary paintings of the 1980s, both set in indeterminate indoor-outdoor spaces, provide a remarkable climax to this little pursued theme: the smudgy 'Sand Dune' (1981; priv. coll.) and the ejaculatory 'Jet of Water' (1988; Marlborough International Fine Art, London). Together these paintings not only demonstrated Bacon's brilliant handling of paint, but also provided a riposte to a Romantic vision of nature. His increasing use of the airbrush as a painting technique resulted in innovative textural effects. There were spectacular successes during this decade, especially his portraits of John Edwards of 1986-8, but there were also accusations that his work had become formulaic, less engaged, and lacking in tension. Bacon decided to paint a second, larger version of his seminal early painting 'Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion'. This new version, 'Second Version of Triptych, 1944' (1988; Tate collection) replaced the poignantly scruffy original with an altogether grander, more imperial version, something Bacon had long wished to do. The result was not without critics: they felt that the grander dimensions and slicker painting technique of this second version resulted in pastiche, which robbed the original of much of its charge. He nevertheless continued to provide new insights into existing themes through increasingly spare paintings in which he pared down the settings and concentrated on essential anatomical details. In 'Triptych, 1991' (priv. coll.), Bacon's last triptych and his final statement of mortality, his general theme, there is a tremendous sense of desolation and loneliness. Much of each canvas is left bare and a defining feature is the dark square against which the figure is set: an engulfing void with intimations of death. A few months later, on 28 April 1992, Bacon died in Madrid where he had been visiting a friend. He was buried in Almudena cemetery, Madrid. He was internationally the most acclaimed British painter of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 50801


Bacon, Francis Thomas (1904-1992), engineer and developer of the fuel cell, was born on 21 December 1904 at Ramsden Hall, Ramsden Crays, Billericay, Essex, the second of three sons of Thomas Walter Bacon (1863-1950), electrical engineer, and his wife, Edith Mary, 'nee' Leslie-Melville (1864-1950). On his father's side Bacon traced his ancestry to Sir Nicholas Bacon (1509-1579), lord keeper of the great seal in the time of Elizabeth I, and father (by his second marriage) of Sir Francis Bacon (1561-1626), the philosopher and lord chancellor of England. Tom Bacon, as he was universally called, devoted his life to the development of the fuel cell, which he always believed offered the possibility of power without the pollution associated with internal combustion engines. Fuel cells, which convert the chemical energy of a fuel directly into electricity, were discovered by Sir William Grove in 1839 but, despite high theoretical efficiencies, remained a scientific curiosity until Bacon, adopting the approach of a creative engineer, developed a viable power source which provided the electrical power for the Apollo spacecraft for man's first voyage to the moon. 
Bacon was educated first at St Peter's Court preparatory school in Broadstairs, Kent, and then at Eton College from 1918 to 1922, gaining the school physics prize in 1922. From Eton he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, taking the mechanical sciences tripos in 1925. After Cambridge he became an apprentice with C. A. Parsons & Co. Ltd, in Newcastle. He was related to and strongly influenced by Sir Charles Parsons, who was described by Bacon as 'a marvellous man with the great quality of always keeping an open mind' (Williams, 3). After his apprenticeship in various departments he was responsible for the development and production of reflectors for searchlights and lights for the then fast growing film industry. During this period, on 4 August 1934, he married Barbara Winifred Papillon (1905/6-2000), daughter of Godfrey Keppel Papillon, estate agent, of the Manor House, Barrasford, Northumberland. They had two sons and one daughter. 
Inspired by two articles in the periodical 'Engineering' in 1932 Bacon began to contemplate the possibility of storing energy in the form of hydrogen and releasing it as electricity. Following Grove he first used platinum as catalyst and sulphuric acid as electrolyte. Hydrogen and oxygen were the two reacting gases. However, in order to reduce costs and improve power output, Bacon subsequently used nickel catalysts and potassium hydroxide as electrolyte. His original experiments were conducted clandestinely at Parsons but when he was discovered he was told either to stop them as not being relevant to the business or to leave; he left. Unlike many inventors he had independent means, his father having settled an appreciable portion of the family estate on him at an early age. This meant that throughout his life he was able to pursue his goal of power without pollution. In this aim the unwavering support of his wife, Barbara, was crucial. Also of great significance was Bacon's personal charm, which enabled him to gain support and finance from many quarters. 
The first concrete support for Bacon's work came from Charles Merz, founder of the consulting engineers Merz and McClellan, who agreed to finance experiments at King's College, London, in Professor A. J. Allmand's laboratory. Many problems were encountered, and although initially it was hoped that fuel cells could be used to power submarines, by late 1941 it was clear that this was not likely to be viable in the short term. Bacon was then directed to research on asdic (underwater submarine detection) at Fairlie in Scotland. 
After numerous rebuffs from industry, some of which were openly derisive, the Electrical Research Association agreed to sponsor fuel cell research, and in 1946 Bacon and his wife settled in a house in 19 acres in Little Shelford, Cambridgeshire, with their three children, Francis (the eldest, who died when twenty-three), Daphne, and Edward. Work was carried out successively in the departments of colloid science, metallurgy, and chemical engineering at Cambridge University from 1946 to 1956. Although a six-cell 150 watt unit was demonstrated at a London exhibition, no interest was shown by industry; the team disbanded and the apparatus was transferred to an outhouse on Bacon's estate. After an anxious six months of inactivity for Bacon, Lord Halsbury, the managing director of the National Research Development Corporation, agreed to finance further development of the Bacon fuel cell. Arthur Marshall, of Marshalls of Cambridge, provided the necessary facilities, and, with a very happy, competent team of engineers and chemists, under the scientific direction of Bacon, and not without overcoming many difficulties, developed a 6 kW system in 1959. 
Although there was no interest in Britain the Leesona-Moos organization in the USA took out a licence which was then exploited by the Pratt and Whitney Division of United Aircraft to provide a highly efficient (75 per cent) power source for the Apollo moon project, the exhaust providing drinking water for the astronauts and humidification of the spacecraft atmosphere. After the success of the space mission Bacon was widely honoured, being invited to 10 Downing Street to meet the astronauts. On a visit Bacon made to the United States, President Nixon put his arm around his shoulders and said 'Without you Tom, we wouldn't have gotten to the Moon' (Williams, 13). 
Bacon received many honours including being made OBE (civil division) in 1967 and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1973; he received the Churchill gold medal of the Society of Engineers in 1972. For the rest of his life he continued to promote the fuel cell with its potential for clean power. He died at his home, Trees, 34 High Street, Little Shelford, Cambridgeshire, of heart failure, on 24 May 1992. He was buried at All Saints' Church, Little Shelford, on 1 June. He was survived by his wife, Barbara, his daughter, Daphne, and his son Edward. His papers were deposited with the Archives Centre of Churchill College, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 50807


Barker, Sir William (1909-1992), diplomatist and Russian scholar, was born on 19 July 1909 at 3 Plank Lane, Leigh, Lancashire, the eldest of the three children of Alfred Barker, master baker and later licensed victualler, and his wife, Annie, formerly Arden ('nee' Atherton). He was educated at Leigh grammar school; Liverpool University, where he took first-class honours in Russian studies; and Charles University, Prague, where he obtained a doctorate for a dissertation on 'the influence of Lord Byron on the poet, dramatist, and journalist J. V. Fric (1829-1890)'. The thesis was supervised by Professor Vilem Mathesius and Professor Jiri Horak. Barker taught for a number of years at the English grammar school in Prague, but returned shortly before the Second World War to take up a post in adult education in Durham. On 19 August 1939 he married Margaret ('b'. 1911), a graduate teacher, daughter of Thomas Beirne, coalminer. They had a daughter and a son. 
On the outbreak of war Barker joined the intelligence corps and was at first posted to the Bletchley Park code-breaking centre; but following the fall of France he was transferred to serve as a liaison officer with the Czechoslovak forces in Britain. In April 1943 he was seconded to the Foreign Office, and two years later he returned to Prague as first secretary in the British embassy when it was reopened at the end of the war. From 1947 to 1951 he served in Moscow, where, as head of the embassy's 'Russian secretariat', he made his mark as an expert interpreter of Soviet politics. Postings followed to Oslo (1951-4), Boston, Massachusetts (as consul-general, 1954-5), Washington DC (1955-60), and Moscow again (1960-63) as minister. Thereafter he held a fellowship at Harvard University Centre for International Affairs (1963-4); and was assistant under-secretary of state in the Foreign Office (1965-6) and ambassador to Czechoslovakia (1966-8). After retirement from the diplomatic service in December 1968 he was appointed Bowes professor of Russian at Liverpool University, a post he held from 1969 to 1976. 
As a Slavonic linguist Barker was one of only a handful to emerge in Britain between the wars (remarkably, another was his own school contemporary G. H. Bolsover, later director of London University school of Slavonic and East European studies). By temperament a thinker rather than a man of action, he would probably have devoted his life to education had it not been for the war. His versatility however was attested by the fact that, though entering the Foreign Office at the relatively late age of thirty-four, he attained the highest rank in the service. His subsequent return to his alma mater, though personally gratifying, left insufficient time to consolidate his earlier scholarly promise. 
Barker's two areas of expertise -- linguistic and cultural studies and political analysis -- complemented each other perfectly. This was well illustrated by his contact with and reaction to the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchov. In April 1956 Barker was summoned from Washington to act as principal interpreter with Khrushchov and Bulganin during their celebrated visit to Britain. This experience gave him valuable insight into the Soviet leader's personality. He referred to it when delivering his inaugural lecture, 'N. S. Khrushchev: an assessment', at Liverpool on 4 December 1969: in this he offered a severely critical appraisal of Khrushchov as a state and party leader, concluding, however, with a typically humane comment: 'But you can't help liking the man!'. 
The USSR was the state whose politics were the most important subject of Barker's attention as diplomat and academic; but Czechoslovakia was the Slav country which he first encountered and in which he lived for longest. When he returned there in October 1966 as ambassador, his pre-war experience and wartime and post-war contacts with Czechs and Slovaks stood him in good stead. Nevertheless, the Warsaw pact countries' invasion in August 1968 presented this mild-mannered, meticulous man with the toughest challenge of his career: how to organize the assembly, protection, sustenance, and repatriation of hundreds of British subjects who were caught in Prague. With the aid of the embassy staff and his immediate family he succeeded in this magnificently. 
Bill Barker was a modest, kindly, and gracious but intellectually rigorous person, devoted to his family, and a distinguished servant of his country. He was appointed OBE in 1949, CMG in 1958, and KCMG in 1967. He was also awarded the Czechoslovak order of the White Lion. He died from a cerebral thrombosis on 8 January 1992 at his home, 19 Moors Way, Woodbridge, Suffolk. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 50808


Barnes, Sir Denis Charles (1914-1992), civil servant and industrial relations expert, was born on 15 December 1914 at 4 Station Road, Openshaw, Manchester, the second son and fifth of six children of Frederick Charles Barnes ('c'.1870- 'c'.1920), a school attendance officer for the local education committee, and his wife, Martha Lilley, 'nee' Berry (1876- 'c'.1920). His parents were self-educated, avid users of public libraries, and keen to see their children educated. From this lower-middle-class metropolitan background, Barnes attended Plymouth Grove elementary school, Manchester, and won scholarships to Hulme grammar school, Manchester, and Merton College, Oxford, where he graduated with first-class honours in modern history in 1936 and a second-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1937. He went straight from Oxford into the civil service, joining the Ministry of Labour. On 29 April 1938 he married Patricia Abercrombie ('b'. 1917), a novelist and the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Murray Abercrombie. They met at a party in London. After their marriage they lived in flats in Battersea and then at 170 Gloucester Place, London, acquiring a rural retreat at Serridge Lodge in the Forest of Dean in the 1960s. There were no children of the marriage. 
Barnes spent his entire career in the home civil service, except for a year touring the USA and two years on secondment to the Foreign Office. He served as private secretary to the minister of labour, George Isaac, in 1945-7, and then progressed steadily within the ministry, becoming deputy secretary in 1963 and succeeding Sir James Dunnett as permanent secretary in 1966. The ministry was renamed the Department of Employment and Productivity in 1968 and the Department of Employment in 1970; Barnes remained permanent secretary until the end of 1973. He was made CB in 1964 and KCB in 1967. 
Barnes was not an archetypal civil servant. Though possessing one of the best brains of his generation, he was more of a fixer than a paper-based policy analyst; he was very outward looking, and latterly spent much time offering advice lying on a ministry sofa. He did not treat his headquarters at 8 St James's Square as an ivory tower, instead forging very active personal links with the press (especially the corps of industrial correspondents), with industrial leaders, and with members of the TUC general council, including successive general secretaries. Defeatist and pessimistic about Britain's post-war, post-empire role, in private he would counsel orderly retreat in terms of global influence and industrial clout, and, at times, in the face of trade-union power. 
Growing impatient with voluntary negotiation in the early 1960s, Barnes sought to improve workers' protection by a burst of legislation on contracts of employment, redundancy payments, and industrial training. He also favoured the establishment of the Donovan royal commission on trades unions and employers' associations (1965-8). Scarred by the Wilson government's failure to support the attempt of his minister Barbara Castle to implement the Donovan commission's findings by regulating unions' access to industrial action through the white paper 'In Place of Strife' (1969), Barnes underwent something of a personal U-turn in his views in 1970, concluding that though statutory intervention was logically necessary, both to regulate strikes and to control pay inflation, no British government would see it through. 
At his best when keeping his finger on the pulse of major industrial disputes, Barnes used the infamous back door to 8 St James's Square both to listen to and to advise a string of employers and trade-union leaders, and the occasional independent arbitrator. Immensely influential, this talent was widely recognized in Whitehall and he often visited no. 10 to give personal advice to prime ministers Wilson and Heath. Wilson went so far as to describe him as 'the best Permanent Secretary in Whitehall' (B. Castle, 'The Castle Diaries, 1964-76', 1990, 215). His influence probably peaked in 1972, which saw the first miners' strike settled by the Wilberforce inquiry and a prolonged search by the Heath administration for a voluntary pact on pay. Barnes viewed a pact as akin to the philosopher's stone and he fell out of favour when in November 1972 the Heath administration changed tack and a statutory pay, prices, and dividend freeze was introduced. As permanent secretary he permitted radical restructuring of his department, creating executive agencies including the Health and Safety Executive, the Training Services Agency (TSA), the Employment Services Agency (ESA), and the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS). 
In 1973 it was decided that the TSA and the ESA should be overseen by the tripartite Manpower Services Commission, and Barnes became the commission's first chairman, in 1974. Unemployment had reached a post-war peak of 1 million in early 1972. Barnes encouraged large-scale vocational training and job creation schemes, and saw the benchmark -- 100,000 trainees -- achieved. He established a degree of independence from the department, which positioned the commission well for the subsequent development of extensive youth training schemes; these eventually 'de facto' extended the formal period of education and training for most young people in Britain to the age of eighteen. He retired from the Manpower Services Commission in 1976, settling with his wife at Wittersham, Kent. He was president of the Manpower Society from 1976, and a director of Glynwed Ltd and the General Accident, Fire and Life Assurance Corporation. 
Idiosyncratic, cynical, and sometimes destructively witty, Barnes inspired huge loyalty from the small circle of colleagues he allowed close. As a modern historian he looked back with pleasure at the lasting achievements of the Manpower Services Commission, and with amazement at Margaret Thatcher's changes to the industrial relations landscape he had thought unattainable. Perhaps to keep the dark arts of conciliation veiled, his own book (written with Eileen Reid), 'Government and Trade Unions' (1980), was bland, uninformative, and pessimistic, and was described at the time by Geoffrey Goodman writing in the 'Daily Mirror' (3 June 1980) as a Wagnerian account of frustration and failure. As a social reformer Barnes made permanent gains in worker protection and vocational training, but in industrial relations his caution and fear of revolution may have delayed reform. He was christened into the Church of England, but was not a practising member. He died following an allergic reaction to a bee sting at his home, the Old Inn, 30 The Street, Wittersham, Kent, on 6 May 1992, and was buried in Wittersham churchyard about five days later. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50810


Barnett, Sir Denis Hensley Fulton (1906-1992), air force officer, was born in Dunedin, New Zealand, on 11 February 1906, son of Sir Louis Edward Barnett CMG (died 1946), a surgeon, and his wife, Mabel Violet, 'nee' Fulton. He was educated at Christ's College, Christchurch, New Zealand, and Clare College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1929, proceeding MA in 1935. 
At Cambridge, Barnett learnt to fly with the university air squadron and was commissioned into the RAF officer reserve. He received a permanent commission in the RAF in 1929, rising to the rank of flight lieutenant by 1934. In these early years he had periods as an instructor and had some experience of what was then the fledgeling art of army co-operation. By the late 1930s, however, he was committed to bombers, and in 1938 was placed in command of 84 squadron, which operated antiquated Vickers Vincent biplanes from Shaybah, Iraq. On 22 April 1939 Barnett married Pamela ('b'. 1918/19), daughter of the late Sir Allen John Grant, engineer, at Christchurch, Sheffield. They had a son and two daughters. 
Throughout the Second World War Barnett served with Bomber Command. With the fall of France in 1940 he was given command of 40 squadron of Blenheim bombers and ordered to attack German shipping in the Channel ports where amphibious forces were being assembled for an invasion of Britain. These planes lacked any real punch in terms of bomb load, were lightly armed, and had a low top speed which made them easy prey to enemy fighters. Faced with a difficult and dangerous task, Barnett and his crews nevertheless made a series of courageous raids whose nuisance value, if not material destruction, was considerable. His leadership in these operations earned him the DFC in 1940. 
Barnett was promoted to group captain in 1941 and for the remainder of the war commanded bomber stations and a bomber group, subsequently occupying the posts of deputy director, bomber operations, Air Ministry (1944), and senior air staff officer, Bomber Command headquarters (1945). Promoted to air commodore in 1945, he served as director of air operations, Air Ministry, until 1946 before joining the air staff in India (1946-7). Periods of service with the Staff College, Camberley (1948), and central bomber establishment followed. 
With the Malayan emergency of the early 1950s Barnett once more found himself organizing bombing operations with outdated aircraft, in this case the Avro Lincoln, a lumbering, piston-driven, four-engine bomber that made little impact against an enemy hiding in thick jungle. By contrast, at the time of the Suez crisis Barnett, who had risen to the rank of air vice-marshal in 1953, was placed in command of allied air task force, Near East, where an all-jet bomber force was at his disposal. When the Anglo-French offensive began on 31 October 1956, Valiant and Canberra bombers, together with the Royal Navy's carrier-borne aircraft, virtually annihilated the Egyptian air force on the ground within forty-eight hours. This action paved the way for the invasion which went ahead untroubled by Egyptian air attacks: a result that was a tribute to Barnett's ability to organize and utilize the precise capabilities of aircraft available to him. 
Thereafter Barnett's career flourished. Promoted to air marshal in 1959 and air chief marshal in 1962, he held the posts of commandant, RAF staff college, Bracknell (1956); air secretary, Air Ministry (1957-9); air officer commanding-in-chief, RAF Transport Command (1959-62); and air officer commanding-in-chief, RAF Near East (1962-4). In this last and final position, he was responsible for British forces in Cyprus and the administration of the sovereign base areas. 
In retirement Barnett was a full-time member of the Atomic Energy Commission with special responsibility for weapons research and development (1965-72). A quiet man who enjoyed fishing in his spare time, his leadership was thoughtful rather than fiery. Yet beneath a modest exterior was a person of great personal bravery with a capacity for outstanding tactical analysis. Barnett was made CBE (1945), CB (1956), KCB (1957), and GCB (1964). In addition, he was appointed commander, US Legion of Merit (1954) and awarded the French Legion d'honneur (commandeur) and Croix de Guerre (1958). 
Barnett died at his home, River House, Rushall, Pewsey, Wiltshire, of coronary thrombosis on 31 December 1992. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 50816


Rognvald (II) Brusason (d. 1046), earl of Orkney, an outstanding member of the earldom family, who also played a foremost role in the stirring events that took place in Norway in the following decade. He participated in the battle of Stiklestad, and went into exile with Harald Hardrada to Novgorod, returning with Magnus Olafsson the Good to Norway in 1035. The following year he was given the title of earl, three fully equipped long ships, and one-third of the islands by Magnus, although when he arrived in Orkney he claimed his father's third also, which Thorfinn allowed, 'because his hands were full with the Hebrideans and the Irish' ('Orkneyinga Saga', chap. 22). The two campaigned together in the Hebrides, Ireland, and a wide area of western Scotland, and this successful partnership continued for several years, culminating in raids on England during Harthacnut's reign (1040-42). They must have made a dramatic contrast: Rognvald, 'one of the handsomest of men, with a fine head of golden hair, smooth as silk', who had 'a great reputation for his shrewdness and courtesy' (ibid., chap. 19), and Thorfinn, 'unusually tall and strong, an ugly-looking man with a black head of hair, sharp features, a big nose and bushy eyebrows' but 'a forceful man, greedy for fame and fortune' (ibid., chap. 20). 


@@@@@


doc= 50817


Blackwood, Lady Alicia (1818-1913), nurse and philanthropist, was born probably on 29 November 1818 at Eaglehurst, near Ower Green in Hampshire, the daughter of George Frederick Augustus Lambart, Viscount Kilcoursie (1789-1828), and Sarah Coppin (died 1823), the only daughter of J. P. Coppin of Cowley, Oxfordshire. Alicia was baptized in the parish church at Fawley on 13 December 1818. After her eldest brother, Frederick John William, succeeded as eighth earl of Cavan in 1838 Alicia and her brother Oliver George and sisters, Henrietta Augusta and Julia, received a royal patent of precedence giving them the rank of an earl's children. 
Alicia Lambart spent her childhood at the Cavan country seats of Eaglehurst in Hampshire and Sharpham Park, near Broomfield in Somerset. Orphaned in 1828, she was probably brought up by relatives and educated at home. On 13 April 1849 she married the Revd James Stevenson Blackwood (died 1882). Blackwood had attended Trinity College, Dublin, where he qualified as a barrister-at-law in 1835. He undertook studies in divinity and was ordained deacon in the Anglican church in 1847; in 1848 he was made a prebendary of Winchester. 
The Blackwoods were prominent members of the Evangelical Alliance founded by Edward Bickersteth, a leading evangelical clergyman and Lord Shaftesbury's private counsellor. They took an active part in London's religious and philanthropic life, travelling regularly from Yorkshire to assemble at the alliance headquarters at Exeter Hall, the major public platform for evangelical religious and social campaigns, and the centre of domestic and overseas missionary activities. From 1846 the Evangelical Alliance organized annual meetings for Reformed protestants from England, Ireland, Scotland, the United States, France, Geneva, and Germany. The Blackwoods attended many of these religious meetings, where they made numerous friends, including two young Swedish women, Ebba and Emma Almroth, whom they met at an Evangelical Alliance conference in Lausanne in early 1856. 
The war in the Crimea, the fall of Sevastopol, and news of the calamitous situation following the battle of Inkerman 'deeply moved' the Blackwoods and Lady Alicia was spurred into action (Blackwood, 2). She organized a small volunteer party to travel to Scutari and in early November 1854 Lady Alicia, her young Swedish friends, a maidservant, and her husband travelled overland and then by the 'La Gange', a French troopship, arriving at Seraglio Point in mid-December. 
From the first days in Scutari, Lady Alicia recorded her experiences in a journal which formed the basis of a wartime memoir, 'A narrative of personal experiences and impressions during a residence on the Bosphorus throughout the Crimean War' (1881). In this memoir she related that she presented herself to the authorities as a willing helper, begging to be 'usefully employed' (Blackwood, 49). James Blackwood immediately secured a post as a military chaplain, and when Florence Nightingale was convinced that Lady Alicia was in earnest and willing to work she was asked to take charge of 200 women sheltering in appalling conditions in the foul basements of the great barrack hospital at Scutari. Lady Alicia described the scene as 'a Pandemonium full of cursing and swearing and drunkenness' (Blackwood, 50). 
Lady Alicia quickly demonstrated her energy and resourcefulness. Initially she took responsibility for 280 women and infants, many of them the wives, widows, and children of soldiers who had arrived from Varna in wretched condition. While sympathetic to the women's plight, Florence Nightingale regarded them as hindrances to the major task of caring for military casualties. With supplies brought from England, charitable gifts, supplemented with goods bought locally, Lady Alicia set up a women's hospital in a rented house. There, with two 'industrious and respectable' women employed as nurses and laundresses, a resident matron, and Dr Peyton Smith, sent out from Leeds, Lady Alicia began work (Blackwood, 54). Observing the destitute condition of the women, she soon decided to establish a small shop to distribute 'gifts to the women' (ibid., 57) sent from England, and to sell tea, soap, and calico at subsidized prices on two mornings each week. Flannel material and soap were in greatest demand. The women's hospital was supported by private subscriptions. As a result of her appeals in 1855 a charity to aid Lady Alicia's work for soldiers' children was established in England by Lord Kinnaird: the Soldiers' Infant Home was to house 100 children (ibid., 317). 
At Scutari, Lady Alicia took charge of a lying-in ward, an invalid hospital, and established a small infants' school with a Sunday school which she supplied with 'bibles', prayers, and tracts. At the request of Sister Bernadine of the Roman Catholic Sisters of Mercy, Lady Alicia established a small school for the children of German Jewish families who had fled from Kerch by sea. Mainly artisans, the families were destitute and had taken up temporary residence in Pera, inland from Tophana. With assistance from a 'Mr. C--- ', a German convert employed by the English Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews, she enrolled fifty-six pupils. By the time peace was proclaimed in Constantinople in March 1856 Lady Alicia recorded that she had 500 women 'more or less' under her charge (Blackwood, 237). Lady Alicia and her chaplain husband worked for fifteen months ministering to the sick and dying. At the end of the war they managed to travel, visiting Balaklava, Inkerman, Chernaya valley, and Cathcart's Hill. They delivered translated bibles and testaments to vanquished Russian soldiers, and travelled to see the khans of Bakhchisaray, the resort of the Karaite Jews in the valley of Jehoshaphat. Lady Alicia recalled that the southern part of the Crimea was reduced to 'one vast cemetery' (Blackwood, 255). 
According to Lady Alicia the wartime journal remained untouched until the death in 1880 of Sultan, her favourite horse, acquired in Scutari and transported to England on the Blackwoods' return in July 1856. The horse had remained 'a connecting link between those stirring and deeply interesting times and the present' (Blackwood, 310). Sultan's death prompted Lady Alicia to recount the 'scenes impressed on our memories that can never be effaced and have been since as monitors to check discontent' (Blackwood, 59). 
In her 'Narrative' Lady Alicia recounted incidents at the women's hospital, conversations with Florence Nightingale and other prominent helpers, and the difficulties in organization. In addition she graphically described the agonies of men dying on the battlefields from wounds and from infectious disease; in freezing winter temperatures frostbite and exposure were constant enemies. Burials, the silent aftermath of battles, rocky cemeteries, and new memorials are poignantly evoked and yet, occasionally offsetting tragedy, Lady Alicia's lively and informative travelogue is reminiscent of Lady Mary Wortley Montague's eighteenth-century Turkish 'Letters'. Just as Lady Mary had been, Lady Alicia was an acute observer of Turkish women's manners and customs. In her 'Narrative' she conveyed vivid descriptions and opinions on Turkish women's demeanour and dress, and managed to communicate her interest well enough to receive invitations to visit the local women's domestic quarters where she 'fraternised', receiving coffee, a hookah, and sweetmeats (Blackwood, 85-6). She supplied her 'Narrative' with illustrations -- pencil sketches of Turkish and Crimean scenery. These were also published separately as an album, 'Scutari, the Bosphorus, and the Crimea, 24 Sketches' (1857). Her wry humour made light of difficulties, and through her writing Lady Alicia emerges as a venturesome individual with a practical streak, kind, earnest, and deeply religious. 
After the Crimean War the Blackwoods returned to the Yorkshire parish of Middleton Tyas, where James Blackwood was appointed vicar. There Lady Alicia applied herself to parish and charitable work, notably for the British and Foreign Bible Society. Correspondence with Florence Nightingale continued sporadically until 1866. On the Revd James Blackwood's retirement in 1874 they moved to Boxmoor House, near Bovingdon in Hertfordshire, where they lived quietly. James Blackwood died in 1882 and Lady Alicia lived on at Boxmoor House continuing her charitable and religious work. She wrote another book, 'Six in the Fold, and One: Narratives Drawn from Life', published by the Religious Tract Society in 1892. 
Lady Alicia Blackwood died at Boxmoor House on 30 July 1913 at the age of ninety-four. As the Blackwoods were childless Lady Alicia left the bulk of her estate to her sister-in-law, the Hon. Elizabeth Lambart, and provided legacies to her sister, Lady Julia Bouwens, her nieces and nephews, and close friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 50818


Thynne, Henry Frederick, sixth marquess of Bath (1905-1992), landowner and businessman, was born in the great Elizabethan house of Longleat, Wiltshire, on 26 January 1905, the second son and youngest of five children of Thomas Henry Thynne, fifth marquess of Bath (1862-1946), and his wife, Violet Caroline (1869-1928), putative daughter of Sir Charles Mordaunt, tenth baronet, and his first wife, Harriet Sarah, 'nee' Moncreiffe. His childhood was spent principally at Longleat, where the fifth marquess lived in high pomp even after the First World War, keeping twenty indoor servants, the footmen kitted out in silk stockings and cocked hats. On the death of his elder brother on the western front on 13 February 1916, Henry Thynne became Viscount Weymouth and heir to the massive Longleat estate. 'How can I look after you?', he asked the great south front of the house upon hearing the news of his inheritance, 'I'll never be able to do it' ('The Independent', 1 July 1992). 
As Viscount Weymouth, Thynne was given a traditional upper-class education at Harrow School and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he studied agriculture. At Oxford he formed part of an odd intersection between the horsey and the arty sets, joining the 'bright young people' and befriending extreme aesthetes such as Brian Howard, the model for Anthony Blanche in Evelyn Waugh's 'Brideshead Revisited'. As a result of their friendship Howard uncharacteristically took up riding and designed colours for Weymouth: four yellow hearts on a black background. Through Howard, Weymouth met Daphne Winifred Louise Vivian ['see 'Fielding, Daphne (1904-1997)], only daughter of George Crespigny Brabazon Vivian, fourth Baron Vivian, and his first wife, Barbara, daughter of William Atonar Fanning. Facing parental opposition, they married privately at St Paul's, Knightsbridge, under the names of Frederick Thynne and Winifred Vivian, on 8 October 1926. Weymouth then left for America with his friend and future brother-in-law Lord Nunburnholme. After an eventful period working on a Texas ranch and exploring Latin America, Weymouth returned to announce his engagement to Daphne Vivian in May 1927; the couple were married publicly at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 27 October 1927. 
Weymouth buckled down to the responsibilities of Longleat, the management of which he took over in 1928. After some further training with the agent of Lockinge Park (owned by relatives of Daphne's), he set about vigorously modernizing and professionalizing the estate. Unnecessary staff were laid off and commercial forestry was undertaken. Weymouth also had the foresighted idea of developing the tourist potential of the caves at Cheddar Gorge, for which he had an unusually modernistic restaurant and museum designed by the landscape architects Geoffrey Jellicoe and Russell Page. He left alone for the time being the big house, where his father continued to reside. Instead he and Daphne lived in more modest houses on the estate, where they could keep up a bohemian lifestyle and friendships with the likes of Cecil Beaton and Robert Byron. They had five children: (Thomas) Timothy (1929-1930), Alexander George ('b'. 1932), Christopher John ('b'. 1934), Valentine Charles (1937-1979), and Caroline Jane (1928-1995). At his father's insistence Weymouth also took on the Conservative candidacy for Frome in 1931 and he served reluctantly as its MP until 1935, but his heart was in land management and the good life, not in politics. 
The Second World War disrupted this idyllic existence. Weymouth joined the Royal Wiltshire yeomanry. He was wounded at the battle of El Alamein, taking a piece of shrapnel in the throat, 'when I was walking about the battlefield on my own... I was bored -- I had lost my tank and I had nothing to do' (Longleat MSS). It was not, as one obituary had it, while leading the Moonrakers tank charge at Tel-el-Aquaquoir, which he missed entirely. Weymouth was invalided home and an old shooting friend, General Pete Corlett, invented a position for him as British liaison officer to the American 19th corps, posted near Longleat. Weymouth's exploits with the 19th corps after D-day earned him bronze and silver stars from the Americans. 
Shortly after the war's end, on 9 June 1946, the fifth marquess of Bath died. Although he had long before handed over to Weymouth the Longleat estate, hoping to escape death duties, he had retained too much capital for too long and the sixth marquess was faced with a bill of $700,000. To pay this he sold 5400 of his 16,000 acres. Almost as daunting as death duties was the great house, then occupied by an evacuated girls' school. To cover its running costs, estimated at $30,000 per annum, Bath thought first of converting it into a luxury hotel, but then decided to open it to the public on a commercial basis, inspired by his success at Cheddar. Apart from Warwick Castle, there was no precedent for mounting a commercial tourist operation at a stately home and in conditions of post-war austerity the venture was a considerable risk. The Baths approached the project with their customary flair, paving estate roads for what they hoped would be a flood of traffic, opening a cafe in the basement, and courting all the publicity they could get. They opened for business on 1 April 1949. To the world's amazement Longleat drew 135,000 visitors in that first year and a new tourist industry took off on its example. Bath soon had the whole estate on a sound economic footing; he also continued in commercial forestry and again called in Russell Page, this time to develop the gardens around the house. 
The Baths' marriage had suffered badly from their wartime separation and their joint venture with the house did not serve to repair the damage. The marriage was dissolved in May 1953 and both parties remarried almost immediately. Daphne married the writer Xan Fielding, Henry (on 15 July 1953) married Virginia Penelope Tennant ('b'. 1917), daughter of Alan Leonard Romaine Parsons and his wife, Viola, 'nee' Tree, and formerly the wife of the Hon. David Tennant. Soon after their remarriages the publication of Daphne's memoir 'Mercury Presides' (1954) revealed the secret of the private wedding, which had not been annulled; it took an appeal to the High Court to get the annulment extended, in 1955. 'Darling', remarked Osbert Lancaster's cartoon character Maudie Littlehampton, 'do you remember betting me a fiver that it was going to prove a lot easier to unite the Germans than to separate the Baths?' Safely unbigamized, the marquess and his new marchioness then had a daughter, Silvy Cerne ('b'. 1958). 
As the stately home business expanded, Bath remained constantly alive to the need to keep his own pioneering operation competitive. He had put pedalos on the lake as early as 1953, opened a garden centre in 1960, and employed a public relations officer, simply to keep numbers at their initial high levels. He was determined to maintain Longleat as a commercial business independent of government subsidy, scorning grants to historic buildings as 'iniquitous' (though he took them eventually to staunch an infestation of death-watch beetle). In 1964 he leapt at a proposal, advanced by the circus impresario Jimmy Chipperfield, for an open-air safari park on the estate. When it was announced that the park would feature a drive-through lion enclosure, the local and national press attacked the 'mad Marquess', 'The Times' growling that 'cattle, sheep and deer ought to be good enough for a Wiltshireman' ('The Times', 2 Sept 1965). But the opening of the joint venture in April 1966 was a popular triumph, and, boosted further by a new exhibition of Churchilliana in the house, tourist numbers jumped to 300,000 for the house and 100,000 for the safari park. Other gimmicks followed: kitchens with waxwork servants, television tie-ins, and teddy bear rallies. 
Somewhat grudgingly, Bath had already handed over management of the bulk of the estate to his heir, Alexander, Viscount Weymouth, having taken care to convey legal ownership as early as 1958, with death duties keenly in mind. As he aged, edging out of the limelight that he had so much enjoyed, Bath devoted himself more to building up his personal collections, which included children's books and items associated with Churchill, Edward VIII, Margaret Thatcher, and, controversially, Hitler. Much criticism had attached to him for his purchase of two Hitler watercolours at auction in 1960. More came when he confessed to admiring the man. Ultimately he built up the world's largest collection of Hitler paintings, garnished with other ghoulish Nazi memorabilia. A huge sale of books netting over $300,000 in 1979 cleared remaining debts, and under his son's management, and with land values soaring, the estate was riding high. He died at Crockerton, Wiltshire, on 30 June 1992, and his ashes were buried in the family vault at Longbridge Deverill church. By the time of his death the sixth marquess had answered triumphantly his youthful question to the great house, 'How can I look after you?' 


@@@@@


doc= 50825


Anne Ethel Beloff-Chain (1921-1991), biochemist, was born in Hampstead, Middlesex, on 26 June 1921, the youngest of the five children of Simon Beloff, export merchant, of Russian Jewish origin, and his wife, Marie, 'nee' Katzin. Max Beloff, Baron Beloff (1913-1999), historian, and Nora Beloff (1919-1997), journalist, were among her older siblings. She read chemistry at University College, London, graduating with first-class honours in 1942, and pursued her doctoral research on the biochemistry of skin burns at Oxford under Sir Rudolph Peters, and subsequently at Harvard Medical School with Dr Chris Anfinson and Dr Baird Hastings. In 1947 she returned briefly to Oxford as a tutor in biochemistry at Somerville College before marrying Chain and accompanying him to Rome. While raising their children she held the post of chief research scientist at the Istituto Superiore di Sanita, investigating intermediate metabolism in animal tissues, especially the biochemistry of insulin and other hormones. On their return to London, both were employed at Imperial College, Anne as reader in biochemistry and, from 1983, professor of biochemistry. In 1986 she moved to the new University of Buckingham as professor to set up and direct an active research group in biochemistry, with funding from the Clore Foundation. She shared with her husband delight in their extended families and a concern with social and charitable causes. She was also involved with the Weizman Institute of Science in Israel, where she was a governor and member of its executive council. She died at her home in Camden, London, on 2 December 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 50828


Benn, John Meriton (1908-1992), educationist and civil servant, was born on 16 July 1908 at 231 Manchester Road, Burnley, Lancashire, the third of the five children of Ernest Benn (1871-1935), leather merchant, and his wife, (Emily) Louise, 'nee' Hey (1879-1957). John Benn was educated at Burnley grammar school and Christ's College, Cambridge (1926-30), where he was a scholar and took a degree in French and German, with a first class in French. He became a teacher at Exeter School (1931-4), Lektor at Halle University (1934), and then a teacher at Regent Street Polytechnic secondary school, London (1935). In the same year he published a school text of 'Practical French Proses'. On 18 April 1933 he married Valentine Rosemary Seward (1910-1998), daughter of William Seward. They had two daughters, Diana and Susan. 
In 1935, at the very early age of twenty-seven, Benn became a divisional inspector of schools in Northern Ireland, and moved to Londonderry. This was a determining event for him, as he lived in Northern Ireland for the rest of his life, and became an outstanding public servant there. As an inspector he was immersed in the strengths and weaknesses of Ulster public elementary schools. The children left school at fourteen, classes of over fifty children were commonplace, parents had to pay for all books, there were no school meals, and there was virtually no school transport. Benn recalled that most rural schools had no artificial lighting and very often no running water, and that the teachers laid and lit the fires in the morning. And yet, he insisted, there was often first-class education in progress, and he admired many of the teachers he encountered. But the system was frugal and old-fashioned, and once the 1944 Butler proposals for England and Wales were known, the case for radical change in Northern Ireland was overwhelming. 
In 1944 Benn ceased to be a school inspector, moved to Belfast as a principal in the Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland, and emerged as the administrative driving force in adapting the 'Butler Education Act' so that universal secondary education was provided for in Northern Ireland, building partly on the private secondary school system which had run parallel to the elementary schools. The separate Roman Catholic schools were retained, and were substantially grant-aided. During the next twenty years, thanks to greatly increased exchequer funding, a completely new network of secondary schools was created and the old secondary schools became high-standard selective grammar schools. The facilities which had been lacking before the war became commonplace. A secondary-school examination system, fully compatible with the system in England and Wales, was introduced. The Ulster College, which evolved later into the University of Ulster, was established. Benn, who became assistant secretary in 1951, senior assistant secretary in 1959, and permanent secretary in 1964, had a gift for steady constructive action, and without him the changes in Northern Ireland would have been far less effectively made. 
In 1969, as one of the responses to the tensions that had erupted in 1968, Benn was appointed the first Northern Ireland commissioner for complaints (or ombudsman), dealing with allegations of unfair practices by local and public bodies. For this post he was ideally suited by temperament and background, and he held it until 1973. It was coupled with the post of Northern Ireland parliamentary commissioner for administration in 1972-3. He gave much time and thought to individuals, and was adept at reconciling conflicting interests. After retirement he was chairman of the Northern Ireland schools examination council (1974-81); pro-chancellor of Queen's University, Belfast, and chairman of the senate (1979-86); chairman of the board of governors of Rupert Stanley College of Further Education (1986-91); and chairman of the board of governors of Sullivan Upper School, Holywood (1987-9). 
Throughout his life Benn was interested in people. He was immensely sociable, and relished nothing better than exercising his skill as a raconteur and enjoying the pleasure of good company. He showed a remarkable gift for understanding ordinary human problems. When he summed up fraught discussions on Irish issues, which he was often asked to do, he was wonderfully fair and illuminating. His integrity, ability, and goodwill were unmistakable. At St Mark's, the Church of Ireland parish at Dundela, Belfast, he was a regular worshipper, church warden, and expert bellringer. He was also an enthusiastic and successful actor with his local dramatic society, the Holywood players. His contribution to society in Northern Ireland was recognized by his appointment as CB in 1969 and the award of an honorary degree of LLD by Queen's University in 1973. He died at 75 Church Road, Holywood, co. Down, on 16 September 1992, and was cremated at Roselawn crematorium, Belfast, following a funeral service in the church of St Philip and St James, Holywood, on 18 September. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 50840


Bohm, David Joseph (1917-1992), physicist and philosopher, was born on 20 December 1917 in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, USA, the son of Samuel Bohm, proprietor of a furniture store, and his wife, Freda. Both parents were immigrants from Europe, his father being born in the Ukraine. Bohm graduated from Pennsylvania State College in 1939 and after a period at the California Institute of Technology moved to Berkeley where he studied for his PhD on proton-deuteron scattering under Robert Oppenheimer. He then began work on plasmas and established his reputation as a theoretical physicist developing important theoretical techniques to describe collective oscillations of plasmas and deriving a formula for what has become known as the Bohm diffusion coefficient. After moving to Princeton in 1947, working with his research student, David Pines, Bohm was able to extend these ideas to the description of electrons in metals, laying the foundations of our understanding of the collective behaviour of electrons in metals. Problems in the interpretation of quantum theory fascinated him and he set out to write a book which would make the widely accepted Copenhagen interpretation of quantum theory, with its inherent randomness and observer dependence, as clear as possible. His 'Quantum Theory' (1951) has become a classic in the field and is remarkable for its clarity and physical insight; his formulation of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen experiment formed the basis of important experimental tests of quantum theory and his discussion of the theory of measurement became the standard. Not satisfied with the Copenhagen interpretation, Bohm developed a causal interpretation of quantum theory, which he published in the 'Physical Review' in 1952. Similar ideas had been published previously by Louis de Broglie and the interpretation became known as the de Broglie-Bohm interpretation. This interpretation brought out the revolutionary features of quantum theory in a clear and accessible way, without the postulate of inherent randomness in nature. Bohm's approach made clear the essential unity of quantum phenomena manifested in his approach through a non-local connection of distant events. Difficulties with the House Un-American Activities Committee led to Bohm's being suspended from Princeton, but supported by both Einstein and Oppenheimer he obtained a professorship at the University of Sao Paulo in 1951. 
In 1955 Bohm moved to the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa where he met Saral (Sarah) Woolfson, the daughter of an English doctor; they were married in March 1956 and had no children. They moved to England in 1957 and Bohm took up a fellowship at Bristol University where, with Yakir Aharonov, he published a paper on the magnetic vector potential describing an effect now known as the Aharonov-Bohm effect. In 1961 Bohm was appointed to the newly created chair of theoretical physics at Birkbeck College, where he remained until his retirement in 1983. Bohm believed that the problems faced by modern physics could not be solved in a truly satisfactory manner within the usual Cartesian conceptual framework and sought to construct a description based on the notion of primitive processes out of which space, time, and matter would emerge. Working with Basil Hiley, he investigated the use of algebraic structures to describe such primitive processes. A renewed interest in his interpretation of quantum theory was stimulated in the late 1970s when his research students began to use computational techniques to calculate quantum particle trajectories in order to demonstrate exactly how the theory worked. After years of neglect Bohm's interpretation is now widely accepted as a viable alternative to Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation. 
In concert with Bohm's work in physics he maintained a deep interest in wider philosophical issues; he explored notions of wholeness and fragmentation across a wide spectrum of thought, and his insight was valued in diverse disciplines. Many of his general ideas on language and thought arose from his friendship and collaboration with Jiddo Krishnamurti, an Indian philosopher and teacher. Their formal dialogues, held in Switzerland, California, and England, were recorded and some were published. Bohm was for some years a trustee of Krishnamurti's foundation school in Hampshire. Bohm was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1990 and was awarded the Franklin Institute's Elliott Cresson medal in 1991. He died in Edgware General Hospital on 27 October 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 50842


Bottomore, Thomas Burton (1920-1992), sociologist, was born on 8 April 1920 at the Collins Trust Maternity Hospital, Waverley Street, Nottingham, the first of the three children of Thomas Joseph Bottomore (1887-1954), milliner, and his wife, Margaret Amy (1894-1977), daughter of James Ernest Bacon, draper, of Nottingham, and his wife, Margaret. Tom, as he was generally known, was educated at Nottingham high school, from 1930 to 1936, and the London School of Economics (LSE), where he graduated in 1943 with an upper second-class BSc (Econ), having worked from 1941 in the Ministry of Economic Warfare. From 1943 to 1947 he did military service, becoming captain and staff captain in the Sherwood Foresters and serving in India and Austria, where he worked in the economics division of the Allied Control Commission. In August 1947, in Vienna, he married Christiane (Christl) von Mosing, a writer and journalist. When he left the army he returned to the LSE, and was awarded his MSc (Econ) in 1950, with a thesis on 'Recent theories of social progress'. In 1951-2 he held a Rockefeller fellowship at the Sorbonne, where he conducted research on the French higher civil service as well as pursuing interests in Marxist theory and workers' co-operatives, and where he got to know many French intellectuals and acquired excellent French and lifelong friends. When he returned to Britain in 1952 he took up an assistant lectureship in sociology at the LSE, and was promoted to lecturer in 1955 and reader in 1959. Meanwhile, having separated from his first wife in 1950 and divorced her early in 1953, on 30 January 1953 he married Mary Kathleen, 'nee' Greasley (1918-1986), who worked as a translator and for the Citizens' Advice Bureau. They had three children: Katherine Helen ('b'. 1954), Stephen ('b'. 1955), and Eleanor Jane ('b'. 1957). 
Bottomore remained at the LSE until 1965, when he left for a professorship at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, Canada. He returned to Britain in 1967 to become the first professor of sociology at the still new University of Sussex, where he remained (apart from brief periods from 1974 to 1976 at Dalhousie University) until his formal retirement in 1985. In personal appearance he was slim, dark-haired, and of medium height, with a dignified yet quizzical expression, a moustache, a conventional tweed-jacketed style of dress, and a pipe often in his hand. In Sussex he lived at Cherry Tree Cottage, in the village of Ditchling, where he helped dig the swimming pool which he regularly used; he listed his recreations as riding, swimming, gardening, travel, reading, film, and theatre. 
The International Sociological Association, founded in 1950, figured largely in Bottomore's life, and he played several important roles in it. In 1953 he became the third executive secretary of the fledgeling association, and held that post until 1959. From 1957 to 1962 he edited its journal 'Current Sociology', which had the important function of providing systematic bibliographical information on major fields of sociological work. From 1970 to 1974 he was vice-president with responsibility for its 'research committees', and from 1974 to 1978 president. (It was for an International Sociological Association commission that he wrote his textbook 'Sociology', published in 1962, designed to provide an introduction suitable for Indian students -- though it was widely used outside India.) He was also president of the British Sociological Association from 1969 to 1971; that position was mainly honorific. 
As a young man, Bottomore had become interested in socialism as a potential remedy for the poverty he saw in Nottinghamshire mining communities and for the rise of fascism, and briefly became a member of the Communist Party. For the rest of his life he was politically committed to socialism, and strongly interested in Marxism, though he was no orthodox Marxist, and his political activity was mainly on the intellectual front. His time in Paris led to co-editorship with Maximilien Rubel of 'Selected Writings on Sociology and Social Philosophy' by Marx (1956), which introduced many sociology students to Marx's thought. He wrote about Marx and Marxists, translated related works, and in 1983 published a 'Dictionary of Marxist Thought'. These initially unfashionable interests were in tune with the times in the late 1960s and 1970s, and that did much to enhance his reputation. Other especially influential works, of a high intellectual standard though written for a student audience, were his 'Classes in Modern Society' (1955) and 'Elites and Society' (1964). Although he drew on empirical work by others, after his time in Paris he was a theorist rather than a researcher. He continued to publish copiously until his death; his later books were largely historical or reference works. His writing was outstandingly clear and readable. He often played a mediating intellectual role, linking Marxism to other social theories and moderating criticisms of either from the other side. His interests and perspectives were always as much international as they were British, and his Marxism was a basis for connections crossing some of the usual boundaries. 
Bottomore was widely respected among sociologists both in Britain and abroad. Numerous graduate students of his became prominent theorists themselves. Some of his closest intellectual relationships were reflected in his retirement Festschrift, 'Social Theory and Social Criticism' (ed. W. Outhwaite and M. Mulkay, 1987) and in an interview that he gave to 'Theory, Culture and Society' (vol. 6/3, 1989). He died at his home, Cherry Tree Cottage, from a sudden aneurysm on 9 December 1992, and was cremated at Woodvale crematorium, Brighton, on 12 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 50845


Bourne, Kenneth (1930-1992), historian, was born at Carshalton, Wick Lane, Wickford, Essex, on 17 March 1930, the son of Clarence Arthur Bourne, a director of a printing and publishing firm, and his wife, Doris English. He attended Southend high school before becoming in 1951 a student at the University College of the South-West (later the University of Exeter). He followed his mentor, Professor William Norton Medlicott, to the London School of Economics (LSE) on the latter's appointment as Stevenson professor of international history in 1953, and obtained his PhD degree from London in 1956. He married on 1 January 1955 Eleanor Anne Wells, a press officer, daughter of Edward Ronald Wells, master grocer. They had one son and one daughter. 
Bourne's career was steady rather than dramatic. He was a research fellow at the Institute of Historical Research, London (1955-6), and briefly held a research appointment at the new University of Reading (1956) before returning to the LSE in 1957, initially as an assistant lecturer, working his way upwards until the conferment of a personal professorship at the LSE in 1976, and a fellowship of the British Academy in 1982, marked the crown of his career. He had by then renounced any interest in the Stevenson professorship in favour of a colleague and friend. He retired early in 1992 and later that year died suddenly in his sleep from a heart attack, at Lewisham Hospital, Lewisham, London, on 13 December 1992. 
Bourne was the last of a series of major historians of British foreign policy in the nineteenth century, a series which included such men as Harold Temperley, Sir Charles Webster, and R. W. Seton-Watson. He differed from his illustrious predecessors, however, in being without any connections with Oxford or Cambridge, and very much the product of the 1944 'Education Act'. His master and formative influence was W. N. Medlicott, himself a product of London University. Bourne's place among his predecessors rests on three pillars. Where they had concentrated entirely on British relations with the European great powers, he was the first to bring Britain's relations with the United States into the general picture of Victorian foreign policy. His first book, 'Britain and the Balance of Power in North America, 1815-1908' (1967), made him an immediate reputation both in Britain and in the United States. But the merits and new approaches he showed in that book were to figure in his second book, the second pillar to his reputation. He had moved from the traditional diplomatic history practised by his predecessors (drawn mainly from the archives of the Foreign Office and the private papers, such as they were, of major political and diplomatic personalities), to seeing foreign policy and the conduct of relations between one state and its fellows as a composition of the whole structure of government, to be documented from the archives of the palace on the one hand, and the military, naval, financial, secret intelligence, and other such organs of government on the other. Strategic factors figured throughout his narratives, not only when major wars seemed to threaten. He was one of the first to interest himself in the issues of military intelligence and foreign policy. Like his colleagues in the twentieth-century field, he found discontinuities resulting from the failure to resolve the separate approaches of different organs of government, apparent on both sides of the Atlantic as well as among the European great powers, to be no problem. Bourne's second book, 'The Foreign Policy of Victorian England' (1970), by comparison, for example, with A. J. P. Taylor's 'Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1815-1914', clearly reveals that for Bourne 'foreign policy' was made as much in cabinet, Colonial Office, War Office, and Admiralty as by heroic (or muddled) figures in charge of foreign offices. Bourne's work was to be prescribed reading for generations of schoolboys preparing for university entry. 
The third pillar on which Bourne's reputation rests is his (alas, unfinished) biography of Lord Palmerston, the first (and only) volume of which, 'Palmerston: the Early Years, 1784-1841', appeared in 1982. It was immediately recognized as the major work it undoubtedly was. Bourne's election to the British Academy followed hot on the heels of its publication. It would not have been possible without the Mountbatten family's decision to grant him access to the Palmerston papers, which they had hitherto denied to historians. But Bourne had also uncovered a series of treasure troves of private papers of Palmerston's many correspondents, containing significant papers not preserved in the Palmerston papers themselves. He had also mastered, and indeed come to own, copies of much of the considerable volume of memoirs, letters, diaries, and so on published by Palmerston's political contemporaries. An indefatigable haunter of antiquarian bookshops throughout the southern counties of Britain, he spent his weekends combing Britain's towns and villages at a time when many of the minor libraries of nineteenth-century dignitaries were being sold by their impecunious and space-starved descendants. 
One cannot help thinking that, had Bourne ever met Palmerston face to face, he would have disapproved of him. But his historical view of Palmerston did nothing to denigrate or debunk one of the great heroic figures of early Victorian Britain. Bourne painted Palmerston as an overbearing and often unscrupulous giant, a man who hid his basic integrity and accuracy of judgement behind the manners and feuds of his time. There can be no doubt that, for all the faults which Bourne recognized in his hero, he admired and exalted him. 
Bourne's work was such as to awake the admiration of professional historians, especially those who were not absorbed, as were so many of his contemporaries, in the new socio-economic history. But it did not catch the imagination of the general book-reading public, still less the media, who looked for the debunking of the great men of Victorian Britain rather than the confirmation of their existing reputations. He was to spend the latter years of his life in publishing source materials for his period. As well as editing the papers of Francis Horner and the second earl of Minto, he master-minded the massive publication by the University Press of America of 415 volumes of documents selected from the Foreign Office confidential print for the years 1860-1939, as editor-in-chief responsible for the documents deriving from the years before 1914. His biggest disappointment was the inability of information technologists to evolve a workable technique for screening the annual 'Foreign Office Lists' in such a way as to make the mechanical compilation of a biographical dictionary of members of the Foreign Office and the diplomatic service from the foundation of the Foreign Office possible. He was to play his part in the celebration at the LSE of the two-hundredth anniversary of the Foreign Office. 
When Bourne began his graduate research, British records were accessible only in part for even the end of the nineteenth century. The fifty-year rule was adopted in 1958; by 1967 the closed period had been reduced to thirty years. With the opening not merely of the Foreign Office records but those of cabinet, service ministries, Colonial Office, India Office, Treasury, in fact of all Whitehall, there came a flood of private papers from the twentieth century. Bourne's own contemporaries were the last of British graduate students for whom the death of Queen Victoria was the 'ne plus ultra' of archival research. By the time his Palmerston biography appeared, the vast majority of graduate students interested in international history as a field of research were plunged into study of the origins of the Second World War, if not those of the cold war. Only the smallest handful were interested in the fields in which Bourne was the unchallenged master. Thus he left no school of disciples behind him. The disappearance of the deference which he as a young historian had paid his elders, and the intensification of external pressures on all in British universities to justify their practices and record, certainly left their mark on him in his latter years. Indeed he was to spend valuable time and effort on university committees and the like defending the values and culture of independent scholarship against external enemies and internal critics and mischief makers. The possibility that it was the stress which this struggle induced in him which led to his early death cannot be ruled out. To those he respected among his contemporaries (and his judgement like that of Medlicott rested solely on estimates of their professionalism as scholars and historians), he was the best and most loyal of friends and an amusing, witty, if sometimes cynical companion. He was a welcome and frequent visitor at a whole range of American universities and was elected to the American Philosophical Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 50846


Bradlaw, Sir Robert Vivian (1905-1992), dentist, was born on 14 April 1905 at 7 Rathmines Road, Blackrock, Dublin, the son of Philip Archibald Bradlaw, dentist, and his wife, Henrietta Louise, 'nee' Samuel. He was a member of a large family with medical and dental connections. His father died when Bradlaw was in his early teens, and he completed his general education at Cranleigh after he and his mother had moved to England. He subsequently studied both dentistry and medicine in London at Guy's Hospital, gaining his LDS in 1926 and MRCS LRCP in 1928. After qualifying he did a spell as a ship's surgeon, visiting the Far East, and also undertook some private dental practice. He also held part-time academic appointments, as a demonstrator at the Royal Dental Hospital in Leicester Square, where he undertook research into the nerve supply of dentine, and at the National Hospital in Queen Square. 
By the mid-1930s Bradlaw had decided on the longer-term direction of his career, resolving to devote himself in part to advancing the discipline of dental surgery, which was still emerging as a learned profession, and at the same time establishing himself in the burgeoning dental academic world. In 1936 he was appointed to the newly established chair of dental surgery at the then small dental school at Newcastle upon Tyne, within the University of Durham. He became dean, and with considerable vision began the transference of function and power from visiting consultants, who hitherto had been the only people available to run dental schools, to a system involving a core of full-time staff who not only could teach but who also, like their medical counterparts, possessed the expertise and responsibility to advance knowledge. He acted also as a consultant to the ministries of Pensions and Supply and the Royal Navy, and served on two influential national bodies, the Central Health Services Council and the government's standing dental advisory committee, of which he became chairman. His influence on dental education during this period was far-reaching and profound, and in the post-war years the developments he had instituted in Newcastle became the model for fundamental changes in the pattern of undergraduate dental education throughout the country. 
However, by the late 1930s Bradlaw's interests were extending on a broader front to encompass postgraduate, as well as undergraduate, dental education, and also the professional political processes governing the provision of the country's dental services. He made a substantial impact nationally in these areas during the war years and afterwards, when his forward-ranging vision was ahead of that of most of his contemporaries. As dean of the Newcastle dental school he served as a member of the Dental Board of the United Kingdom, the governing body of the profession operating under the auspices of the General Medical Council. In 1943 he became a member of the Teviot committee, set up by the minister of health to consider the measures needed to improve dental education, research, and legislation. One recommendation in the final report of the committee in 1946 was that the Dental Board should be replaced by an independent General Dental Council. Bradlaw was also involved with other luminaries, including Sir Alfred Webb Johnson, Sir Wilfred Fish, and Sir William Kelsey Fry, in setting up a faculty of dental surgery within the Royal College of Surgeons of England. This was established by supplemental charter in 1947 and, in recognition of his major contribution, Bradlaw was appointed as the first dean of the faculty. He was Hunterian professor at the Royal College of Surgeons in 1955, receiving the Colyer gold medal in the same year and the honorary gold medal of the college in 1968. During his period as dean he initiated the examination for the fellowship in dental surgery, analogous to the FRCS in general surgery. In 1974 he delivered the first Bradlaw oration at the Royal College of Surgeons. 
In 1960, after twenty-four years of notable contribution to the university and its dental school, Bradlaw left Newcastle and returned to London to become dean and director of studies at the Institute of Dental Surgery, director of the Eastman Dental Hospital, and professor of oral medicine in the University of London, posts which he held until he retired in 1970. He was an accomplished lecturer, his field of special interest being the manifestations in the mouth of general disease. His presentations were enriched with knowledge and experience gained from his own research. In 1954 he received the British Dental Association's Howard Mummery prize for his work on oral syphilis, and was also a recipient of the Tomes prize. 
Under the 'Dentists Act' 1956, the General Dental Council was created to replace the Dental Board of the United Kingdom. Bradlaw, a member of the new council from the outset, became president in 1964, succeeding Sir Wilfred Fish, previously chairman of the Dental Board. He retired as president in 1974. In his presidential address in 1973 he advocated the inclusion of items of preventive dental treatment in the National Health Service's general dental service scale of fees -- an innovative concept for its time. He was also very active in the British Dental Association, serving as a member of its representative board, and as president of the association in 1974. 
As well as holding various postgraduate qualifications and diplomas, Bradlaw was the recipient of many honours, including doctorates from ten universities. Of particular satisfaction to him was the degree of doctor of civil law awarded by the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1965. In 1975 he was made an honorary fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine. He was also chevalier de la sante publique (France); knight, order of St Olaf (Norway); and commander, order of Homayoun (Iran). He was appointed CBE in 1950 and knighted in 1965. 
Bradlaw was a widely read, cultivated man with diverse interests, including cooking, eighteenth-century paintings, Chinese and Korean celadon ware china, fashioning pottery, and cultivating orchids. All these subjects were studied with the same dedication that he devoted to his professional activities. In his Newcastle days he liked in addition to shoot and fish, while golf was a challenge which he pursued with vigour. Some time during mid-life he became a Roman Catholic, deriving great spiritual comfort from his religion for the rest of his life. Although essentially a private man, he was also a sociable and convivial host. His unobtrusive kindnesses were appreciated by many, yet he had a dignified, serious demeanour which appeared formidable to subordinate colleagues. He was a shrewd judge of junior colleagues' abilities and potential, and gave valuable career guidance to many. His wit and self-deprecating sense of humour were well known; when he arrived for a meeting at the University Senate House on the morning his knighthood was announced, he recounted with much glee how, in the railway carriage on his way into London, one avid reader of 'The Times' turned to his neighbour and said 'look at the people they give knighthoods to these days' (private information). He never married. He died on 12 February 1992 at Stoke Goldington, near Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, the place to which he had retired. In his will he requested that there should be no announcement of his death and no memorial service. 


@@@@@


doc= 50848


Bratby, John Randall (1928-1992), artist, was born on 19 July 1928 at a nursing home in Wimbledon, the first of two children of George Alfred Bratby (1887-1947), wine taster, and his wife, Lily Beryl Randall (1897-1945). The Bratbys traced their roots to Derbyshire, while the Randalls were a London family. Instability marked the Bratbys, with Bratby's grandfather dying in an insane asylum, and an uncle confined for life in a mental institution. George Bratby was to manifest symptoms of mental illness, and the shadow of this darkened Bratby's own life, and made him at times fearful for his sanity. It was not a happy childhood. From an early age, Bratby was aware of his father's frightening paranoid energy: a man quite capable of believing there were hidden microphones in his chimney, or that the radio could listen to you just as you could hear it. There were constant rows between his parents, and there was little warmth or affection in the home. Later, the increasingly deranged and now unemployed George Bratby embarrassed his son by wandering the suburban streets of Norbiton in sandals and casual clothes while everyone else was going to work. 
At school, Bratby was shy, unpopular, and bullied. He did not distinguish himself at lessons. Coupled with his miserable home life, this led him to create an alternative world: he resold school buns at breaktime, wrote pornographic stories, for the reading of which he charged, and trained himself as a boxer. Not until he was seventeen did he begin to show any real aptitude for art, and then it was due to the inspired teaching of Harold Watts, who recognized the potential in Bratby's sketches of boxers. Conscripted, Bratby was swiftly discharged on account of his extreme myopia, but managed to obtain an ex-service grant, with which, at Watts's encouragement, he went on to study at Kingston School of Art (1947-50). There he discovered the extraordinary determination to succeed which took him on to the Royal College of Art (RCA; 1951-4), and his early fame. 
Bratby believed that he had inherited his father's energy, and that it was this which gave him the drive to paint. The artistic impulse he attributed to his mother's family. Painfully shy and often aggressive because of it, he was unsuited to art school camaraderie, and found academic training uncongenial. At Kingston he failed the intermediate exam in arts and crafts, and was forced to leave. But by this point, painting was his life-raft, and he continued to paint and draw obsessively. He managed to produce a body of work, awkward but not without talent, which convinced the professor of the Slade School of Fine Art to offer him a postgraduate place. Bratby, with what was to become typical cheek and canniness, managed to swap his Slade place for one at the Royal College, which he considered a superior institution. It was while a student at the RCA that the Bratby myth began to coalesce. According to his own later slightly embarrassed account he frequented prostitutes and was tempted into physical violence. He lived wildly, splurging his grant and then having to stow away in the attics of the college (from which he and his paintings were once summarily ejected), or begging and sleeping rough in Hyde Park. His work matched his lifestyle. Influenced by the down-to-earth realism of Sickert, Bratby depicted the seedier aspects of his surroundings, and would be found in the college studios painting a dustbin, or setting up his easel in a lavatory. The style of his painting was correspondingly crude and vigorous -- he favoured thick pigment in sombre colours. The professor of painting at the college, Carel Weight, thought him the most talented student he had ever had. On 2 April 1953 he married his fellow RCA student Jean Esme Oregon Cooke (1927-2008). A sculptor and potter, Cooke subsequently became a painter of real distinction. 
In 1954 Bratby had the first of a series of one-man exhibitions at the acclaimed Beaux Arts Gallery, and his public career was launched. He began to win prizes: first in the John Moores junior section (1957), and Guggenheim awards (1956, 1958). In 1954 he first exhibited a painting at the Royal Academy, becoming an associate in 1959, and a Royal Academician in 1971. With his trademark thick paint and his flair for publicity (he had a talent for leaking stories to the press), Bratby soon became not only a folk hero in the art schools of Britain, but a household name. At first the critics' response was overwhelmingly supportive, with the 'Sunday Times' comparing Bratby's rendition of a cornflake packet favourably with Velazquez's 'Rokeby Venus'. In 1956 he was chosen to represent Britain at the Venice Biennale, along with the other so-called kitchen sink painters -- Edward Middleditch, Jack Smith, and Derrick Greaves. A major early painting, 'Still-Life with Chip Frier', was that year bought by the Tate Gallery. Other examples of his work are in the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 
In 1957 Bratby was commissioned to paint the pictures for the film of Joyce Cary's novel 'The Horse's Mouth', starring Alec Guinness as its bohemian artist-hero. He exhibited his work in America, and bought a house in Blackheath. Then, in 1960, he was suddenly dropped by the influential critics, as abstraction and pop art seized their collective attention. Although he remained a thoroughly popular artist, selling well until the end of his life, Bratby's critical reputation slumped, to show the first signs of reassessment only in 1990. From 1960 onwards, his behaviour must be seen in the context of early success painfully followed by what he saw as consignment to art historical limbo. 
Disillusioned with painting, and perhaps having momentarily overworked his seam, Bratby took up writing, producing a stream of luridly autobiographical illustrated novels, beginning with 'Breakdown' in 1960. This was followed by 'Breakfast and Elevenses' (1961), 'Brake-Pedal Down' (1962), 'Break 50 Kill' (1963), and a host of unpublished sequels and short stories. Bratby was driven to be prolific: in his writing he was as compulsive and compelling as in his painting. A portrait series begun in 1967 eventually numbered more than 1500 pictures. Meanwhile, in 1970 Bratby suffered a crisis in his life and art, adopting a highly charged Fauvist palette and threatening his marriage with increasingly wayward behaviour. He drank heavily and pursued young ladies. There were several driving offences. Then in 1974 he met Patricia (Patti) Prime ('b'. 1931), an actress, through a lonely hearts column. In 1975 he was divorced from Jean Cooke. He married Patti on 4 May 1977, and a period of relative stability ensued. 
As Bratby grew older, he tended to work frenetically, and then spend up to half the rest of the year travelling abroad on the proceeds. As he scrawled late in life on a Missoni carrier bag: 'I do not want to be right and broke, I'd rather be wrong and in funds.' If the paintings sometimes suffered as a result, there was usually still some trace of the Bratby genius to transform and reinvent what he saw with urgent physicality. The intensity of his early work created a hard act even for Bratby to follow, while his popularity in the media tended to militate against his genuine achievement. He died outside his home in Hastings, the Cupola and Tower of the Winds, Belmont Road, on 20 July 1992, and was cremated at Hastings crematorium on 29 July. He was survived by his wife, Patti. 


@@@@@


doc= 50855


Briginshaw, Richard William, Baron Briginshaw (1908-1992), trade union leader, was born on 15 May 1908 at 183 Mayall Road, Brixton, London, the first son of Richard Briginshaw, newspaper worker, and his wife, Alice Jubilee, 'nee' Coates. He was educated at Stuart School, Brixton. Although his background was classic working class and he left elementary school at fourteen to take a job as a printer's devil, his early days were not poverty stricken: his father had a comparatively well-paid and secure job as a printer with Odhams Press. Even so there was a great deal of poverty in homes close to the Briginshaw family and in later years Briginshaw (Dick or Briggie, as he was universally known) vividly recalled the ambience of his childhood in Brixton -- children at his school without boots, often without food, widespread poverty because of unemployment, and a depression that was to colour and determine his political thinking and the course of his life. 
Briginshaw's father encouraged him to read and through night school and his own ambitious drive he studied economics and law in his spare time, and eventually earned a diploma from University College, London. At the same time he worked his way from job to job as a trainee in the machine rooms of Fleet Street, not as a skilled compositor but as a machine hand. He found work in virtually every machine room in Fleet Street and as he moved from newspaper to newspaper he quickly acquired a reputation as an articulate union advocate. On 15 November 1931 he married Catherine Morritt (1910/11-1989), daughter of Harry Morritt, a Covent Garden porter. They had three sons. 
In 1938 Briginshaw was elected assistant secretary of the London machine branch of the National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants (NATSOPA), one of the most influential units in the union. He became the youngest official in the union. His election to secretary of the branch seemed to be a virtual formality -- a post that would have put him in line for the top job as the union's general secretary, then occupied by George Isaacs, later minister of labour in Attlee's government. But Briginshaw was already deeply radicalized and had joined the Communist Party. He was a leading organizer of the Printers' Anti-Fascist Movement, which Isaacs and the NATSOPA executive steadfastly refused to recognize. To the union hierarchy this was a communist 'front' organization and beyond the fringe of acceptability. They ordered Briginshaw to withdraw from it. He refused and was dismissed from his union post. The period that followed was frequently a hard struggle for Briginshaw but he refused to yield to the union's anti-communist policy. He volunteered for the army shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War and was finally called up in 1941. He served in India, the Middle East, and western Europe, several times refusing a commission on the grounds of wanting to remain among the rank-and-file as an ordinary soldier. 
Briginshaw returned to civilian life at the end of 1945, with no job prospect in the union and the need to return to any Fleet Street machine room that would employ him. By then he had joined the Labour Party, though he remained firmly on the left, and his relationship with the right-wing union establishment was still abrasive. Yet by 1948 he had re-established himself and was elected again as assistant secretary of the London machine branch. From then his rise was rapid. In 1949 he was elected a national officer of NATSOPA and in 1951 he was elected general secretary -- succeeding (after a brief interregnum) his old foe George Isaacs, who had held on to his union post despite being a minister in the Attlee cabinet. Briginshaw remained general secretary until his retirement at the end of 1974. 
Briginshaw's twenty-three years as leader of the strongest print union in the country was a remarkable stint by any standards. His awkward, often almost disdainful, style brought him more enemies from among the other print union leaders than from among the newspaper barons themselves. Even his political friends on the left found him a difficult ally, since he was often more cavalier with them than with political opponents -- or with employers, some of whom became close enough to be regarded, almost, as friends. He often found himself alongside strange bedfellows, including Lord Beaverbrook, with whom he formed an 'unholy alliance' -- as his critics claimed -- during the campaign opposing Britain's entry into the Common Market. Briginshaw regularly wrote feature articles for all the Express group, denouncing the government negotiations, and when Britain eventually joined the community he became a joint founder of the Get Britain Out campaign. In 1969 his support for Rupert Murdoch was a substantial factor in Murdoch's acquisition of 'The Sun' (the former 'Daily Herald'), which had been put on the market by the International Publishing Corporation. To the fury of his fellow print union leaders he made clear his preference for Murdoch over Robert Maxwell as a potential purchaser of the paper, on the grounds that Murdoch was a better guarantor of job security and higher wages for his members. 
Briginshaw's reputation in the print industry was that of a tough negotiator and a ruthless, albeit extremely shrewd, campaigner for his members. He symbolized the uncompromising attitude of print workers in their demands for higher wages, job protection, and the closed shop. Yet he was also a modernizer and foresaw much of what was to transform the newspaper and print industry long before Murdoch performed his dramatic switch to Wapping. He predicted the revolution in print technology and privately admitted that the 'gravy train' would hit the buffers before long. He always wanted one big union for the printing industry rather than a multitude of smaller, specialized craft unions. In 1966 he took a big step along that road by bringing about a merger between NATSOPA and the National Union of Printing, Bookbinding, and Paper Workers, to form the Society of Graphical and Allied Trades (SOGAT). Nevertheless, the two sections soon fell apart amid bitter recriminations, and remerged only after Briginshaw's retirement. He was a formidable opponent of all attempts at an incomes policy -- whether operated by Conservative or Labour governments. He resigned from the Labour Party in 1968 because he disagreed with the Wilson government's introduction of a statutory pay policy, though he soon rejoined. His membership of the TUC general council (1965-75) was less significant than it might have been, considering his seniority as a union leader, and he was never a member of the TUC's 'inner circle'. His constant opposition to TUC policy on incomes, and indeed to any co-operation with government that might limit trade union freedom, left him always on the margin of influence. 
Briginshaw caused a mild sensation by accepting a life peerage as Baron Briginshaw of Southwark when he retired at the end of 1974. A year later he published 'Abolish the House of Lords' -- denouncing the House of Lords as 'a creaking anachronism' ('The Independent', 31 March 1992). He served on the council of the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) from 1974 to 1976, and was a member of the British Overseas Trade Board (1975-7) and the board of the British National Oil Corporation (1976-9). He was a member of the court of Cranfield Institute of Technology and served for six years as a governor of Dulwich College. His retirement was marred by allegations of malpractice following the discovery that union funds had been moved into Swiss bank accounts in the wake of trade-union legislation by the Heath government in 1971. Members of the NATSOPA section of the merged union took legal action against Briginshaw and three colleagues, accusing them of misapplying funds. He was finally cleared of all charges in 1982, when he made it clear that his actions had been wholly concerned with protecting union funds against possible seizure under Heath's new legislation. 
Briginshaw was a tall, powerfully built, handsome man, whose healthy bronzed appearance often persuaded his critics that he had just returned from holiday. As he grew older his carefully coiffed silver-grey hair crowned a strong, bespectacled face. His wife, Catherine, died in 1989, but by then he had formed relationships with several women and had one son with Kathleen Maybin and a son and daughter with his secretary and personal assistant, Joan Wing. He died at the Mayday Hospital, Croydon, on 26 March 1992, of a perforated duodenal ulcer. He was survived by his six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 50861


Hall, Sidney (1788/9?-1831), map maker and engraver, was probably born in 1788 or 1789. Nothing is known of the circumstance of his birth, parentage, education, or early life, although the terms of his will suggest that he had a brother and a sister. 
Hall first appears in 1814 in partnership with Michael Thomson, an obscure map maker and engraver under whom he may have trained. By 1816 Hall had taken over Thomson's premises in Bury Street, Bloomsbury, London, where he was to remain throughout his career. His early work included maps of London produced for Samuel Leigh in 1818 and 1819, and a set of miniature county maps for the same publisher's 'Leigh's New Pocket Atlas, of England and Wales' in 1820. By 1821 Hall was already utilizing the new steel-engraving plates manufactured by Jacob Perkins's process. The hardness of these plates enabled engravers to achieve much greater density of detail without loss of clarity, and Hall was almost certainly the first map maker to realize the potential of this development. Among much fine work he is remembered in particular for the fifty-three folio maps, produced from 1827, for his 'A New General Atlas' of 1830. This atlas was of such detail as to require the separate publication of a closely printed 360-page index of place names in 1831. Equally impressive were the maps produced between 1828 and 1830 for 'An Historical Atlas' by Edward Quin. These maps show considerable technical virtuosity, with dark clouds (produced by aquatint) rolling back to reveal the world as known to Western civilization at different periods. The finished work is a striking piece of nineteenth-century design and a significant contribution to the development of the historical atlas. 
Hall's last work was a set of quarto English county maps for the publishers Chapman and Hall. These maps were used in a variety of publications and could also be bought individually, folded to pocket size, and 'mounted in a case'. Periodically revised to include new information, and later photo-mechanically enlarged, they remained in print for the next half-century. Hall died before the set was completed and it is noticeable that counties from the latter part of the alphabetical sequence are signed not in his usual form 'Sidy. Hall' but with the plainer 'S. Hall'. This was the style adopted by his widow, 
Selina Price and Sidney Hall had married on 25 August 1821 at St George's, Bloomsbury. The bride came originally from Radnorshire, Wales. The marriage was childless. Of Sidney Hall's character and disposition no record is found. His circle of acquaintance is likewise unknown, although one of the executors of his will was the London surgeon Sidney Van Butchell, whose forename perhaps suggests a family connection. George Shillibeer was a near neighbour in Bury Street and presumably an acquaintance at just the period that Shillibeer planned the first London omnibus routes. 
Sidney Hall died on 18 February 1831, his age being given as forty-two, and was buried at St George's, Bloomsbury, on the 27th of that month. His will provided for his wife's security in slightly varying terms, depending on her continuance of the business. The sale of a copyhold estate in Richmond, Surrey, provided legacies for nephews and a niece. There was $100 for a brother and $50 for his wife's nephew to pay an apprenticeship fee. On the death of Selina Hall in November 1853 the Bury Street premises passed to that same nephew, Edward Weller (1819-1884), who himself became a map maker of considerable repute, and whom Selina may have trained. The family connection was maintained in the naming of his son, Francis Sidney Weller, also a map maker of some note. 


@@@@@


doc= 50865


Kip, William (fl. c.1585-1618), engraver, born in Utrecht, arrived in England about 1585. He was perhaps primarily a goldsmith and jeweller and is so described on the various returns of aliens which provide almost the sole extant biographical record. While no known examples of his work as a goldsmith or jeweller survive, his output of printed work is notable for a number of important maps. The most significant of these is the four-sheet wall-map of the British Isles, 'A Descripsion of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland & Ireland with al the Ilands Adiacent', engraved for Hans Woutneel in 1603, a handsome production known only in a single surviving copy, with a pictorial genealogical table celebrating the union of the crowns of England and Scotland. More widely known is the important sequence of thirty-four county maps after John Norden and Christopher Saxton engraved by Kip for the 1607 edition of William Camden's 'Britannia'. Other examples include the map of Hertfordshire for Norden's 'Speculi Britanniae' (1598), two miniature maps in roundels of England and the world of about 1602, also engraved for Woutneel, and Edward Wright's important untitled two-sheet map of the world of about 1610. 
Beyond maps, Kip was responsible for engraving a portrait of Queen Elizabeth, probably dating from the 1590s but known only in a later state, as well as Stephen Harrison's magnificent series 'The Arch's of Triumph Erected in Honor of James' (1604) -- the earliest English set of plates to show the lavish temporary architecture erected for ceremonial events. 
Kip had a son, Immanuel, baptized in 1597, and daughters Debora ('bap'. 1601) and Rebecca ('bap'. 1603). Debora married Balthazar Gerbier in or before 1618 and appears, with her children, in a well-known portrait by Rubens apparently dating from early in 1629 and now in the National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC. Kip is recorded living in Coleman Street, London, with his wife and an English-born child in 1617 (when he was said to have been in England for thirty-two years) and living in the Candlewick ward of the City with a daughter and her Dutch husband, presumably Gerbier, in 1618. The household also included a young painter from Amsterdam and a young merchant from Hamburg. It is not known when or where he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 50867


Daniel Lizars (1760-1812), who worked as a printer and engraver in Edinburgh, and his wife, Margaret Home. Daniel Lizars was a student of the engraver Andrew Bell. He engraved Raeburn's portrait of Lord Braxfield, but was better known for his views of Edinburgh, including 'Perspective View of South Bridge Street', which appeared in the 1786 edition of the 'Edinburgh Magazine'. Six of his works were also mentioned in the 'Edinburgh Scene', among them 'View of the New Bridge of Edinburgh'. He died in Edinburgh on 10 December 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 50872


Toms, William Henry (d. 1765), engraver, was probably born in London, the son of Peter Toms, gentleman, of St Margaret's, Westminster, London. Details of his background and upbringing are unknown. His elder brother was the naval officer Peter Toms (1690/91-1763), one-time commander of the 'Saltash'; a fellow officer, Captain Philip Toms (died 1772), was also a relation. Toms was apprenticed to the draughtsman and cartographer John Harris ('fl'. 1686-1730), and his indenture of apprenticeship, which gives details of his father, is dated 30 April 1716 (Worms and Baynton-Williams, 670). He was married, first, to Rachael, with whom he lived at Union Court, Holborn, London; their son, Peter Toms, was baptized on 3 July 1726 and later became a noted painter and herald. After a long illness his wife died about 1736. On 28 October 1738, at St Mary's, Marylebone, he married Anne (or Anna Maria) Sweet; the couple had two daughters, Sidney ('b'. 1739) and Henrietta Maria ('b'. 1743), and a son, William Henry ('b'. 1741), who were baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn. 
Toms produced his first engravings in 1723 and 1724, but these were not published until after his death; the engraver's name appears on four plates, two of which are dated, in the second part of William Stukeley's 'Itinerarium curiosum', first published in 1776. Toms was a subscriber to John Dart's 'Westmonasterium' in 1723, and in 1726 he appears in Samuel Sympson's list of leading engravers. Early plates by Toms appear in Michael Hoare's 'The Builder's Pocket-Companion' and Batty Langley's 'A Sure Method of Improving Estates', both dated 1728, while in the following year he produced forty-eight plates for Stephen Switzer's 'An Introduction to a General System of Hydraulicks and Hydrostaticks'. 
Toms's output increased during the 1730s. William Williams's 'Oxonia depicta' (1733?) featured eight of his plates, and in the same year Toms collaborated on Henry Popple's 'A Map of the British Empire in America' -- the largest printed map of North America published during the colonial period. In 1734 he engraved a prospect of Greenwich Hospital which prompted George Vertue to note that Toms had 'lately done many works of Etching or Stylographic work with great skill and merrit' (Vertue, 'Note Books', 30.194). From April 1735 Toms was commissioned by Francis Blomefield to engrave plates for 'An Essay towards a Topographical History of the County of Norfolk'. Blomefield's correspondence offers insights into Toms's temperamental character. From the outset the engraver was dilatory and Blomefield was pressed to write three letters, each more demanding in tone, before the first proof was delivered. A second order was then issued, again requiring three additional letters before its delivery in January 1736, accompanied by an inflated bill. Had Blomefield's relationship with Francis Hoffman, Toms's potential replacement, not proved so disastrous, it is likely that the two men would have parted company. In the event Blomefield and Toms were reunited in 1736, at a time when Toms was desperate for work, due in part to his wife's ill health, which he informed Blomefield had cost him 'upward of two hundred pounds' (Stoker, 143). Relations briefly improved. In 1736 Toms executed the well-known 'ex libris' for his patron, but by October of the following year Blomefield was again disputing charges; despite the two men continuing to collaborate until at least 1743, there were noticeably fewer commissions for Toms in later volumes of the 'Essay'. 
Between 1735 and 1739 Toms was engaged in a partnership with the painter Robert West on one of his most successful and best-known works, 'Perspective Views of all the Ancient Churches, and Other Buildings, in the Cities of London, and Westminster', a pioneering work and 'an indispensable record of the appearance of London churches mostly now vanished without trace or demolished and rebuilt' (Adams, 78). Despite the success of the work's first and second series in attracting both subscribers and patrons -- who numbered the artist William Hogarth, the engraver Hubert Francois Gravelot, and the architect James Gibbs -- no further series were issued. However, during the production of the second series, West and Toms collaborated on a series of plates to illustrate William Maitland's monumental 'History of London'. 
In 1741 the engraver and print-seller John Boydell was bound apprentice to Toms, having famously been inspired by one of his cuts. In 1739, then in a state of despair and considering emigrating, Boydell had discovered a print of Hawarden Castle engraved by Toms: 'I admired it to a great degree... I thought I should like to Follow the art of Engraving [and]... wrote to Mr. Toms who offered to take me on trial' (Boydell, 82-3). Boydell spent the next six years in Toms's studio, working alongside Louis-Philippe Boitard and Jean-Baptiste Chatelain. He found his master 'very civil', though 'subject to be in Liquor, and very Outrageous and at such times striking his Servants and beating the wainscott with his fist'; he was also 'a very passionate man' and one who 'committed many extravagances while his phrenzy lasted' (ibid., 85). In 1746 Boydell paid Toms $30 to release him from his final year's service, and after Toms's death Boydell purchased some of the engraver's plates. 
In addition to engraving plates for the book trade, Toms produced a substantial body of single-sheet prints. His portraits include those of the celebrated strongman Thomas Topham, 'lifting 1836 lbs' (1741), from a drawing by C. Leigh, and of the clergyman Henry Barker by George White, after a mezzotint by Thomas Gibson. However, the largest part of Toms's single-sheet output comprised maps and views, often produced with other draughtsmen. Among some fine perspectives are a series of London views, five of Hampstead Heath and three of Highgate, produced in 1745 with Chatelain, and a skilled engraving from 1753 of the newly constructed 'London Hospital, Whitechapel', again with Chatelain, after the painting by William Bellers. Toms developed a particular expertise in engraving maps and plans, many clearly intended for naval instruction and aimed at naval buyers -- perhaps influenced by, or marketed with the help of, his brother. His output in this field was prolific and his naval connections allowed him to respond rapidly to contemporary events. Following the fall of Cartagena, Toms and Samuel Harding were commissioned to engrave a drawing of the attack provided by Captain William Laws at a meeting at Will's Coffee House on 2 May 1741. Remarkably, the resulting plan was on sale only a week later, a feat achieved by recutting an existing plan of the harbour, executed by Toms in 1740. Also of note are his 'ex libris', including that of Sir Rowland Winn, fourth baronet, which he engraved in 1743 from a design by the architect James Paine, the only bookplate designed by the architect. 
Toms's output declined in the 1750s, but both book work and single-sheet commissions continued, albeit more sporadically. In 1754 he engraved the River Humber after G. Woodhouse, the plate dedicated to The Worshipful Corporation of Trinity House in Kingston upon Hull, and the following year he placed an advertisement in the 'London Evening-Post' offering 'A New and Accurate Map of... Jersey' (24-6 June 1755). A subscription call in the 'Gazetteer and London Daily Advertiser' (28 April 1756) is the only surviving evidence for Toms's 'An Exact Representation of that Beautiful and Capital Ship called, Henry Grace de Dieu', while an advertisement for another lost print, a 'Third Rate Man of War', appeared later in the same year ('Public Advertiser', 21 October 1756). Toms's spectacular trade card for the undertaker John Deschamps, after Noel-Nicolas Coypel, engraved no later than 1757, is also noteworthy, though this may have been completed several years earlier. The last known engravings by Toms for books appear in the second edition (1756) of John Armstrong's 'The History of the Island of Minorca'. 
Whatever the cause of Toms's declining output, matters reached a head in March 1761, when he was imprisoned at the king's bench for debt. However, in March 1763 it was reported that 'By the death of the late Admiral Toms of Masham Street, Westminster, a genteel fortune devolves to his brother Mr William Henry Toms, formerly an eminent engraver in Union-court, Holborn' (Walpole, 225). With the inheritance also came his brother's house in Masham Street, to which Toms now moved. He may have produced occasional prints after this -- the frontispiece to the catalogue of the Society of Artists exhibition (1766) is said to have been signed by him, despite appearing after his death. Toms died at Masham Street, Westminster, on 12 September 1765, when he was remembered as 'an Eminent Engraver in various branches of that Art' ('Lloyd's Evening Post', 11-13 September 1765). Toms's output as an engraver was mixed. At his best he certainly displayed Vertue's 'great skill and merrit', at his worst precious little of either. While his naval and cartographic work was abundant and significant, his most skilled prints were the views and perspectives of London. His contributions to books such as Francis Drake's 'Eboracum', William Stukeley's 'Stonehenge', and Thomas Badeslade's 'Chorographia' -- the first genuine pocket-sized atlas of the eighteenth century -- have been regularly plundered and ensure that his work continues to circulate widely in the twenty-first century. 


@@@@@


doc= 50875


George Bartholomew (1784-1871), who was born on 9 January 1784, perhaps in Dunfermline, the eldest (natural) son of John Bartholomew (1754-1817) of Baldridge, Dunfermline, and Margaret Aitken (1758-1808). George, though as much a general engraver as a specialist map-engraver, was the direct ancestor of the Edinburgh family of map makers John Bartholomew & Son Ltd. He was brought up by his mother alone in humble circumstances on the south side of Edinburgh's Old Town (off Richmond Street). 
George Bartholomew showed early promise by the neatness of his copperplate script, so that in 1797 he was apprenticed to the well-known engraver Daniel Lizars (1754-1812), at the Parliamentary Backstairs, and under whose watchful eye he succeeded to the tradition handed down from Andrew Bell (1726-1809), proprietor of the original 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and before him from Richard Cooper, founder of the school of map engravers in Edinburgh. Bartholomew undertook a variety of engraving commissions, including business prospectuses, visiting cards, ornamental titling and the occasional presentation watch, all of which demonstrated his excellence in lettering. 
In 1805 or 1806, a few years after the completion of his apprenticeship, Bartholomew set up on his own as an independent engraver, trading from East Richmond Street, though he continued to work for Lizars. After William Home Lizars (1788-1859) and his brother Daniel succeeded to the business on the death of their father in 1812, and moved to larger premises at 3 St James Square, Bartholomew widened his skills to take in map-engraving on both copper and steel plates. 
On 15 May 1815 at St Cuthbert's Church, Edinburgh, Bartholomew married Anne McGregor (1791-1849) from Gladsmuir, a few miles to the east of Edinburgh. They had four sons and six daughters, of whom the eldest son, John ['see below'], was born on 26 April 1805, some ten years before the marriage. Following his marriage George continued to be listed in Edinburgh's trade directories as an independent engraver, usually based in East Richmond Street until the 1820s and then at 6 Leopold Place until the 1840s, as well as at addresses in Gayfield Place. He was identified with John Lothian's 'Plan of the City of Edinburgh' (1825, 1829), and Lothian's 'Plan of the Town of Leith and its Vicinity' (1826), which also appears in John Wood's 'Atlas of Scottish Towns' (1828), which established his reputation with local publishers. 
Since George's work was essentially carried out in the name of his employer, W. H. Lizars, it is hard to identify his contribution to the firm's output; however, enough evidence survives to show his involvement in county maps of Scotland and other general maps used for a sequence of atlases, such as Lothian's 'County Atlas of Scotland' (1827), J. Thomson's 'Atlas of Scotland' (1831), W. H. Lizars's 'Edinburgh Geographical General Atlas' (1840), and Blackwood's 'Atlas of Scotland' (1840). He continued to work, on occasion, for his son John, and indeed outlived the latter by a decade. He died of cancer of the cheek at 6 Salisbury Place, Edinburgh, on 23 October 1871. His family memorial is on the west wall of Warriston cemetery, Edinburgh. 
About 1820 George's son 


@@@@@


doc= 50876


John Bartholomew (1805-1861) was apprenticed to W. H. Lizars, where he developed his pictorial engraving skills. It is from this date that the family enterprise has traditionally taken its foundation. Bartholomew's work records demonstrate that he was probably trained in map-engraving by his father, by then Lizars's senior map-engraver. After completing his apprenticeship in 1826 John set up on his own account as an engraver, working during his early years from 4 East St James Street. Lizars continued to support him with orders for an increasing number of maps, his earliest being a 'Plan of Edinburgh for the General Post Office Directory' (1826). His brother William (1819-1881) followed a similar training, and worked for his father and in the Ordnance Survey office before succumbing to mental illness. From the mid-1850s he was permanently resident in the Crichton Royal Institute in Dumfries, then in the late 1870s was transferred to the Royal Edinburgh Asylum. Nevertheless, some remarkable full-size pen-and-ink drawings by him survive from the time that he was institutionalized which show patients suffering from a wide range of medical conditions. 
On 25 May 1829 John Bartholomew married Margaret (1796-1864), the daughter of William McGregor (died 1821), a farmer's servant of Gladsmuir. They had five children, of whom John ['see below'] and Henry (1834-1899) became engravers; a daughter, Anne, survived him. John Bartholomew's first commercial premises were in 1859 at 4 North Bridge, which he shared with the publishers Adam and Charles Black, and which had the advantage of a printing works in an adjacent building, Spottiswood House. He prepared many maps for Black's publications, including travel guidebooks and also the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', in twenty-one volumes, which Adam Black had purchased from Constable in 1827. The close association between the two firms was to continue for more than forty years. John's work for Blacks and for atlases such as Lizars's 'Edinburgh Geographical General Atlas' (1836) was of very high quality in the true tradition of Edinburgh engraving. In 1855 three generations of Bartholomews -- John, his father, and his sons -- shared the work in premises at 59 York Place. John retired in 1859 and moved to Grangebank Cottage, Morningside, Edinburgh, where he died on 9 April 1861. 
John and Margaret's son 


@@@@@


doc= 50880


Carington Bowles (1724-1793), printseller, the son of John Bowles, was born on 1 April 1724. He was apprenticed to his father on 2 March 1741, was made free of the Joiners' Company on 2 March 1752, and soon became his father's partner, trading as John Bowles & Son until he took over his uncle's shop. His father left him only a token legacy 'as I have already advanced him and he is not only in a very flourishing business but possessed of a plentiful ffortune out of Trade' (will, PROB 11/1056/335). Carington's characteristic contribution to the family publishing interest was comic prints, or 'drolls'. He became the principal publisher of the designs of John Collett and later of Robert Dighton and they, with lesser designers, produced hundreds of droll prints which comment with rumbustious humour on the social preoccupations of the time. Carington Bowles died on 30 June 1793 at Kensington Gore, London, and was succeeded in business by his son 


@@@@@


doc= 50881


Thomas [ii] Bowles (1689/90?-1767), who took over the running of the business from his father about 1714. He was first recorded in 1695 with his sister, Anne, as surviving children of Thomas Bowles. His birth is not recorded in the parish registers of St Gregory which survive up to 1687 but in its report of his death in 1767 the 'London Evening-Post' gave his age as eighty-seven. This is inherently unlikely since it would have made Bowles twenty-four years old when apprenticed to his father in 1704 and it is possible that the report erred by exactly ten years. He was made free of the Joiners' Company in 1711 and about that time he married Bethia Stevens. 
Although best-known for his ruthless piracy and commercial exploitation of the ideas of artists such as William Hogarth, Thomas [ii] Bowles was also an energetic and enterprising publisher in his own right. In 1720 his 'Bubble Cards' and other South Sea Company satires achieved nationwide distribution. During the next decade he undertook an impressive set of sea pieces after Thomas Baston (1726) and an even more ambitious series of historical prints of the life of Charles I (1727) which George Vertue considered 'well deserves being Collected as one of the productions in the Art of Graving here, whereby, alone may be seen the improvements by encouragement this Art has obtaind in London within the space of Twenty Years' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.191). In 1743 he and his brother John ['see below'] published prints of the paintings that decorated Vauxhall Gardens and from about that date they launched a long series of topographical views depicting the sights of London and the surrounding villages. Thomas [ii] Bowles retired from business in 1763, and on 8 April 1767 'the great printseller' ('GM', 37, 1767, 192) died at his house in Stoke Newington leaving most of his estate to his daughter Bethia Squire and her two sons, William and Thomas. He was succeeded in the shop (now numbered 69 St Paul's Churchyard) by his nephew Carington ['see below'], as his own son, Thomas, had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 50886


Grierson, George (c.1680-1753), bookseller and printer, was born in Edinburgh, the son of George Grierson, merchant, and his wife, Margaret Allane. His father's family had held estates in Dumfriesshire and Kirkcudbrightshire since the early fifteenth century. His elder brother James became minister of religion at Tingwall, Shetland. Nothing is known of George's early life and training except that he moved to Dublin in 1703 as a bookseller and printer. He purchased a house in Essex Street in Dublin for $533 and was admitted in 1709 as freeman of the city. In 1720 he set up his own printing house and was made a churchwarden of St John the Evangelist, Drumcondra, on the outskirts of Dublin. It seems that his printing office and his house were situated at Drumcondra. 
Grierson's first wife, Mary, was buried at St John's on 19 May 1726, and in the same year he married the talented classical scholar Constantia Crawley (1704/5-1732) of co. Kilkenny ['see 'Grierson, Constantia]. As she was a good friend of Jonathan Swift, Grierson's reputation as a printer was considerably enhanced. With her help he was appointed printer-general to the king in Ireland, and the post was confirmed by a patent dated 1 December 1727. Lord Carteret praised the work of both Grierson and his wife in a letter of 20 December 1730 to the duke of Newcastle, in which he claimed that they had made printing into an art and recommended that Grierson should succeed Andrew Crooke as the king's printer. Grierson was appointed to the office of king's printer after Cooke's death in July 1732, and received a final grant of the office to himself and his heirs on 1 December 1744. Constantia died on 2 December 1732 at the age of twenty-seven and was buried at St John's on 4 December, mourned by her only surviving son, George Abraham, and her husband, who depended so much on her scholarship and contacts. Grierson none the less married for a third time on 20 August 1734 at Belfast. His bride was a widow, Jane Cromie ('nee' Blow); they had seven children, three of whom died young. 
Grierson was a successful businessman, and besides his own books he published for the government and for institutions such as Dr Steevens's hospital; between 1735 and 1748 he earned $650 from printing for the Incorporated Society for Promoting English Protestant Schools. His publishing output was certainly large by Irish standards. His wife's editions of Virgil, Terence, Justinian, Juvenal, and Tacitus, which were published between 1724 and 1730, became known as 'Grierson's Classics', and his reprints included 'Pope's Miscellany Poems' (1736), which sold nearly 1500 copies. Grierson also had the sole rights to reprinting Bibles, the 'Book of Common Prayer', and 'Psalms' in Dublin; in 1749 he published 20,000 copies of the 'New Testament' to 'open the eyes of the poor Papists'. His fine editions of Sir William Petty's 'Maps of Ireland' and Dupin's 'Ecclesiastical History', in three folio volumes (1722-4), added to his reputation. 
Grierson died in Dublin on 27 October 1753, and left the king's printer's patent and a quarter of his estate to his son George Abraham, on condition that his half-brother Hugh Boulter should receive a quarter of the benefits when aged twenty-one. Grierson's brothers-in-law George Ewing, a bookseller in Dublin who married Jane Grierson in 1718, and James Blow (1676-1759), a Belfast printer, were his executors. In 1759 his widow moved to Castle Street, Dublin, where she carried on the bookselling business. 


@@@@@


doc= 50888


Imray, James (1803-1870), hydrographer and stationer, was born on 16 May 1803 in Spitalfields, London, the third child and eldest son of the six children of James Imray (1761/2-1830), a Scottish dyer, and his wife, Elizabeth Cooper (1779/80-1842). In 1818, shortly before his fifteenth birthday, Imray was apprenticed to William Lukyn, a stationer, of George Street, Mansion House. Six years later, on 16 May 1824, he married Elizabeth Cutbill (1805-1836), the daughter of another Spitalfields silk family, and when their first child, Elisabeth Ann, was baptized in 1825 James described himself as a bookseller. In 1827 and 1828 he was trading briefly on his own account as a bookbinder specializing in account books, first in Cheapside and then at 116 Minories, the premises of the chart publisher Robert Blachford. There is no further record of his trading until 1835 when he opened in Budge Row, just west of Cannon Street, again specializing in account books. In 1836 he was also trading as a dealer in marine stores in Patriot Row, Bethnal Green; that year, on 24 October, Elizabeth died of consumption leaving him with three young children, but before the year was out he had returned to the Minories to join Michael Blachford as a partner in the Blachford chart publishing business. 
Blachford and Imray traded together for ten years and brought a new vitality to the business, which had been lagging sadly behind its rivals; they enlarged and updated the chart list, published new sailing directions, and opened a nautical academy. During these years Imray was still involved in stationery, with a share in the Budge Row account book business, having taken in a partner, William Fitch, and an interest in another unsuccessful stationery venture. In 1846 Imray sold out to Fitch and committed himself to a future in chart publishing, acquiring Michael Blachford's share of the chart business and becoming sole proprietor. A period of rapid growth followed and in 1850 he moved to larger premises at 102 Minories. Imray's own particular interest was in chart compilation and he expanded his list beyond home trade waters with new charts of American and eastern seas. The publication of sailing directions, the manufacture and sale of nautical instruments (with which the firm had widened its services to navigators), and the nautical academy all flourished. In 1854, when his elder son, James Frederick Imray (1829-1891), became a partner in the book and instrument sides of the business, the firm became James Imray & Son. 
By the 1860s Imray had become the leading British commercial chart publisher and was operating from three premises: 89 Minories housed chart publication, 102 Minories chart and books sales and the nautical academy, and 1 Postern Row the instrument shop. The majority of the fast-growing British merchant fleet used his charts because, although accurate Admiralty charts were now available, merchant shipmasters still preferred the charts of commercial publishers, named 'blue backs' from their distinctive blue paper backing, and particularly James Imray's blue backs. They were popular because they retained the traditional format of a small-scale general chart with many large-scale insets of harbours. They were designed to answer the needs of a particular voyage conveniently and used modern survey material, now available from Admiralty and foreign government charts. They were more expensive than Admiralty charts, but fewer of them were needed because for some voyages they provided all that was required on a single chart; they were also accompanied by complementary sailing directions. 
As official surveys of Australia, New Zealand, the north-west coast of America, and the coast of Chile became available, Imray used them to compile charts designed for wool clippers, gold rush ships, and copper and nitrate clippers. As the influence of the East India Company waned and eastern seas opened to all British ships he published new charts of the Indian and Pacific oceans, followed by popular series of larger scale charts for the intricate passages through the eastern archipelago and on to China. Charts for particular trades were promoted with labels such as 'Rice ports of India' and 'Cotton ports of Georgia'. Before he died his catalogue listed over 150 charts. He also led the defence of the private publishers against increasing Admiralty competition and in 1865 acquired the 'Mercantile Marine Magazine', the mouthpiece of the private publishers, edited by his navigation teacher W. H. Rosser. 
Imray's success was founded on shrewd business skills and an appreciation of his customers' needs. Although he expanded the firm's other activities his heart was in chart publishing and he always kept personal control of this. He was the leading private chart publisher of the day, standing head and shoulders above his competitors. His name was virtually synonymous with the term 'blue back': Thomas Gray, of the marine department of the Board of Trade, wrote in 1875 that 'I only know of Imray's charts (i.e. the blue backs) as running the Admiralty charts close' ('Memorandum relating to the Supply and Correction of Charts', Board of Trade departmental paper, no. 79, 1882). 
In his later years Imray and his second wife, Ann Hilton (1809-1892), whom he married on 4 January 1838, lived in Manor Park, Streatham, where his granddaughter remembered him in old age as a red-haired, very stockily built, florid faced man who was fond of children. He died there on 15 November 1870 at the age of sixty-seven after a long illness; the cause of death was given as cardiac dropsy. 
James Frederick Imray inherited the business on his father's death. Although he also drew charts, his principal contribution was authorship of many of the firm's sailing directions. His 'North Pacific Pilot, Part I' (1870) was considered the best available and supplied by the Admiralty for use in warships. However, James Frederick lived the comfortable life of a second generation proprietor and lacked his father's business acumen. In the face of increasing Admiralty competition, the firm began to decline slowly and after his death his inexperienced young sons had to agree to amalgamation with their competitors Norie and Wilson in 1899. Five years later they were joined by the only other surviving private chart publisher, R. H. Laurie. 
The amalgamated firm, Imray, Laurie, Norie and Wilson Ltd, under the leadership of the Wilson family, carried the tradition of British private chart publishing on through the twentieth century. They survived the near monopoly of government charting, finding a role in meeting the needs of specialist users such as fishermen and yachtsmen. They are still publishing charts today. 


@@@@@


doc= 50892


Mount, Richard (bap. 1654, d. 1722), nautical publisher, the only son of three known children of Ralph Mount, yeoman, of Chislet, Kent, and his wife, Mary Court, was baptized on 16 November 1654 at Elmsted, Kent, where his parents had been married in January of that year. In 1670 Mount was apprenticed to William Fisher, bookseller and publisher of Postern Row, Tower Hill, London. Fisher's business, founded by his predecessor William Lugger, was in the heart of maritime London, near the river and Trinity House, and already specialized in mathematical and navigational books. In 1677 Fisher extended this by taking a share in 'The English Pilot, Mediterranean', part of the first comprehensive English maritime atlas begun by John Seller in 1671, and in 1679 went on to acquire rights, copper plates, and printed sheets for some other parts of 'The English Pilot' and Seller's 'Atlas maritimus'. 
Mount married William Fisher's daughter Sarah ('bap'. 1657?, died 1717) on 3 October 1682 and from 1684, although he was not formally freed of his apprenticeship until 1693, his name began to appear on publications both jointly with Fisher's and on his own account. When Fisher died in 1692 Mount inherited the business. This inheritance from his father-in-law, which included substantial parts of 'The English Pilot' and copyright in a number of successful maritime books, laid the foundations for the control over English nautical publishing which Mount achieved during the next thirty years. 
In his first years as proprietor Mount was in his prime and, as well as continuing to trade as a successful general bookseller and stationer, worked energetically to build on the firm's lead in the maritime field. He published James Atkinson's 'An Epitome of the Art of Navigation', and acquired sole ownership of popular titles in which Fisher had had a share, such as Andrew Wakeley's 'The Mariner's Compass Rectified', Nathaniel Colson's 'The Mariner's New Kalendar', and Richard Norwood's 'Seaman's Practice'. The first three of these remained in the firm's list, with numerous editions, over the next hundred years. In 1693 he became the sole distributor of Grenville Collins's 'Great Britain's Coasting Pilot', the first English maritime atlas of the English coast. He tried to publish parts of 'The English Pilot', which was still incomplete and in complicated multiple ownership, but too many of the plates were still owned by others, principally the chartmaker John Thornton, for his efforts to succeed. 
About 1700 Mount took a partner, 
Richard Mount died on 29 June 1722 at his home at Postern Row, Tower Hill, London, after a kick in the leg from a carthorse on London Bridge, and was buried at St Katharine by the Tower. He was a respected sober City figure, and had served twice as master of the Stationers' Company and presented a clock to its court room. He was comfortably off and owned several houses near the Postern Row premises and the right to collect tolls for passing through nearby George Yard. A contemporary commented: 'Mr Mount is not only a moderate, but has a natural antipathy to excess: he hates hoarding either money or goods and being a charitable man, he values nothing but the use of it, and has a tender love for truth. (J. Dunton, 'The Life and Errors of John Dunton', 1818, 219)' He requested that his funeral should be private, attended only by his close family and the money saved distributed among his less prosperous relations. He had been fortunate in his inheritance but had turned it to good account.Mount and his wife had three sons: William, the eldest, who succeeded him in the business, Fisher, and John. He left them advice which extolled moderation and good works, and warned them to 'be very cautious of being decoyed by the specious Pretense of Projectors, or of trusting others too far in the Management of any Part of your Estate; and have a care of adventuring on hazardous Undertakings' (appended to 'A Sermon Occasioned by Death of Mr Richard Mount', 1722). 
After the deaths of Richard Mount and Thomas Page, who died in London on 15 March 1733, the firm passed through the hands of three more generations of each family, trading under varying combinations of the Mount and Page names. Page was twice married, first, by 1704, to Elizabeth, of whom no more is known other than that she was the mother of at least four of his children. By 1721 she was dead and at some point after this he married Mary Crompton, who survived him with further children. Richard's son William Mount (1688-1769) led the firm for thirty years, most of them in partnership with Page's son, Thomas Page II (1704-1762). They were followed by William's son, John Mount (1725-1786), and Thomas Page III (1730-1781). They were succeeded by their sons, William Mount II (1753-1815) and Thomas Page IV (1756-1797). The families were linked by marriage no fewer than three times during the century, and both grew prosperous and acquired country houses and land. Richard Mount had left them all the advantages of a virtual monopoly of a specialized market, which was expanding fast as the numbers of English ships increased, but although they were commercially successful for fifty years after his death Mount's descendants perhaps paid too much attention to his urging of caution in their undertakings and too little to his example of vigour. The firm did little or nothing to update or add to their new editions of 'The English Pilot' or 'Great Britain's Coasting Pilot', and although many books were reprinted regularly the number of new titles gradually dropped. They failed to meet the higher standards expected as navigational knowledge expanded in the second half of the century or compete with the new businesses attracted into both chart and book publishing by the growing market. They gradually lost their share of the nautical market and by 1800 became purely a stationery business. The name Mount disappeared from the firm's title at the same time, though its successors continued to trade as stationers until 1974, under the name Smith and Ebbs. 


@@@@@


doc= 50893


Sayer, Robert (1724/5-1794), print, map, and chart publisher, was born in Sunderland, the youngest of three sons of James Sayer (1695-1736) of Stockton, a lawyer and descendant of the Sayer family of Worsall, Yorkshire, and his wife, Thomasine Middleton. 
Sayer's first known link with the map and print trade was the marriage, in January 1747, of his elder brother James to Mary Overton ['see under 'Overton family (per. c.1665-c.1765)], proprietor of the map and print business of her late husband, Philip Overton, at the sign of the Golden Buck in Fleet Street, London. Mary continued trading for a year or more after her marriage, after which Robert Sayer, then aged about twenty-four, acquired her stock and shop. Sayer became a freeman of the Stationers' Company by redemption on 6 September 1748, and the first advertisement placed by him trading on his own appeared in December that year. There is no evidence of any apprenticeship or whether he had already received early training in the trade with the Overton family, but whatever his experience it seems that he enjoyed the support of his brother and sister-in-law for several years, as until 1751 the land tax on the Fleet Street premises was charged to James Sayer. 
Overton had built up a large collection of plates, mainly by the purchase of successful plates from their original publishers and by the use of a network of contacts for the sale of prints in the provinces and abroad. The cartographic side of the business had recently been strengthened by the purchase of plates of the publisher John Senex, who had died in 1740. Overton had also shared a number of publishing ventures with the Bowles family of St Paul's Churchyard. Sayer recognized the strengths of this pattern of business and adopted similar strategies. 
In the 1750s London was fast becoming the centre of the European print trade, and Sayer catered for the explosion of interest in topographical views of English scenery, houses, and gardens and played a central role in the distribution and publication of design books disseminating architectural and decorative ideas to a large public. Sporting prints and books on penmanship were among other popular lines which reached provincial and colonial markets through his network of local contacts. He also sold large numbers of humorous mezzotints or 'drolls', though these did not reach the height of their popularity until the 1770s and 1780s. 
In 1753 Sayer entered the county atlas market, joining John Rocque in publishing an edition of Thomas Read's 'Small British Atlas', and he then went on to join other partnerships publishing county atlases. The most important English atlas in which he had a share was the 'Large English Atlas' (1760), published with Thomas Bowles, John Bowles & Son, and John Tinney. 
In 1760 Sayer and his first wife, Dorothy Carlos (died 1774), whom he had married in 1754, and their young family moved to slightly larger premises a little further east at 53 Fleet Street. He was by now operating on a very large scale with his own printing presses and engravers and printers. He began to move into fine print publishing, taking a lead in publishing engravings of contemporary English paintings, including works by Edward Penny, Angelica Kaufmann, and particularly Johan Zoffany. He published Zoffany's royal portraits, had a share in his theatrical mezzotints, and owned several of the artist's works himself. 
Sayer's financial strength enabled him to acquire important stock, plates, and drawings from Thomas Jefferys's business after the latter's bankruptcy in 1766, and he became the dominant partner with Jefferys in several cartographic publications, including 'A General Topography of North America and the West Indies' (1768). He also acquired stock from John Rocque's estate after his death. 
In 1774 Sayer took John Bennett, previously his apprentice, into partnership, and a period of increased productivity followed. An important series of American atlases was based on plates Sayer had acquired from Jefferys: 'The West India Atlas' (1775), 'The American Atlas' (1775), 'The North American Pilot' (1775), and 'The Western Neptune' (1778). These took the firm into chart publishing and were quickly followed by 'The Channel Pilot' and 'The East India Pilot', and during the 1780s by charts of the northern and western coasts of Britain, the Baltic, the Mediterranean, and west Africa. Many of the charts were based on the work of other cartographers, but in contrast to much of Sayer's publishing the partners were the sole owners of all the plates from the outset. Within a decade Sayer and Bennett had become the leading British chart publisher, while maintaining its prominent position in maps and prints. The firm's new atlases included Samuel Dunn's 'New Atlas of the Mundane System' (1774), Bernard Scale's 'Hibernian Atlas' (1776), and 'The American Military Pocket Atlas' (1776), the last of these catering for topical interest in the American colonies. 
In the early 1780s John Bennett began to show signs of insanity, and the partnership came to an end in 1784 or 1785. Sayer was now sixty and made no innovations after Bennett left. By 1791 he was in ill health, relying increasingly on his assistants and eventual successors, Robert Laurie and James Whittle, and spending much time in Bath and at his house in Richmond. 
Sayer was by now a rich man, but he declined the City of London honours of sheriff and mastership of the Stationers' Company and turned his mind to improving the large house on Richmond Hill which he had bought in 1776. Zoffany painted a family group here, showing Sayer in the grounds of the enlarged mansion, which he barely lived to see, with his second wife, Alice Longfield, 'nee' Tilson, the widow he married on 8 February 1780, and James Sayer, the surviving son of his first marriage. It shows a solid, plainly dressed man, untouched by extravagances of dress or manner that his wealth might have brought, but well content to be portrayed as a country gentleman. 
Sayer's success was based on commercial rather than creative skills. He achieved a leading position in the print, map, and chart trades by benefiting from common production facilities and distribution channels and exploiting the expanding markets in all three fields. As a publisher he was shrewd and cautious, at first venturing into the risky atlas market only in partnership with others, and spotting trends in popular taste but building his vast collection of plates by buying plates which had already proved successful. As a seller he developed his provincial, colonial, and foreign contacts to reach a wide market. It was only in the second half of his career, operating from this strong base, that he became more adventurous, moving into fine prints of contemporary pictures and later into chart publishing. 
Sayer died at Bath aged sixty-nine on 29 January 1794 'after a lingering illness' ('The Times', 3 Feb 1794, 4c) and was buried at St Mary's, Richmond, on 7 February. He was survived by his second wife and by one but probably no more of his six children. 


@@@@@


doc= 50894


Scale, (Peter) Bernard (1739/40-1826), cartographer and surveyor, was born in 1739, or perhaps early in 1740, in London, possibly in Bermondsey, the son of Bernard Scale (1672/3-1744), whose occupation is unknown, and grandson of Bernard Scale, a protestant pastor from Languedoc, who fled France, and whose descendants were active members of the Huguenot communities in London, Dublin, and Colchester. Scale had at least one sister, Mary Ann (or Mary Anne). Their father died in poverty in 1744, but they were provided for by their wealthy and childless uncle, Peter Scale ('b'. 1668/1671), who was born in France, served as a soldier in Colonel Theodore Vesey's regiment of foot in Ireland between 1715 and 1717, and settled in Colchester, styling himself gentleman. His Irish and Essex connections may have lain behind both siblings' subsequent connections with those areas. 
Little is known of Scale's life before, in the 1750s, he was taken as a pupil by John Rocque, a cartographer of Huguenot descent, who in 1751 had married Scale's sister, Mary Ann, by then already the widow of Edward Bew, a druggist. Rocque was at this time trading from Dublin, and there Scale learned skills from him for his later career as a land surveyor, cartographer, and land agent. Rocque founded the 'French school' of land surveying in Dublin, and Scale was his most distinguished follower. He eclipsed his master in the artistic quality of his work, while matching his high technical standards, but was neither so prolific nor so influential, his work being largely confined to Ireland (where he is known to have worked in seventeen counties) and to Essex and Sussex in England. His striking hallmark was to treat the cartouche and legend as if they were on separate torn pieces of paper. His penmanship and use of colour were unusually fine, and he exhibited landscapes to societies of artists in Dublin and London. 
In September 1758 Scale set up in business in Dublin as 'P. Bernard Scalle' who would survey 'Counties, Cities, gentlemen's estates etc., after the manner of Mr John Rocque, his brother-in-law by whom he was instructed' ('Sleator's Public Gazetteer', 1758, cited in Mason and Bensusan-Butt, 510). He retained a business in Dublin until 1779, trading from various addresses, but most enduringly at Lower Abbey Street from 1767 to 1777. Notable works during these years were his survey of Trinity College, Dublin (1761, TCD) and, with former pupil William Richards (died 1766), a curious map of Ireland for a watch-case (1762); two fine plans of the city and environs of Waterford (1764); and, using a 'marine theodolite' invented by Richards, 'Directions for Navigating into the Bay of Dublin from Wicklow Head, and from Balbriggen' (1765), with charts. The 'Directions' were supported by subscribers, mostly Dubliners, and including some Huguenots, and passed a stiff instrumental test devised by the Dublin committee of merchants. 
On 14 October 1765 Scale married Henrietta Letch (died 1824) in Dedham, Essex. Henrietta was related to several influential Huguenot families, including the Debonnaires of Colchester. She returned with Scale to Ireland. Their children were William Bernard (1766-1769), Henrietta Ann (1767-1850), Bernard ('b'. 1770), Julia (1771-1772), Charlotte (1772-1773), Morley ('b'. 1773, died 1773), and Margaret Sophia ('m'. 1807). 
After the death of Richards in 1766 estate surveying became Scale's main preoccupation. Notable works from this period were his atlas of the manor of Ardglass, co. Down (1768) and the 'Tables for the Easy Valuing of Estates' (1771), which was dedicated to James Fitzgerald, first duke of Leinster, for whom Scale surveyed in 1771. He often produced one finely coloured and decorated display map in the French tradition and a plainer map for daily use in the Irish tradition. Apart from estate maps he issued revisions of Rocque's plans of Dublin in 1773 and 1787 and produced the thirty-seven elegant county maps of 'An Hibernian Atlas' (1776) which was commercially successful but not technically or artistically innovative. 
In 1774 Scale and his family moved to Mangroves, a house near Great Warley, near Brentford, Essex. Scale kept his Irish business interest, being in partnership in Dublin from 1774 to 1778 with his former pupils John Brownrigg (1748/9-1838) and Thomas Sherrard ('c'.1750-1837). With them he surveyed the estates of Trinity College, Dublin (1775, TCD) and he continued some Irish surveying by himself, in 1774 mapping the Irish estates of the duke of Devonshire, and in 1782 surveying the Irish estates of Viscount Midleton. 
Scale's first English commission was a map of an estate in Sussex, executed in 1774. There followed other similar commissions; the most important were the survey of the 6700 acre Mistley estate in Essex, home of the politician Richard Rigby, of which Scale produced a volume of thirty-one very fine maps (subsequently in Essex Record Office), and that of the Essex estates of the Worshipful Company of Embroiderers (latterly at the Guildhall Library, London), a commission that may have fallen to him because of a family connection of his wife. 
In 1786 Scale's wife was left a large fortune: this brought social advancement but a premature end to his career. The following year the family moved to Boreham, Essex, and in 1788 bought Noakes Place, Great Baddow, Essex, where they lived until 1803 when they moved to North Hill, Colchester. They moved in prosperous circles, having family, religious, and business links with successful Essex Huguenot families: their son Bernard graduated from St John's College, Cambridge, and was vicar of Braintree, Essex, from 1796 to 1852. Scale styled himself a gentleman, and gave up surveying and cartography, having no instruments to leave by the time he made his will, though he continued to work as an estate agent. He was an established member of Colchester society, being a member of the Castle Book Society, and in 1811 was a member of the commission for 'improving the navigation from Hythe to Wivenhoe, and paving and better improving Colchester'. His wife, Henrietta, died in 1824 and he followed on 26 January 1826, aged eighty-six, at his home, North Hill, Colchester. He was buried in Colchester. 
Scale, with his master, the ultimately more influential Rocque, transformed Irish large-scale cartography, in particular carrying the estate map 'from agent's office to library or drawing room' (J. Andrews, 'Irish maps', Irish Heritage ser., 18, cited in Mason and Bensusan-Butt, 508). The contemporary rebuilding in towns and modernization of estates in Ireland gave scope for their work and their influence endured well into the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 50897


Stent, Peter (b. in or before 1613, d. 1665), printseller and printer, was born at Binsted, Hampshire, the second of the seven children of John Stent (died in or before 1645) and his wife, Joan (died in or after 1645). A prosperous man, John Stent left cash bequests of $622, with $106 destined to Peter. The son served ten years (1627-37) as a Merchant Taylors' Company apprentice, originally to Elizabeth Lowe ('fl'. 1620-1630), widow of George Lowe ('fl'. 1612-1626), a London printer of engravings. Stent remained a member of the Merchant Taylors' Company for life. About 1642 he opened a shop in Giltspur Street, just outside Newgate, London, where he sold engravings printed on his own rolling presses. Disruptions during the civil war presented an opportunity to purchase over 700 plates from printsellers and artists, for which his father's bequest provided capital; Stent aggressively added new pieces until he had eight times more plates than any predecessor -- over 1750. 
Stent sold copies after European masters (Leonardo, Raphael, Van Dyck, and Rembrandt) and English artists (Francis Clein, William Dobson, and Robert Walker), as well as prints by the best engravers working in England (William Faithorne, Wenceslaus Hollar, and Francis Barlow). However, the bulk of his inventory strove for utilitarian currency across a broad range of subjects: military exercises, the only county maps with roads, writing instruction, business forms, architectural manuals, natural history sketches, religious items, satires, and even pornography; 300 portraits illustrated shifting political factions and cultural achievements in England and Europe. Such prints could be framed and varnished for home decoration, while the portraits, borrowed by contemporary publishers to illustrate history books, were later prized by collectors for interleaving in James Granger's 'Biographical History of England... [with a] Catalogue of Engraved British Heads' (1769). 
Stent's clientele could afford a few pennies for small, crude works, but would pause at the shilling or two required for large, quality prints. The business was driven not by artistic considerations, but by the question of whether his projects could recapture the investment in materials, shop overheads, and hourly rates paid to engravers. Preferring old-style patrons to this new commercialism, the etcher Hollar complained that Stent paid a 'trifle' for a valuable landscape and declined to purchase a plate portraying Thomas Hobbes (Globe, 33). To make money the product had to be novel, affordable, and available before it appeared in competitors' shops. Notices in newspapers encouraged new customers; broadside advertisements doubled as wholesale order forms. 
Stent and his wife, Susanna, had a daughter, Elizabeth, still a minor when he died of the plague on 29 September 1665. He bequeathed small cash gifts to two brothers and a sister who had gone unmentioned in their father's will; Elizabeth received $250. His wife inherited the substantial estate, including a house in Snow Hill and the shop, whose plates alone were worth between 4's'. and $2 each. She soon sold the business to John Overton (1640-1713), under whom it thrived. 


@@@@@


doc= 50901


Thornton, John (bap. 1641, d. 1708), hydrographer, was baptized at St Botolph, Aldgate, London, on 8 October 1641, the second of seven children of John Thornton, cutler and razor maker, and his wife, Ann Gomer. The family lived on Tower Hill and later East Smithfield, the road to Ratcliff which had long been a centre of chart making. In 1656 Thornton was apprenticed to John Burston of Ratcliff Highway, a leading chart maker and freeman of the Drapers' Company. There he learned the skills of manuscript chart making developed in England over the previous hundred years and passed down from master to pupil by members of the Drapers' Company. 
Having married Ann Boult on 23 June 1664, Thornton completed his apprenticeship and became a freeman of the company on 11 January 1665. His earliest surviving signed chart, dated 1667, shows the east coast of England and is a typical 'platt' of the time, drawn on vellum and mounted on two hinged wooden panels for protection. Thornton was by now working on his own account from premises in East Smithfield and the following year took on two apprentices. Soon after this he moved to the Minories, where he remained for the rest of his career, working principally 'at the Sign of England, Scotland, and Ireland'. 
Some forty manuscript charts with Thornton's name are known, dated between 1667 and 1701, showing European, American, Mediterranean, and eastern waters. They include large oceanic charts on four panels but the majority are pilot charts of smaller areas drawn in his later years. Most of these larger scale charts are for navigation in eastern seas and were at first drawn from traditional Dutch sources, but they gradually incorporated material from East India Company voyages and reflected English interests in the area. By 1673 Thornton had extended his activities into printed map and chart publishing, and may well have mastered engraver's skills himself. Charts of the Strait of Magellan by Sir John Narborough and Hudson's Strait were followed by numerous other printed works, including the first map of Philadelphia. 
Thornton's contemporary John Seller conceived the idea of the first English printed maritime atlas and published the first two volumes of 'The English Pilot' in 1671 and 1672. In 1677 Thornton joined a partnership which took over the project from Seller and played an important part in the subsequent history of the work and its companion volume, the 'Atlas maritimus'. Thornton contributed charts to the Mediterranean volume published by the partnership in 1677 and in 1689 was responsible, with a partner, William Fisher, for 'The English Pilot: the Fourth Book', covering the Atlantic coasts of North America and the Caribbean. In 1703 he was the sole compiler and publisher of 'The Third Book', the first English seaman's guide for the route to the East. Many of its thirty-five charts were engraved versions of charts he had previously been producing in manuscript form. The volume was dedicated to the directors of the East India Company and produced with their encouragement. Thornton described himself as 'Hydrographer to the Company' and also to the Hudson's Bay Company, although there is no evidence of official appointment to either office. 
Thornton's charts, both manuscript and engraved, were distinguished by a bold clear style, and attention to improvement by frequent correction, unusual for the time. His working life straddled the transition of the fast-expanding English chart trade from manuscript to printed charts and he was unique in playing a leading role in both fields. His major contributions to three of the five volumes of 'The English Pilot' were used by English seamen almost unaltered for over half a century after his death. 
Thornton died early in 1708 and was buried on 23 January at St Botolph, Aldgate. His wife had predeceased him, as had their daughter Sarah and possibly a second wife, Ann Greenleafe, whom he may have married at St Katharine by the Tower on 31 March 1694. By his will, drawn up on 12 March 1707, Thornton left substantial bequests to his daughter Ann, Sarah's six children, and his sons, Macabees and Samuel. 


@@@@@


doc= 50902


Finn, Elizabeth Ann (1825-1921), author and supporter of Jewish settlement in Palestine, was born on 14 March 1825 in Warsaw, the eldest child of the Hebrew scholar the Revd Alexander McCaul (1799-1863). Her father, a Christian missionary to the Polish Jews, was ordained and married in England in 1823 and then spent a further eight years in Poland. In 1831 the family moved to London, where he devoted himself to making the condition of the Jewish people known in England; in 1841 he became professor of Hebrew and rabbinical literature at King's College, London. 
Elizabeth McCaul was educated by her mother and taught Hebrew by her father, and exhibited a flair for languages. At twelve she taught Hebrew and translated German works for publication. She grew to be a slender woman with a broad brow and strong, regular features. From 1841 James Finn (1806-1872), an Arabic and Hebrew scholar, was a regular visitor to the McCauls. In November 1845 he was appointed British consul for Jerusalem; he and Elizabeth married on 2 January 1846, and set out for Palestine. 
Both the Finns, but particularly Elizabeth, saw it as their chief mission to encourage Jewish residence in Palestine under British protection, and to explain the Jews and Palestine to a Christian audience. James Finn, courageous but intolerant and single-minded, made many enemies because of his strongly held opinions. Mrs Finn took great interest in the often turbulent life of Jerusalem and of its small Jewish population. In the early years she accompanied her husband through the Levant and 'as far eastward as any English people chose to go' ('Reminiscences', 61). Each year they spent eventful summer months (with their three children) in camps in the wild, barren lands of Palestine. 
In 1913 Elizabeth Finn dictated her reminiscences, which give a panorama of the comings and goings of great and small in and around Jerusalem, and reveal the drama, history, and gossip of the period. Running through all the work is her concern for impoverished Jews: she set up on her landholding a workshop which eventually employed 150 women, and trained Jewish artisans. In 1855 she started writing the semi-fictional 'Home in the Holy Land' (1866), which was followed by a sequel, 'A Third Year in Jerusalem' (1869), about the life of Europeans living there. In these works she lucidly described the events of everyday life: the visits of pilgrims, the Christian disputes, the bazaars, Jewish weddings, Muslim funerals, and the social life of the consulate. 
In 1863 James Finn was, somewhat ignominiously, replaced as consul; the family returned, saddened and in debt, to England, and settled after a few years in west London. After her husband died in 1872, Mrs Finn threw herself into new activities. She edited his unfinished work, a record of his consulship, expressing in it their joint disappointment that Britain had 'abandoned the dismayed Christians' ('Stirring Times', 475). She helped set up the Palestine Exploration Fund, the Society for the Relief of Distressed Jews, and the Distressed Gentlefolk Aid Association, the last with the assistance of her daughter Constance; she translated the Mahdi's letters to General Gordon for the biography of Gordon; and she was mentor and interpreter to the patriarch of the Ancient Syrian church during his long stay in London in 1875. 
Elizabeth Finn died on 18 January 1921 at her home in Hammersmith, London, and was buried beside her husband in Wimbledon churchyard. In 1923 her 'Palestine Peasantry' was published. Her son's foreword reflects her controversial views: 'the lack of anything like national unity among [the people of Palestine]... would render entrusting them with a measure of self-government a somewhat hazardous experience' (E. A. Finn, 'Palestine Peasantry', 1923, 6). The charities and trusts she helped to establish flourished long after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 50903


Samuel Thornton (c.1665-1715) also inherited his father's business with his stock of charts, copper plates, and instruments. He had not been formally apprenticed to his father but had worked with him and learnt his trade. Only one manuscript chart with Samuel Thornton's name is known, of the entrance to Canton (Guangzhou), 1707, but he almost certainly drew at least one chart which bears his father's name and made an important contribution to his father's later work. On John Thornton's death Samuel became a freeman of the Drapers' Company by patrimony and continued to publish many of his father's printed charts, including a revised edition of 'The English Pilot, Third Book' in 1711. Samuel Thornton died in September or October 1715 and most of the Thornton chart plates passed to the firm of Mount and Page. 


@@@@@


doc= 50906


Willdey, George (bap. 1676, d. 1737), optical instrument maker and retailer, was baptized on 8 February 1676 at St Editha's Church in Church Eaton, Staffordshire. He was the son of Thomas Willdey, a 'gentleman' of Church Eaton, and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Chetwind. Following his father's death Willdey moved to London, where on 25 February 1695 he was bound apprentice to the optician John Yarwell (died 1708), a talented lens maker, of Ludgate Street. He gained his freedom from the Spectaclemakers' Company on 26 March 1702 and thereafter worked as a journeyman for Yarwell and then for his rival John Marshall, whose premises were at the sign of the Archimedes and Spectacles in Ludgate Street. 
Within four years Willdey had entered into a business partnership with Timothy Brandreth, with whom he opened a shop in Ludgate at the sign of the Archimedes and Globe. Willdey and Brandreth used trade cards and newspapers to advertise a wide range of mainly optical instruments including vision aids, microscopes, telescopes, and burning glasses. In 1707 the partners participated in a brief but vitriolic print advertising war with John Yarwell and Brandreth's former master Ralph Sterrop, even placing wagers on a public comparison of their respective telescopes. Yarwell and Sterrop claimed that their former apprentices were selling microscopes made by Edmund Culpeper, whose mathematical instruments they openly advertised. It seems likely that Culpeper made the bodies of the microscopes, but that Willdey and Brandreth inserted their own lenses. This was a common practice in early modern instrument making, given the different skills required for making glass and non-glass components, and one which Willdey would continue to adopt. He later supplied both finished instruments and instrument components to a number of other makers in London. 
On 30 November 1709 Willdey married Judith Sene or De Senne (1679-1740), a French Huguenot immigrant of St Anne's, Blackfriars, where the couple married. The Willdeys had at least five children, two of whom -- George ('bap'. 1713) and Judith ('bap'. 1715) -- died in childhood. Another George ('bap'. 1716) died of consumption in 1736 at his father's residence at Clapton, near Hackney. Thomas (1717-1748) later took over the family business, and in April 1733 Jane Frances married Peter Fenoulhet of St Margaret's, Westminster, then clerk of the entries in the Excise Office. Fenoulhet's filing of a number of lawsuits on behalf of their son, James John, over purported mishandling of the family business has ensured the preservation of eleven inventories of household goods and commercial stock from 1737. It also preserved partial shop and household accounts, both dated and undated, unevenly drawn from across the period 1710 to 1737. These are the only extant shop accounts from the London instrument trade before the late eighteenth century. 
Willdey's marriage into the Huguenot community brought craft and trade connections that enabled him to expand his stock to sell a range of 'curious Toys', as well as instruments ('Flying Post, or, the Post Master', 24 Jan 1713). In the early eighteenth century 'toys' denoted small fashionable decor and accoutrements for adults, such as mother of pearl game counters or ingenious snuff boxes. Willdey also sold printed goods, beginning in 1709 with maps and globes produced in collaboration with the publisher John Senex and his associates. He later purchased and reused the copper plates for popular historical maps, such as Christopher Saxton's atlas of England and Wales of 1574-9. In 1711 Willdey parted company with Brandreth and, four years later, moved his premises at the corner of Ludgate and St Paul's Churchyard. Thereafter his stock expanded further to include snuff, coffee and tea, medicinal and cosmetic elixirs, cutlery and china, and commemorative items. He was unique in the instrument trade, and unusual among retailers, in advertising hundreds of times in the fledgling London newspapers, boasting that 'no shop in Europe can shew so great a Choice as his contains' ('Daily Post', 26 March 1729). One of his more remarkable advertising ploys was to erect a giant burning glass on his roof, which recalled recent scientific experiments with these instruments ('Post Man', 1-3 Nov 1720). Willdey was also unusually active on the court of the Spectaclemakers' Company, attending almost all of its meetings over two and a half decades. He worked his way up the ranks and served as master for an unprecedented eleven-year term between 1722 and 1733, only cutting ties at the apparent onset of ill health. 
As the range of its stock grew, Willdey's 'Toy-shop' attracted titled and royal visitors such as the whig politician James, first Earl Stanhope, and the prince and princess of Wales, as well as foreign ambassadors and royalty. His wholesale business exported vast quantities of wares to the British provinces as well as to Portugal, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands. Willdey accumulated such a large and diverse stock by using tens of thousands of instruments and instrument tubes to barter for other types of wares. He was regularly assisted by his wife and by fifteen apprentices who were mainly drawn from Staffordshire, the Huguenot community, and his family. Eight were women, which was unique in the male-dominated instrument trade and unusual even in the toy trade. 
George Willdey died on 9 November 1737 at Ludgate of an apoplectic fit, having suffered ill health for a number of years. He had requested burial 'in a decent manner [with] only three Coaches and a Hearse with Gloves Rings and Scarves to the Pall Bearers' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/686/128). On the following day the 'London Evening Post' commented on Willdey's 'noted great Toyshop at the Corner of Ludgate-street by St. Paul's, where he acquir'd a plentiful Fortune with a fair Character'. A week later he was described as 'the most noted Toyman in Europe' ('The Old Whig, or, The Consistent Protestant', 17 Nov 1737). Willdey left behind houses in Clapton and Ludgate, fashionable trappings including a carriage, retail and wholesale stock worth over $7000, and an estate of more than $9000. 
In his will Willdey had expressed concern that 'my Son Thomas will not nor canst Settle his mind to Business' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/686/128). His widow duly took over the shop with the assistance of a former apprentice, Susanna Passavant -- daughter of a deceased Huguenot jeweller of Soho -- until Judith's death at Clapton in 1740. Passavant then continued as shop manager under Thomas, who, freed from the Spectaclemakers' by patrimony, apprenticed one woman in 1746. After Thomas's death in 1748 Passavant left to run her own successful shop at Ludgate Hill. However, George Willdey's reputation survived the closure of his shop. In her poem of 1750, 'Soliloquy on an Empty Purse', Mary Jones fondly recalled the 'temptations thick and strong' to 'stop / At Wildey's toys' (quoted in Lonsdale, 162). 


@@@@@


doc= 50910


Miller, John (1805-1883), civil engineer, was born on 26 July 1805 at Ayr, son of James Miller, builder, and his wife, Margaret Caldwell. He had at least one brother; their father is presumed to have been Scottish. John Miller was educated at Ayr Academy. Alternative accounts state that at the age of twelve and a half he entered the office of C. D. Gairdner, solicitor and estate factor, or that he was apprenticed to the town clerk of Ayr with a view to becoming a lawyer: one appointment may have succeeded the other. In 1823, however, he moved to Edinburgh and was employed in the office of Thomas Grainger, who had been in business as a surveyor and civil engineer since 1816. In 1825 Grainger took Miller into partnership. 
Several authorities state that Miller attended Edinburgh University, without specifying dates. He cannot be clearly identified from surviving university records, but he might have been the John Miller who matriculated in law in 1823, or more probably he was one of two John Millers who matriculated in arts (which included engineering) in 1826. 
John Miller's introduction to railway engineering came with the construction of the Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway between 1823 and 1826; this was followed by the Garnkirk and Glasgow Railway, opened in 1831. Subsequently, Grainger and Miller worked individually on separate projects, though the partnership was dissolved only in 1845. John Miller became a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1832. He married on 1 December 1834 Isabella ('b'. 'c'.1802), daughter of Duncan Ogilvie of Perth, a merchant. They had at least five children -- four daughters and a son, also called John. 
Miller was engineer to the Dundee and Arbroath Railway, built between 1836 and 1838 and, more importantly, to the Glasgow, Paisley, Kilmarnock, and Ayr Railway (GPKA), built between 1837 and 1843. More importantly still, he was engineer for the Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway, authorized in 1838 and opened in 1842: this was a line very much in the Stephenson tradition, with extensive engineering works to provide a near-level route. 
By then Miller was the leading railway engineer in Scotland, and he thus found himself immensely busy during the railway mania of the mid-1840s. In 1845 alone he deposited plans before parliament for more than 1500 miles of railway. He successfully completed the North British Railway (Edinburgh-Berwick), the Edinburgh and Hawick Railway, the Glasgow, Dumfries, and Carlisle Railway (in effect an extension of the GPKA), the Dundee and Perth Railway, the Stirling Midland Junction Railway (a short but important link from Polmont to Larbert), and several lesser lines. He was also engineer to the proposed Direct Northern Railway, one of several contenders for the route from London to York. 
Exhausted, perhaps, and with his fortune certainly made, John Miller retired in 1850 at the age of forty-five. He was said to have been arrogant and his estimates always low; nevertheless, some of his railways remained of vital importance 150 years later. His great viaducts continued to carry trains, notably the 26 arch Avon Viaduct and the curving 36 arch Almond Viaduct on the Edinburgh and Glasgow line. His Ballochmyle Viaduct, south of Kilmarnock, had a central, semicircular masonry arch of 181 feet in diameter, the largest in Britain -- though Miller himself considered his greatest work to be the nearby Lugar, or Templand, Viaduct, with its 14 arches carrying the railway 150 feet above the Lugar water. 
Miller had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1841. By 1865 he had left the established Church of Scotland to support the Free Church. He stood unsuccessfully for parliament in 1852 and 1865, but was a Liberal MP for the city of Edinburgh from 1868 until 1874. Much of his time was devoted to running the extensive estates he had bought: Leithenhopes in Peeblesshire and Drumlithie in Kincardineshire. He became a JP and a deputy lieutenant. He died a widower, after a short illness, on 8 May 1883, at his residence, 2 Melville Crescent, Edinburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 50911


Molyneux, Emery (d. 1598), maker of globes and ordnance, came, according to Petruccio Ubaldini, who knew him, 'of obscure and humble family background' (Crino and Wallis, 14) and was probably the Emery Molynox who was presented as William Cooke's apprentice to the Stationers' Company in October 1557. By the 1580s he had gained a reputation as an able mathematician and maker of mathematical instruments, working in Lambeth, to the south of London. These skills brought him into the company of Richard Hakluyt and the explorers John Davis, Walter Ralegh, and Thomas Cavendish, and the mathematicians Edward Wright and Robert Hues, and led him to accompany Francis Drake, perhaps on the circumnavigation of 1577-80, for Ubaldini reported 'He himself has been in those seas and on those coasts in the service of the same Drake' (ibid., 13). In his 'Pathway to Perfect Sayling' (1605) Richard Polter commented that Molyneux had been a skilful maker of compasses and hourglasses. 
It seems likely that Davis introduced Molyneux to his own patron, William Sanderson, a rich London merchant. Molyneux and Wright were looking for a sponsor to enable them to build globes promoting England's maritime achievements, and Sanderson provided $1000. Molyneux's globe recorded Drake's track and that of Cavendish, whose own circumnavigation brought him back to England on 9 September 1588. Molyneux gathered information from navigators, and by inspecting rutters and pilots, such as that for Brazil and the West Indies which he gave to Thomas Harriot in 1590. The celestial globe was less original, but was to be used with the terrestrial for oceanic navigation. Wright helped to plot the coastlines and translated some of the legends into Latin; the maps were engraved for printing by Jodocus Hondius. On 10 April 1591 the astrologer and physician Simon Forman visited Molyneux's workshop; he taught Molyneux how to find longitude and claimed to have found an astrological method, which Molyneux challenged him to demonstrate publicly, but to no avail. 
The first edition of Hakluyt's 'Principal Navigations' (1589) announced the imminent appearance of the globes, describing Molyneux as 'a rare Gentleman in his profession, being therein for divers yeeres, greatly supported by the purse and liberalitie of the worshipfull merchant M. William Sanderson' (Hakluyt, 1.xxx). As made, the globes were just over 2 feet in diameter. They were the first to be constructed so as to be unaffected by humidity at sea, and their flour-paste construction was unusual for the time; Simon Forman remarked that Molyneux's moulding or casting process for the globes was 'the only way to caste [anything] whatsoever in perfecte forme... and yt is the perfectest and trewest waie of all wayes... and this was the wai that Mullenax did use to cast flowere in the verie forme' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1494, fol. 1491). Ubaldini's letters to the duke of Milan detail Molyneux's progress on their construction: the first pair were presented to Queen Elizabeth at Greenwich in July 1592; another terrestrial globe was presented with entertainments at Sanderson's house in Lambeth. The largest and most prestigious globes, bought by royalty, noblemen, and academic institutions, cost $20 each. One example of this first edition survives at Petworth House, Sussex, and a later one, dated 1603 and bearing the arms which had by then been conferred on Sanderson, is now preserved with its matching celestial globe in Middle Temple Library, London. 
Elizabeth immediately realized the propaganda value of these globes, as did other observers: Shakespeare ('The Comedy of Errors', III.ii) and Thomas Dekker both alluded to them in their plays, Dekker (in 'The Gull's Hornbook' of 1609) stating: 'What an excellent workman, therefore, were he that could cast the globe of it into a new mould. And not to make it look like Molyneux his globe, with a round face sleeked and washed over with white of eggs, but to have it in plano as it was at first, with all the ancient circles, lines, parallels and figures. (Dekker, 73)' Sanderson presented a lesser globe to Sir Robert Cecil in 1595, together with Hues's 'Latin booke that teacheth the use of my great globes' (Skelton, 7). No examples either of the smaller globes, priced as low as $2 and intended as practical navigation aids for seafarers and students, or of Molyneux's treatise 'The Globes Celestial and Terrestrial Set Forth in plano', published by Sanderson in 1592, are known. 
Molyneux was still associated with Forman in 1595 when the merchant Robert Parkes was to purchase coal, saltpetre, pitch, oils, and waxes for him, perhaps connected to work on his cannon. Molyneux sought the queen's patronage for this 'new invention, of shot and artillery, to be used principally in naval warfare: protection of ports and harbours, a new shot to discharge a thousand musket shot; with wildfire not to be quenched' ('CSP dom.', '1574-80', 339). This undated document is ascribed to 1570, but is surely later, as Molyneux was issued with a royal warrant in March 1593 and the matter was taken up by the privy council on 4 November 1596, when the lord admiral was urged 'to speak to Molyneux, Bussy and the two Engleberts about their offensive engines' ('CSP dom.', '1595-7', 303), as part of measures to defend the south coast of England against recusants, a request seemingly ignored. In 1594 Elizabeth granted Molyneux a gift of $200 and an annuity of $50, but these rewards could not prevent him and his wife, Anne, emigrating to Holland in 1597; he surrendered the annuity on his departure. He wished to distribute his globes personally to other European princes, and a base in Amsterdam, fast becoming the centre of globe and map-making, was better for this purpose. Either he or Hondius, who had returned to Amsterdam in 1594, took the printing plates for the globes. 
The states general of the United Provinces showed more interest in Molyneux's cannon, granting him a twelve year privilege on a similar invention on 26 January 1598. On 6 June Molyneux lodged a second application, but he died in Amsterdam almost immediately, his wife being granted administration of his estate in England later that month. On 9 April 1599 she was granted a Dutch compassionate pension of 50 florins, suggesting that Molyneux had died in poverty. There appears to have been no surviving family, and the nascent English globe-making industry died with him, though his globes were spoken of in England over forty years later as 'yet in being, great and small ones, celestiall and terrestriall, in both our universities and several libraries, here and beyond the seas' (Sanderson, sig. A3'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 50919


Garthwaite, Anna Maria (1688-1763?), textile designer, was born on 14 March 1688 at Harston, Leicestershire, the second of the three daughters of the Revd Ephraim Garthwaite (died 1719), rector of Grantham, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Rejoyce, 'nee' Henstead. The first forty years of her life were spent in Lincolnshire where her father was a well-connected Anglican clergyman with family associations with the City of London. After his death in 1719 it is probable that she went to live with her elder sister, Mary, the wife of Robert Dannye, rector of Spofforth, Yorkshire. In 1729 or 1730 Dannye died, and both sisters then went to London, where they eventually settled in Princes Street (now 2 Princelet Street) in the parish of Christ Church, Spitalfields. Their choice of residence may have related to a connection to the locality via the Bacon family, but germane to Anna Maria's professional life was the significance of Spitalfields as the centre of the quality eighteenth-century silk industry in England. 
The Garthwaite daughters, to each of whom their father left a legacy of $500 as well as his library, were probably well educated in a conventional manner, Anna Maria having had particular aptitude for design and botanical drawing. Her interest in textile design was apparent by 1726, when she collected and annotated a series of textile designs, 'by diverse hands', which included technically innovative and high-quality French work. Her first drawing, inscribed 'sent to London before I left York', was competent but simple. The largest series of her work, comprising many hundreds of drawings of silk designs and patterns, some of which are still enrolled in their contemporary arrangement covering the period from 1726 to 1756, has survived and is in the collection of the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. It is clear that, at a time when the English silk industry vied with French manufacturers for the quality home and export market, she was one of the foremost designers of 'flowered', or brocaded, silks. 
The V&A collection shows that Garthwaite was capable of working within all the stylistic trends of the period. Her designs with a floral emphasis have particular grace and individuality, and her work demonstrates considerable ability in placing these against the fashionable formal background. Noteworthy is her interest in some rare exotics. Her output was at its highest in the 1730s and 1740s, when such patterns were most fashionable, and at her peak she was producing eighty designs a year. In the early 1750s the numbers declined sharply and by 1756 she had varied her range to include a flowered gauze and a carpet pattern. Silks of her design have been found not only in the United Kingdom but also in Europe and North America. 
The enrolled lists and the annotations, probably in her own hand, show her to have been working for silkmen at the top level of the market concerned with textiles which were time-consuming to weave and costly to manufacture. She displayed a noteworthy grasp of textile technique, including technical direction as necessary. Surviving silks show how well her designs adapt to form and function. Garthwaite point paper, imprinted with squares for drafting designs in the early nineteenth century, may be a retrospective tribute to her expertise. The basis for her technical knowledge can only be conjectured, though Robert Campart, a Spitalfields ribbon weaver of Huguenot extraction, is named as a beneficiary, together with his wife, in Garthwaite's will. 
Since the status of silk designers was high, and their role in the export trade crucial, it is unfortunate that the female silk designer so favourably referred to in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for 1749 ('GM', 319) and adversely criticized in F. Rouquet's 'L'etat des arts en Angleterre' of 1755 (Rouquet, 111) is not named. However, P. K. T. Thornton has made a convincing case for Garthwaite's authorship of 'Of designing and drawing of ornaments,... for the use of the flowered silk manufactory, embroidery and printing (of the various kinds of flower'd silks)' in the 1759 edition of G. Smith's 'The Laboratory or School of Arts'. Knowledgeable, lucid, and amusing, it sheds a somewhat jaundiced light on the role of the English silk designer as opposed to the French, at a time when the English silk industry was about to enter a period of crisis. The heartfelt comments that 'a new pattern drawer will come into vogue and the old experienced one will be discarded. These ungenerous proceedings I have experienced myself' (Garthwaite) may have oblique reference to Garthwaite's diminishing output after 1750. 
It is not known where or exactly when Garthwaite died, but on 24 October 1763, at Princes Street in the parish of Christ Church, the 1758 will of Anna Maria Garthwaite, spinster, in which she left a fairly modest estate of about $600, was proved. Bequests imply a friendly, well-provided household but there is no mention of designs, though these were valued tools of the trade. Her sister, Mary Dannye, in whose Yorkshire estate she was to have an interest, predeceased her. Their niece, Mary Baron, was the main beneficiary. 


@@@@@


doc= 50926


Buckmaster, Maurice James (1902-1992), intelligence officer and businessman, was born on 11 January 1902 at Ravenhill, Brereton, Staffordshire, the son of Henry James Buckmaster ('c'.1857-1943), brewer, and his wife, Eva Matilda, 'nee' Nason ('b'. 'c'.1868). He was educated at Eton College from 1915 to 1920 and secured a classics exhibition to Magdalen College, Oxford, but lack of money stopped him from continuing his academic studies. Instead, he taught French to schoolchildren, worked briefly for 'France Soir', and spent six years at J. Henry Schroeder & Co., merchant bankers, in London. On 2 July 1927 he married May Dorothy Steed ('b'. 1904/5), daughter of Frederick Othnill Steed, silk merchant; they had a son and two daughters. In 1929 Buckmaster began his long association with Ford Motors. He was personal assistant to the chairman of the English branch for three years, from 1932 to 1936 managed Ford SA France, and then spent three years as head of the European department at Dagenham. 
Buckmaster was commissioned into the intelligence corps in October 1939, and after a war intelligence course at Minley Manor and a course on photographic interpretation at Farnborough was posted as an intelligence officer to 50 division in the British expeditionary force in France. He was mentioned in dispatches for services in that role during the retreat to Dunkirk, from which he was evacuated on 2 June 1940. He served as a liaison officer at Weymouth during the battle of Britain, and then joined the Dakar expedition as a GSO3 (intelligence). After it failed, he rejoined 50 division, and was briefly an instructor on the intelligence course at Bridgwater. 
In the spring of 1941, on the invitation of Gerald Templer, Buckmaster joined the Special Operations Executive (SOE) with the rank of major, and spent the summer on courses. He then, after a brief spell in the Belgian section, became head of the independent French (F) section in November 1941. On 18 December the same year, his first marriage having ended in divorce, he married Anna Cecilia Frances Stevenson (1903/4-1988), daughter of Michael Reinstein, of independent means, and divorced wife of Aubrey Melford Steed Stevenson. She was thereafter his constant companion at home, but could know nothing of his secret work. This consisted in finding, training, and dispatching to France -- usually by parachute -- men and women who could pass for French, who would prepare tasks of sabotage and subversion that would assist an eventual British armed re-entry into France. They came, as Buckmaster came, under the orders of the chiefs of staff, passed down through SOE's command channels (Buckmaster, often wrongly described as SOE's head, stood four steps down its staff ladder). He had fluent French (spoken with an English accent) and friendly manners, but no direct experience of Nazi occupation methods, and too little detailed information from 'the field' about what life in France was currently like. 
Buckmaster's section sent nearly 500 agents into France, over 100 of whom died, either in action or in concentration camps. Eighteen of them were dropped, unperceived by Buckmaster, directly into Gestapo hands. General de Gaulle strongly disapproved of their presence, but they inflicted substantial damage on the enemy and on French collaborators, imposing for example substantial delays on reinforcements for the Normandy front in June 1944. After the liberation of France in September 1944, Buckmaster, by now promoted full colonel, made a progress round that country, thanking those who had supported his leading agents, and he made sure that his men and women secured plenty of decorations, including three George crosses (all for women) and over a score of appointments to the DSO. He was himself made a civil OBE in 1943, and a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1945 (promoted officier in 1978). 
Buckmaster was released from the army late in 1945 and returned to Ford, for whom he worked in England for another fifteen years, first as head of the European department, then, from 1950, as director of public relations. From 1960 he was a freelance publicity consultant, specializing in champagne imports, and was much in demand in France at reunions of those who had worked with him. The ''reseaux' 'Buck'' (Buck networks) are now established as part of French resistance history, and several towns have streets named after him. He published two books, 'Specially Employed' (1952) and 'They Fought Alone' (1958), crammed with anecdotes, most of them true, though few of them applied to the correct places and agents. His health began to fail when he was in his eighties and he retired from London to Forest Row in Sussex. He died at his home there, the Walhatch Country Hotel, of heart failure, on 17 April 1992. He was survived by the three children of his first marriage. A memorial service was held at Holy Trinity, Brompton, on 2 July 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 50928


Sir Giles Lionel Bullard (1926-1992), diplomatist, was born in Oxford on 24 August 1926, the second of four sons and the third of five children of Sir Reader Bullard and his wife, Miriam Catherine (Biddy), 'nee' Smith. He was educated at the Dragon School, Oxford, and at Blundell's School, Tiverton, where he was head of the school. He won a scholarship to Balliol, which he attended from 1944 to 1945, before three years of national service, including a year with the West African Rifles, which he much enjoyed. In 1948 he returned to Balliol, where he was president of the junior common room, and played cricket and rugby for the college, and rugby for the university in 1950 and 1951, in the latter year as captain of the side that beat Cambridge 13-0, he himself contributing most of the Oxford score. In 1952 he captained an Oxford team which made an unbeaten tour of Japan. He graduated with a second in modern history in 1951. On 20 December 1952 he married Hilary Chadwick (died 1978), daughter of J. C. Brooks, of London; they had two sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 50934


Butler, Joyce Shore (1910-1992), politician, was born at 354 Moseley Road, Balsall Heath, Birmingham, on 13 December 1910, the only child of Arthur Edward Wells, photographer, and his wife, Florence Maud, 'nee' Jeary. She was educated at King Edward's High School, Birmingham, and worked briefly at the Society of Friends' Woodbrooke College. In 1934 she received a certificate in elocution from the London Guildhall School of Music and later taught drama. She married Abraham Victor (Vic) Butler (1911-1992), with whom she had a son and a daughter. 
Joyce and Vic Butler both belonged to the Labour Party and the Co-operative Society. Through the Co-operative Women's Guild she gained experience in organizing, educating, and agitating, and became known as a consumer champion. She ran unsuccessfully for local office in Birmingham before her husband's appointment as a Co-operative political organizer took them in 1946 to London where, in 1947, she was elected to Wood Green borough council. She eventually became deputy mayor (1961-2) and, as chairman of the council's housing and planning and development committees for almost ten years, she oversaw the council's major house-building efforts of the 1950s. 
In 1954 Butler became leader of Wood Green council, and was therefore well placed to win the Labour Party's nomination as candidate for the parliamentary seat when the sitting Labour MP stood down. Sponsored by the London Co-operative Society, she was elected MP for Wood Green in 1955 and held the seat until 1979. Her interest in local government remained strong, and she was vice-chairman of the Labour parliamentary housing and local government group from 1959 to 1964. Following the reorganization of the London boroughs, she served one term (1964-8) on the new Haringey council, and was the unanimous choice to be its first chairman in 1964. She was succeeded by her husband when he was elected mayor on the first of two occasions. 
Butler's concise, highly articulate, and well-informed speeches earned widespread respect. She was elected vice-chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party (1965-70) and chairman of the Co-operative MPs, and had a place on the speaker's panel; in this latter capacity she chaired the House of Commons when it sat in committee. In 1965 she was made parliamentary private secretary to the minister of land and natural resources, Frederick Willey, but in May 1967 she resigned in sympathy with seven parliamentary private secretaries who had been dismissed for refusing to support the government over its application to join the EEC. One of her concerns was that prices would rise after Britain entered the Common Market. This episode ended her chances of a ministerial appointment, although her potential was recognized by Harold Wilson, among others. 
Butler was one of the most active back-benchers, and was a persistent sponsor of private members' bills. A pacifist, who took part in the Aldermaston marches, she often spoke on nuclear issues. She raised frequent questions about consumer and environmental issues and, after repeated efforts, succeeded in passing the 'Farm and Garden Chemicals Act' (1967) requiring detailed labelling of the contents of pesticides. Other bills which she introduced, particularly those seeking to protect consumers through improved labelling of food and hygiene products, were unsuccessful but increased awareness of that issue. She devoted much of her attention to health matters, asking the first parliamentary questions about the thalidomide drug. In 1964 she founded the Women's Cervical Cancer Control Campaign (later the Women's National Cancer Control Campaign), which united over forty interested organizations. A believer in alternative remedies such as naturopathy and osteopathy, she introduced a bill in 1976 to create a statutory register of all osteopaths who followed a recognized course of study. Other unsuccessful bills sought to safeguard patients' privacy from medical students and ban the advertising of sweets during children's television programmes. 
Butler's other major concern was women's rights, and her most important achievement was the first bill outlawing discrimination against women in education, employment, and social and public life, and establishing a board to address complaints. Prompted partly by the case of a woman constituent barred from becoming a bus conductor, she introduced the bill four times, starting in 1967. Although she failed to obtain a second reading, the derision which greeted the issue steadily decreased. Like all her causes, the bill benefited from her manner of making points rather than scoring them. Subsequently sponsored by Willie Hamilton, who won a place in the private members' ballot, the bill formed the basis of Labour's landmark 'Sex Discrimination Act' (1975), though Butler regretted that the legislation was weaker than her original bill. During her last term in parliament she maintained a watching brief for women's interests: with five others she left the House of Commons select committee set up to investigate the abortion laws over concerns that it intended to restore restrictions on abortions, and she chaired a committee investigating violence against children. 
In 1979 Butler retired from the House of Commons to make way for someone younger and was disappointed that no woman was found to succeed her. She remained in demand as a speaker, and continued to be active in numerous organizations, serving as president of the London Passenger Action Confederation, vice-president of the Fawcett Society, chair of the Hornsey Housing Trust, and president of the Tottenham Hotspur ladies' football team. The preservation of England's landscape was one of her enduring concerns, reflected in her support for the Woodland Trust and the National Trust. Her years of community service in and out of parliament ensured an enduring popularity in Wood Green. After suffering a stroke on Christmas day 1991 she died of a heart attack in Highlands Hospital, Enfield, London, on 2 January 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 50935


Cairns, David (1904-1992), Church of Scotland minister and theologian, was born on 11 June 1904 at the manse of Ayton, Berwickshire, the first of the two children of David Smith Cairns (1862-1946), minister of the United Presbyterian church, and his wife, Helen Wilson Craw (died 1910), daughter of a neighbouring farmer. In 1907 his father was appointed to the chair of systematic theology in the United Free Church college in Aberdeen, becoming moderator of the United Free church general assembly in 1923, and in 1929 principal of the college, where he taught until his retirement in 1937. 
The younger David Cairns was schooled extensively, at Aberdeen grammar school (1912-16), at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh (1916-22), at Aberdeen University (1922-4), at Balliol College, Oxford (BA 1928), at Christ's College, Aberdeen (1928-31), and in postgraduate study at the University of Zurich (1931-2). A year as assistant minister of Govan Old Parish under the charismatic Revd George MacLeod was followed by ordination and induction to the charge of Bridge of Allan, Trinity, where he ministered until 1941, demitting upon commissioning into the royal army chaplain's department, in which he served until the end of the Second World War. In 1946-7 David Cairns was secretary to the Student Christian Movement at Oxford, whence he was appointed to the chair of practical theology at Christ's College, Aberdeen -- a post which he held until his retirement in 1972. He received an honorary doctorate of divinity from Edinburgh University in 1953. On 16 December 1948 Cairns married Emily Rosemary Russell ('b'. 1920), daughter of Dr A. S. Russell of Christ Church, Oxford. They adopted a daughter in 1953 and a son in 1954. 
David Cairns was the son of a highly distinguished churchman, theologian, and academic scholar, a father whom he revered. From an early stage in life he demonstrated the same intellectual aptitude and giftedness as his father had before him, gaining a first-class honours degree at Oxford and the clear commendation of his mentor there, Dr John MacMurray, who wrote to Cairns senior that 'David owes his First to himself more than to anyone for sheer hard work and sound self-reliant thinking' (private information). His early years as a minister prepared him well for what was to be his major life work in the academic world, continuing scholarly research in the fields of systematic and practical theology, for example in the translating of Emil Brunner's work, and in the production of numerous articles for a variety of journals. In his care for and preparation of candidates for the ordained ministry, principally though not exclusively for the Church of Scotland, David Cairns was a kindly mentor, meticulous in his work, possessed of a lively, sometimes sharp, sense of humour and motivated always by a deep pastoral sensitivity for his students. 
In his later years Cairns was severely afflicted by arthritis and, despite suffering great physical discomfort, periodic surgery, and hospitalization, he was quite indomitable in his determination to continue with his work. He was an avid reader on all manner of subjects and, since his close association from Govan days with George MacLeod, founder of the Iona community, he maintained a lifelong concern for social, political, and theological subjects and, in particular, issues of justice, peace, and disarmament. A very gifted artist especially in watercolour, whose work was widely commended, he revelled in capturing the magnificent landscapes of Europe and Britain, travelling frequently while his health permitted, but continuing to find and give pleasure through painting, even in the latter years of confinement at home or in hospital. As was his family's custom, David Cairns corresponded voluminously. A deeply committed minister and churchman all his life, his faith was a continual pilgrimage of exploration even to the end, where a copy of his Greek 'New Testament', often accompanied by a volume of the Greek classics, was always to be found by his bed; and he would engage with visitors in deep theological discussion and debate, his mind and intellect still keen, and quite undimmed by age. 
His own path of life was modelled on that of Cairns senior, with whom he maintained a close, affectionate, and highly intellectual correspondence until his father's death. He immersed himself totally in his work and he is remembered fondly, with respect and high regard by the successive generations of students at Christ's College. After a long period of increasing frailty, patiently borne, David Cairns died at Woodend Hospital, Aberdeen, on 17 October 1992. He was buried from Beechgrove parish church, Aberdeen, where he had given long and faithful service as a member of the kirk session. 


@@@@@


doc= 50937


Marshall, Arthur Calder- (1908-1992), writer, was born on 19 August 1908 at El Misti, Woodcote Road, Wallington, Surrey, the second of two sons of Arthur Grotjan Calder-Marshall, a civil engineer, and Alice Poole. After a peripatetic childhood, following his father's career, the family settled at Steyning, Sussex, when Calder-Marshall was fifteen. He depicts his rebellious and questing adolescence there in his partial autobiography, 'The Magic of my Youth' (1951). This centres on his friendship with an individual named Vickybird or the Poet (the otherwise unnamed Victor Neuburg) and on the then infamous occultist Aleister Crowley, whom he records as a thoroughly seedy and disillusioning character. 
Calder-Marshall attended St Paul's School, London, before going up to Hertford College, Oxford. As secretary of the Oxford University Poetry Society, he invited Crowley to come and speak in 1930. He was fascinated by the idea of anyone so reassuringly evil 'in a world where blacks and whites were breaking up so fast into various shades of grey' (Calder-Marshall, 'The Magic of my Youth', 177). This became the scandalous 'banned lecture' on Gilles de Rais, which was not allowed to take place and was instead printed as a notoriously boring pamphlet. Like so many of his class and generation, Calder-Marshall did an early stint of schoolmastering, teaching from 1931 to 1933 at Denstone College, a minor public school. His misgivings about the public-school system, and indeed about English bourgeois society and capitalism as a whole, were later expressed in his Hogarth Press pamphlet, 'Challenge to Schools' (1935). Calder-Marshall became a full-time writer in 1933, and during the 1930s he was a productive experimental novelist whose strong leftward views were in tune with the era that he looked back on ruefully in his 1941 'New Statesman' article 'The pink decade'. 
Calder-Marshall's contribution to the 'Writing in revolt' issue of 'Fact' (no. 4, 1937) was something of a manifesto for non-bourgeois writing. In contrast with bourgeois literature's emphasis on the individual, Calder-Marshall believed, the progressive writer should depict society as a whole, for which he advocated some form of 'the composite method' as found in the work of John Dos Passos and others. Calder-Marshall admired Dos Passos for his democratic vitality and formal boldness, such as the incorporation of 'newsreel' sections into 'USA'. 
In accordance with this, Calder-Marshall's early fiction attempted to find composite forms for a more interpersonal, collective, and socially conscious writing, focusing on relationships and institutions rather than on the subjectivity of the individual character. 'About Levy' (1933) consists of forty-odd sketches and vignettes -- two washerwomen talking, some men in a pub, a judge addressing a jury, and so on -- which add up, with a little work from the reader, to the story of a sympathetic Jewish doctor accused of murder. 'Dead Centre' (1935) anatomizes the life of a public school through sixty-odd short chapters, each narrated by different boys and masters. Calder-Marshall's methods are those of an era when both cinematic montage and the Mass-Observation movement of Charles Madge and his associates were very much in the consciousness of writers and intellectuals. 
On 6 July 1934 Calder-Marshall married Violet Nancy ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Benjamin Sales, a director of a manufacturing chemist's. They had two daughters. Calder-Marshall became a Hollywood scriptwriter for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1937. During the war he was employed by the British Petroleum warfare department and, from 1942 to 1945, by the films division of the Ministry of Information. In 1946 he wrote the screenplay for the award-winning Paul Rotha documentary 'The World is Rich'. After the war he branched into writing biographies, including that of the pioneering sexologist Havelock Ellis. One biography in particular, 'No Earthly Command' (1957), the life of Vice-Admiral Alexander Riall Wadham Woods DSO, was a turning point in Calder-Marshall's own life. During the battle of Jutland, while he was signals officer to the admiral of the Grand Fleet, Woods allegedly received an 'interposed message' instructing him to serve God, and he ended his life as a poor parson working with down-and-outs in the East End of London. 
Having initially been cynical about the commission to write Woods's biography, which came from an American film producer, Calder-Marshall came to believe while researching it that Woods was praying for him from heaven, and the book became the emotive story of Calder-Marshall's own conversion to Christianity. It is possible that Calder-Marshall felt this religious change independently, to some extent, and that he chose to dramatize it in the biography project. 
Calder-Marshall continued to write fiction, and 'The Scarlet Boy' (1961) is often considered to be his finest novel, exploring the effects on a group of people of a house haunted by two boys who have committed suicide. As in 'No Earthly Command', the narrator finds his own character and beliefs changing as he tries to report events. 
Calder-Marshall wrote many documentary film scripts, a play, three books for children, and several fictions under the pseudonym of William Drummond, as well as editing editions of Thomas Paine and Jack London, among others. Notable later non-fiction includes 'Wish you Were Here: the Art of Donald McGill' (1966), about the saucy seaside postcard artist, and 'Prepare to Shed them now: the Ballads of George R. Sims' (1968), which comprises a substantial introduction to the life of the social reformer and sentimental balladeer who wrote 'Christmas Day in the Workhouse'. Calder-Marshall's 'Lewd, blasphemous and obscene: being the trials and tribulations of sundry founding fathers of today's alternative societies' (1972) revives a clutch of Victorian free-speech controversies, framed by the contemporary 'Oz' magazine obscenity trial. 
Calder-Marshall's move away from thirties leftism towards the Christian faith was underpinned by unchanging ethical concerns. His 1930s work has dated to some extent, but the best of his later fiction has an enduring psychological and moral finesse. However, his most enduring work may well be 'The Magic of my Youth', a minor classic of English autobiography. Shrewdly intelligent, his best non-fiction has an unusual combination of down-to-earth social awareness and steady moral concern, together with a wit and an urbanity of a kind that is not prominent in academic cultural studies. About 5 feet 9 inches tall with a stocky build, Calder-Marshall was, as his daughter Anna recalled, 'a Spencer Tracy type when young. As he grew older, his sandy hair went a lovely grey. He had very blue eyes... and a deep voice. He gave off goodness' (private information). 
Arthur Calder-Marshall lived latterly at Twickenham, and died at the William Harvey Hospital at Ashford, Kent, on 17 April 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 50941


Carter, Angela Olive (1940-1992), writer, was born on 7 May 1940 at 12 Hyde Gardens, Eastbourne, Sussex, the second child and only daughter of Hugh Alexander Stalker, a journalist, and (Sophia) Olive, 'nee' Farthing, who had been a cashier at Selfridge's store in Oxford Street. She spent much of her childhood in Yorkshire, near Rotherham, where she went to stay with her maternal grandmother to escape wartime bombing. She always remembered these years with affection. One uncle was a miner and she retained a sympathy with working people all her life. She said that, as a child, she grew up thinking that all sheep were black, so dense was the industrial pollution. Her grandmother's house contained three copies of Foxe's 'Book of Martyrs'. Its horrific accounts of martyrdoms, and the even more horrific illustrations, may have influenced her fiction, through which violence ran like a thread. 
After the war Angela Stalker was educated at Balham direct-grant school in south London. She made many cinema excursions with her father, especially to the vividly decorated Granada Cinema at Tooting. The love affair with films and film-going lasted the rest of her life, and features strongly in her fiction and essays. When she left school, her father got her a job as reporter on a local paper, the 'Croydon Advertiser'; but the direct reporting of events was not her forte. She met an industrial chemist, Paul Malcolm Carter ('b'. 1931/2), and on 10 September 1960 married him, following him to Bristol when he started teaching in a technical college there. From 1962 to 1965 she read English at Bristol University, specializing in medieval literature, because she disliked the prevailing critical fashion for 'relevance' and 'social content', as advocated by F. R. Leavis and his many acolytes. She derided this as the 'eat up your broccoli' school of fiction and plunged wholeheartedly into reading legends and romances. 
Angela Carter, who began to write at university, became, thereafter, one of the most startling writers of her time. Her short stories and novels were in the line of descent from Gothic fantasy, but with the strand of sexual menace made more explicit. She wrote wide-ranging essays on both literary and social subjects, notable for their sardonic wit. She delighted in paradox: thus, she was a feminist, but she detested the puritanical aspect of such beliefs; she had a soft spot for the marquis de Sade, but she deplored the concept of woman as victim. Her best writing had many of the qualities of an unexpurgated fairy story by the Brothers Grimm. Thinking back to the libertarian 1960s, she compared that period's would-be overthrow of existing moralities to the French Revolution: 'Truly, it felt like Year One' (M. Wandor, ed., 'Gender and Writing', 1983). She admired the surrealists, and one critic called her 'the Salvador Dali of English letters' ('Daily Telegraph', 17 Feb 1992). 
Her first novel, 'Shadow Dance' (sometimes reprinted as 'Honeybuzzard'), was written during her second summer vacation at university and published in 1966. Two more novels followed at precocious speed: 'The Magic Toyshop' (1967), one of her best and most widely read fictional works, and 'Several Perceptions' (1968). With the latter she won the Somerset Maugham award, which specifies that the prize money is for foreign travel. She used it to leave her husband (they were divorced in 1972) and go to Japan; she liked to think that Maugham would have approved. 
Sometimes 'Shadow Dance', 'Several Perceptions', and 'Love' (1971) are referred to as the Bristol trilogy. They can all be read as grotesque fantasies, in parallel with 'The Magic Toyshop', which features a Gothic wicked uncle and a heroine under sexual and physical threat. But their settings also reflect the world in which Carter moved after she first left home, the provincial bohemia of Bristol and Bath. Here, she tried to live as much like a French left bank 'habituee' as she could. She dressed in black like the singer Juliette Greco and thought the films of Jean-Luc Godard were 'some sort of touchstone'. Her most admired film actress, however, was Louise Brooks, as much for her free-living life and her stylishness as for her films, of which Pabst's version of Frank Wedekind's expressionist drama 'Lulu' is the most famous. In 1988, Carter wrote her own version for the National Theatre, which remained unperformed. 
In 1967 Carter had begun to publish essays in the London-based weekly 'New Society', and for the next twenty years was one of its characteristic voices. Her time in Japan (1969-72) created a hiatus in the public appreciation that she had begun to receive for her fiction. Thereafter, for several years, many readers first encountered her through her pungent, highly original essays. (She published a first selection in book form as 'Nothing Sacred' in 1982. The complete essays were published posthumously with other journalism in 1997 as 'Shaking a Leg'.) One much-quoted essay, 'Lorenzo the closet-queen', attacked D. H. Lawrence's view of women. But some of her most powerful essays sprang from her experiences in Japan, including 'Once more into the mangle', a ferocious account of Japanese sado-masochistic comic books, in which she propounded a thesis she later developed at book length in 'The Sadeian Woman' (1979). The women in these comics are raped, tortured, and often murdered in horrible and ingenious ways. 'But, whichever way the women go,' she wrote, 'they all go through the mangle -- unless they are very wicked indeed; when they obey the Sadeian law and live happily ever after.' Carter was a child of the post-1945 welfare state, she said -- 'all that free milk and orange juice and cod liver oil' (S. Maitland, ed., 'Very Heaven: Looking Back at the 1960s', 1988) -- and she always claimed allegiance to the protestant work ethic, but this sometimes took an eccentric form; pornography, she argued, was art with a job to do. 
She had gone to Japan to join a lover; he told her he would never forget her, which she noted 'is not the kind of thing one says to a person with whom one proposes to spend the rest of one's life' (A. Carter, 'The Quilt-Maker', 'Burning your Boats', 1995). After a short-lived job with the NHK Broadcasting Company in Tokyo, she lived penuriously. She worked for a time as a bar hostess in the Ginza entertainment district, where, she said, 'I could hardly call my breasts my own' ('Independent on Sunday'). She wrote about the experience not only in a collection of semi-autobiographical short stories, 'Fireworks' (1974), but also in a gleefully ironic essay, 'Poor butterfly', in which she noted the attraction of western hostesses for Japanese businessmen and described her role and that of her colleagues as 'a masturbatory device for gentlemen'. 
Carter found in Japan an exoticism and an obsession with violence and style which continued to mark her own writing. She wrote often, and brilliantly, about the importance of apparently trivial details of fashion, frequently emphasizing its fetishistic aspects. Style, she thought, had 'heartless innocence'. Dandies are usually thought of as male, but Carter wrote with a dandy's wild grace. Among the authors she admired was the aesthete Ronald Firbank, about whom she wrote a radio play, 'A Self-Made Man' (1984). 
Her novels moved, for a period, into a macabre version of science fiction, starting with 'Heroes and Villains' (1969) and followed by 'The Infernal Desire Machines of Dr Hoffman' (1972) and 'The Passion of New Eve' (1977). These began to seem strained, with their obsessive breaking of taboos. Harking back to her studies of medieval literature, they were also allegories, a form of writing later authors have found it hard to tackle successfully. These novels were often seized on by academic analysts of her work, because they lent themselves to thematic dissection. 
One of Carter's most successful books came next, a retelling of traditional fairy stories, whose overall title 'The Bloody Chamber' (1979) evoked the legend of Bluebeard's castle; she later wove some of these violent and erotic tales into the script of an intellectual horror film, 'The Company of Wolves' (1984), directed by her fellow novelist and short-story writer Neil Jordan. One of Carter's most provocative books, 'The Sadeian Woman', also appeared in 1979. This was the first non-fiction title commissioned by the feminist publishing house Virago, with which she had been closely associated from its launch in 1972. With its defence of de Sade, and its teasing interpretation of his most notorious works as psychological insights into the freedom that non-procreative sex could bring for women, it created an outcry among feminists. She suggested to Virago that it should be followed by a republication of de Sade's novel 'Juliette', a tale of wickedness rewarded, but Virago declined. 
After her return from Japan Carter lived in Bath again, but then settled in south London with Mark William Pearce, a potter. From the late 1970s she increasingly depended on university teaching for a regular income, holding temporary posts at, for example, the universities of Sheffield and East Anglia in England, Brown in the United States, and Adelaide in Australia. Her teaching helped to strengthen her following among students, but her campus life meant that some of the direct observation of a wider world that gave such force to her essays and fiction began to fade. Her novel 'Nights at the Circus' (1984) marked a change of approach. Her previous novels and short stories had been bejewelled miniatures (one East European translator of her densely written, sparkling prose described it as 'embroidery'); but this was much longer than any previous book. The story of Fevvers, a Cockney trapeze artist who grows wings, it was laden with symbolism, and it took her into the mainstream of the 'magic realism' school of writing, whose founding father is usually said to be the South American novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez and whose best-known practitioner in Britain at the time was Carter's friend Salman Rushdie. 
Unfortunately, 'Nights at the Circus' had a mixed reception, and Carter wrote only one more novel: 'Wise Children' (1991). This too was more diffuse than her earlier work, but it had an attractively light touch. Set in south London, the fantastical life story of Dora and Nora Hazard evokes music-hall and cinema history, with strong undertones of the transformations and sexual confusions of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' and 'As You Like It'. 
There had been a crammed toy-box in the Carter-Pearce household long before there was a child. In 1983 Carter had a late and much loved son, Alexander, with Mark Pearce, whom she married on 2 May 1991. She told one fellow writer, 'Sometimes, when I read my back pages, I'm quite appalled at the violence of my imagination. Before I had a family and so on' ('Vogue', August 1985). She was a good judge of her own writing; probably her best work was done before she was forty. At that age, also, she suddenly changed her appearance, from her previous sprite-like look to that of a wise witch from a fairy tale. She stopped hennaing her hair and pursuing fashion. She was much older than Pearce, and the change emphasized this. The two of them went around London by narrow boat, exploring the hidden backwaters of canals. They sometimes wore identical greatcoats. 
Carter spoke with a slight stutter, and her conversation was ribald, allusive, and often caustic; none of this helped to make her a well-known public figure. She depended on readers falling in love with her baroque prose, aflame with artifice; and for many of those initial readers she was an almost private passion. Early in spring 1991 she was diagnosed with lung cancer. She died in London on 16 February 1992 and was cremated at Putney Vale crematorium. The obituaries were longer and more generous than most of the reviews she received in her lifetime. In the days after her death there was a sudden upsurge in sales of her books, and many sold out: 'There is a popular necrophilia,' said one friend, the cultural historian Marina Warner. Carter became one of the most widely taught novelists in British universities. Soon three posthumous collections were published: 'Burning your Boats' (1995), containing all her short stories; 'The Curious Room' (1996), containing her forays into drama, most notably her radio plays; and 'Shaking a Leg'. Her memorial celebration was held at the Ritzy Cinema in Brixton, south London, her beloved Granada, Tooting, having been converted into a bingo hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 50944


Cheshire, (Geoffrey) Leonard, Baron Cheshire (1917-1992), air force officer and charity founder, was born on 7 September 1917 in the Egerton Nursing Home, 65 Hoole Road, Hoole, Chester, the elder of two sons of Geoffrey Chevalier Cheshire (1886-1978), an academic lawyer who became Vinerian professor of English law at Oxford, and his wife, (Burella) Primrose Eleanor Barstow (1889/90-1962). There were two generations of lawyers on his father's side; and his mother's father and brothers were all army officers. 
Cheshire's early life, described as 'secure, encouraging, disciplined' (Morris, 9), was spent at Cothill, a village outside Oxford, where his parents had built a house. He was sent to the Dragon School in Oxford, but learned to speak French after spending a year at Pau in the Pyrenees with his mother and her family. In 1931 he won a scholarship to Stowe School, where his teachers included the writer T. H. White. He demonstrated 'resolution and a competitive streak' while there (ibid., 20), but was curiously detached. The headmaster of Stowe described him as hard-working, but not very gifted; nevertheless in 1935 he won a place at Merton College, Oxford (his father's college), to study jurisprudence. He went up to Oxford in autumn 1936 after a spell in Germany learning the language. 
At Oxford, Cheshire followed the usual pattern of extrovert young men of the time: he became noted for 'fast cars, reckless exploits, fantastic extravagance, mounting debts and shady associations' (Morris, 23). He apparently modelled himself on the Saint, the raffish hero of stories by Leslie Charteris. He was also known to go dog-racing with college servants; and at one time he held the undergraduate record for the fastest return from Hyde Park Corner to Magdalen Bridge, in an Alfa Romeo. Yet Cheshire also unobtrusively worked hard. His tutor, F. H. Lawson, described him as 'intelligent and competent', and he graduated in 1939 with a good second-class degree. 
Cheshire had joined the Oxford University air squadron in 1936; and he coped with the elements of flying, effectively, if not brilliantly. He later recalled how, watching Hitler's progress, he had become aware 'that something evil and dangerous was abroad' ('The Times'), and decided that he must oppose it. He applied for and accepted a permanent commission in the RAF, taking it up after his graduation in June 1939. He was then sent to the flight training school at RAF Hullavington. 
In June 1940 Cheshire was posted to 102 squadron, Bomber Command. The great majority of his contemporaries at Hullavington volunteered for Fighter Command, but not Cheshire. A contemporary recalled that, when commiserated with, his reply was, 'Nonsense. Look, there are nineteen of you and there is only one of me -- they will hear about me' (private information). He became a co-pilot on an Armstrong Whitworth Whitley, his pilot being a tall New Zealander, Frank Long. Cheshire later praised the way 'Lofty' Long taught him not just the drills for flying at night by instruments, but also how to fly under heavy enemy fire. While in the RAF he was familiarly known as Chesh, even sometimes Cheese. With his 'slim athletic frame', his 'clean-cut, boyish good looks... made him a WAAF favourite' ('The Independent'). 
Cheshire was soon captain of his own plane and carrying out raid after raid on the industrial cities of Germany. His dedication was such that he 'volunteered for missions when it was not his turn and even while he was assigned temporarily as a flying instructor' ('The Times'). His rapport with his air crew and with his ground crew became legendary: one later commented that 'He could get me to do anything' (Morris, 101). He was once criticized for drinking with his crew in a saloon bar reserved for officers, but replied: 'If I am good enough to fight and fly with these men I am certainly good enough to drink with them' (private information). 
Within a year Cheshire was awarded the DSO for bringing home his holed and burning aircraft -- and its crew -- after an attack on Cologne: 'If ever an aircraft flew on faith and little else that one did' (Morris, 64), a colleague wrote. His commitment and dedication could not fail to impress his commanding officers, and led to rapid promotion: to flight commander and then squadron leader. In 1941, however, he had to go to Montreal to collect a plane; and while waiting for it to be prepared, had some leave in New York. While there he had a whirlwind romance with a stage and screen actress. According to his biographer, 'Constance Binney was extrovert, a little gaudy, wealthy and moved in a circle of world-famous friends' (Morris, 77); and they were married in Montreal on 15 July 1941. Constance arrived in England in October to be with him. His parents, unfortunately, took against her, dubbing her Jezebel. 
Constance nevertheless recognized her husband was gifted, and she encouraged him to become a writer. In spare time during the day, and also between operations, he wrote a book about his experiences. This became 'Bomber Pilot', which sold out its first 10,000 copies soon after publication. It made Cheshire into a public figure and led to his writing other articles and giving lectures. He also gave one of the broadcasts in the BBC's 'Postscript' series on radio in August 1942. 
Cheshire was the first to admit that luck played a great part in his survival. He was constantly under enemy fire month after month without fatal damage -- although it was no doubt responsible for his breakdown and prolonged ill health after the war. His targets included some of the most heavily defended on the continent, but he attacked them successfully and with initiative. Any new plan for such attacks was thoroughly tested by Cheshire, and he constantly sought to improve the efficiency of his aircraft (especially the four-engined Halifax, deemed by many to be unsafe); and he pressed for the introduction of smaller, faster aircraft, such as the Mosquito. 
Cheshire demonstrated outstanding leadership qualities and at twenty-five became the youngest group captain in the RAF, commanding the bomber station at Marston Moor. This pleased Constance as it took him away from operations, but he was desperate to return to a flying command. This caused his superiors some problems, as they did not wish to waste such a brilliant talent; but in due course the perfect post emerged. Although he had to revert to the rank of wing commander, Cheshire was given command of the legendary 617 squadron. Formed by Guy Gibson in 1943, and using new bombs designed by Barnes Wallis, the 'dambuster' squadron had become famous through their low-level attacks on the Eder and Mohne dams. 
Under Cheshire's command and commitment the squadron became responsible for further refining the art of precision bombing. Through intensive training and great technical skill 617 became adept at marking targets by diving and dropping marker flares from only a few hundred feet. A larger force was then able to drop their bombs from a safer altitude. The technique was first successfully tested early in 1944 on an aero-engine plant at Limoges (which was destroyed in a manner that gave the French workforce time to escape). Subsequent precision targets that were destroyed or put out of action included the submarine pens at Le Havre and the sites of V-weapons in northern France. The latter included the V3, 'a nest of long range guns, in a subterranean tunnel, protected by a thick concrete shelter and designed to be able to pour 600 tons of explosives a day on London' ('The Times'). Flying a new single-seater Mustang, Cheshire himself marked the site, and the weapon was destroyed by new deep-penetration bombs specially designed by Barnes Wallis. 
One of the biggest operations Cheshire and 617 were involved in was a D-day deception operation, codenamed Taxable. It involved dropping metallic strips, known as 'window, in such a fashion as to imitate, on German radar, an invasion fleet approaching France in the Pas de Calais area. The operation worked wonderfully and successfully lured coastal and fighter defences away from the real invasion force heading for the beaches of Normandy 150 miles away. It has been described as 'the RAF's greatest spoof operation'. ('The Times')' Cheshire was recommended for a bar to his DSO, but was told that he would instead receive the VC. The citation was published on 8 September 1944 and was unique. Rather than an individual act of courage on a particular day, it cited four years of sustained courage, and bombing sorties in the face of heavy ground reaction. Nevertheless, the citation discussed at length the great raid on heavily defended Munich on 24-25 April 1944; and it went on to praise the 'careful planning, brilliant execution and contempt for danger which has established for Wing Commander Cheshire a reputation second to none in Bomber Command' (Morris, 181). 
Shortly afterwards Cheshire flew his 100th mission, at which point he was grounded. After three months with air command, south-east Asia, he was attached to the joint staff mission in Washington at the end of 1944. The latter appointment may have been brought about because his wife had had a breakdown, and needed to return home; however, the strain was finally affecting Cheshire himself, and early in January 1945 he himself was briefly admitted to hospital in Pasadena. 
Cheshire may have thought that his war was over but, as an obituarist later wrote, 'The culmination of his war could not have been more dramatic' ('The Times'). He was appointed one of two official British observers to the culmination of the Manhattan project, the dropping of the world's first atomic bombs. Due to American opposition Cheshire was unable to secure a place on the plane that dropped the bomb over Hiroshima; but after pressure from the British government, he did witness the attack on Nagasaki on 15 August 1945. 
There is no doubt that the experience was overwhelming. His health continued to deteriorate and RAF doctors sent him to St Luke's psychiatric hospital at Muswell Hill, London. An 'affective disorder' was diagnosed and he was invalided out of the RAF on 22 January 1946. His marriage was also over (a divorce being ratified in January 1951). The atom bomb did not make Cheshire an out-and-out pacifist, as he realized that such a campaign would not 'fit the real world in which we live' ('The Times'). However, it did initiate the reorientation of his life towards a search for real peace. His life became, as he later put it, 'an attempt to achieve the kind of peace to which the key exists only in men's hearts' (ibid.). 
Cheshire first sought to achieve this through creating self-governing communities of ex-servicemen; but these experiments soon disintegrated. However, he was left with a property that had been acquired: this was Le Court, a large country house near Liss in Hampshire; and it was unclear what he should do with it. Then he heard that Arthur Dykes, an ex-serviceman who had belonged to one of those communities, was dying of cancer. Cheshire agreed to nurse him at Le Court and thus -- unknowingly at the time -- began not only his life's work, but a dedication to the sick and the needy that rapidly became characterized as saintly. 
'I began to wonder if there weren't others in his position, dying and unwanted,' Cheshire later wrote. 'I also decided that I would not go out of my way to find them, but would merely leave things to take their course. If they came my way, I would accept them' (Morris, 250). After Dykes there was an old woman of ninety-five, and 'Le Court filled with the disabled, the unwanted, the helpless' (ibid., 254). The experience of nursing Dykes went hand-in-hand with a religious conversion and, four months after Dykes died, Cheshire became a Roman Catholic on Christmas eve 1948. Thereafter he dedicated his life to the betterment of humanity. 
Given his war record, whatever Cheshire did was news; and there is no doubt that his initiative touched a post-war nerve. As word got around of what Cheshire was doing, nurses and helpers arrived to share the burden. An obituarist later noted, 'Financially the place lived from hand to mouth, though through the appeal of the Cheshire name donations kept trickling in and from week to week bills somehow got paid. From being a sort of doss house, gradually Le Court became transformed into a real home, where human wrecks discarded by society were able to regain their self-respect. ('The Times')' The helpers included Cheshire's parents, who moved from Oxford to a cottage close to Le Court. At the start they had misgivings: his mother referred to his 'mad, wild, schemes' (Morris, 284) and his father to Leonard's 'new Messiah complex' (ibid., 285); but they supported him to the hilt. His father, who survived his mother by seventeen years, played a key role in organizing what became the Cheshire Foundation Homes for the Sick. 
In the late 1940s Cheshire continued to do some work with Barnes Wallis; and while testing a pilotless aircraft in Cornwall, found an abandoned building near the test site. In a process that was repeated hundreds of times in Britain and abroad, he decided that this would become a home for the disabled. The project was written up in the 'Catholic Herald' and elsewhere and again attracted funds and helpers. Under the influence of his new faith, Cheshire dedicated it to St Teresa of Lisieux; and St Teresa received its first patients early in 1950. Shortly afterwards Cheshire was diagnosed with a cavity on the lung. Although hospitalized for over two years in a sanatorium in Midhurst, he continued to direct this work from his bed. 
In the mid-1950s two biographies documenting Cheshire's war record -- and also his new work for the disabled and dying -- boosted his public prominence. The first was Russell Braddon's 'Cheshire VC' (1954). Another, 'No Passing Glory' (1955), was written by Andrew Boyle, then a journalist on the 'Catholic Herald'; they first met in 1950 and became lifelong friends. As early as 1953 Boyle was writing to Professor Cheshire that his son was 'surely one of the exceptional spirits of any age' (Morris, 291). 
By 1955 there was a 'family' of six Cheshire homes in Britain; each was run as an independent entity with its own management, but responsible to the Cheshire foundation that acted as their guardian. Cheshire's own day-to-day involvement with them was no longer strictly necessary; but he remained an active presence. The central concept on which he based the whole Cheshire movement was not 'how disabled is he?' but, 'with his disabilities what can he accomplish?'; and the answer was always surprisingly encouraging. While in the Channel Islands in 1956 he enlisted the help of his old teacher T. H. White, in setting up a home on Alderney. White perceptively noted that he had 'all the characteristics necessary for a saint -- obstinacy, fanaticism, charm' (Morris, 343). During this period it has been estimated that 'a new Cheshire home opened somewhere on average every three months' (ibid., 346). 
Many of these new homes were in the third world, where Cheshire increasingly spent a large part of his time. His international mission to alleviate suffering began in India with the establishment of Bethlehem House in Bombay; and, as ever, Cheshire operated through influential contacts at the highest level. He managed to secure the support of the prime minister, Nehru; and after a meeting with Cheshire, Nehru is quoted as saying to an aide: 'That is the greatest man I have met since Gandhi' (Morris, 366). 
By 1956 Cheshire was working closely with (Margaret) Susan (Sue) Ryder, Baroness Ryder of Warsaw (1924-2000). Sue Ryder had already carried out similar charitable work among concentration camp survivors in Poland; and at this time they formed a joint mission for the relief of suffering, the Ryder-Cheshire Foundation. One of their first projects was a large centre, including hospital facilities, at Dehra Dun at the foot of the Himalayas called Raphael, after the archangel of healing. Their joint foundation went on to establish similar missions in India, Nepal, Tanzania, Australia, and New Zealand to cater for victims of tuberculosis, mental handicap, and leprosy. In the UK they also initiated the Ryder-Cheshire scheme to improve the quality of life of the housebound. 
Cheshire and Ryder were married on 5 April 1959 in a private chapel in Bombay Cathedral. Their love for each other and their work were intermingled: before their wedding they had together composed a prayer about finding God 'In the sick the unwanted and the dying, And there we will serve Thee, unto death' (Morris, 373). Such was indeed their life of dedication. For much of their married life they lived in a few rooms in the Sue Ryder home at Cavendish in Suffolk; but a large part of their time was spent touring their homes and projects around the world. They had a son and a daughter. Cheshire later said that marriage had been his saving, having curbed his impulsiveness. 
By 1959 the main elements of Cheshire's work were in place, and in subsequent decades his main concern was with development: 'From now on the ideas ripen, but they do not fundamentally change' (Morris, 376). His reach was extended to far-flung parts of the globe -- to Singapore, China, the Middle East, and West Africa -- but many of these later initiatives had to be carried out by others. By 1992 there were 270 homes in 49 countries. Cheshire's biographer has described them as like new flames spread from 'the single taper of Arthur Dykes's life' (ibid., 375). By no means all the homes were residential. In many countries they also served the purpose of maintaining and developing wider care services for the disabled. All were locally run and financed, according to the Cheshire ethos; and disabled people were themselves represented on every level of the foundation's organization. 
It was not until the very end of his life that Cheshire accepted any form of official recognition for his work: in 1981 he became a member of the Order of Merit, and in 1991 accepted a peerage. Early in 1992 he was diagnosed with motor neurone disease, and he died on 31 July of that year in the Sue Ryder home at Cavendish, Sudbury, Suffolk. Cheshire was buried in the village cemetery, but there was a memorial mass at Westminster Cathedral on 25 September. 'He had allowed God into his life and this transformed him,' declared Cardinal Basil Hume in a homily on that occasion. 'He had said 'yes' to God, not half-heartedly, not with reluctance but, characteristically, in a manner that was total and even radical' (Morris, 434). In her Christmas message at the end of the year, the queen mentioned that she had met him at a reception for members of the Order of Merit shortly before his death. She recalled how Cheshire, despite his own illness, had spoken to her only of 'his hopes and plans to make life better for others' (ibid., 429). 
Lord Cheshire was one of the most remarkable men of his generation. In his tribute, Lord Denning spoke for many when he said that 'He has done more good for more people than anyone else in the country' (Morris, 435). Another person, who had worked closely with him in the foundation, said that he was 'inspirational and never defeatist', recalling Cheshire's heartfelt declaration that 'If the cause is right, the means will be found somehow' (ibid., 434). 


@@@@@


doc= 50945


Florence, Philip Sargant (1890-1982), economist, was born on 25 June 1890 at Nutley, New Jersey, USA, the son of Henry Smythe Florence and his wife, Mary Sargant-Florence. He was an American citizen, but spent most of his life in Britain. Alix Strachey ['see under 'Strachey, James Beaumont] was his sister. After attending Rugby School, he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1909 as a history scholar, and obtained a first-class degree in economics in 1914. He then studied at Columbia University, New York, where he took his PhD degree with a thesis on the effects of fatigue on the productivity of workers. He married an American, Lella Faye Secor, in New York in 1917, and she became his close companion until her death in 1966. They had two sons. 
After committee work in Britain and the USA, Sargant Florence returned to Cambridge University as a lecturer in economics in 1921 and stayed there until 1929, when he was appointed professor of commerce at the University of Birmingham. He was dean of the faculty of commerce and social science at Birmingham from 1947 to 1950, and retired in 1955. He remained active in retirement, taking visiting professorships in the United States, at Johns Hopkins University and the University of Rhode Island, and serving on a number of committees. From 1972 until his death he was a vice-president of the Royal Economic Society. He was appointed an honorary CBE in 1952. 
Sargant Florence was a lively Cambridge undergraduate, much influenced by his contemporary C. K. Ogden, who interested him in words and their meaning. This was later reflected in Florence's 'Basic English for the Social Sciences' (1962). At Cambridge he was a founder of the Heretics Society, and served as its secretary until 1914. He also helped to found the 'Cambridge Magazine' and served on its editorial committee. His mother, Mary, was one of its contributors. 
Sargant Florence was much interested in social as well as economic questions, having served on the British Association committee on fatigue from the economic standpoint (1913-15), and as investigator to the Health of Munitions Workers Committee (1915-16). In the USA he was an investigator for the US public health service (1917-21), and lecturer for the bureau of industrial research and bureau of personnel administration, New York (1919-21). His first book, published in 1918, was 'Use of Factory Statistics in the Investigation of Factory Fatigue'. The title of this book displayed another of his main interests -- the statistical study of industrial problems. This was reflected directly in his 'Statistical Method in Economics and Political Science' (1929), and in his many works on the economics of industry. For example, his 'Ownership, Control and Success of Large Companies, 1936-51' (1961) was a pioneering and detailed study of the concentration of ownership in British industry, including details of directors, ownership, dividend policy, financial success, and an analysis of very large companies. Perhaps his best-known work, again involving many statistical comparisons, was his 'Logic of British and American Industry' (1953, revised 1971). His width of interests was reflected not only in his books, but also in articles published in sociological, statistical, and psychological, as well as economic, journals. 
Sargant Florence soon became well known in the midlands, and became an influential figure both in the university and in midlands industry. These interests were temporarily suspended by the Second World War, when he and his wife, both American citizens, were evacuated to the United States, where he acted for a while as consultant to the national resources planning board. On returning to Britain during the war he joined the staff of the American ambassador, John Winant. 
After the war Sargant Florence resumed his university duties, and undertook wide-ranging investigations in the midlands connected with post-war reconstruction, especially town and country planning. He published, among other works, 'Country Town' (1946), a study of Worcester; 'English County' (1947), an inquiry into the industries of Herefordshire; and 'Conurbation', a report on regional planning in Birmingham and the Black Country. From 1957 to 1963 he presided over the Greater Birmingham employment committee, and remained active as an author, academic, and committee member well into old age. His work for Birmingham University was recognized by his honorary degree of DSocSc (Birmingham), and his reputation in America was recognized by his honorary LittD (Humanities) (Columbia). 
Sargant Florence was a man of many and varied interests, who infected all around him with his lively mind, his 'joie de vivre', and his delightful and witty personality. He was no theoretical economist, though he did develop an interest in macroeconomics in his old age, but he made many contributions, both academically and practically, through his extensive work in the midlands, to improving industry and the conditions of its workers. He was always interested in local and national politics, and was a member of the Labour Party, at least for a time. But he was no enemy of capitalism, believing that its strength may lie in its very variety and balance of power, allowing the fittest for the given circumstances to dominate. Florence died at Highfield, Birmingham, on 29 January 1982, and was cremated at Lodge Hill crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 50947


Christofas, Sir Kenneth Cavendish (1917-1992), diplomatist, was born at Kismet, Highcroft Gardens, Golders Green, Middlesex, on 18 August 1917, the only son of Edward Julius Goodwin (died 1917/18), commercial agent and a private in 370 labour company, and his wife, Lillian, 'nee' Levinson. His father died after being gassed in the trenches during the First World War, and his mother subsequently married Alexander Christofas, a Greek aristocrat and marine lawyer, who took British citizenship; Kenneth took his stepfather's name. On 1 May 1948 he married Jessica Laura Sparshott ('b'. 1917/18), daughter of Tom Sparshott, marine engineer, of London; they had two daughters. 
Christofas was educated at Merchant Taylors' School and University College, London, where he took a degree in classics and economics. On the outbreak of the Second World War he was commissioned into the Queen's Own Royal West Kent regiment and went with the British expeditionary force to France. His later military career was principally on the staff. He was appointed MBE and a member of the order of Polonia Restituta in 1944, and was among the select band who reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel while still in their twenties. After the war he thought about staying on in the army but instead in December 1948 joined the foreign service under the scheme for former officer direct entrants. There Europe became his specialization, with spells in the European departments at home and the Rome embassy, and the first of several assignments in Brussels. In the intervals he broadened his horizons on secondment to the Commonwealth Relations Office as economic counsellor in Lagos and to the Colonial Office as head of the economic department. 
In 1969 Christofas was appointed CMG and returned to Brussels as deputy head of the UK delegation to the EC. He had been hand-picked to play a key role in any negotiations for British entry. When the Heath government opened negotiations in 1970 Christofas was the senior man in the Brussels end of the team led by Sir Con O'Neill that prepared the ministerial rounds. His special task was the adoption of the 'acquis communautaire', the mind-numbing task of reviewing the community's secondary legislation which a new entrant had to enact and apply. The mountain of documents over which he laboured was unfeelingly displayed on the table where Heath signed the Accession treaty in 1972. 
Christofas's rare European expertise took him back in 1972 to the Cabinet Office, where he worked with the committees responsible for European affairs. When Britain joined the EC in 1973, he was appointed to the post of director-general of the secretariat of the Council of Ministers, responsible for, notably, the work of the economic and finance council and relations with the European parliament. These charges made full use of his talents but his finer hour came with the inauguration in 1975 of regular meetings of heads of state and government in the European Council. Ministers came to know and appreciate his mastery of his subjects, his skill with his pen, the methodical preparations he undertook, and the masterly records he composed. More than one delegation paid tribute to his 'farouche intelligence' and, on tricky occasions, his ability to magic away a difficulty by the smooth adjustment of a phrase in translation. A man of some theatricality (and with more than a passing resemblance to Alfred Hitchcock), he once espied in a corridor Walter Scheel, then German foreign minister, and rushed towards him with open arms -- making the security officers reach for their pistols. Parliamentarians, too, appreciated his professionalism in the defence of council interests for which they might have little sympathy. In conferring on him the parliamentary gold medal, of which he was the first recipient not to be an MEP, they little knew how deep this diplomatic professionalism ran. His private advice to colleagues dealing with the European parliament was to 'treat them like dirt'. 
Christofas was not a man to seek popularity among his staff but he inspired their respect, slightly tempered by the pet name they gave him, M. Bretelle, from the red braces which he sported. His closest collaborator, a tough German, once said that he had never had a difference with him. He had a tight schedule for his weekly flight back to Eastbourne, chiding the cabin crew to get off the ground and enable him to catch his train at Gatwick (to which the airline conveyed him by taxi). On these trips, dressed down and clutching his bag of washing, he was a world away from the dapper British public servant of his working life. 
Christofas retired in 1982 and was promoted KCMG. He was briefly able to spend more time on one of his passions, motoring, until left disabled by a stroke a few years later. Long-distance rail travel, meticulously planned, continued to absorb him, and it was while returning from one of his outings that he collapsed and died in Victoria Station, on 3 November 1992; he was cremated at Brighton crematorium. He would have wanted to be remembered for his role in Britain's participation in the ever closer European union. He was the test of Britain's ability to enrich the corps of European public servants who, unseen, enabled their political masters to reach their publicly-proclaimed agreements. Having known war in the European and Far East theatres he was among those devoted to burying 'age-old rivalries' and escaping from 'bloody conflicts' -- to use the language of the treaty of Rome's preamble. He confirmed that a great Englishman could also be a great European. 


@@@@@


doc= 50948


Clapham, John (1908-1992), musicologist, was born on 31 July 1908 at Studland, Baldock Road, Letchworth, Hertfordshire, the only son and the second of the three children of John Clapham (1870-1947), stockbroker, and his wife, Edith Maud Taylor (1875-1956). After school at Bedales, Clapham began his musical studies as a cello pupil of Douglas Cameron at the Royal Academy of Music in London in 1927, at the same time studying harmony and counterpoint with Stewart Macpherson. In 1931 he became an external student of London University, where he graduated in 1934, while continuing his cello studies, to which he added double bass lessons under Eugene Cruft. During the pre-war years musicological research increasingly interested Clapham. 
On 1 August 1939 Clapham married Katharine Irene Benham (1911-1962), a fellow cello student at the Royal Academy of Music, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. In the same year he joined the BBC as a sound engineer, but in 1941 he was dismissed because he was a conscientious objector, even though his case had been raised in the House of Commons by Winston Churchill and the BBC had been told to reinstate him. He spent the rest of the war years first in the fire service and then as a teacher at Wycliffe School, Bristol, which was evacuated to Lampeter in 1943. In 1946 he was appointed as a lecturer in music at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, and as cellist of the university's chamber ensemble. It was here that his interest in Dvorak became firmly established and that he first met a great-grandson of the Czech composer, the violinist Josef Suk. He became familiar with Dvorak's chamber works first through performance and then through analytical study. He examined in detail the supposed connection between American Indian music and the composer's 'American' works, and largely disproved popular belief that there was a direct link, before turning his attention to a study of the orchestral music. Of his many students, he considered the Welsh composer William Mathias to be among the most brilliant. In 1946 Clapham gained his DMus as an external student of London University, and in 1959 he was made a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music. His many visits to Prague began in 1956 and continued until 1988. 
In 1962 John Clapham was appointed senior lecturer in the music faculty of Edinburgh University, and he was reader there from 1969 until his retirement in 1973, when he returned to live in Bristol. Soon after his arrival in Edinburgh his wife died, and he took comfort in his family and in the company of his Edinburgh colleague and friend, the composer Hans Gal, with whom he shared a quiet, droll sense of humour. On 30 December 1966 he married Mary Cousins ('nee' Wright) (1915-1997), herself a violinist and schoolmistress and the former wife of Farquharson Cousins, principal hornist of the Scottish National Orchestra. In the same year Clapham's first major study on Dvorak, 'Antonin Dvorak: Musician and Craftsman', was published. His widening interest in Czech music led to a fine study of Bedrich Smetana for the series 'Master Musicians' (1972). He turned his attention to other Czech composers, including Janacek and Martinu, and was among the first to draw attention to the relationship between Janacek's speech-rhythm melodic patterns and Dvorak's late symphonic poems. He thus established himself internationally as the leading authority outside Czechoslovakia on Czech music. 
In 1974 Clapham was, with Josef Suk, the founder patron of the Dvorak Society for Czech and Slovak Music in Great Britain, having previously been a founder member of the Dvorak Society in Prague. In 1979 another book, simply entitled 'Dvorak', was published. From this time and almost until his death he continued his research and writing on Czech music, publishing many valuable papers on a wide range of related topics in academic journals such as 'Music & Letters', the 'Musical Quarterly', the 'Music Review', and 'Czech Music'. A third Dvorak study, 'Antonin Dvorak: Man and Artist', remained unpublished. Among his closest Czech friends he counted Jarmil Burghauser, that country's leading Dvorak scholar and the author of the standard thematic catalogue of Dvorak's works, first published in 1960. Over the years, John Clapham selflessly helped Burghauser in the mammoth task of producing a revised second edition, which was eventually published in 1997. In recognition, the author included Clapham's name on the title-page. As early as 1960 he had been proposed for an honorary doctorate of Charles University, Prague, but the political situation prevented this. After the 'Velvet revolution' in 1989, Burghauser and his Czech friends again raised the matter, but at the time of his death the necessary academic formalities had not been completed. 
John Clapham was a very private person but very warm towards all who shared his enthusiasm for the Czechs and their music. To fellow scholars, young and old, he was always most generous and ever helpful; to the end, however, he would never let an error of detail pass, even a slip of the tongue in conversation, without polite but firm correction. Students who could match his standards found in him a fine teacher, while others found his scholastic demands inhibiting. His last years were spent close to the home of his younger son, at Stanton Court Nursing Home, Stanton Drew, Bristol, where he died on 9 November 1992. He was cremated on 17 November at Haycombe, Bath, and his ashes were buried that day at St Andrew's Church, Chew Magna. He and his second wife had separated. The name of Clapham has remained alive in Czech music scholarship after his death in the constant reference to his books and papers at musicological conferences and in published studies, not only by those who knew him but also by a new generation of researchers sharing his lifelong interests. 


@@@@@


doc= 50950


Carr, Barbara Irene Veronica Comyns (1907-1992), writer, was born on 27 December 1907 at Bell Court, Bidford-on-Avon, Warwickshire, the fourth among the six children (five girls and one boy) of Albert Edward Bayley (died 1922), a Birmingham brewer and industrialist, and his wife, Margaret Eva Mary, 'nee' Fenn. Her childhood was described in her first book, 'Sisters by a River' (1947), a memoir that evokes both the enchantment and the darker dimensions of her early family life. Having married at seventeen a much older and ostensibly a more wealthy man, Margaret Bayley lost her hearing in the trauma of her final confinement and remained deaf for the rest of her life. She communicated with her children through sign language and strange little notes left around the house, which suggest that her handicap exaggerated her wayward thinking. The marriage was turbulent, her husband drank too much, and, like so many at the time, the family declined from bourgeois security through poverty into debt. The tragic vulnerability of women, especially to the cruelty of men, later became a major theme in Barbara Comyns's work. 
The Bayley girls were ineffectually educated by a succession of governesses. After the death of her father when she was fifteen, Barbara, intending to be a painter, attended art school, first in Stratford upon Avon. She then won a scholarship to the Heatherley School of Fine Art in London, a college which, unusually for the time, employed live models for life drawing. She found work in an animation studio drawing cartoons, and, inspired by the literature she had read in public libraries, also began to write, although she found her early work too derivative and destroyed it all when she married. 
On 30 May 1931 she married John Francis Pemberton ('b'. 1909/10), a painter not destined for success. Barbara lost her job when she told her boss she was expecting a baby. Their son, Julian, was born in 1932, followed by a daughter, Caroline, in 1935. The couple's struggles later became the basis of her first novel, 'Our Spoons Came from Woolworths' (1950). Over the next few years Barbara lived in London and supported her family in many ways: renovating pianos, trading antiques, working as a cook, dealing in classic cars, breeding poodle puppies, converting flats, and -- having considerable beauty -- modelling for artists and photographers. For a while during the Second World War, her marriage having broken down, she lived with Arthur Price, a benevolent and mildly disreputable character who later became the basis of her last novel, 'Mr Fox' (1987). When the blitz came and a flying bomb landed in her Hampstead garden, Barbara left London with her family and took a job as a cook in a country house. It was there, living in a tied cottage, that she began to write notes of her own childhood to amuse her children. 
Divorced from John Pemberton, Barbara married on 29 August 1945 Richard Strettel Comyns Carr ('b'. 1908/9), a Foreign Office official and the grandson of a prominent QC and playwright. Thinking that her full married surname of Comyns Carr was too long to appear on a book jacket, she chose to use Barbara Comyns as a shorter, more convenient pen-name. On their honeymoon in a cottage in Wales she began another novel, eventually published as 'The Vet's Daughter' (1959), but put it aside in favour of a biography of the painter Leigh Hunt, which never found a publisher. 
Meanwhile, at the encouragement of a friend, Comyns collected the fragments of the memoir of her childhood, which she had put away in a suitcase containing old photographs, and sent them to publishers. The honesty, even relish, with which she related a pre-war middle-class household, complete with cruelty, violence, drunkenness, and attempted murder, did not accord with the post-war craving for normality, so at first the proposed book met with no success. 'Lilliput' magazine eventually serialized extracts under the title 'The Novel Nobody will Publish'. These were read by the literary adviser to Eyre and Spottiswode, who subsequently published the whole text in 1947 under the title 'Sisters by a River'. Although the family's descent from luxury to poverty provides a narrative thread, 'Sisters by a River' is a collection of sketches rather than a novel. The mood meanders from pastoral beauty, nursery escapades, kittens, strawberries, new frocks, and childish treats to surreal terrors, macabre discoveries, violence, and cruelty. Fantasy interludes are given the weight of reality, as in a scene where a magic twig gives two five-year-olds the power of levitation. These random transitions, which occur often within a few sentences, convey vividly a world viewed with a child's understanding. Critics responded warmly to 'Sisters by a River', but Comyns was annoyed that, to enhance the childlike tone of the book, her publishers made a feature of her eccentric spelling. While her naive vision remained part of the charm of her writing, Comyns later ensured that her husband edited her work. 
The success of 'Sisters by a River', added to the happiness and security of the Comyns Carr marriage, encouraged a prolific period which first produced 'Our Spoons Came from Woolworths'. This novel tells the tragic tale of Sophia and Charles, two young London bohemians whose marriage is too ephemeral to survive on love, art, and idealism alone. Although a more disciplined and mature work than Comyns's first book, it is as much autobiographical as fictional, with only a few wholly imaginary incidents, such as the Dickensian horror of the scene in which the rejected and feverish young wife collapses in a doorway with her child dying in her arms. Comyns found confidence to complete 'The Vet's Daughter', her most admired work of pure fiction. It was serialized by BBC Radio, adapted for the stage, and turned into a musical, 'The Clapham Wonder', by Sandy Wilson. London life in Edwardian Battersea, in a household losing its grip on middle-class values, is viewed through the eyes of the narrator, Alice. From childhood onwards her sadistic father and vulgar stepmother destroy her faint chances of happiness. In the final pages, impelled by sheer terror of her father, the young woman flies into the air above Clapham Common, drawing a large number of onlookers. When she falls to earth she and her malevolent stepmother are trampled to death in the crowd. Next Comyns wrote 'Who was Changed and who was Dead' (1954), a novel inspired by newspaper reports of an epidemic of ergot poisoning in a French village. She relocated the story to the Warwickshire village of her childhood and imagined a macabre fantasy in which the river floods and the villagers are driven murderously insane. 
Comyns had little time to enjoy the success of her work, however. Her husband's Whitehall superior, indeed the owner of their honeymoon cottage, was Kim Philby, now exposed as the mastermind of the Cambridge spy ring. Association with Philby ended Richard Comyns Carr's career and the family faced not only poverty but also scandal. They moved to Spain, where they lived for eighteen years, first in Barcelona and later in Andalucia. Their flight produced another memoir, 'Out of the Red and into the Blue' (1960), which was followed by three more novels, 'The Skin Chairs' (1962), 'Birds in Tiny Cages' (1964), and 'A Touch of Mistletoe' (1967), in which Barbara responded, perhaps unwisely, to her publisher's request for something 'less macabre' (private information). 
In the early 1980s, when the feminist imprint Virago republished Barbara's early work, the Comyns Carrs returned to England to live in the Richmond area, in homes where she always insisted on painting the ceiling of one room blue with white or gold stars. This move also inspired a renaissance in Comyns's writing, and she produced three more novels: 'The Juniper Tree' (1985), 'The House of Dolls' (1989), and finally 'Mr Fox'. 
After a short illness, Barbara Comyns died at 14 Stanton Cottages, Stanton upon Hine Heath, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, on 15 July 1992, and was buried at Stanton church. As a writer, her surreal imagination, elliptical style, and delicate lyricism foreshadowed the magic realist school and provide a record of bohemian life in London in the mid-twentieth century. In life, her unique charm, vivacity, and courage won her loyal friends but not the recognition of the literary establishment; she remains an unjustly neglected author. 


@@@@@


doc= 50957


Morton, Charles (1819-1904), music-hall and theatre manager, was born in Hackney, Middlesex, on 15 August 1819. Little is known of his early life, but he was established as a publican by about 1840. In 1849 he acquired the Canterbury Arms in Upper Marsh, Lambeth, where he boosted custom by organizing concerts. In May 1852 he opened a custom-built concert hall on the skittle alley, to which admission was gained by a 6died refreshment ticket, redeemable for drinks. The venture proved sufficiently popular for an improved hall to be opened in December 1854, at a reputed cost of $40,000. 
It was, above all, this early phase of Morton's career that eventually earned him the title 'Father of the Halls'. Most modern students of music-hall history agree that this claim was in many ways undeserved. Morton's reputation owed much to his longevity and his popularity with certain key figures in the worlds of entertainment and journalism, and these factors combined to marginalize the achievements of others. Although his decision to build a 'music-hall' that was physically separate from the public house was unusual, many publicans, in the provinces as well as London, were developing concert halls from the 1840s and 1850s and utilizing several of the practices once commonly seen as peculiar to the Canterbury. Nevertheless, Morton was a significant figure in the growth of the industry, above all as a skilled publicist at an important moment in its development. Particularly in the 1870s, he also made a substantial contribution to the development of musical theatre and light opera in London. 
Arguably Morton's most distinctive contribution to the nascent industry can be seen in his attempt to develop a refined style of entertainment that helped to earn much needed respectability and publicity. More forcefully and effectively than most of his contemporaries, he stole the clothes of those potential enemies who sought to reform popular recreation by placing great emphasis on the moral and educational tone of certain elements of the Canterbury's programme. He employed a choir which performed operatic selections, glees, and madrigals; indeed, Gounod's 'Faust', or at least extracts from it, was given for the first time in Britain at the Canterbury in 1859. A small art gallery was established in an annexe in 1856, along with a small reading-room. In 1855 and 1856 Morton produced theatrical entertainments at the hall, although the fact that he did so without the necessary licence brought him into conflict with the local magistracy. Even then, the subsequent publicity helped to boost the hall's success even further. Morton thus foreshadowed much of the philosophy that underpinned the growth of the so-called variety industry from the late nineteenth century. 
The music-hall industry had begun its colonization of London's West End in 1857 with the opening of Weston's Music Hall, and Morton followed this trend by opening the Oxford Music Hall in Oxford Street in March 1861. Significantly, the hall opened with a concert featuring Charles Santley, a leading young bass-baritone in the fields of oratorio and opera, and the operatic soprano Euphrosyne Parepa. Rather more typical fare followed this skilfully designed publicity stunt, with most leading music-hall performers of the period appearing at the Oxford. In the late 1860s the hall was strongly associated with the Great Vance, a leading comic singer. The Oxford burnt down in February 1868, an event which was to sever Morton's connection with the industry for some time. From 1868 to 1870 he was proprietor of the North Woolwich Gardens, which featured a combination of concerts, acrobatic entertainments, and ballet, but, partly as a result of poor weather, the venture failed. In 1870 he took over as part proprietor of the Philharmonic in Islington, where he began a new phase of his career as a promoter of light opera and musical theatre. His greatest success came with the production of Offenbach's 'Genevieve de Brabant', starring Emily Soldene, which opened in November 1871. A dispute with his business partner at the Philharmonic led to Morton's leaving the theatre in 1873 to spend the next four years in a number of short-term ventures, including a tour of the United States with the Soldene Opera Bouffe Company, one of the earliest light opera companies to tour America. The venture lost $8000, and Morton spent the rest of his career in managerial positions as a result of his lack of capital. For most of the period between 1877 and 1890 Morton managed the Alhambra, first as a theatre and light opera house, later as a variety theatre. He was forcibly retired by the directors in 1890, and it was in a poem read at his farewell benefit concert that the journalist Clement Scott awarded him the sobriquet 'Father of the Halls'. In 1891 Morton became manager of the Tivoli Music Hall, and he completed his career at the Palace. He retired on account of ill health in August 1904, and died at his home, 11 Oval Road, Regent's Park, on 18 October 1904. 
Morton's private life is decidedly obscure. He was, at least in his old age, almost teetotal, a non-smoker, and a vegetarian. He was married twice -- his first wife died in the 1840s -- and his death left his second wife, Kate, in 'The Era''s words, 'very inadequately provided for'. A benefit concert was held for her in November 1904. Morton also left at least one daughter, Olive Meads, who was present at his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 50958


Wilson, Henry Joseph (1833-1914), politician, was born at Old Radford, Nottinghamshire, on 14 April 1833, the son of William Wilson (1800-1866), a Nottingham cotton spinner, and his second wife, Eliza, 'nee' Read, (1803-1851), whose family had managed the Sheffield smelting works since its inception in 1760; William Wilson became a partner in the company after his marriage. The missionary Sarah Poulton Kalley ['see under 'Kalley, Robert Reid] was his elder half-sister. Living in Torquay in his adolescence, Wilson was educated by a private tutor, then at the West of England Dissenters' Proprietary School at Taunton (1848-50), and at University College, London (1850-51). His university education was terminated prematurely by family illness, and he was apprenticed as a farmer at the 1000 acre Newlands farm near Mansfield, leased by his father in 1853. On 23 November 1859 he married Charlotte (1833-1921), daughter of Charles Cowan, a paper manufacturer and Liberal MP for Edinburgh. Their children included: Katie (1861-1868), Cecil (1862-1945), Helen Mary Wilson (1864-1951), Oliver (1866-1955), and Gertrude ('b'. 1876). Wilson's family had been committed Congregationalists, but the strong nonconformist sensibility he retained was impatient of dogma, and he regularly attended Quaker meetings in later life. 
The farm at Newlands brought little profit despite arduous and unremitting labour. Nevertheless, here Wilson marked out the causes which brought them a life lived constantly under the pressure of agitation. His championing of 'teetotal farming' presaged a life of temperance activism: he later served as vice-president and then president of the British Temperance League. His organization of the Mansfield Mechanics' Institute illustrated his recognition of the need for wholesome alternatives to the public house. His service as the first president of the Mansfield Co-operative Society likewise reflected his deep-seated commitment to self-improvement, while his support for anti-slavery campaigns and the North in the American Civil War foreshadowed his lifelong struggles against female slavery and the state regulation of vice. 
After his father's death in 1866 Wilson gave up the farm to join his brother at the Sheffield Smelting Company. He quickly became its dominant force, and encouraged diversification into standard silver, which considerably augmented profitability and financed a generous company paternalism. As soon as he had mastered the smelting business Wilson threw himself into politics, championing ultra-progressive Liberalism in opposition to the dominant whiggish Liberalism of the 'Sheffield Independent' and the Sheffield Liberal Association. Although in 1875 he was appointed secretary of a united Sheffield Liberal Association, and in 1876 was elected to the Sheffield school board, Wilson remained almost perpetually at odds with moderate Liberalism, fighting a rearguard action after 1900 against a powerful local Liberal imperialism. It is one aspect of this, his long-running attempts to launch a radical paper for the city, which has most often brought Wilson to the attention of modern historians. 
Nevertheless Wilson's contemporary significance lay more in his co-operation with Josephine Butler in the campaign against the 'Contagious Diseases Act' than in his local activism. Joint secretary (with Butler) of the British, Continental and General Federation for the Abolition of Government Regulation of Prostitution, he toured in the USA in 1875, and was active from 1876 onwards in the International Abolitionist Federation. After the 1886 'Criminal Law Amendment Act' he played a prominent role in the National Vigilance Association. Wilson was a member of a committee of investigation into prostitution in India appointed in 1892, and a member of the royal commission on the opium traffic, for which he visited India in 1893-4, eventually issuing a dissenting minute severely critical of the official sanctioning of the trade. He gave his own account of this activity in 'Copy of a rough record of events and incidents connected with the repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts' (1907). 
Serving as MP for the Holmfirth division of Yorkshire, West Riding (1885-1912), Wilson was a prominent Liberal internationalist and anti-imperialist. From 1886 to 1890 he made ten visits to Ireland, actively supporting Irish nationalism, and was at the forefront of the conciliation movement during the South African War. Wilson's radicalism was that of the Newcastle programme (adopted by the National Liberal Federation in 1891), in which individual rights loomed more prominently than social obligations; nevertheless, after 1900 he shifted steadily towards the support of a greater measure of social legislation: not only old age pensions, but also the 'Eight Hours Bill' for miners, which he had opposed in the 1890s. He had always been a firm champion of Lib-Labism; nevertheless, socialism and the rise of an organized Labour Party discomforted him. He retired from the Holmfirth seat in 1912. 
When Wilson died, at his residence at Osgathorpe Hills, Sheffield, on 29 June 1914, his friends paid tribute to a persevering campaigner, perhaps brusque and inflexible, but to the last both family man and combative Christian, while his Conservative opponents remembered 'a man of war, full of fight to his fingertips... [an] untattoed political savage' ('Sheffield Daily Telegraph'). Wilson was cremated at City Road cemetery, Sheffield, on 3 July 1914. 


