@@@@@


doc= 50959


Colam, John (1827-1910), campaigner for animal welfare, was born in Louth, Lincolnshire on 18 January 1827, the fifth of the nine children of William Cowlam (Coulam or Colam), master bricklayer, and his wife, Mary Crow. He was baptized at the Canon Street Independent Chapel, Louth. Initially apprenticed to a painter, he moved to London to work for a relative, James Colam (an uncle or grand-uncle), a ham and tongue dealer in Charterhouse Street. He inherited the business on James Colam's death, in March 1851, and successfully expanded it, opening a second shop in Aldersgate Street. By 1856, however, he had relinquished the business, and soon afterwards became a journalist. He had married, on 17 October 1850, Elizabeth, daughter of Charles Newby, fish salesman. His wife died on 15 March 1871 after giving birth to the thirteenth of their children (two of whom died in infancy). He married in 1874 (probably abroad) Frida Louise Charlotta Otilie Ahlers (died 1932), who was born in Germany; they had a son who died in childhood. 
Colam's arrival in 1861 to succeed the recently deceased secretary of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA), Mr Middleton, was recalled by a member of the society's executive committee a quarter of a century later as 'like the waving of a Magician's wand' (RSPCA minute book, 19 July 1886, fol. 374). Not hitherto known to the committee, and chosen from twenty-four candidates, Colam was soon being praised at the society's annual meetings for his unusual combination of qualities. He was no mere office clerk: his personal intervention on 28 March 1870 at the Agricultural Hall, Islington, to prevent a bull-fight, incurring bruises in the confrontation that confined him to his bed for several days, became one of the society's oft-recalled epic events. Punctual, business-like, courteous, working long hours and never missing an executive committee meeting, Colam told the annual meeting in 1886 that he always considered 'that I am married to the cause' (RSPCA, '75th Annual Report', 1898, 139). Strict but humane in handling the society's officers, he was quick to complement the society's prosecutions by educational effort, to build up the humanitarian case with improved annual reports and bulky evidence to public inquiries, and periodically to rejuvenate the office arrangements. Even-tempered and judicious, he kept a close grasp on detail and courageously conducted the society's own case in the lawcourts; he took pride in the fact that it was not until 1893 that he received a writ for malicious prosecution (RSPCA minute book, 12 June 1893, fol. 48). 'If he had selected the Bar as his profession', said the president of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, Dr Fleming, in 1886, 'he would have risen to the top of the tree' (RSPCA minute book, 19 July 1886, fol. 378). 
Colam was a shrewd strategist. Far from discouraging specialist offshoots from the society, he saw these as the best way to realize two desirable objectives: channelling off potentially distracting concern about what for him were side-issues into dogs' homes, bird and child-protection societies, beekeepers' associations, and homes of rest for horses; and protecting the society's reputation with governments, rich subscribers, and religious groupings by encouraging a distanced but nonsectarian and friendly rivalry from anti-vivisectionist and anti-hunting zealots operating on their own. Ever pursuing the practicable in a world beset by fanaticism and sentimentality, Colam maximized the support for edging forward year by year the state's commitment to humane objectives. He told an international conference in Paris in 1900 that he knew of no method so likely to benefit animals as 'a sensible attempt to convince mankind... that we are not dreamers, but reasonable men and women... trusting to a gradual development of our principles to accomplish that which at present cannot be attained' ('Animal World', 1 Sept 1900, 132). Such a standpoint was not always welcome. He was among the prime targets of the anti-vivisectionist Frances Power Cobbe when she grumbled about the RSPCA's timidity; the anti-hunting vegetarian H. S. Salt saw him as 'a veritable Proteus in the skill with which he gave the slip to any one who tried to commit him to any course but the safest' (Salt, 161). 
Yet the society's executive committee was happy enough. Pay rises for Colam were frequent: up to $300 a year in 1862, $400 in 1866, $500 in 1872, with further annual rises of $100 in 1880 and 1886, and after his retirement in 1905 an annual pension of $1000 (RSPCA minute books). By 1867 the solicitor John Curling, who had regularly been making scenes at annual meetings, was publicly praising the new regime ('Annual Report', 1867, 51), and by the 1880s the annual meeting had become a forum for eulogy. 'Without Mr. Colam I do not know what we should do', Dr Fleming told it in 1886 (RSPCA minute book, 19 July 1886, fol. 378). By 1888 there were three Colams at the society's headquarters: Frank Colam had by then been appointed to assist his father, and Robert Colam helped with pressing business when his father was absent. 
On retirement Colam carried off many documents with which to write the society's history, but seems never to have delivered. The 1901 census found him living at 21 South Park Hill Road, Croydon, with his wife, cook, and housemaid. He died after a brief illness at Ingeborg, South Park Hill Road, Croydon, on 25 May 1910, aged eighty-three, and at the funeral in Norwood cemetery three days later his third son, Robert Frederick Colam (1859-1942) (recorder of Croydon from 1900 to 1939), was among the principal mourners. 
This major lifetime's achievement leaves a puzzle behind, for the RSPCA scarcely noticed Colam's death, 'The Times''s obituary was thin, and the 'Dictionary of National Biography' and 'Who's Who' ignored him. For this there may be two reasons. First, Colam saw his role as resembling that of a civil servant, tactfully and shrewdly leaving publicity to others. But second, his retirement was marred by an unfortunate incident. So concerned was he for the society's welfare that he mistakenly tried in a confidential letter to influence members of its executive committee on who should succeed him. He recommended an inside candidate trained as a solicitor, whereas the successful candidate was Captain G. L. Derriman, a disabled Grenadier Guards officer whom Colam saw as 'a martinet' (RSPCA minute book, 13 Feb 1905, 356), and who occupied the post from 1905 to 1908. It was an unfortunate lapse on Colam's part, for the society, after growing only slowly in the 1850s and being plagued by public disputes, had made remarkable advances from the 1860s onwards, and for these Colam deserves much of the credit. During his time as secretary the society's annual income rose fortyfold, and the number of its prosecutions fourteenfold. He is a voluntarist equivalent of the unobtrusively effective professional civil servant who was concurrently advancing in the public sphere. Whatever may have happened at the end of his career, Colam's influence as exemplar to other British and even overseas humanitarian bodies was considerable, and deserves acknowledgement. 


@@@@@


doc= 50960


David, Elizabeth (1913-1992), writer on cookery, was born on 26 December 1913 at Wootton Manor, near Polegate, Sussex, the second of four daughters of Rupert Sackville Gwynne (1873-1924), politician, and his wife, the Hon. Stella, 'nee' Ridley (died 1973), daughter of Matthew White Ridley, first Viscount Ridley. Her father was the Conservative MP for Eastbourne from 1911 until his death, and she was baptized in the chapel of the House of Commons on 22 January 1914. She and her sisters were educated at home until their father's sudden death in 1924, when they were sent to boarding-school. She attended Godstowe preparatory school and then St Clare's Private School for Ladies, Tunbridge Wells. At the age of sixteen her mother sent her to Paris to study art and French, and it was there that she had her first taste of good French food. 
Restless and independent, Elizabeth Gwynne tried (without much success) to become an actress during the mid-1930s, and for a brief time she worked as a junior vendeuse at the fashion house of Worth. She taught herself to cook, collected recipes, and bought a refrigerator with money given for her twenty-first birthday. Yet she also wanted adventure. In early 1939 she and her lover Charles Gibson Cowan -- another social rebel, though from the East End rather than the home counties -- bought a boat, the 'Evelyn Hope', and set off for Greece. The outbreak of the Second World War found them in the south of France, and they were forced to spend the winter of 1939-40 in Antibes. There Elizabeth Gwynne met her most important mentor, the writer and traveller Norman Douglas, who inspired her love of the Mediterranean. She and Cowan set off again in the spring of 1940, and had reached the Strait of Messina when the Italians entered the war on 10 June. The 'Evelyn Hope' was impounded, they were briefly interned, and they reached Athens -- boatless and penniless -- in July 1940. In September Cowan found a job teaching English on the island of Syros in the Cyclades. There, living in primitive conditions in the village of Vari, Elizabeth Gwynne learned how to cook with the basic staple foods of the Mediterranean. The German invasion of Greece in the spring of 1941 forced them to flee to Egypt, where she spent the rest of the war -- first in Alexandria and then in Cairo, where between 1942 and 1945 she ran the ministry of information's reference library. On 30 August 1944, in Cairo, she married Lieutenant-Colonel Anthony David (1911-1967), an officer in the Indian army (Royal Deccan horse regiment), later a club manager and shop owner, and son of Ivor David. She followed him to India after the war, fell ill, and returned to England alone in 1946. That winter, which was exceptionally harsh, she began writing out her yearning for the food she had grown to love in France, Greece, and Egypt. Her husband returned to England in 1947, and in 1949 they bought the house she was to live in for the rest of her life, at 24 Halsey Street, Chelsea, London. 
In 1949, encouraged by a friend who worked on the magazine, Elizabeth David began writing a cookery column for 'Harper's Bazaar'. Her first book, 'A Book of Mediterranean Food', was published in 1950 by John Lehmann. It proved an immediate success, and was followed by 'French Country Cooking' (1951). Her next book was 'Italian Food', for which she made an extensive research trip to Italy which took up most of 1952. Of all her books it was the one in which she felt she had put the best of herself, though it was by far the most difficult. It was published in 1954, and was followed a year later by 'Summer Cooking'. She had not stopped writing for 'Harper's', but in 1956 she was easily persuaded to move to 'Vogue', which offered her more money and more prominence. 'Vogue' also gave her the opportunity to visit many different areas of France, during which she completed her research on the book for which she would be best remembered: 'French Provincial Cooking' (1960). The book was dedicated to 'PH', a man with whom she had been in love since the early 1950s. The affair coincided with her separation from Tony David, from whom she was divorced in 1960. There were no children of the marriage. 
The publication of 'French Provincial Cooking' marked the end of a decade of strenuous work, during which David had written for a number of newspapers, including the 'Daily Express', the 'News Chronicle', and (from 1955 to 1960) the 'Sunday Times'. She left the paper in 1960 and soon after was taken on by 'The Spectator'. Her professional career was at its height. She was hailed not only as Britain's foremost writer on food and cookery, but as the woman who had transformed the eating habits of middle-class England. To her editors she was a stickler for detail, but to her readers she was a joy. Her books and articles were filled with historical anecdote and irreverent wit, and she could describe food in a way that inspired people to cook -- though her recipes took no short cuts, and demanded time and trouble. 'To one reader who totted up the deadly total of bowls, sieves, spoons and forks needed to make a smoked haddock souffle, she wrote back: 'You forgot the plates'' ('Profile of Elizabeth David', 'New Statesman', 9 Aug 1968). 
Tall and well-built, with a long neck and slanting black eyes, David's feline grace was accentuated by the severe, well-cut suits she wore with crisp white shirts in her professional life. Some people found her cold and daunting, but around the kitchen table at Halsey Street her friends saw a very different person. She loved to sit and talk for hours over a bottle of wine and a packet of Gauloise cigarettes, with her back to her old gas cooker. Every now and again she would lean round to peer into the oven or twiddle with a knob, but her attention was on the conversation -- which was colourful, wide-ranging, and punctuated by gales of laughter. When the food was ready it was served in the dishes it had cooked in, without fuss or comment. 
Yet for all David's success, she was not happy. Her long-standing affair with PH ended, and a combination of misery, alcohol, sleeping pills, and overwork resulted in a cerebral haemorrhage, in the spring of 1963. She recovered, but her sense of taste was impaired for a time, and she felt that she could never write another book. Instead, she and four other partners decided to set up a kitchen shop. Elizabeth David Ltd opened at 46 Bourne Street, Pimlico, in November 1965. It pioneered a new generation of shops devoted exclusively to kitchenware. David chose the stock and compiled the catalogues, and Bourne Street became the centre of her life. She wrote four little booklets, for sale on the premises: 'Dried Herbs, Aromatics and Condiments' (1967), 'English Potted Meats and Fish Pastes' (1968), 'The Baking of an English Loaf' (1969), and 'Syllabubs and Fruit Fools' (1969). She even found time to write another full-length book, 'Spices, Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen' (1970), which she saw as one of the first of a series of volumes on English cookery. But she was not a businesswoman. Tensions between her and her partners became intolerable, and in 1973 she severed all connection with the shop -- which continued trading under her name. Over the years she tried repeatedly to get her name back, but without success. 
In 1977 David was badly injured in a car accident, from which she took a long time to recover. She was still in hospital for the publication of 'English Bread and Yeast Cookery' (1977), which was hailed as a masterpiece of scholarship. Once on her feet again she immersed herself in researches for her next project, 'Harvest of the Cold Months: the Social History of Ice and Ices' (1994). This book developed slowly, as a series of essays. It was still far from completion when she published a book of her journalism, 'An Omelette and a Glass of Wine' (1984). Although she made several visits to California in the 1980s, David's health was failing. A series of falls resulted in long periods in hospital, and she never got over the death in 1986 of her sister Felicite, with whom she had shared her house for the previous thirty years. She was seventy-eight when she suffered a severe stroke, followed two days later by another. She died at her Halsey Street home on 22 May 1992, and was buried on 28 May at the family church of St Peter's, Folkington. On 10 September 1992 a memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, followed by a 'memorial picnic' in the Nash Room at the Institute of Contemporary Arts. 
Elizabeth David appeared on 'The Food Programme' with Derek Cooper on Radio 4, broadcast on 24 October 1982, and a few years later she agreed to take part in a documentary about herself presented by Jancis Robinson -- 'A Matter of Taste', broadcast by Channel 4 on 26 December 1989. These were exceptional: she usually shunned publicity, rarely gave interviews, and never spoke about her private life. However, she was much photographed, by Cecil Beaton and Anthony Denney among others. There is also a portrait of her by John Ward now in the National Portrait Gallery, showing David in the kitchen of her house in Halsey Street. 
David was the best writer on food and drink this country has ever produced. When she began writing in the 1950s, the British scarcely noticed what was on their plates at all, which was perhaps just as well. Her books and articles persuaded her readers that food was one of life's great pleasures, and that cooking should not be a drudgery but an exciting and creative act. In doing so she inspired a whole generation not only to cook, but to think about food in an entirely different way. 


@@@@@


doc= 50961


Dawes, William (1762-1836), astronomer and colonial administrator, probably born at Portsmouth, was the eldest son of Benjamin Dawes, clerk of works in the Office of Ordnance in Portsmouth. He was gazetted second lieutenant of marines in September 1779, and was wounded in the 'Resolution' (74 guns) during action against the French in Chesapeake Bay in September 1781. In 1786 he volunteered for service in the first fleet going to New South Wales. He had hoped to get posted ashore but there were no vacancies, so he was appointed to the marine detachment in the 'Sirius' (22 guns). However, William Bayly, headmaster of the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth, who had been Captain Cook's astronomer, wrote to Sir Joseph Banks recommending Dawes for a similar job, citing his knowledge of languages, botany, mineralogy, and also astronomy. Subsequently the board of longitude appointed him their official astronomical observer and lent him instruments appropriate for setting up an observatory in the new colony. He was asked especially to look out for a comet expected in 1788 or 1789. 
The first fleet sailed in May 1787 under the command of the future governor of New South Wales, Captain Arthur Phillip. After leaving the Cape of Good Hope, Dawes and Captain Phillip transferred from the 'Sirius' to the armed tender 'Supply', and pushed on ahead of the main fleet to land at Botany Bay on 18 January 1788. Dawes was thus one of the first to land in the new colony. Having decided that Port Jackson a few miles to the north was a better place for the new settlement, Phillip founded the city which he named Sydney on 26 January. Soon after, when news reached Sydney that two French frigates, the 'Boussole' and 'Astrolabe' under the command of La Perouse, were anchored in Botany Bay, Dawes accompanied John Hunter, captain of the 'Sirius', from Sydney to Botany Bay to offer any assistance that might be needed, and spent the night in the 'Boussole'. The two French ships sailed northwards on 10 March, never to be seen again by white men. 
From March 1788 Dawes was employed ashore as engineer and surveyor, and by early July had been discharged from the 'Sirius'. He had already begun to build an observatory on what became known as Dawes Point on the west side of Sydney Cove, then known as Point Maskelyne. He saw no comet but made many other observations, principally for settling latitude and longitude. As the new colony's engineer and surveyor -- with no extra remuneration -- he constructed gun batteries at the entrance to Sydney Cove, and laid out the government farm and the first streets and allotments in Sydney and Parramatta. Often with Watkin Tench, he went on many expeditions in the mountains, where his surveying training and skills were invaluable. 
Dawes contemplated settling in Australia but, having fallen out with Governor Phillip, he had to return to England in 1791 and was soon recruited by the anti-slavery evangelicals Wilberforce and Henry Thornton to go to Sierra Leone, where he served as governor in 1792-4 and again in 1795-6. A strong evangelical, he became a member of the Clapham Sect. 
In January 1799 he succeeded William Wales as mathematical master at Christ's Hospital. He had married Judith Rutter (died 'c'.1800) in July 1794, and they had a daughter, Judith, and two sons, William Rutter Dawes, born in Christ's Hospital on 19 March 1799, who was to become a distinguished astronomer; and Macaulay, who died young (named after Zachary Macaulay, a colleague in Sierra Leone and father of the historian). 
Dawes resigned from Christ's Hospital on 7 November 1800 to return to Sierra Leone, where he was again governor from 1801 to 1803. He left William Rutter in the care, first, of his grandfather in Portsmouth, then, from 1807, of Thomas Scott, a colleague at the Church Missionary Society, for whom Dawes worked in England from 1804 to 1808. In 1813, at Wilberforce's suggestion, he went to Antigua to work for the anti-slavery cause, taking his daughter (who later married there) but not his son. Either in Antigua, after 1813, or around 1811, before he left England, he married Grace Gilbert. He died in penury in Antigua in 1836, survived by his second wife. A novel by Jane Rogers based on Dawes's life in Australia, which contains much historical information about him, was published in 1995 under the title 'Promised Lands'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50967


Dennison, Stanley Raymond (1912-1992), economist and university administrator, was born in a small terrace flat at 49 Trevor Terrace in North Shields on 15 June 1912, son of Stanley Dennison (1884-1943) and his wife, Florence Ann Smythe (died 1984). His father worked in the office of the local gas company, first as a clerk and then as cashier. The boy went to Tynemouth Municipal High School, in the first year in which economics was taught there. He then went to Armstrong College, Newcastle, part of Durham University, where he so impressed his teachers that they arranged for his admission to Trinity College, Cambridge. From 1935 to 1939 he was lecturer in economics at Manchester University, years which saw the completion of 'The Location of Industry and the Depressed Areas' (1939), an influential book on a theme which had interested him since Armstrong College days. In 1939, when only twenty-seven, he was appointed professor of economics at University College, Swansea, but in 1940 became chief economic assistant in the war cabinet secretariat, one of a team responsible for mobilizing the industrial war effort. For this work he was made a CBE. In 1945 he became a fellow of Gonville and Caius College, and university lecturer in economics, at Cambridge. His lectures on the structure of industry were informed by deep practical knowledge of the subject gained during the war, and were very popular with students. 
In post-war decades Dennison encountered conflicts both in college and in the university's economics faculty. At Caius, discontent was aimed at reforming an old-fashioned system of college government. Dennison was on the side of the reformers; as senior tutor from 1952 he did much to modernize the college's administrative procedures. Among Cambridge economists, differing views on economic policy polarized into disputes maintained with a rancour which astonished visiting scholars. Some of the disciples of J. M. Keynes, convinced of the competence of the state as an economic manager, and gullible about contemporary communist regimes, enjoyed a dominant position among Cambridge economists in these years. Those who disagreed with them, like D. H. Robertson and Dennison, were treated with an intolerance which made rational argument difficult. In his writings and teaching Dennison never wavered from his reasoned exposition of more liberal economic doctrines. 
In 1958 Dennison left Cambridge to become professor of economics at Queen's University, Belfast. Four years later he was appointed to the prestigious David Dale chair of economics at Newcastle. He modernized the department, expanding staff and student numbers and encouraging a programme of research and publication which greatly enhanced its standing. He also served for six years as pro-vice-chancellor, making a major contribution to the administration of the newly independent University of Newcastle. 
In 1972 Dennison became vice-chancellor of the University of Hull, where he secured significant improvements in staffing and subject coverage. He was less happy in dealing with militant students encouraged by a disaffected minority of left-wing academic staff. Dennison was angered by what he saw as unjustified disruption of the university's affairs, and this was reflected in his sometimes abrasive handling of the malcontents. When he retired in 1979 he returned to Tyneside, spending his last years in a flat with views of the sea and the mouth of the Tyne. He continued for some years to chair the governing body of Newcastle's Royal Grammar School. Throughout his career he was in demand for committee work; for example, he served on the review body on remuneration of doctors and dentists, on the University Grants Committee, and as vice-chairman of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals. He died, unmarried, on 22 November 1992 at Greenacres Nursing Home, Coast Road, Wallsend, and was cremated on 1 December at Tynemouth crematorium. 
Among twentieth-century economists, Dennison was an influential champion of a kind of liberal economic thought which, though overshadowed for a while by post-Keynesian collectivist doctrines, had before the century's end revived to exercise an effective influence on both economic thinking and public policy. He never courted popularity, and expressed profound scepticism about the economic competence of the state at times when to do so was unfashionable. Although his lucid writings and his participation in public inquiries were significant, much of his personal influence was exercised in ways which were less visible, which may account for the limited public recognition which he received. He was always willing to welcome and support visiting scholars who espoused beliefs similar to his own. For example, in Milton Friedman's 'Memoirs', Dennison appears repeatedly not only as 'a first-rate economist', but also as someone who had warmly but unobtrusively supported Friedman on his early visits to Britain. The Institute of Economic Affairs was one of the most influential think-tanks in twentieth-century Britain, paving the way in its publications and other activities for what came to be seen as the Thatcherite era. For many years, as a member of its council, Dennison played an important role in shaping the institute's work. He was an active early participant in the Mont Pelerin Society, an international group of considerable standing inspired by the work of Hayek. 


@@@@@


doc= 50968


Witts, Francis Edward (1783-1854), Church of England clergyman and diarist, was born on 26 February 1783, at George Inn Yard, Cheltenham, the eldest son of Edward Witts (1746-1816), gentleman and high sheriff of Oxfordshire, and Agnes Tracy Travell (1748-1825). He attended Elmore School, near Gloucester, until 1795, when his parents moved to Edinburgh, where the boy attended the high school. 
Between 1798 to 1800 the family spent their winters at the court of the grand duke of Saxe-Weimar, where Witts attended a school kept by M. Mounier for foreign students. Witts visited the theatre, where he enjoyed 'the noble dramas of Schiller' (Witts, diary, 28 June 1828), attended concerts -- mostly of music by Mozart -- and started his diary. After returning to England he matriculated in 1802 at Wadham College, Oxford, obtaining his BA in 1805 and his MA in 1809. Missing Weimar, he led a rather solitary life: he wrote in his diary on 31 October 1803, 'Kept aloof from the Herd and dined alone'. 
Destined for the church, Witts was groomed to succeed his uncle, the Revd Ferdinando Tracy Travell, rector of Upper Slaughter, Gloucestershire. He was ordained deacon in 1806 and priest in 1807, both at the Chapel Royal, St James's. From 1806 to 1808 he was curate of Urchfont and Stert, Wiltshire; he was rector of Upper Slaughter, Gloucestershire, from 1808 until his death, and was also vicar of Stanway, Gloucestershire, from 1814 to 1854. On 30 May 1808 he married Margaret Backhouse (1786-1850) -- 'a virtuous, loving wife', he wrote sadly in his diary after her death in 1850 (Witts, 'Diary', 174). Their only child, Edward Francis Witts (1813-1886), succeeded Witts as rector of Upper Slaughter, and Edward's son, Broome Witts, in turn succeeded his father. 
Witts was squire of Upper Slaughter as well as its parson. He became a long-serving justice of the peace, and in 1852 was appointed deputy lieutenant of Gloucestershire. 'Country squires, well qualified and permanently resident are few in this district', he noted dryly (Witts, 'Diary', 181). His diary exhibits his full participation in local social and cultural life. Witts enjoyed dining out, and travelled in all weathers and by every means of conveyance -- horse, phaeton, carriage, stagecoach, and steam train. He recorded new roads, buildings, and the spread of towns. Witts and his son both became keen botanists and conservationists, and he also helped organize the musical life of Cheltenham and Gloucester, attending many concerts. Quietly religious, Witts disapproved of hunting parsons and was generous to his parishioners. He records that he relied upon 'three checks to the frailty of our nature; self-examination, prayer and professional study' (Witts, 'Diary', 13). At the end of the day he liked to read some Shakespeare and then write up his diary. Witts died on 18 August 1854, and was buried in St Peter's Church, Upper Slaughter, on 25 August. 
A selection from his diary, edited by David Verey and published in 1978, shows 'a spectrum of Witts' social life', sketching the Cotswold parson who chronicled the changing landscape and steady expansion of Gloucester and Gloucestershire. The entire diary (there is a missing section, 1808-20) gives a fuller picture of the rector, presenting his acute comments on life, politics, and people. 


@@@@@


doc= 50969


Devlin, Patrick Arthur, Baron Devlin (1905-1992), judge and legal philosopher, was born at Chislehurst, Kent, on 25 November 1905, the eldest of three sons and second of five children of William John Devlin (died 1932), architect, and his wife, Frances Evelyn (Fanny), 'nee' Crombie. His father, William, came from a Catholic family from co. Tyrone in Ulster but had left Ireland for London to train as an architect. His mother, Frances, was a member of a wealthy Aberdeen family of cloth manufacturers who were protestants. His father's practice did not prosper and in 1909 the family moved from Chislehurst to Aberdeen where Devlin's mother had many relatives and where his father, as the only Catholic architect, might hope to improve his earnings. The hope was disappointed but, with his Crombie relatives, Devlin had a happy childhood. He and his siblings were brought up as Catholics. His brother Christopher (1907-1961) subsequently became a Jesuit priest and writer, and his two sisters, Joan ('b'. 1904) and Frances (1909-1941), became nuns; his youngest brother, William (1911-1987), was a Shakespearian actor. 
Devlin was sent to school at Stonyhurst College (1914-22). He did not excel academically but he learned to speak clearly and enjoyed debating, for which he won a joint first prize. He left school early to join the Dominican order as a novice, but after a year abandoned the idea. His enquiring mind had developed a distaste for unthinking acceptance of dogma. Subsidized by his uncle George Crombie he went instead to Christ's College, Cambridge (1923-7). There his talent for debating flowered. He represented the university on a debating tour of the American middle west in 1925 and became president of the Cambridge Union in 1926. With striking red hair and a clear, resonant voice, he possessed both wit and charm. He made some good friends, notably the Butlers (R. A. and Sir Geoffrey) and Arthur Goodhart. He read first history and then law, in both of which he acquired a lifelong interest. His mind was not however attuned to examinations. Their unpredictable questions left no time for serious thought, and he was twice placed in the second half of the second class. All his life he needed time for reflection. He ceased at Cambridge to be a practising Catholic, though his cast of mind continued in the Jesuit mould. 
In 1925 Devlin committed himself to a career at the bar but, as it was a choice not a vocation, he did not mean to let it prevent his enjoying life. Enjoyment meant not idleness, which he dreaded, but a life of occupation and congenial work that allowed for the pursuit of virtue. The virtue he preferred to pursue, if he had to choose between compassion and justice, was justice, 'the root of which is a love of the order that moves the universe' (P. Devlin, 'Taken at the Flood', 74). The 'planetary pleasures', high among which he ranked good wine, contributed to enjoyment but for them money was needed. $400 a year was the figure he aimed at when starting at the bar, and with the generous help of Uncle George and Arthur Goodhart, whom he helped with editing the 'Law Quarterly Review', he managed to secure it. He joined Gray's Inn in 1927 and took lodgings first in Half Moon Street, Mayfair, then at the Savile Club, the centre more of a literary than a legal circle. In 1928 he was marshal to Mr Justice Charles on the northern circuit. He passed the bar examination in 1929. His pupillages with Cartwright Sharp and St John Field did not lead to many briefs, but he soon had the good luck to be interviewed by William Jowitt, the Labour attorney-general, with a view to becoming his devil. At the end of the interview 'with my hand on the door handle I turned around and said that I was very keen to get the job' (ibid., 104). He was taken on and worked for Jowitt while he was attorney-general from 1929 to 1931 and later shared his chambers when in 1932 Jowitt returned to private practice. In the meantime Devlin had become known as junior counsel for the prosecution in the Annie Hearn case, a 'cause celebre' of murder by poisoning tried in 1931. His career was however solidly established only after a commercial brief in 1935, for which he was chosen because, of the juniors in practice at the time, his name sounded most Irish. He took the chance, which led to a good deal of work for Shell, and soon became a leading commercial lawyer. 'Luck at the bar is opportunity. It is a try that can be converted into a goal' (ibid., 160). 
Devlin had already, on 12 February 1932, married Madeleine Hilda Oppenheimer (1909-2012), younger daughter of Sir Bernard Oppenheimer, the diamond magnate. They had six children, four boys and twin girls, and, in due course, dozens of grandchildren. His wife and all six children became Catholic converts. His family life was notably happy. What with that and his powerful intellect, he was largely able to brush off the criticism that he later attracted. 
By the outbreak of the Second World War, Devlin had a lucrative commercial practice. From 1931 to 1939 he was prosecuting counsel to the mint. During the war he served as junior counsel to the ministries of War, Transport, Food, and Supply, and in the legal department of the Ministry of Supply (1940-45). He took silk in 1945, was attorney-general for the duchy of Cornwall in 1947-8, and became a master of Gray's Inn in 1947. But he did not practise as senior counsel for long. Jowitt, now lord chancellor, appointed him a judge in the King's Bench Division in October 1948 at the age of forty-two. He was the second youngest person to be appointed to the High Court bench in the twentieth century. The appointment was not political, for Devlin was not a Labour supporter. He was conservative by temperament. But like Lord Goddard, a friend and admirer, he would not tolerate injustice, and was often critical of the legal establishment. He was knighted in 1948. 
As a judge Devlin soon established himself as a sound commercial and maritime lawyer. He became a successful president of the restrictive practices court from its creation in 1956 until 1960. He did not share the reservations of those who thought that the work of the court would involve too much economic and political controversy. In this he turned out to be correct. Unlike Lord Denning, Devlin did not regard it as the judge's duty to bring the law into line with contemporary views of justice. That role was for parliament and the jury. The judge should analyse the law carefully and administer it as it stood. 
Devlin also made a mark, unexpectedly, as a judge in criminal cases. He was prepared to probe the principles underlying criminal law with a rare insight and attention to detail. As an assize judge in 1949 he gave a direction to the jury on the law of provocation that was much admired. In 1957 he tried Bodkin Adams, an Eastbourne doctor who was popularly supposed to have murdered up to 400 elderly patients from whom he expected legacies. The charge was confined to one alleged murder, supposedly the one best supported by the evidence. The evidence unearthed by the defence, however, weakened the prosecution case. On Devlin's direction, which drew a distinction between alleviating pain and deliberately cutting short life, the jury acquitted the bumbling doctor. Thirty years later, when the persons concerned were all dead, Devlin wrote a brilliant account of the trial in 'Easing the Passing' (1985). In it he lambasted the prosecutor, Sir Reginald Manningham-Buller, attorney-general at the time of the trial and later lord chancellor, as clumsy, stupid, and perverse. Devlin was not throwing doubt on the jury's verdict, though in his view Bodkin Adams was probably a mercy killer greedy for legacies. He was criticized for expressing this view of Dr Adams, but he combined respect for the due process of law with a zeal for truth, even harsh truths. 
After the trial Devlin and Manningham-Buller were both regarded as candidates for the vacant post of lord chief justice, to which in the event neither was appointed. Two years later, in 1959, Devlin was chairman of a commission of inquiry into the declaration by the governor of a state of emergency in Nyasaland. The commission concluded that there were grounds for declaring the state of emergency but that the supposed plot by Dr Hastings Banda and others to murder the governor, his officials, and all the Europeans in Nyasaland was a figment of an informer's imagination. Manningham-Buller ridiculed this conclusion in a speech, much applauded, in the House of Commons. The statement in the commission's report that Nyasaland was 'a police state, no doubt temporarily' was true but caused offence in governing circles. But despite what Devlin, tongue-in-cheek, referred to as his 'incompetence in finding the elementary facts' (Devlin, 'Easing the Passing', 191) the prime minister promoted him to the Court of Appeal in 1960 and the House of Lords (as Baron Devlin of West Wick) in 1961. 
Devlin was not happy as an appellate judge. He found the work dreary and was frustrated by the time-wasting procedures and lack of office and secretarial facilities for appeal judges, especially in the House of Lords. The United States supreme court seemed to him more effectively organized. He gave some interesting judgments, taking the view that the civil law of torts should only rarely be used to punish a defendant who had deliberately behaved badly, but that it could properly be used to give remedies for economic as well as physical losses. He did not have time to make the sort of impact on the law made by his contemporary Denning. Whether, as many thought, he would have made a great mark had he held the office of lord chief justice or master of the rolls can only be surmised. The incumbents staying on longer than expected, he was not appointed to either post and, after fifteen years on the bench, he resigned in 1964 at the early age of fifty-eight. 
After his resignation Devlin secured interesting and lucrative work as an arbitrator. He was also judge of the administrative tribunal of the International Labour Office (ILO) in Geneva from 1964 to 1986 and greatly enjoyed his visits there. From 1969 to 1971 he chaired the ILO inquiry into freedom of association in Greece. From 1964 to 1969 he was the first non-journalist chairman of the Press Council and in that capacity was diplomatic enough to establish easy relations with the press. He sat as chairman of the Wiltshire quarter sessions from 1957 until 1971, his informal manner, free from any hint of the pompous, being much appreciated. But he resisted attempts to lure him back to the judiciary. 
Instead the latter part of Devlin's career was devoted mainly to writing about law and history, which he now saw as not only a pleasure but a duty. He had the knack of presenting a closely reasoned and professionally accurate argument in a form that was intelligible and of interest to non-lawyers. Many of his lectures and addresses were published in 'Samples of Lawmaking' (1962), 'The Enforcement of Morals' (1965), and 'The Judge' (1979). Keenly interested in the relation between law and morals, he saw the criminal jury as the body with the power, though not the right, to refuse to apply laws that were politically oppressive or that the ordinary person found unjust, for instance the law of bigamy as it applied to those who could not afford a divorce. Only in this way could criminal justice take account not merely of the law but of the merits of a case. Devlin first expounded this theme in his incisive Hamlyn lectures, 'Trial by Jury' (1956). He elaborated it in later works, right up to an article, 'The conscience of the jury', published in the 'Law Quarterly Review' in 1991. It was not that he thought juries particularly shrewd, except in deciding who was telling the truth. But judges, having conferred on juries the power to decide guilt or innocence, should respect that power. He therefore criticized decisions of the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords in which judges, when new evidence had come to light after a conviction, took it on themselves to decide its cogency without referring it to a jury. 
This was one reason why Devlin joined Ludovic Kennedy, Lord Scarman, Basil Hume, and others in campaigns to secure a further review of the convictions first in the Luton post office murder trial ('R. v. Cooper and McMahon', 1969), then in that of the Guildford four, convicted in 1975. The Guildford case arose from an IRA bombing in which the police arrested and forced confessions from four innocent people, though by the time of the appeal in 1977 it was known who had in fact carried out the bombing and how. The campaigns were in the end successful and the convictions were quashed, those of the Guildford four in 1989. Despite increasing deafness, Devlin continued to campaign for a review of some other dubious convictions that undermined respect for English criminal justice. In the upshot an independent body was set up to review convictions that were alleged in the light of new evidence to be wrongful. 
Devlin's interest in the relation of law to morality led to a famous controversy with Professor Herbert Hart. The context was the recommendation of the Wolfenden committee in 1957 that homosexuality between consenting adults should cease to be criminal. Devlin favoured a modest degree of reform, but in his Maccabaean lecture of 1959 was driven to dig deeper. He argued that the ordinary person's sense of what was morally unacceptable was not valuable merely in inducing juries to frustrate the enforcement of bad laws. If sufficiently strong, popular morality could justify making conduct a criminal offence. It was not true, as Wolfenden had argued, that there was a sphere of private morality into which the criminal law should not enter. Devlin's argument, as he later discovered, was along lines similar to that advanced by a previous judge, Fitzjames Stephen, in 'Liberty, Equality, Fraternity' (1873). Though Devlin clearly had in mind the sort of sub-Christian morality that prevailed in Britain at the time, his argument was open to the objection that it appeared to justify the enforcement of any morality strongly supported by public opinion, however corrupt -- for example that of the Nazis. Hart, in reply, renewed a theme developed by John Stuart Mill, arguing that only the avoidance of harm to others could justify making conduct criminal. He failed, however, to explain satisfactorily how differences of opinion about what was harmful could be resolved, and how far the state was justified in preventing vulnerable people from harming themselves. The debate, though inconclusive, was conducted at a high level of eloquence and has been educative to generations of students. Devlin revised and extended his views on the subject in 'The Enforcement of Morals' (1965). 
In retirement Devlin lived at West Wick House and Farm in Pewsey, Wiltshire, which he had bought in 1943. He also had a property in the Algarve in Portugal. He now had more time to think. One of the topics he thought about more deeply was the personality of Woodrow Wilson, in whom he had become interested during the debating tour of America in 1925. In 'Too Proud to Fight' (1974), a patient and well-marshalled but over-long book, he concluded that Wilson entered the war in 1917, despite having just been re-elected on a policy of neutrality, in order to have a dominating place at the peace conference that would follow when the war was won. 
In recognition of his status as a writer on law Devlin was made a fellow of the British Academy in 1963. Between 1962 and 1980 he received honorary degrees from the universities of Glasgow, Toronto, Oxford, Cambridge, Leicester, Sussex, Durham, Liverpool, and St Louis, Missouri. He was high steward of Cambridge University from 1966 to 1991. Though increasingly deaf, he continued to help the campaign against the unjust convictions of supposed terrorists, such as the Maguire seven. In 1988 he began a fascinating autobiography, 'Taken at the Flood' (1996), which was aimed at budding lawyers and which he carried, as intended, up to 1935, the year in which his practice became firmly established. Of medium height and latterly with a stoop, he was not physically a commanding figure. But his charm, sense of humour, and informality endeared him to people of all sorts. He enjoyed life and brought enjoyment to others. When near death he asked after careful reflection to see a priest. He died peacefully at West Wick on 9 August 1992, fortified by the rites of the Catholic church, and was buried in Pewsey cemetery on 11 August. He was survived by his wife and six children. A memorial mass was held at St James's, Spanish Place, on 28 October 1992. 
Devlin was a complex character. His rigorous conscience and eloquence made him a thoughtful and effective enemy of untruth and injustice. At the same time he admired and skilfully defended the common-law tradition of organic growth, even if it involved tolerating anomalies. He and Denning, also appointed to the bench in his early forties by Lord Chancellor Jowitt, combined judicial and juristic work in a way that had no parallel among English judges since the time of James Fitzjames Stephen. If Denning was the more influential judge, Devlin was the more powerful writer, indeed the most impressive produced by the English bench in the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 50971


Cook, Robert Percival (1906-1989), biochemist, was born on 14 April 1906 in Melbourne, Australia, the fourth in the family of three sons and two daughters of Francis Percival Cook (1867-1933), stationer and printer, and his wife, Alice May Margaret, 'nee' Robertson (1870-1950). His grandfather John Cook had emigrated to Australia from Appledore, Devon. He was educated at Trinity grammar school (1912-14) and then (1914-22) at Scotch College, Melbourne, which, in his words, 'gave a good didactic education in the old Scots tradition'. During studies for his BSc (1925) at the University of Melbourne his interest in biochemistry was encouraged by William J. Young, who with A. Harden had discovered the important role of phosphates in alcoholic fermentation. 
In April 1926, Cook travelled to London to work with A. J. Clark in the department of pharmacology at University College. Three months' work resulted in his first published paper, in the 'Journal of Physiology' -- a token of future productivity. In the same year he enrolled at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and gained his PhD in 1930 for work on bacterial metabolism; he was also a member of the renowned research school led by Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins. In 1928-9 Cook spent six months' study leave at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where he met Milada Anastasia Novakova ('b'. 1903/4). They were married in Cambridge on 8 November 1929, and had two sons and one daughter. Robert and Milada published a translation of Claude Bernard's 'Lecons sur les phenomenes de la vie: communs aux animaux et vegetaux'. The award of a Beit memorial fellowship supported Cook's further research, including collaboration with J. B. S. Haldane, which demonstrated the multiplicity of oxygenases concerned in bacterial cell respiration. Between 1932 and 1935 Cook was engaged in the citric acid industry, returning to Cambridge, again as a Beit fellow, in 1935. 
With characteristic enterprise, Cook began medical studies in 1938, qualifying as MB, BChir (Cambridge) in 1943. In 1940 he was appointed lecturer in biochemistry in the physiology department, University College, Dundee. His expertise was utilized in wartime studies of topics such as the nutritional value of school meals. In 1942, he was awarded a DSc by the University of Melbourne. Much of his subsequent career was enthusiastically dedicated to research and teaching in biochemistry. After years of determined effort, in 1965 he achieved designation of the biochemistry laboratories as a separate department, and when the University of Dundee came into being, a chair of biochemistry was inaugurated (1967). Cook, who had been a senior lecturer since 1945, recommended that a younger biochemist should be appointed. He was given a personal chair (1971), and retired as emeritus professor in 1973. He had been elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1946. 
Cook's most influential and wide-ranging scientific contributions were concerned with the biochemistry and metabolism of cholesterol. A series of papers initiated in 1938, entitled 'Cholesterol metabolism', explored the effects of dietary cholesterol on tissues and organs of various animals. Metabolites of cholesterol were also isolated and analysed. These extensive studies indicated, for example, marked differences in the susceptibility of rats and rabbits to high levels of cholesterol: the rabbits readily developed the severe lesions of the aortal intima (that is, inner wall) that constitute atheroma -- broadly, the result of deposits such as fats, cholesterol, and calcified matter. Atheroma is a significant factor in human heart disease, and Cook's work helped to stimulate the subsequent expansion of research in this field. He skilfully applied chromatographic techniques to the analysis of sterols that are minor constituents of commercial cholesterol (from wool wax). The possible participation of such 'companions' of cholesterol in atheroma was also being investigated by the distinguished chemist Louis Fieser, in whose Harvard laboratory Cook spent a fruitful period in 1952. Publication of the book 'Cholesterol' in 1958 established Cook's international reputation. In addition to devising and editing the work, with chapters by world authorities, he was the author of several chapters. The book has retained its unique value: the massive proliferation of research now precludes the compilation of a comparable survey in a single volume. Great attention is now devoted to the role of 'minor' sterols, present at low levels but potentially of high potency, both in physiology, and in the pathology of human arterial disease. 
Cook's tall, animated figure and attractively outgoing character -- warm, humorous, knowledgeable, and strongly opinionated -- enlivened many scientific meetings. He was active in the Biochemical Society, the Scottish Society for Experimental Medicine, and the Nutrition Society. Cook died at Dundee on 26 August 1989, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50973


Kodicek, Egon Hynek (1908-1982), biochemist and nutritionist, was born on 3 August 1908 in Kamenny Ujezd, Bohemia, the son of Emma and Samuel Kodicek. In 1915 his father, a doctor, moved with the family to Budweis, as medical chief of the military hospital there. Egon attended the local 'Gymnasium' ('c'.1918-1927), where he read widely, cultivating a lasting interest in philosophy. He was good at sports, which he continued to enjoy during his medical course at Charles University in Prague. A brilliant scholar, he graduated as MD in 1932. He then joined the university's department of internal medicine and began his lifelong research on vitamins. The greatest influence on his career came from his studies with J. Heyrovsky at the Physicochemical Institute, which convinced him of the importance of measurement in biological research. Heyrovsky had invented the analytical technique of polarography, for which he received the 1959 Nobel prize for chemistry. Kodicek's early polarographic determinations of vitamin A and folic acid (a vitamin required for production of blood cells) in foods and animal tissues gained him several awards, including the Masaryk Fund prize for research (1938). 
The German occupation of Prague in March 1939 made it imperative for Kodicek, who was of Jewish origin, to leave Czechoslovakia. He was offered a place at the Dunn Nutritional Laboratory in Cambridge, only just managing to avoid arrest while awaiting a visa. He reached Cambridge in June 1939. On arriving in Cambridge, Kodicek registered as a research student at Trinity College and was awarded a PhD in 1942 for his research on nicotinic acid. Kodicek had in 1936 married Jindriska (Jindra) E. M. Hradecka, an ophthalmic surgeon who had been a fellow student at medical school. She and their daughter Jana finally escaped in August, and the family lived initially on a grant from the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning. Their second daughter, Ivana, was born in 1943. Cambridge became the family's permanent home, and the Dunn Laboratory for thirty-four years the base for Kodicek's wide-ranging work. Vitamins and hormones formed the core of his research, and he developed methods of analysis of their often minute concentrations in tissues. Kodicek's measurements of vitamin C, riboflavin, and nicotinic acid helped government assessments of the nutritional value of wartime diets. His shrewd applications of new physical techniques, notably isotopic labelling, fluorimetry, ultracentrifugation, and chromatography, promoted recognition of nutritional research as a respected science. 
Kodicek declined offers from the USA, and in 1947 the family became naturalized British subjects. He continued investigations on nicotinic acid (later named niacin). This compound is responsible for the prevention of pellagra, a serious disease associated with diets based on maize. Kodicek found that much of the niacin in cereals was bound in a macromolecular matrix, and was nutritionally unavailable. Severe deficiency of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) was known to impair healing of wounds, and Kodicek explored this effect extensively at the Dunn Laboratory, demonstrating abnormalities in connective tissue proteins and carbohydrates; but the biochemical complexities were beyond the scope of existing techniques. 
Kodicek's frustrations on the vitamin C front were compensated by manifold achievements in research on the steroidal vitamin D (calciferol), which is essential for the control of calcium absorption and metabolism; serious deficiency leads to the soft bones characteristic of rickets. The term vitamin D comprises two compounds of very similar structure, vitamin D2, derived from yeast, and vitamin D3, derived from cholesterol. The vitamins are produced (both in nature and commercially) by the action of ultraviolet light on precursor sterols. Studies of vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), in which hydrogen atoms in certain C-H bonds had been partly replaced by radioactive tritium, indicated loss of tritium -- and correspondingly of hydrogen -- from two sites during metabolism. It transpired that C-H was being converted into C-OH, yielding hydroxy-vitamins responsible for bioactivity. H. F. DeLuca at Wisconsin identified 25-hydroxycholecalciferol, while 1greekLetteralpha,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (calcitriol), discovered in Kodicek's laboratory in 1969, proved to be the hormone, metabolically elaborated from the vitamin, that stimulated calcium uptake by the intestine. Kodicek's magnificent contribution to the elucidation of the action of vitamin D was his crowning achievement, and a vindication of his appointment in 1963 as director of his laboratory. After retirement in 1973, he continued research, until overtaken by ill health, at the Strangeways Research Laboratory, Cambridge, investigating his hypothesis (which few accepted) that vitamin D was directly active in bone formation. After his death, it was shown that the bone-forming cells were indeed targets for the action of 1greekLetteralpha,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. 
By virtue of his experience, wisdom, and encyclopaedic knowledge -- leavened by beamish geniality -- Kodicek chaired innumerable national and international committees. His many awards included the British Nutrition Foundation prize, and (jointly with DeLuca) the 1974 Roussel prize. A long-standing Biochemical Society member, and Ciba medallist, he also became an honorary member of the Nutrition Society, after being president from 1971 to 1974. He was elected FRS in 1973 and appointed CBE in 1974. 
Kodicek's lifelong enthusiasm was an inspiration to his students, and to attenders at meetings who experienced his warm avuncularity (gently spiked with incisive criticism). He died at his home, 11 Bulstrode Gardens, Cambridge, on 27 July 1982. 


@@@@@


doc= 50974


Dickens, Monica Enid (1915-1992), author, was born on 10 May 1915 at 52 Chepstow Villas, Bayswater, London, the fifth of the five children of Henry Charles Dickens (1878-1966), barrister, and his wife, Fanny (1876-1966), daughter of Herman and Emma Runge. Monica Dickens was a great-granddaughter of the novelist Charles Dickens. Her father was the eldest son of Dickens's eighth child, Sir Henry Fielding Dickens, common serjeant of London. She herself became one of the two or three best-selling women novelists of her generation, with the publication of forty-three books between 1939 and 1993. 
Monica Dickens was educated at St Paul's Girls' School, on a double scholarship, but was expelled for throwing her school uniform over Hammersmith Bridge. A lively, attractive girl, with glamorous blonde hair, she joined the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art but was asked to leave, she claimed, for not being able to act. Although she was presented at court in 1935, she was not a success as a debutante. With no career training, she took jobs as a cook-general in a variety of London houses. Then, at a chance meeting with a young publisher in 1937, she was encouraged to write about her experiences below stairs. Within three weeks she completed her first book, 'One Pair of Hands', which was an immediate success and earned the approbation of such influential figures as Compton Mackenzie and Malcolm Muggeridge. A humorous yet pointed depiction of the relationship between the upper classes and the servants, it revealed her keen eye for detail and her sense of the absurd. 
Monica Dickens's first novel, 'Mariana', followed in 1940, and then in 1942, after she had taken up nursing as her war work, she wrote 'One Pair of Feet', based on her time at the Edward VII Hospital in Windsor. Before this was published, she moved to a factory as a fitter, making spare parts for Spitfires. Her novels 'The Fancy' (1943) and 'Thursday Afternoons' (1945) increased her reputation. 
Praise came with every book, Monica Dickens's admirers at this time including J. B. Priestley, Rebecca West, and John Betjeman. She was becoming well established on the literary scene, and her novels were appearing at regular intervals. They included 'The Happy Prisoner' (1946), 'Joy and Josephine' (1948), and 'Flowers on the Grass' (1949). 'My Turn to Make the Tea' (1951) was inspired by her experiences as a junior reporter on a local newspaper. She was by now living in a thatched cottage called Bury End in the village of Hinxworth, Hertfordshire, where she kept horses and ponies and entertained her many friends from the Royal Ballet. For twenty years she wrote a weekly column for 'Woman's Own', and this brought her in touch with a readership of 9 million. Her articles were noted for their originality and common-sense approach. 
On 7 December 1951 Monica Dickens married Commander Roy Olin Stratton (1900-1985), US Navy, and went to live in Washington before settling into a large family house in the village of North Falmouth, on Cape Cod, Massachusetts. The house, which could sleep at least fourteen, was often full. As well as their two adopted daughters, Pamela and Prudence, there were countless friends and family members who came to visit, including Monica Dickens's parents and her sister Doady. She was very close to her family, who called her by her childhood nickname, Monty. 
Monica Dickens's books continued with, among others, 'The Winds of Heaven' (1955) and 'The Heart of London' (1961). 'Cobbler's Dream' (1963) indulged her lifelong love of horses and was later made into a thirty-part television serial -- 'Follyfoot' -- while 'Kate and Emma' (1964) was arguably her most accomplished novel. Monica Dickens's popularity was explained not so much by her skills as a story-teller as by her ability to sketch characters that were instantly recognizable. A book signing session in Sydney in 1965 was the birth of the language known as Strine, when Monica Dickens asked, 'Shall I write someone's name in it?' and the reply came, 'Emma Chisit'. 'To Emma Chisit, with best wishes'. 'No, Emma Chisit?' 'Twenty-three shillings'. 
Between 1970 and 1971 Monica Dickens wrote a number of books for children, including the 'World's End' series. These were followed by 'Last Year when I was Young' (1974) and her autobiography, 'An Open Book' (1978). In 1985 Roy Stratton died and Monica went back to her roots. In the village of Brightwalton, on the Berkshire downs, she found a thatched cottage that closely resembled her beloved Bury End. Here she entered her 'third age', surrounded by friends, family, dogs, and a garden overlooking a glorious valley. Novels written at this time included 'Dear Doctor Lily' (1988), 'Scarred' (1991), and her last book, 'One of the Family', which was published in 1993. 
Her curiosity about people and her ability to empathize with their problems, combined with her deep understanding of human behaviour, led Monica Dickens, in the early 1970s, to become a Samaritan. She had great admiration for the Samaritans' founder, the Revd Chad Varah, and in 1974 she opened a branch in Boston, Massachusetts. Other branches followed, and, owing to her inspiration and persistence, the Samaritans eventually became a thriving organization throughout the United States. Her novel 'The Listeners' (1970) was based on her experiences with the Samaritans in London. She said becoming a Samaritan was simply the most important thing she had ever done (Grove, 122). In 1981 she was appointed MBE. 
Monica Dickens was modest enough to put much of her success down to 'unbelievable luck', but all her life she was determined to succeed. When things went wrong, her attitude was a brisk 'What's next?' She was warm, wise, and strong, sometimes stubborn, but always witty. When operated on for bowel cancer, she wrote to a friend, 'It's not a full stop -- just a semi-colon' (Grove, 128). For Monica Dickens, a worthy descendant of her famous great-grandfather, not only on account of her literary skills, but also because of her strong sense of humanity, the full stop came two years later, in 1992, at the BUPA Dunedin Hospital, Reading. It was Christmas day. She was cremated and her ashes scattered a week later, on 1 January 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 50977


Home, William Douglas (1912-1992), playwright, was born on 3 June 1912 at 23 Moray Place, Edinburgh, the third son and fifth of the seven children of Charles Cospatrick Archibald Douglas-Home, Lord Dunglass, later thirteenth earl of Home (1873-1951), and his wife, Lady Lilian (1881-1966), daughter of Frederick William Lambton, fourth earl of Durham. After an infancy spent at the ancestral homes of the Hirsel, near Coldstream, Berwickshire, and Douglas Castle, Lanarkshire, Will disliked going to Ludgrove School in Hertfordshire in 1921. He was a shy nervous child who learned to hide behind a mask of flippancy. His characteristic mode of speech would later be a light, allusive banter, accompanied by whimsical half-smiles. He became a teller of anecdotes and also the subject of them, emerging as a practical joker at Eton College (1926-31) and New College, Oxford (1931-4). 
On leaving university with a fourth in history, the Hon. William Douglas Home -- he dispensed with the hyphen -- spent two years at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London before making his stage debut in Brighton in 1937. He looked an acceptable leading man, with his slender build, high brow, straight nose, and small eyes, but his acting ability was insufficient to launch a career. In any case writing interested him more. His first full-length play, 'Great Possessions', appeared at the Q Theatre in London in March 1937. Subsidized by his father, he shared a flat in South Eaton Place with his friends Jo Grimond and Brian Johnston. 
Having been an idealistic supporter of appeasement, Douglas Home helped Kenneth de Courcy produce 'Intelligence Digest' in 1939-40, a newsletter that some deemed defeatist. Douglas Home described himself as 99 per cent pacifist, yet, when drafted into the Royal East Kent regiment (the Buffs) in July 1940, he went on to serve as a second lieutenant in what became the Royal Armoured Corps. However, the Second World War brought out his stubborn and opinionated side. Douglas Home contested three parliamentary by-elections between 1942 and 1944 as an Independent Progressive, denouncing Churchill's objective of unconditional German surrender. He then refused in September 1944 to participate in the assault on Le Havre after the allies turned down a German request for a ceasefire to allow civilian evacuation. When Acting-Captain Douglas Home publicized this in the press, he was court-martialled and sentenced to a year's hard labour, first at Wormwood Scrubs and then at Wakefield. He defended his conduct ever after, though his eventual appeal for a review of the case failed in 1991. Will was not simply a charming jester. 
On his release in June 1945 Douglas Home wrote 'Now Barabbas...', a compassionate prison drama which made his name as a playwright when it opened in London in February 1947. This was followed at the Vaudeville Theatre in August 1947 by another hit, more typical of subsequent ones. 'The Chiltern Hundreds' exploited the comic potential of an upper-class socialist facing the family butler as his tory opponent in a by-election. Douglas Home based the benignly eccentric aristocrats on his own relations. Thoroughly good-humoured, with easy conversational dialogue, the piece gave rise to a film, an American version, and two sequels. His next few plays fared less well, however; audiences booed the anti-war fantasy 'Ambassador Extraordinary' (1948). 
In 1950 Douglas Home was Conservative prospective parliamentary candidate for Kirkcaldy Burghs, but only briefly: he opposed the Korean War. Grimond later induced him to contest Edinburgh South as a Liberal in 1957 and 1959. On 26 July 1951 Douglas Home married Rachel Leila Brand ('b'. 1929); she succeeded as Baroness Dacre in 1970. They had one son and three daughters and lived for thirty years (1954-85) at Drayton House, East Meon, Hampshire. 

'The Reluctant Debutante', a polished light comedy, proved highly popular at the Cambridge Theatre, London, where it received 752 performances (1955-6), with Wilfrid Hyde White, Celia Johnson, and Anna Massey, prior to success on Broadway and on film. Then came the backlash: drama critics, exhilarated by John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' (1956), suddenly turned Douglas Home into an Aunt Sally who symbolized everything snobbish, out-of-date, and shallow in British theatre. Kenneth Tynan, especially, aimed to drive 'the Honourable William' off the stage. Douglas Home held out doggedly against the 'new wave' of social realism. His 'Aunt Edwina' (1959) made fun of a retired colonel changing sex after mistakenly taking equine hormone pills. Incensed by vitriolic reviews, the author backed it with his own money and lost. 
Douglas Home's dramatic range was broader than many allowed. He wrote serious works on contemporary moral themes (though maybe not very effectively), topical skits, and a string of plays about historical figures, such as 'The Thistle and the Rose' (King James IV of Scotland) in 1949, 'Caro William' (Melbourne) in 1952, 'Betzi' (Napoleon) in 1965, and 'The Queen's Highland Servant' (John Brown) in 1967. Nevertheless, he remained pigeon-holed as a purveyor of 'bourgeois' drawing-room comedies. The mid-1960s were lean years. The appointment of his brother Sir Alec Douglas-Home (1903-1995) ['see 'Home, Alexander Frederick Douglas-] as prime minister ensured a fair London run for 'The Reluctant Peer' (1964). Otherwise he had to retreat into the provinces, whence he contrived his comeback in 1967. 'The Secretary Bird', a comedy of marital infidelity, premiered in Swanage, Dorset; it went on to achieve 1463 performances in the West End, showing impresarios that audiences and critics were not the same. Fresh commercial successes followed: 'The Jockey Club Stakes' (1970), 'Lloyd George Knew my Father' (1972), and 'The Kingfisher' (1977). Actors of the calibre of Kenneth More, Alastair Sim, Rex Harrison, and Ralph Richardson starred in his shows. 
Douglas Home was prolific, writing memoirs, verse, and magazine columns, as well as forty-five performed plays. Interest in his stage works slowly faded from the late 1970s, but they appeared at regional venues, in amateur productions, and in France (where they retained high critical esteem). Never financially prudent -- he was a lifelong devotee of the turf -- he felt obliged to take a smaller house in 1985, when heart trouble required the fitting of a pacemaker. Still he kept creating well-crafted new dramas; the last to be staged was 'The Christmas Truce' (1989). William Douglas Home died at his home, Derry House, Kilmeston, near Alresford, Hampshire, on 28 September 1992. He was buried four days later in the churchyard of All Saints, East Meon, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 50978


Miller, William Galbraith (1848-1904), jurist, was born on 3 June 1848 in Glasgow, eldest of the three sons of Thomas Miller, warehouseman and pawnbroker, and his wife, Isabella, 'nee' Galbraith. Initially privately educated, he attended Glasgow high school for three years before matriculating at Glasgow University in 1864. He followed various arts courses, gaining distinctions in his classical subjects. He graduated with second-class honours in mathematics in 1872. In 1869 he had begun a legal apprenticeship, adding law courses to his studies. To fulfil the requirements for the Glasgow LLB degree, he needed to take further courses in Edinburgh. These included lectures by James Lorimer, to whom his first book was dedicated. He graduated again in 1875, the first to do so under the thirteen-year-old regulations. After setting a precedent by convincing the Court of Session that his LLB warranted direct admission as a law agent, he entered a local firm and became a partner there two years later. In 1884 he left to join the Faculty of Advocates, and moved to Edinburgh, though he continued to teach a course at Glasgow University as he had since 1876. Although his practice at the bar was not extensive, he was well respected and regularly consulted by colleagues. 
Miller was most remembered for his teaching, for his efforts to improve legal education, and for his academic work. For more than fifteen years he gave a course in public and international law at Glasgow in return only for the fees paid by his students. During this period he was passed over for two chairs, one in Glasgow and one in Edinburgh, despite strong support from distinguished lawyers and his own students. It was not until 1894 that he was awarded an annual salary of $300 as a lecturer. This was insufficient to allow him to give up his practice and he continued to travel from Edinburgh. Throughout these years Miller corresponded with university authorities, legal practitioners, and the press in attempts to improve the content and funding of law teaching. He also published various articles, the most substantial being a pamphlet of forty-eight pages, 'The Faculty of Law in the University of Glasgow' (1889). He met with little success in these campaigns and in an allied scheme for the LLD degree. This is reflected in his will, with his book collection being left away from the university. His friends were also forbidden to set up any memorial to him there, in the belief that, when the changes he sought did come about, his reputation and memory would 'take care of itself'. His brother Harry was, none the less, moved to publish a pamphlet within months of his death, 'to put on record the main facts of his connection with Glasgow University, and what he tried to do for the Faculty of Law' (Miller, preface). 
Miller's academic writings are marked by intellectual acumen, humour, and a scholarship extending beyond law, philosophy, and history into philology, art, and poetry. They include fourteen articles in law journals, and in 1887 two papers in the 'Journal of Jurisprudence' on various analogies between the development of language and law which foreshadowed later research. His main contributions to legal theory are found in three books: 'Lectures in the Philosophy of Law' (1884); 'The Law of Nature and Nations in Scotland' (1896); and 'The Data of Jurisprudence' (1903). Like many Scottish and Glaswegian contemporaries, he wrote in the Kantian and Hegelian traditions, though the 'Data' is of more sociological bent. The second volume, which he died before producing, was intended to return to the abstract. Miller's ideas were clearly influential on other scholars, with whom he corresponded extensively, and are, for example, recorded in the works of Roscoe Pound, the renowned American legal theorist. Miller travelled widely within Europe. In 1895 he was invited to become a member of the 'Internationale Vereinigung fur vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft und Volkswirthschaftslehre', and in 1903 he was elected to the council of the International Law Association. 
Miller was, as an illustrated appreciation in the 'Scots Law Times' of 1898 put it, 'a capital cellist, as his many years as a prominent member and President of Glasgow University Orchestral Society bear witness' and a man of many friends. He died on 6 February 1904, at 13 Albany Street, Edinburgh, of congestion of the lungs. Belated acknowledgement by the university authorities came in a motion by the general council, encapsulating him 'as a pioneer in the systematic study of Jurisprudence on its scientific side, to which he devoted his life and made contributions of lasting value, as an able and successful teacher and as a man of gracious and attractive personality'. 


@@@@@


doc= 50979


Goudy, Henry (1848-1921), jurist, was born on 16 September 1848 at Strabane, co. Tyrone, the eldest son of the Revd Alexander Porter Goudy DD (1809-1858), an Irish Presbyterian clergyman, and Isabella Kinross (1824-1906), daughter of an Ayr merchant. After his father's death his mother returned to Ayr. Between 1864 and 1867 Goudy studied at the University of Glasgow. He matriculated as a law student in Edinburgh in 1868, and graduated MA in 1870 and LLB in 1871. Goudy then spent a year studying law at the University of Konigsberg, before his admission as an advocate on 22 November 1872. 
The Scots bar was currently confident and buoyant, devoted to energetic intellectual endeavour, stimulated by the revival of legal education in the universities after 1860 and by contacts with German legal science. Shortly after his admission, Goudy demonstrated a talent for scholarship by writing an article for the 'Journal of Jurisprudence' on the controversial topic of the liability of railway companies, focusing on a new German statute. With William C. Smith he published 'Local Government' in 1880, a memorandum intended to facilitate discussion of reform. This was followed in 1886 by Goudy's 'Law of Bankruptcy'. A vitally important work, which reached a fourth edition in 1914, it was for long the authoritative text in Scots law in this field, and was not entirely superseded in some respects even at the end of the century. Goudy was the first editor of the 'Juridical Review', to which he contributed throughout his life. 
A Liberal, Goudy held a minor public office in Gladstone's governments in the 1880s. He was a candidate for the chair of Scots law in the University of Edinburgh in 1888, when the Conservative John Rankine was appointed. In 1889 he succeeded his own teacher, James Muirhead, as professor of civil law at Edinburgh. The main duty of the holder of this chair was to teach Roman law. If Goudy's publications had hitherto indicated an interest in Scots law, his training in Edinburgh and Konigsberg had prepared him for this office. Possessed of a 'striking face and tall, commanding figure', Goudy was, according to James F. Whyte, 'a born teacher' who 'never missed an opportunity of helping his students' (Whyte, 163). He published a number of articles on Roman law in the 'Juridical Review', and in 1899 he produced a second edition of Muirhead's 'Historical Introduction to the Law of Rome', the plagiarism of which by Hannis Taylor he exposed in a notable article in the 'Juridical Review' in 1908. 
In 1893 Goudy was called to the regius chair of civil law in the University of Oxford, in succession to his fellow Ulsterman James Bryce, who had advised Gladstone on the appointment. Here he helped to develop the embryonic law school. His inaugural lecture, 'Fate of Roman law north and south of the Tweed', published as a pamphlet in 1894, was a slight piece. In 1910 he published the interesting, if scarcely profound, 'Trichotomy in Roman Law', a German translation of which appeared in 1914, by E. Ehrlich. Goudy himself translated as 'Law in Daily Life' (1904) a work of R. von Jhering, which set out a series of examination questions on legal issues arising out of everyday experience. If Goudy stressed the importance of historical knowledge in understanding the law, he had a strong interest in law reform; he argued in favour of codification to the Edinburgh Merchant Company in 1893 and was still addressing the Society of Public Teachers of Law on its benefits in 1919. In 1908 he had been one of the founders and first president of the society (and served again in 1918-19). Goudy also had a strong interest in international law and in 1915 was one of the founders and first vice-president of the Grotius Society. 
Goudy was awarded the degrees of DCL from Oxford in 1894 and LLD from Edinburgh; in 1917 he was elected as an honorary bencher of Gray's Inn. Though troubled by ill health all his life, he did not retire from the regius chair until 1917. All Souls then continued him in his fellowship, and the university appointed him professor emeritus. He had long had a house in West Malvern. On 3 March 1921 he died, unmarried, at 7 Lansdown Crescent, Bath, and was buried in Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 50980


Rankine, Sir John (1846-1922), jurist, was born at Sorn, Ayrshire, on 18 February 1846, the eldest of the seven surviving children of the Revd John Rankine DD (1816-1885), Church of Scotland minister at Sorn, and his wife, Jane (1819-1879), daughter of Charles Simson of Threepwood, Langshaw, Roxburghshire. After schooling at Sorn and at Ayr Academy, he attended Edinburgh Academy from 1859 to 1861. He matriculated at the University of Edinburgh in 1861 and graduated MA in 1865. He embarked on legal study in the University of Edinburgh in 1866 before proceeding to Heidelberg, where he studied Roman law under C. A. von Vangerow, whom, according to Logan Turner, he was always later to refer to as 'my revered teacher'. 
After returning to Edinburgh Rankine was admitted as an advocate on 17 December 1869, joining a bar which was enjoying an intellectual revival and to which he was to make a distinguished contribution. According to Sir James Balfour Paul, Rankine 'had never a great forensic practice, but as a chamber counsel his opinion was much sought after and valued' (Paul, 306). A conservative in politics, he served briefly as an advocate-depute in 1885. 
Rankine was elected professor of Scottish law in the University of Edinburgh early in 1888. He held this office with great distinction until his retirement in 1922 and was reputed to be an excellent teacher. A factor in this appointment was his important scholarly publications, the first of which was 'The Law of Landownership in Scotland' (1879). An epoch-making work, it was the first authoritative survey of the law in this field; a fourth edition appeared in 1909, and was regularly used throughout the twentieth century. In 1887 Rankine published 'The Law of Leases'. This also became a standard authority in its own day and reached a third edition in 1916. In 1921, towards the end of his life, Rankine published 'A Treatise on the Law of Personal Bar in Scotland', which, though it was the fruit of five years' research, was not a success. Rankine used as his textbook John Erskine's 'Principles of the Law of Scotland', which he edited four times between 1890 and 1911. He was also a general editor of the 'Scottish Revised Reports'. A lighter side is revealed by his contributions to 'Ballads of the Bench and Bar' in 1882. 
Rankine's academic excellence was recognized in 1891 when he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and again in 1892 when the University of Glasgow conferred on him the honorary degree of LLD. When a Scottish roll of queen's counsel was instituted in 1897 Rankine was one of the first appointed. He served as a governor of the Royal Infirmary, the Royal Veterinary College, Donaldson's Hospital, and the Edinburgh Royal Asylum. As one might expect of a man with three brothers-in-law who were ministers, one of whom was professor of divinity in the University of Glasgow, Rankine was active in the Church of Scotland though he never became an elder. He served on the church's foreign mission committee, travelling abroad on its behalf to India in 1884 and to South Africa in 1902. His public services were recognized in 1921, when he was knighted. 
Rankine had comfortable personal means. Genial and impressively whiskered, he was very fond of cigars and shooting. He never married but lived with his unmarried brother, Charles Rankine Simson, writer to the signet, whose estate of Threepwood (inherited through their mother) Rankine in turn inherited on his brother's death in 1911. He divided his time between his estate of 1000 acres and his house at 23 Ainslie Place, Edinburgh. Shortly after retirement from the chair, Rankine died suddenly at Threepwood on 8 August 1922. 


@@@@@


doc= 50981


Lawrie, Sir Archibald Campbell (1837-1914), lawyer and antiquary, was born on 8 September 1837 in West Nile Street, Glasgow, the eldest son of John Adair Lawrie (1801-1859), surgeon and professor of surgery at the University of Glasgow, and his wife, Janet Finlay, of The Moss, Stirlingshire. He was educated at the University of Glasgow, where he graduated BA in 1856, and was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates in December 1860. At about this time he moved to Edinburgh. Lawrie was active in the Speculative Society at Edinburgh University, holding the offices of secretary and president in the early 1860s. 
Lawrie was introduced through family connections to Cosmo Innes (1798-1874), an antiquary of medieval Scotland, and was therefore brought into contact with the movement -- particularly associated with publishing clubs such as the Bannatyne and Maitland clubs -- responsible for gathering, editing, and publishing early Scottish records. As Lawrie put it later, he did not know if he had been attracted to record scholarship and antiquities by Innes or the reverse. The fruit of his close working relationship with Innes was their compilation, with another advocate, Archibald Anderson, of the great index to the eleven volumes of 'The Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland'. This appeared in 1875 and crowned an enterprise begun in the early part of the century by the pioneering record scholar Thomas Thomson and completed by Cosmo Innes. 
While in practice at the bar Lawrie acted on several occasions as interim sheriff-substitute at Glasgow, Greenock, and Peebles. In 1873, shortly before the completion of the index, Lawrie was appointed, on the recommendation of Lord Advocate George Young, as district judge of Kandy, Ceylon. The ingrained sceptical turn of his nature, which was held to be a mark of his historical work, was also reportedly a feature of Lawrie's judicial practice, together with a patient approach to investigation and unfailing good humour. The latter could sometimes run to 'playful' sarcasm. Residence in Ceylon did not mean, however, an abandonment of his work as a compiler. 'A Gazetteer of the Central Province of Ceylon' (1896), a descriptive miscellany with translations of source material about his jurisdiction, marks Lawrie's continuing interest in such work even while overseas. In 1880 he married Constance, daughter of John Dennistoun and widow of John W. Hamilton. She died in 1890. 
Lawrie remained in Kandy until his appointment as senior puisne judge of the supreme court of Ceylon in 1892, at which time he moved to Colombo. During his time there he met and entertained many of the dignitaries of empire, including Edward, prince of Wales, and Prince George. From this position he retired in 1901 and was knighted in the same year. 
During the last part of his life Lawrie earned a leading reputation in his own right as a collector, editor, and critic of early Scottish records. He chose on his return to Scotland to settle at The Moss, Dumgoyne, Stirlingshire, the ancient home of the Buchanan family, from whom he claimed descent. The house, which he had inherited from his uncle William Finlay, was a good setting for work on his plan to make a critical study of the early reigns in Scottish history, beginning with David I. In 1906 Lawrie played host to the 'pilgrimage' made to The Moss to mark the quatercentenary of George Buchanan, tutor to James VI. He did not, however, contribute to the accompanying volume and was generally reported to be averse to speech making, essay writing, and reviewing. 
In 1905 Lawrie, in accordance with his scheme, published 'Early Scottish Charters Prior to AD' 1153. He used annals, charters, and cartularies, and the result was less a narrative than a collection of texts with extensive annotation of each document. Although not always accurately transcribed, the documents in this work became essential for historians of Scotland because of the void in pre-fourteenth century Scottish records caused by Edward I's removal of documents to England in 1291. Lawrie's zeal for caution was a hallmark of his work. George Neilson commented that he was 'a constitutional doubter, but generous enough in his admission of his own occasional error' (Neilson, 247). Even this description may have been too lenient, as is suggested by Lawrie's refusal to believe new documentary evidence in support of the authenticity of the Scone foundation charter of 1120, which he had denied. This aside, he avoided generalizations and ethnological inferences, and concentrated his interest on chronology, genealogy, and cross-examination of individual sources. In the same year (1905) as this work was published, Lawrie received recognition from his alma mater in the form of an LLD from Glasgow University. 
A change in his plan was revealed by the publication in 1910 of his second major work, 'Annals of the reigns of Malcolm and William, kings of Scotland, AD' 1153-1214. In this the annals appeared and were edited separately, and were intended to be followed by the charters. This intention was not to be fulfilled, but after his death Lawrie's material was put in the hands of John Maitland Thomson, who had given him valuable help and to whom the volume of 1910 had been dedicated. It was later deposited in the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh. Lawrie died at The Moss on 11 May 1914 of a heart-related illness and was buried on 15 May in the parish church graveyard at nearby Killearn. 


@@@@@


doc= 50982


Omond, George William Thomson (1846-1929), historian, was born on 13 September 1846 at Craigentor, Monzie, near Crieff, Perthshire, the only son and second of the five children of John Reid Omond (1804-1892), minister of the Free Church of Scotland in Monzie, and his wife, Margaret Jane Thomson (died 1887), daughter of William Aird Thomson, minister, of Perth. His parents were both Scottish; his father, the former parish minister of Monzie, 'came out' at the Disruption in 1843. He was baptized 'George William' in the parish church on 11 October 1846, but it was in accordance with the forms of the Free Church of Scotland that he married Margaret Isabella Alice Wright ('c'.1849-1932), daughter of James Wright, foreign merchant, on 23 July 1878. They had one son and three daughters. 
Omond was educated at Edinburgh Academy (1857-64) and at Edinburgh University (1864-8); he graduated MA with a first in classics and a second in philosophy. In his second year he matriculated as 'George William Thomson Omond'. He was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in 1871 but had no extensive practice, though he was appointed as an advocate-depute in 1885. In 1886 he stood as a Liberal for West Perthshire. He was not elected and instead pursued his career in writing, particularly historical writing, rather than the law or politics, though he continued to designate himself advocate of the Scots bar. His first book, 'The Merchant Shipping Acts 1854 to 1876' (1877), indicated some early interest in shipping law; but it was his historical interest in the law of the sea, as it affected neutral merchant ships in time of war, which was apparent in two later works, 'The Law of the Sea' (1916) and 'A Documentary History of the Armed Neutralities 1780 and 1800' (1919), in which he collaborated with Sir F. Piggott. 
Undoubtedly Omond's best-known historical work is 'The Lord Advocates of Scotland' (2 vols., 1883), which deals with the office of lord advocate and the careers of the holders of it from the fifteenth century to the passing of the 'Scottish Reform Act' (1832). In part it was overtaken by later studies but it remained a valuable source. 'The Lord Advocates of Scotland: Second Series, 1834-1880' (1914), less well known and sometimes overlooked, updated the story to 1880. Other contributions to Scottish history are 'The Arniston Memoirs... 1571-1838' (1887), an account of the remarkable legal family and dynasty, the Dundases of Arniston; and studies concerning the history of attempts to unite Scotland and England, 'Fletcher of Saltoun' (1897) and 'The Early History of the Scottish Union Question' (1897). In the 1890s Omond tried his hand at fiction with three novels which were later forgotten. 'The Boers in Europe' (1903) was a patriotic piece on continental support for the Boer cause. In 1917 Omond was elected FRHistS. He served on the society's council from 1919 to 1922 and as vice-president from 1922 to 1925. 
One of Omond's major interests was the Low Countries and their history, an interest focused principally on Belgium, where Omond lived for a considerable period. This led to a number of publications between 1906 and 1928, including guide books, with some recycled material and illustrated mainly by Amedee Forestier. Omond also produced a popular history, 'Belgium and Luxembourg' (1923), and was responsible for the chapter 'Belgium, 1830-1839' in the second volume, published in 1923, of the 'Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy', edited by A. W. Ward and G. P. Gooch. He wrote various articles on questions relating to Belgium and for his contributions to Anglo-Belgian relations he was made a chevalier of the order of the Crown (Belgium). 
Omond was said to have a kind and genial personality. In the latter part of his life he lived in England, in Essex, Kent, and Surrey. He died on 18 June 1929 at Knaphill, Surrey, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50983


Durlacher, Lewis (1792-1864), chiropodist, was born probably in Warwickshire, the son of Solomon Abraham Durlacher (1757-1845), chiropodist and dentist, and his wife, Elizabeth Harris. He learnt the craft of chiropody from his father, in Bath, Somerset. About 1816 Durlacher commenced practice at 22 St James's Street, London. He had the support of several surgeons, including Sir Astley Paston Cooper, which was unusual because chiropody was regarded as a humble, non-medical trade. In 1826 he won the approval of 'The Lancet' after he demonstrated his treatment for embedded toenails at the hospital of surgery in Panton Square. From 1823 until his death he was surgeon-chiropodist to the royal household of three successive sovereigns: George IV, William IV, and Victoria. He was presented with a snuff box engraved 'To my friend Lewis Durlacher from William IV'. 
Durlacher's book, 'A Treatise on Corns, Bunions, the Diseases of Nails, and the General Management of the Feet', was published in 1845. It had good reviews; the 'British and Foreign Medical Review' (19, 1845, 560-1) considered it 'the result obviously of much experience and written in a fair and honest spirit. It is, in fact, the only work on the subject which has any pretensions to scientific accuracy'. An American edition appeared the same year and had considerable influence. The book contained the first description of plantar digital neuroma, and included the best accounts of the embedded toenail and the inward-forming wart. He also developed the use of silver nitrate. 
Durlacher tried to establish a free dispensary for people with diseases of the foot. He believed that the public should be protected from empirics either by legislation or by the medical licensing bodies' making the study of diseases of the feet part of the medical curriculum. 
Durlacher married Susanna Levi (1798-1874) on 2 January 1820. They had five sons and one daughter. He had a thorough education in scripture and Hebrew literature. Active in the Jewish community in London, he took a leading part in the affairs of the Western Synagogue. Durlacher died at his home and place of practice, 15 Old Burlington Street, London, on 3 March 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 50985


Runting, Ernest George Virgo (1861-1954), chiropodist, was born on 26 December 1861, at 68 South Audley Street, London, the son of William Runting (died 1881), dentist, and his wife, Fanny Maria Potter (1832-1882), chiropodist, who followed her parents in the craft. Educated privately, Runting at fifteen was apprenticed as a cadet to a three-master ship, the 'Suffolk', and he served for five years, making many trips to North America. On the death of his father in 1881 his mother bought him out of the service and trained him and his brother William in chiropody. 
In 1884 Runting started his own practice in Elm Park Terrace, South Kensington, London. He built a large connection and followed his mother, who was chiropodist to Queen Victoria, with royal appointments to Queen Alexandra and Queen Mary. From earning fee receipts of $64 10's'. in 1884 he went on to average $2000 per annum from 1897 to 1927, having the leading practice in the country, but treating the needy free. 
Runting's ambition was to make the craft of chiropody a profession, and he had contact with developments in America from 1895, when chiropodists were first licensed in New York. A patient, the Revd Dr Arnold Whittaker Oxford (1855-1948), was impressed by Runting and suggested in 1912 that they should form a society of chiropodists. Oxford had been the high-church vicar of St Luke's, Beswick Street, for sixteen years, but becoming uncertain of his ecclesiastical position had trained in medicine. A wealthy man, Oxford found medicine the medium for his humanitarian activities. In addition to being a Greek scholar, an author of books on antiquarian subjects, an untiring worker in the hospital and charitable fields, and a leading freemason, he was so impressed by Runting's skills as a chiropodist that he was determined that such benefits be brought within the reach of everyone. A meeting was called of thirty-five chiropodists (the leading practitioners from England and Scotland) and held at Runting's home and place of practice, 7 New Burlington Street, London, on 14 November 1912, when the decision was taken to form the National Society of Chiropodists, with Runting as president and Oxford as honorary treasurer. 
In 1913 the society opened the Silver Street Pedic Clinic (later the London Foot Hospital), near the British Museum, for the free treatment of the necessitous poor. A journal, 'The Chiropodist', was started in January 1914; a library was begun, and lectures and clinical training were established. A school of chiropody was due to open in 1914 (Oxford had persuaded several medical practitioners to help), but the outbreak of war prevented it. During the war servicemen were treated free at the clinic, and short courses were provided for soldiers sent by the War Office who then served as battalion chiropodists. The school was eventually opened at the clinic in April 1919, and Runting headed the staff (all giving their services free) and was active in developing the academic course and clinical teaching. Runting and Oxford are regarded as the founders of the London Foot Hospital School of Podiatric Medicine. Runting had contributed a chapter to the first multi-authored work of its kind, 'Textbook of Chiropody' (1914); and the first of his own books, 'Battalion Chiropody Training and Practice', was published in 1918. 
Runting's classic 'Practical Chiropody' was published in 1925 and received good reviews from the 'Medical Times' and 'The Lancet'. The book reached its eighth edition in 1952, and there were seven reprints; a revised, ninth edition was published in 1956, after Runting's death, and there were several American editions as well as one in Spanish. 'The Lancet' had printed an article by Runting on the treatment of corns in 1927, and in many of his other writings Runting built on the work of Lewis Durlacher (1792-1864), developing the use of silver nitrate, the treatment of verrucae, toenail problems, the rational approach to the treatment of corns, and the importance of considering 'the chiropodist's handicap -- the shoe'. From its beginnings in 1914 'The Chiropodist' had a monthly page of jottings by Runting, under the pen-name Old Chiro, which continued until 1945 and did much to influence the development of the profession. A selection appeared as 'Chiropody Jottings' in 1932. 
Runting and his wife, Mabel (1851/2-1932), had a son and two daughters (one in practice with him). Runting devoted his life to chiropody, and, generous of his time and money to needy patients, his colleagues, and his church, he died a poor man. He was a member of All Souls Church, Langham Place, London, for many years, and was elected people's warden of St Peter's in 1946. Runting died as a result of acute bronchitis at his home, 155 Chiltern Court, Baker Street, London, on 16 January 1954. A thanksgiving service was held at All Souls on 22 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 50988


Lloyd, Albert Lancaster (1908-1982), ethnomusicologist and radio and television broadcaster, was born on 29 February 1908 at 136A Trevelyan Road, off Tooting High Street, London, the son of Ernest Lancaster Lloyd, a draper's packer, and his wife, Mabel Emily Barrett. His father was an accountant's son from Islington, his mother a printer's daughter from Battersea. Details of his early life are sketchy; he lived in both London and Sussex and attended Hornsey grammar school, where he began his lifelong involvement with languages. At the age of sixteen, with his mother dead and his father, a war invalid, unable to look after him, Lloyd went to Australia as an assisted migrant. 
In Australia Lloyd worked as a farm-hand and shepherd and had what was probably his first significant encounter with traditional songs. He began to jot these down in notebooks in order to remember what he encountered -- not, in any sense, as a folk-song collector. It was in his teenage years that Lloyd made use of library postal loans to continue his education. He also listened extensively to Western classical music on borrowed 78 r.p.m. records. 
Lloyd returned to England in the early 1930s and lived near King's Cross, London. In a short space of time he encountered unemployment, the British Library reading room, a group of left-wing intellectuals including Dylan Thomas, Jack Lindsay, George Rude, and A. L. Morton, and, via this group, the Communist Party. He remained a loyal member for the rest of his life. He worked for a time in Foyles foreign book department and started writing translations (including editions of Lorca's poems) and criticism. In 1937 and 1938 he worked as a labourer on a whaling ship and as a merchant seaman. 
In 1940 Lloyd obtained a job as a journalist with 'Picture Post', which (with some interruption for military service) lasted for about ten years. His regular partner on the magazine was the celebrated photojournalist Bert Hardy, and 'the two Berts' created many acclaimed features. Lloyd's language skills enabled him to travel widely. He purposely suggested stories in parts of the world that he knew were 'musically lively' and thus acquainted himself directly with a diversity of foreign folk musics. In the end Lloyd fell out with the owners of 'Picture Post', who had become uneasy about Lloyd's political views in the growing cold war atmosphere. The proprietor, Edward Hulton, fired the editor, Tom Hopkinson, over the printing of a story felt to be 'politically too hot'. Lloyd resigned in sympathy with Hopkinson, and resolved to make a living as a freelance writer and collector. During his period at 'Picture Post', on 13 April 1946 he married Charlotte Maria Ohly ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Jean Adam, an assistant bank manager; they had a daughter. 
Lloyd's Communist Party connections were important in establishing him as a freelance. In the cold war atmosphere of the 1950s he had easy access, where others were denied, and was welcomed in eastern Europe. It is reported that he caused no little resentment among Soviet bloc folklorists because of the way in which he was able to obtain privileged access to their hard-won sources. Another important connection that sustained Lloyd was with the BBC. He had done some work in the late 1930s with producer Lawrence Gilliam on 'The Voice of the Seaman', a revolutionary piece of radio that made use of actuality, not actors. Soon after, he worked on 'Shadow of the Swastika', a drama documentary on the rise of Hitler. Lloyd's left-wing enthusiasms worried some at the BBC and his contract was not renewed. In spite of continuing suspicion, Lloyd produced many scripts in the post-war period, ranging from ethnomusicological work for the Third Programme to twenty-minute scripts for schools' broadcasts. A significant number of BBC personnel realized the uniqueness of his talents and made extensive use of him. In the 1970s he made a number of highly acclaimed television programmes with the film-maker Barry Gavin. 
Lloyd was instrumental in the creation of the British folk music revival of the post-war period as both a writer and a performer. His pamphlet 'The Singing Englishman' (1944), produced under wartime conditions, laid the foundation for his mature work, 'Folk Song in England' (1967). In this book Lloyd combines the tradition of English folk-song scholarship, largely derived from Cecil Sharp, with the radical historiography of such people as A. L. Morton and E. P. Thompson. This is further fleshed out with understandings derived from American and eastern European folk music scholars. It is a heady concoction that fitted well with the spirit of the time; a seminal work which tried to unite disparate and perhaps incompatible elements. Perhaps Lloyd's most significant contribution was to map out the territory of what he called 'industrial folk song', the work of mainly mining and cloth making communities who continued producing songs into the earlier phases of industrialization. The book has attracted much scholarly criticism, sometimes mixed with deep admiration, since the time of its publication. Lloyd had a way of side-stepping questions which were inconvenient or did not fit with his particular perceptions of the world. He could always draw on a rich store of esoteric knowledge to confound his opponents. 
Lloyd, together with Ewan MacColl, the Scottish actor turned singer, was the most important influence on the post-war British folk-song revival in the 1950s and 1960s. Some people objected to the way in which he altered and adapted traditional material, collating variants and creating versions that some thought were 'too good to be true'. Numerous people attest to his generosity with his time and material, and to the encouragement he gave younger performers and scholars who were just beginning to discover the riches of traditional music. He bridged the gap between the first and second folk-song revivals in collaborating with Ralph Vaughan Williams on 'The Penguin Book of English Folk Song' (1959), a classic collection which drew extensively on the work of pre-1914 collectors. 
It is as a presenter and performer that many people remember Lloyd. He had an extensive repertory of English and Australian songs. The early experiences of hearing him sing could be likened to the opening of a door on to a fascinating, strange, and yet familiar country. His performances were characterized by his total involvement with the song. He often bore a wry smile. His voice took unexpected turns as he explored a song. His pitching was occasionally approximate, but many found his performances deeply satisfying. Most of all, he communicated his obvious delight in the songs he so valued and did so much to popularize. Lloyd died on 29 September 1982 at his home, 16 Crooms Hill, Greenwich, from pneumonia and heart failure, and was cremated. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 50992


Atkinson, Sarah (1823-1893), philanthropist and writer, was born on 13 October 1823 in Athlone, co. Westmeath, Ireland, the eldest of five daughters and one son of John and Anne Gaynor. She was educated at home; the family moved to Dublin about 1838. On 11 August 1849 she married George Atkinson (1810-1893), a doctor and apothecary who was also joint proprietor of the 'Freeman's Journal' until he sold his shares in 1852. In 1850 the couple had a son, who died in his fourth year; they had no other children. Sarah Atkinson appears to have suffered a deep depression after the loss of her child: Lady Gilbert noted 'that grief seems to have completely changed her life' (Gilbert, ix). Thereafter she devoted much of her life to charitable work in Dublin. 
With her great friend Ellen Woodlock (1811-1884) Atkinson investigated the conditions in which girls were held in Irish workhouses, and argued for urgent reform in this area at the Social Science Congress held in Dublin in 1861 and in an article in the 'Quarterly Review' of January 1859. In 1856, together with Woodlock, she established St Joseph's Industrial Institute in Dublin, which took girls from the workhouse and trained them for domestic service. Among her other charitable endeavours she helped establish the children's hospital in Temple Street in Dublin, which was given over in 1876 to the care of the Sisters of Charity, a religious congregation in which two of her sisters were nuns. She also campaigned successfully to have the South Dublin Union workhouse opened to visitors, and she was a regular hospital visitor. Through her charitable work Sarah Atkinson became firm friends with Bessie Rayner Parkes (1829-1925), whom she is credited with converting to Catholicism. 
Atkinson was a prolific writer, but all her works appear to have been published anonymously or signed only with her initials. She wrote articles for the 'Irish Quarterly Review', 'Duffy's Hibernian Magazine', 'The Month', 'The Nation', 'Freeman's Journal', and the 'Irish Monthly'. Her subjects ranged over art, travel, history, economics, and biography, and all involved a profound level of research. Her best-known work was the official biography of the founder of the Sisters of Charity, 'Mary Aikenhead: her Life, her Work, and her Friends' (1879), which was praised by the historian Edward Lecky. In the tradition of other women who wrote biographies at this time, she read through original documentary material relating to the congregation and sought the oral testimony of Aikenhead's friends to construct her biography. While it is hagiographical in approach, it contains a wealth of information about the congregation. The introductory chapter of this biography provided an overview of Irish history that attempted to place Aikenhead's work in the context of the oppression visited on Catholics by, among other things, the penal laws. Reviews of the biography favourably compared the introductory chapter with Lecky's own work on the eighteenth century. A collection of Sarah Atkinson's 'Essays' was published posthumously in 1894. Among her friends she counted the well-known writers Katharine Tynan (1861-1931) and Rosa Mulholland, later Lady Gilbert (1841-1921). She died on 8 July 1893 at Drumcondra, Dublin, and was buried in the city's Glasnevin cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 50993


Concannon, Helena (1878-1952), historian and politician, was born in Maghera, co. Londonderry, on 28 October 1878, one of the four daughters and three sons of Louis Walsh (died 1917) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Donnelly, who were proprietors of Walsh's Hotel in Maghera. Both parents had strong nationalist credentials, her father being a member of the Irish Land League, and her mother having been a member of the Ladies' Land League. Her brother Louis Joseph Walsh became a member of Sinn Fein and a leading nationalist writer. The family was also devoutly Catholic: her brother Richard became a priest and her sister Alicia a nun. The Walsh children enjoyed lively and happy childhoods. They spent much of their time in the family kitchen where they enjoyed entertaining visitors and storytelling. 
Helena Walsh's parents were avid readers who were interested in education and encouraged their daughter's academic potential. She was educated by the Loreto nuns in Coleraine and Dublin. An excellent student, she won three gold medals for her performance in intermediate examinations and in 1897 a three-year scholarship that allowed her to pursue her interest in modern languages at the Royal University of Ireland. In 1899, accompanied by her close friend and future professor of German at University College, Dublin, Mary Macken, she studied German at the Berlin University, before moving on to the Sorbonne to study French. 
In 1902 Walsh proceeded MA at the Royal University, having graduated BA with first-class honours in 1900. Her student years were intellectually, culturally, and politically stimulating. She was in touch with student politics through her brother Louis, who had enrolled at University College, Dublin, and had quickly become a leading student politician and writer. Like her brother, she became active in the Gaelic League, studying the Irish language with Patrick Pearse. She remained dedicated to the restoration of the Irish language for the rest of her life. 
In 1900 Walsh met her future husband, Thomas Concannon, who had returned to Ireland from America; he was the son of Patrick Concannon, a farmer. They married at Maghera on 23 July 1906. They later took up residence in co. Galway where their home, named Lios-na-Mara by Patrick Pearse, became a beacon for visitors prominent in the Irish cultural and political worlds. Thomas Concannon, also an active member of the Gaelic League, shared his wife's dedication to the Irish language, which he taught. Together they produced a number of Irish language textbooks and maintained a large circle of friends within the Irish language movement. 
Helena Concannon secured a lectureship in Italian at University College, Dublin, in 1909, but the offer was withdrawn before she could take up the position, and she embarked on a writing career in earnest, while her husband became a civil servant. She experimented with a number of literary genres, publishing many poems, essays, and commentaries, but she was best known for her popular histories of Ireland. She produced over twenty books, most of them in the areas of women's history and religious history, as well as several textbooks. Her work was relentlessly nationalist and Catholic, prompting disapproval from a number of critics who denounced her children's history books in particular as ahistorical. Her 'Irish History for Junior Grade Classes' was considered so overtly political that it was banned during the Anglo-Irish War, though it was resurrected under the Irish Free State. 
Concannon herself was an advanced nationalist and anti-partitionist who supported Sinn Fein and opposed British rule in Ireland. Through her histories she lauded the innate spirituality of the Irish people, praising their constant resistance to the British presence. Her analysis of Irish history was very much based on the unshakeable twin pillars of Catholicism and patriotism. Her two most popular books about Irish women echoed these themes, praising the devotion of Irish nationalist women while emphasizing the centrality of women's spiritual and domestic role in the home to the well-being of the nation. She recognized that women had largely been omitted from most works of Irish history, but her own attempts to rectify this were often more prescriptive than analytical. Nevertheless, they proved to be enormously popular; her 'Women of Ninety-Eight' (1919) went through several editions and long remained the standard text on the subject. 
In the unsettled political climate of early twentieth-century Ireland, Concannon's books found a large audience among nationalists and language revivalists. Her work became even more popular after Irish independence, and in 1929 she was awarded a DLitt for her outstanding contribution to historical knowledge by the National University of Ireland. Her 'Daughters of Banba' (1922) won a Tailteann gold medal in 1924 and 'The Poor Clares in Ireland' (1929) was awarded the National University of Ireland historical research prize in 1929. 'The Blessed Eucharist in Irish History' (1932) was nominated the 'golden book' of the Eucharistic Congress of 1932, and even won the praise of Pope Pius XI himself, who sent Concannon the apostolic benediction. Her works on Irish women's religious history were innovative, as Concannon conducted research in institutional archives. They emphasized the spiritual resilience of Irish nuns in the face of English oppression and were well received in religious periodicals. Concannon herself contributed numerous articles on devotional subjects to Irish religious publications. 
A strong supporter of Eamon De Valera, Concannon yielded to his pleas that she become more involved in party politics in 1933, when she was elected to the Dail as a Fianna Fail candidate for the National University of Ireland. After university representation in the lower house was abolished in 1937, she was elected to the senate, serving until her death. She spoke frequently on women's issues, supporting social welfare measures and strongly backing rural domestic economy schools. Her advocacy of such institutions underlined her belief that women's education should prepare them for their lives as bastions of Irish Catholic homes, though she herself boasted few such skills and employed a housekeeper. She also continued to emphasize the fierce independence and spirituality of the nation, making frequent appeals to Irish history and religion in her speeches. This did not endear her to some political opponents, and she incurred the particular wrath of feminists and fellow members of the Women Graduates' Association who condemned her for supporting De Valera's constitution of 1937, which contained several controversial clauses about women's roles. Her support in the 1940s for the censorship of allegedly explicit books revealed that her ideas about the social and moral purity of the nation overrode any belief she may have had in intellectual freedom. 
Concannon died at the Bon Secours Hospital, Glasnevin, Dublin, on 27 February 1952, and was buried in Bothar Mor cemetery, Galway. Lauded by many fellow senators, colleagues, and friends as an outstanding Catholic and patriot, Concannon's reputation as a historian in particular has been questioned by later critics in the light of her sentimental and unscholarly approach to her subjects. Though her books appear amateurish and didactic to the modern reader, it is important to recognize that her work on women's history in particular was almost unique for its time and remains a useful starting point for modern scholars. She helped to pave the way for new generations of historians of Irish women. 


@@@@@


doc= 50995


Hayden, Mary Teresa (1862-1942), historian and campaigner for women's causes, was born in Dublin on 19 May 1862, the daughter of Thomas Hayden (1823-1881), physician, and his wife, Mary Anne Ryan (died 1873). Thomas Hayden was born in Parsonsville, co. Tipperary, the son of a Protestant father and a Catholic mother. The children of that marriage were brought up in the Roman Catholic faith, and after completing his medical training Thomas Hayden served as professor of anatomy at the school of medicine in the Catholic University of Ireland (1855-81). He in turn raised his own children, Mary, and her brother, John Joseph (1859-1936), as Catholics, assuming an increasingly active role in their upbringing after the death of his wife in 1873. 
Mary Hayden was sent as a boarder to the Ursuline convent at Thurles, co. Tipperary, in 1873, where she excelled academically, distinguishing herself in history, geography, and Christian doctrine. However, she disliked boarding and having been sent in 1875 to Mount Anville, a prestigious convent school, in co. Dublin she left after only two months. She subsequently attended Mount Anville's newly opened day school in Harcourt Street, Dublin. An eager and successful student, Hayden initially benefited from her father's progressive views on education. But when her rebellious streak became apparent and she failed to conform to the 'ladylike' manner he deemed appropriate, her father objected to her academic aspirations and denounced her behaviour as 'fast'. Hayden was frequently expected to serve as hostess at numerous social events at the family home in fashionable Merrion Square, Dublin, but she found such occasions dull, despairing in particular of the well-bred women she was required to entertain and to emulate. Labelled a 'bluestocking' by her closest friends, she took up smoking and, to the despair of her father, continued to protest against her exclusion from such masculine activities as cricket, politics, and intellectual life. 
After the death of her father in 1881, Hayden embarked in earnest on her academic career. She attended classes in Dublin at the Dominican convent in Eccles Street and the protestant Alexandra College, the most progressive and genuinely academic women's college in Ireland. She studied languages and literature, winning a scholarship in modern languages and taking a BA with honours at the Royal University of Ireland in 1885. Among the first Irish female graduates, she won further distinction in 1887 when she graduated from the Royal University with an MA with first class honours. In 1895 she was awarded a Royal University junior fellowship in English and history, but, to her dismay, she was not awarded a university fellowship. Convinced that she was excluded from a senior university post because of her sex, she taught instead at a number of women's colleges, and became increasingly involved in the movement to improve provision for female students and academics. 
Hayden made her first public pronouncement on the position of women in the Royal University in 1888, when she participated in the publication of a pamphlet, 'The Case of the Catholic Lady Students of the Royal University Stated'. She subsequently led the campaign to have women accepted as full students at University College, Dublin, and in 1902 she co-founded and became vice-president of the Women Graduates and Candidate Graduates Association. An advocate of women's suffrage, she joined the Irish Women's Franchise League, became a member of the Irishwomen's Suffrage and Local Government Association and co-founded the Irish Catholic Women's Suffrage Society in 1915. Hayden was also a founder member and president of the Irish Women Patrols, a volunteer women's police force established in 1914. An energetic philanthropist, she also founded the St Joan of Arc Girls' Club for poor children and supported the Alexandra College Guild for social work. 
A member of the National Executive of the Gaelic League, Hayden became increasingly interested in Irish history and language. This was reflected in her appointment in 1909 as lecturer in modern Irish history at University College, Dublin. She was promoted to professor in 1911 and became the only female founder member of the senate of the new National University of Ireland in 1909, a position she held until 1924. In recognition of her contribution to the National University, she was created an honorary DLitt in 1935. A popular professor, she maintained her dedication to women's education, holding the presidency of the National University Women Graduates' Association from 1913 until her death. A prolific writer, Hayden published short stories and scholarly articles and reviews on numerous aspects of Irish history and culture in journals including 'Spectre', 'New Ireland Review', and 'Studies'. Published in 1921 and co-authored with George A. Moonan, 'A Short History of the Irish People from the Earliest Times to 1920' (1921) was her most important contribution to Irish history. Known popularly as 'Hayden and Moonan', the book served as the standard Irish history text in schools and universities for over fifty years. 
Through her association with the Gaelic League, Hayden befriended many of the men who led the 1916 Easter rising. However, as a constitutional nationalist and a pacifist, she disapproved of the Easter rising and of Irish separatism. She consequently refused to support the 1918 election campaign of Constance Markievicz (a participant in the rising), earning the disapproval of many of fellow feminists and nationalists. Despite rapidly changing political circumstances which saw republican candidates swept into power in the 1918 general election, Hayden joined the Irish Dominion League which campaigned for Irish home rule within the empire and supported the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921. 
Aggrieved by the marginal role women continued to play in Irish political and intellectual life, Hayden became one of the most outspoken critics of public policy in independent Ireland. As an active member of the National Council of Women in Ireland and the Women's Social and Progressive League, she protested against the under-representation of women in the Irish senate and new legislation which threatened to weaken women's employment rights. She reserved her harshest criticism for the 1937 Irish constitution, arguing that the clauses concerning the place of women in Irish society represented a return to the middle ages. 
Bespectacled and earnest, Hayden's serious demeanour and public commitment to worthy causes belied a lively sense of humour and an enjoyment of domestic activities including baking and sewing. A keen cyclist and swimmer, she also travelled widely throughout Ireland and the continent and journeyed as far as India. Hayden remained a popular and controversial speaker on issues ranging from women's rights to Gaelic Ireland well into her seventies. She died, unmarried, at her home, 26 Cambridge Road, Dublin, on 12 July 1942, and was buried in Dublin on 15 July, leaving an estate of $2726 which was divided among her family and friends. She characteristically bequeathed small sums to charities for animals and children and instructed masses to be said in her local Catholic parish for the repose of her soul and for the souls of her deceased parents. 


@@@@@


doc= 50997


Nourse, John (bap. 1705, d. 1780), bookseller, was baptized in Oxford on 8 July 1705, the fourth child of Edward Nourse (died 1738), surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Towersey (1680-1740); his elder brother was Edward Nourse, surgeon. Apparently educated in Oxford, John Nourse was apprenticed to the London bookseller John (I) Osborne on 6 August 1722, becoming free in October 1729. He may then have been associated with William Mears -- one of the publishers of Daniel Defoe's 'Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain' and a dealer in plays and legal and botanical books -- whose activities ceased in 1734. Nourse advertised the 'Hortus Elthamensis' of J. J. Dillenius, the first Sherardian professor of botany at Oxford, in 1732 and from then on was a well-known London bookseller at the Lamb without Temple Bar, opposite Catherine Street on the Strand. He specialized in language books, contemporary foreign literature, and in scientific, particularly mathematical, books, becoming bookseller to the Society for the Encouragement of Learning and to the commissioners of longitude, and claiming the title of bookseller to the king from 1762 to 1780. 
Nourse's London shop was a rendezvous for scientific discussions; here he sold not only his own publications, numbering in all well over four hundred editions, but also older works and recent foreign books. By 1742 he had a contractual arrangement with the important Hague bookseller Pierre Gosse and he visited Paris in 1765, where he was interviewed by the authorities on the state of the London trade. He also conducted a long exchange trade with the leading continental booksellers, the Luchtmans of Leiden, allowing them to supply works such as the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' to places such as St Petersburg. The accounts for the latter trade survive at Universiteitsbibliotheek, Amsterdam. He was in touch both with important Enlightenment writers, such as Montesquieu and Voltaire, and with their publishers, and was thus able to reprint their works in England in French (while arranging simultaneously for an English translation), sometimes including passages those authors had not been able to publish abroad. His editions were so well known on the continent that his name was used by clandestine publishers there as a disguise, once even occurring in the form 'Toujours a Londres chez l'eternel Jean Nourse' (F. A. Chevrier, 'L'Almanach des gens d'esprit', 1762). His early anonymous reprint of Voltaire's 'Candide' (1759) was probably made from a proof copy and it represents an earlier state of the text than that of the Geneva first edition. The 'Philosophical Books' that he advertised included works not only by such authors as Voltaire, but also minor foreign writers, in addition to the 'Nautical Almanac' and lexicographical and grammar books; he also sold children's books, and mathematical and scientific works by writers such as Robert Dossie, William Emerson, John Harrison, Sir John Hills, Colin Maclaurin, and Thomas Simpson. 
Nourse was therefore one of the great European booksellers of the Enlightenment; he made English publications available abroad and was a major source of Enlightenment works, both in the original and in translation, in England. He never married and he died in Kensington on 25 April 1780. His firm passed into the nominal care of his brother, Sir Charles Nourse (died 1789), before being taken over by Nourse's assistant, Francis Wingrave, later succeeded by John Collingwood. The firm probably came to an end about 1824. The file of business letters received by Nourse, including letters from many well-known academic, literary, and scientific people of the period, was acquired by the autograph collector William Upcott, and letters addressed to Nourse are therefore to be found in many libraries. He is said to have been buried (on 2 May 1780) in the churchyard of St Giles's Church, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 50998


Mitchel, John (1815-1875), Irish nationalist, the first surviving son of John Mitchel (died 1840), a Presbyterian minister, and his wife, Mary Haslett (1786-1865), was born at the manse, Camnish, near Dungiven, co. Londonderry, on 3 November 1815. His father was appointed minister of Newry Presbyterian Church in 1823, and the family moved to Dromalane House. John Mitchel was educated at Dr Henderson's classical school at Newry, where he met his lifelong friend John Martin (1812-1875). In 1830 he matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, and graduated in 1834. His father was deeply disappointed that Mitchel felt he had no vocation for the ministry. After an attempt at working as a bank clerk he entered the office of John Henry Quinn, a solicitor at Newry. At the close of 1836 he eloped with Jane Verner, a sixteen-year-old schoolgirl ['see below']. The fugitives were captured at Chester, and Mitchel was taken back in custody to Ireland, where he was kept a few days in prison before being released on bail. Their second attempt was, however, more successful, and on 3 February 1837 they were married at Drumcree church. The marriage was said to have been extremely happy, and the couple had six children. In 1840, after being admitted a solicitor, Mitchel entered into partnership with Samuel Livingstone Fraser, a successful attorney, and ran the branch office at Banbridge, often defending Catholics against local Orangemen. In 1839 he helped organize a public dinner for Daniel O'Connell in Newry. In the same year he began suffering from asthma, an illness that haunted him for the rest of his life. 
In 1842 Mitchel became acquainted with Thomas Davis, the friend who, in Mitchel's own words, 'first filled his soul with the passion of a great ambition and a lofty purpose' (Dillon, 1.70). The following year Mitchel and Martin joined Daniel O'Connell's Repeal Association, but only after the death of Davis in September 1845 did he totally commit himself to politics, and accept a place on the staff of 'The Nation'. Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, the paper's proprietor and editor, described him as follows: 'He was rather above the middle size, well made, and with a face which was thoughtful and comely, though pensive blue eyes and masses of soft brown hair, a stray ringlet of which he had the habit of twining round his finger while he spoke, gave it, perhaps, too feminine a cast... (Duffy, bk 3, 191)' As early as on 22 November 1845 his 'Nation' article 'Threats of coercion' caused great controversy, as Mitchel suggested that railways could be sabotaged in an Irish uprising. In June 1846 Duffy was prosecuted for publishing it, but the jury could not reach a verdict. In the same year Mitchel published 'The life and times of Aodh O'Neill, prince of Ulster; called by the English, Hugh, earl, of Tyrone', and edited the poems of Thomas Davis. 
Mitchel seceded from the Repeal Association with the rest of the Young Ireland party on 28 July 1846. Under the influence of James Fintan Lalor, Mitchel's political views became more radical, and he began to proclaim that peasants should withhold rent to survive the famine. Finding himself unable any longer to agree with Duffy's more moderate policy, he left 'The Nation' in December 1847. After the council of the Irish confederation voted against his radical ideas, he withdrew from that also. 
On 12 February 1848 Mitchel issued the first number of the 'United Irishman', a weekly newspaper published in Dublin, which included his well-known letters to Lord Clarendon, and to the protestant farmers in the north. With the onset of revolutions in Europe, Mitchel openly advocated a 'spontaneous revolution' in Ireland. A charismatic figure and excellent writer, Mitchel came to epitomize revolutionary nationalism and Irish hatred of British rule in Ireland. 
On 13 May Mitchel was arrested under the new 'Treason Felony Act', which he claimed was passed because of him. He was tried at the commission court in Green Street, Dublin, before Baron Lefroy and Justice Moore, on 25 and 26 May 1848, and was sentenced on the following day to fourteen years' transportation. His paper was suppressed. Immediately after the verdict, he was taken by the 'Shearwater' to Spike Island, co. Cork, as the authorities feared a rescue operation in Dublin. The court case had attracted enormous interest in Ireland and abroad, and copies of Mitchel's speech from the dock and a photograph of him taken in prison were sold all over Ireland. The press heavily questioned the legality of the verdict, since the jury had been packed. 
In June Mitchel was conveyed in the 'Scourge' to Bermuda, where he was confined to the hulks. Because of his bad asthma, he was removed in the 'Neptune' to the Cape of Good Hope. Owing to the colonists' refusal to permit the convicts to land, a stance that Mitchel wholeheartedly supported, the 'Neptune' remained at anchor in Simon's Bay from 19 September 1849 to 19 February 1850. In April 1850, Mitchel arrived in Van Diemen's Land, where he was allowed to reside with John Martin in one of the police districts on a ticket-of-leave. In June 1851 he was joined by his wife and family. On 9 June 1853 Mitchel resigned his ticket-of-leave, and escaped from Van Diemen's Land with the aid of Patrick James Smyth and his wife, hiding for over a month until sailing on 2 August to Tahiti, and from there on the 'Julia Ann' to San Francisco, where he met with an enthusiastic welcome. After moving to New York in the hope that he could achieve something for Ireland there, he started a newspaper, 'The Citizen', on 7 January 1854. It became known for its strong opposition to the abolition movement, and for serializing Mitchel's 'Jail Journal', a detailed personal account of his transportation, published as a book in 1854; it became a classic of Irish revolutionary writing. His criticism in the 'Journal' about Duffy's conduct during his trials in 1848-9 led to a bitter and acrimonious quarrel between the two men. 
At the close of the year Mitchel moved to East Tennessee, and took to farming and lecturing. This was the first of many moves, reflecting his restlessness caused by the feeling that his real Irish home was barred to him. From October 1857 to August 1859 -- together with the major of Knoxville, William G. Swan -- he conducted the 'Southern Citizen', a weekly journal advocating the interests of the southern states, which was first published at Knoxville, and subsequently at Washington. His pro-slavery stance has been widely criticized, being regarded as contradictory to his revolutionary ideas. It was based on the belief that slavery was a better system than the wage slavery of industrialization. He was highly influenced by the ideas on slavery of Thomas Carlyle. Additionally, he felt that there were two nations in America, north and south, and he was strongly in sympathy with the agrarian lifestyle of the southern planters. 
Although Mitchel was heavily involved in the debate over abolition his heart was in Irish rather than American affairs. In 1859 he edited the poems of James Clarence Mangan, and a year later 'An Apology for the British Government in Ireland' and 'The Last Conquest of Ireland (perhaps)' were published; in these he again emphasized that 'The Almighty, indeed, sent the potato blight. But the English created the Famine' ('Last Conquest', 1860, 219). 
In August 1859 Mitchel visited Paris, where he went to reside in the following year as correspondent for American newspapers, hoping that in the event of an Anglo-French war, Ireland would seize the opportunity. In Paris, his daughter Henrietta finally converted to Catholicism, a step that Mitchel accepted, being very tolerant in religious matters. Although his writings reflect his Presbyterian upbringing, he felt that his own beliefs were often 'almost pagan'. 
Mitchel returned to New York in September 1862, after the outbreak of the civil war, and managed after much difficulty to get through the federal lines to Richmond. Finding that he was disqualified for military service by reason of his nearsightedness, he became editor of 'The Enquirer', the semi-official organ of the Confederate president Jefferson Davis. Owing to a divergence in their views Mitchel resigned this post in 1864, and began writing the leading articles for 'The Examiner'. Additionally, he joined the Richmond city guard and the ambulance corps. The American Civil War cost Mitchel dearly. Fighting in the Confederate army, his sons John and William were killed, and another son, James, was severely wounded. 
On the conclusion of the war Mitchel went to New York, where he became editor of the 'Daily News', a staunch southern paper. In consequence of his articles supportive of the southern cause Mitchel was arrested by the military authorities on 14 June 1865, and was confined in Fortress Monroe for nearly five months. Later he mused: 'I suppose that I am the only person who has ever been a prisoner-of-state to the British and the American Government one after the other.... I despise the civilization of the nineteenth century, and its two highest expressions and grandest hopes, most especially -- so the said century sees nothing that can be done with me, except to tie me up. (Dillon, 2.218)' The treatment Mitchel received in prison was extremely harsh, and his health broke down irretrievably. Shortly after his release on 30 October 1865 he went to Paris as the financial agent of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, hoping that amid the mounting tensions between England and America, the Fenians could accomplish a revolution in Ireland. When he realized that this would not happen, he resigned that office in the following year, returning to America in October 1866. Here he began work on his 'History of Ireland', which was published in 1867. In February 1867 he refused the post of chief executive officer of the Fenians in America, and on 19 October following published at New York the first number of the 'Irish Citizen'. In this paper, which was strongly democratic in American politics, he opposed both the Fenians and the home rulers, but spoke at a rally in New York in support of the families of the Manchester martyrs in the winter of 1869/70. In the same year he serialized a continuation of the 'Jail Journal', which embraced the years 1853-66. Increasing health problems caused him to discontinue his paper on 27 July 1872, which rendered his financial situation very insecure. In the same year he wrote letters against James Anthony Froude's anti-Irish prejudices in 'The Irish-American', which were published as a book, 'The Crusade of the Period' (1873). In February 1874 Mitchel, despite his dislike of the home rule movement, allowed himself to be put forward 'in absentia' as its candidate in Tipperary. He failed. In summer 1874 Mitchel returned to Ireland after twenty-six years of exile. On 16 February 1875 he was elected unopposed for Tipperary while he was on his way once again to Ireland, arriving the following day. On 18 February Mitchel was disqualified for being a convict, but was again returned by a majority of 2368 votes on 11 March, when he declared that he would not take his seat. Mitchel died at Dromalane House, Newry, on 20 March 1875. He was buried on the 23rd of the same month in the Unitarian cemetery, Old Meeting-House Green, High Street, Newry, where a monument was erected to his memory by his widow, who regretted that after following him all over the world, she had not accompanied him to Ireland. On 26 May 1875 the Irish court of common pleas posthumously issued another disqualification of Mitchel. Mitchel's ideas strongly influenced the Irish republican movement especially at the beginning of the twentieth century. However, since that time, no new biography has been written about him. A statue of him stands in John Mitchel Place, Newry. 
Mitchel's wife, Jane Mitchel (1819/20-1899), was born Jane Verner, only daughter of Mary Ward (died before 1847?). Her mother was the daughter of a coachman on the Verner estate in Loughgall, co. Armagh, and Captain James Verner was most likely her stepfather. There were rumours of illegitimacy, and the Verner family later denied that Captain James was ever married to Mary Ward. 
Jenny Mitchel was gentle and petite in appearance, but strong-willed and independent-minded. Although she opposed John's desire to give up his profession to work on 'The Nation', she soon got involved in Young Ireland activities herself. When John started the 'United Irishman', she organized his newspaper files, edited contributions, and wrote anonymous letters to the editor. Her politics were as radical as her husband's. After his arrest she urged his friends to attempt a rescue operation, and was deeply disappointed when he was transported without resistance. Eager to follow her husband into exile, she would have immediately set out for Bermuda, but he urged her to wait until he was settled. With her five children she set out to Van Diemen's Land on 22 January 1851, and immediately after the birth of her sixth child, Isabel, she organized Mitchel's escape with Smyth. 
In America and France Jenny Mitchel supported her husband's activities, and was able to organize the frequent moves of the household quickly and successfully. When John returned to America in 1862, she remained in Ireland with two of her daughters, Minnie and Isabel, but soon decided to bring food and clothing to blockaded states. However, the blockade runner, 'Vesta', ran aground and caught fire, which left them stranded on a sandy island near the coast of North Carolina. They made their way back to Richmond only with great difficulty. While she supported the southern states, she did not openly advocate slavery. During the war, she worked as a nurse in Richmond. 
After her husband's death Mitchel established a partnership with her son James in a photolithographic firm, and was the manageress in his absence. Jenny Mitchel died on 31 December 1899 at her home in Briggs Avenue, Fordham, New York, and was buried in Woodlawn cemetery, Bronx, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 51001


Rossa, Mary Jane O'Donovan (1845-1916), Irish nationalist and poet, was born in January 1845 in Clonakilty, co. Cork, the daughter of a successful businessman named Irwin. She was educated for three years at the Sacred Heart Convent in Roscrea, co. Tipperary. In the spring of 1864 she met the nationalist and Fenian Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa (bap. 1831, d. 1915), and the couple were secretly married on 22 November 1864, Mary Jane becoming O'Donovan Rossa's third wife, despite the opposition of her family. O'Donovan Rossa managed the Fenian paper the 'Irish People', and Mary Jane's first poem, 'The Ruin', was published there in May 1864. She was regarded, at this stage, as an inexperienced but talented young poet. Some of her poetry, however, was classified by the police as seditious. When the 'Irish People' office was raided in September 1865, and most of the staff imprisoned, Mary Jane became one of the founders of, and secretary to, the Ladies' Committee, which aimed to raise funds for the families of imprisoned Fenians: her own husband had been sentenced to twenty years' penal servitude in 1865 for his Fenian activities. 
The years 1865-70 proved to be the most politically active years of Mary Jane O'Donovan Rossa's life. She acted as secretary to the Ladies' Committee for eighteen months, during which she and her children were supported from committee funds. She resigned from the committee in April 1867, stating she did not wish to be financially dependent on it. It would appear that she was also disappointed in her work for the committee, having openly criticized many of the Fenians and having in turn been publicly attacked for her views. She was also disillusioned by the abortive Fenian rising of February 1867, and in that year she went to America, leaving her son, Maxwell, and two of O'Donovan Rossa's five children from his previous marriages in the care of her parents. She wrote poetry for the New York 'Irishman' in order to make a living. With the assistance of Fenian friends she published a volume, 'Irish Lyrical Poems', in 1868. Later she took up a very successful career as a public reader, and toured the United States and Canada in 1868-9. The purpose of this tour was to promote the cause of Ireland, to raise funds for the Fenians, and to try to reopen the trial of her husband. 
Mary Jane O'Donovan Rossa was openly critical of the Fenian leadership. She took out a lawsuit against the Fenian chief John O'Mahony to claim $8000 which her husband had loaned the movement for the organization of the 'Irish People' in the 1860s. She was attacked for this action, but withdrew her claim only on the advice of her husband. In January 1870 she returned to Ireland to campaign for her husband's release from prison. She was asked by the Fenians to engage in another speaking tour to raise funds and she travelled the British Isles until December 1870 in this cause. The announcement of an amnesty for Fenian prisoners, which also meant the release of her husband, effectively ended her active political campaigning. 
In January 1871 Mary Jane O'Donovan Rossa, with her husband and their son, returned to New York. She retired from political life and gave birth in all to thirteen children, seven of whom reached adulthood. She continued to write poetry, which was published in O'Donovan Rossa's paper the 'United Irishman', and she substituted as editor for the paper during his frequent absences. She returned once to Ireland in 1905-6, but on her contracting pneumonia O'Donovan Rossa decided to take her back to New York. When her husband's health deteriorated in 1911, she wrote regular reports about his condition in John Devoy's 'Gaelic American'. When O'Donovan Rossa died in June 1915 she took his body to Ireland for burial. On her return to America she wrote a series of articles on her Irish experiences in 1915, which were published in the 'Gaelic American' between September 1915 and January 1916. She now became very active in politics again and spoke at the Irish Race Convention in New York in March 1916. She also wrote political poetry, dedicated to the heroes of 1916, for the 'Gaelic American', and she worked as an adviser to nationalist organizations such as Cumann na mBan ('Women's Council'). 
Mary Jane O'Donovan Rossa died unexpectedly of heart disease on 17 August 1916 at her home at 622 West 135th Street in New York city. Her body was taken to Ireland for burial beside her husband at Glasnevin cemetery in Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 51006


Ketelbey, Abel (1675/6-1744), barrister and politician, was the first surviving son of Edward Ketelbey (died 1725), of Bitterley Court, Shropshire, and his wife, Anne ('bap'. 1656), daughter of Abel Gower of Baughton St John's, Worcestershire. He matriculated (aged fifteen) at Balliol College, Oxford, on 1 July 1691, entered the Middle Temple on 11 July 1693, and was called to the bar on 19 May 1699. On 18 February 1704 he married Mary Williams at St Ethelburga's, Bishopsgate, London. They had one daughter, also named Mary. In the same year he was made a freeman of Ludlow, Shropshire. 
In March 1709 Ketelbey purchased 500 acres in South Carolina, and consequently was made a landgrave of the colony, although there is no evidence that he actually visited his property. In July 1709 he acted as a witness to the will of the governor of Carolina, Colonel Edward Tynte, made in preparation for his return to the colony. By 1710 Ketelbey was coming to the fore as a lawyer in London. Narcissus Luttrell noted in January that Ketelbey had acted in the queen's bench for three men accused of drinking Henry Sacheverell's health, and in December 1710 he signed a legal appeal to the House of Lords. He served as agent for Carolina between 1712 and 1716 and, presumably because of his colonial links, in July 1713 he was proposed for membership of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. In 1715 in particular he was active in representing the colony at the Board of Trade and Plantations, putting the case of the planters and merchants for government relief in the face of pressure from the indigenous population and the adjoining French settlements. However, in 1716 he was discharged from acting as agent for Carolina. In December 1716 he was retained as counsel by many of the Jacobite prisoners facing trial in Carlisle, following the failure of the rising of 1715. He reportedly received at least $500 in fees but, as many of those charged entered guilty pleas, it is not certain how many trials he actually attended. In October 1719 he appeared at the Old Bailey as defence counsel for John Matthews, a nineteen-year-old printer accused of printing and publishing a libel, 'Vox populi, vox Dei', arguing that the law in this case was 'making that high treason which was never high treason before' ('State trials', 15.1364). Nevertheless, Matthews was found guilty and executed. 
Ketelbey's appearance in such a high-profile trial may indicate that his political ambitions were becoming more apparent. Following the death of Sir Thomas Powis in April 1719 he was elected recorder of Ludlow. Another indication of a new direction to Ketelbey's career may be that the one-time counsel for Jacobites came to defend a government whig. In 1720 his appearance at Hereford assizes as counsel for the lord chancellor, Thomas Parker, first Baron Macclesfield, against Thomas Coningsby, first earl of Coningsby, resulted in a pamphlet by Coningsby, 'The First Part of the Earl of Coningsby's Case Relating to the Vicarage of Leominster', which was voted a scandalous libel by the House of Lords on 21 February 1721 for the accusations it levelled against Macclesfield and his agents. 
Ketelbey was returned to parliament for Ludlow in the general election of 1722, combining with Acton Baldwyn to defeat one of the incumbents, Humphrey Walcot. The other sitting MP, Sir Robert Raymond, the attorney-general, had been forced to find a seat in Cornwall. Returning, perhaps, to a previous political alignment, in November 1722 Ketelbey acted as defence counsel for the Jacobite conspirator Christopher Layer in a high-profile treason trial in the king's bench, which acted as the forerunner to the bill of pains and penalties proffered against Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, in 1723. Ketelbey argued successfully that Layer's chains should be removed during the trial, but failed in his attempts to have the case thrown out owing to a defective indictment. Thereafter he attempted to puncture the prosecution case by questioning the credibility of the crown's witnesses, but without effect as Layer was found guilty and eventually executed. 
Ketelbey is recorded as having spoken occasionally in the House of Commons and indeed on one of the days on which he appeared in court in the Layer trial (26 November 1722) he was appointed to a select committee on a petition from the merchants and traders to the Carolinas, Spain, and Portugal. On 7 March 1724 he offered a clause to the house watering down the bill amending the act which ordered the registration of Roman Catholics in Scotland and those in Great Britain refusing the oaths for the security of the government, and on 2 December 1724 he supported the introduction of a bill to deal with the 'evil-minded Persons' who had settled in Wapping, 'under the Pretence of being Shelterers for Debt' but instead committed 'great Violences and Outrages' ('JHC', 20.352). 
Ketelbey's busy legal career may have been responsible for his failure to win a seat at the 1727 general election. He stood as one of the tory candidates at Great Bedwyn, Worcestershire, under the patronage of Charles, Lord Bruce, but came bottom of the poll. Bruce's father, Thomas Bruce, second earl of Ailesbury, an exiled Jacobite, wrote after the election that Ketelbey had done more than merely practise his profession 'for his name hath been so often in print in relation to trials on the crown side' (Lawson, 189). As Ketelbey was one of the leading pleaders in the king's bench and in chancery in 1720 and was still a leading pleader in 1740, his essentially professional approach, which led to him representing both the government and its opponents, clearly had a political cost. 
In August 1724 Ketelbey's daughter had married Robert Johnston (died 1743), the younger of the two sons of Gideon Johnston, commissary of Carolina (died 1716), who had been sent to England to be educated in 1712, and after being entered at the Middle Temple had been called to the bar in May 1724. Robert Johnston Ketelbey, as he became, was made a sergeant-at-law in 1736, his sponsors being Lord Bruce (Ketelbey's political patron) and John, second Baron Carteret (a proprietor of Carolina). Ketelbey's grandson, Abel Johnston Ketelbey, was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1736, while Ketelbey was serving as treasurer of the inn. 
Ketelbey died on 5 December 1744 at Lamb's Building, in the Middle Temple, and was buried at Bitterley, Shropshire. As he had outlived his son-in-law, 'Mr Serjeant Ketelbey', who had died in June 1743, he was succeeded in his estate by his grandson. 


@@@@@


doc= 51008


Munster, saints of (act. c.450-c.700), were holy figures whose cults centred on the medieval province of Munster (modern counties Clare, Limerick, Tipperary, Waterford, Cork, and Kerry), including Osraige (Ossory, modern co. Kilkenny). While having an overall provincial kingship, Munster was divided into several geographical-political regions. This is reflected in the cults of its saints. 
The main dynastic power in Munster up to the end of the tenth century was that of the Eoganachta. The east of the province was dominated by Eoganacht Chaisil while the west formed the distinctive region of Iarmumu (west Munster) under the rival Eoganacht Locha Lein. With the rise of the Dal Cais (from east Clare) in the tenth century this was overshadowed by the division of a northern Tuadmumu (Thomond) from a southern Desmumu (Desmond). Such divisions were superimposed on older patterns. Munster was inhabited by many ancient and scattered population groupings. The profusion of peoples is reflected in a profusion of minor saints and churches. This was undoubtedly encouraged by the lack of strong central authority from the Eoganacht kings. The result is a bewildering confusion of separate traditions. Finally, the eastern boundaries of the province were controlled by the powerful and semi-autonomous kingdom of Osraige. This kingdom was alienated to the Ui Neill in the second half of the ninth century but subsequently gravitated towards the adjacent province of Leinster. Unsurprisingly, its saints look towards both Munster and Leinster. Saints were drawn into this world of shifting alliances long after their deaths. They generally flourished in the sixth and seventh centuries, but their cults continued to be elaborated throughout the middle ages. After the thirteenth century there is a lacuna in the sources and the modern use of ancient cult sites, in some cases, cannot be traced back beyond the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
The most important of the widespread but disparate sources are hagiographical lives, either in Irish or Latin, or both, which are extant for many Munster saints. The Latin lives, in general, are found in the three great thirteenth- and fourteenth-century collections known as the 'Codex Salmanticensis', 'Codex Insulensis', and 'Codex Kilkenniensis'. None of them is directly dependent on the others but they often used common sources, and some of the individual lives are significantly earlier than the date of their inclusion in the collections. Furthermore, it has been argued that a group of lives in the collections, mainly emanating from north Munster and adjacent kingdoms in Leinster and Mide (Meath), can be dated to the eighth century. Certainly, some of these lives betray convincing signs of an early origin. Several Irish language lives are preserved in later medieval manuscripts such as the fifteenth-century 'Book of Lismore'. But many of the texts are known only because they were transcribed by the Franciscan Micheal O Cleirigh (Michael O'Clery) in the 1620s and 1630s. Fortunately, O Cleirigh was an accurate copyist. Nevertheless, many of the lives he transcribed date at the earliest from the thirteenth century. Even demonstrably later lives contain early strata, however. 
Some saints are mentioned only in the martyrologies and their notes. These texts are calendars, which list saints, Irish and foreign, against their appropriate feast day -- that is, the traditional day of the saint's death. The most important of the martyrologies are the martyrology of Tallaght from the first half of the ninth century and 'Felire Oengusso' from later in the same century. The latter was heavily annotated and the 'scholia' (notes) dating from the ninth through to the twelfth century contain very important material. Another significant source is the martyrology of Gorman, composed between 1166 and 1174 by Mael Muire Ua Gormain (Marianus Gorman). This martyrology is heavily dependent on the martyrology of Tallaght and helps to fill the gap in the latter between 1 November and 16 December. The most important later martyrology is the martyrology of Donegal, compiled by Micheal O Cleirigh about 1630. O Cleirigh's information is not to be dismissed lightly, since he had access to many early sources, some of which are no longer extant. 
One of the most interesting early sources for the origins of several Munster cults is the text of the so-called west Munster synod, preserved among the Laud genealogies. It may have been written during the reign of the Eoganacht Locha Lein king, Mael Duin (died 786), who is mentioned in the text, though it purports to describe events in the second half of the sixth century. It names several saints who attend a synod called by the king of Ciarraige Luachra (north Kerry). The text's enumeration of the regions where each saint wields jurisdiction is a useful pointer to the geographical distribution of the cults. 
The difficulty with source material spills over into a difficulty regarding chronology. The chronology of this shadowy period, the age of saints, is not always certain, especially as this age was, in part, a retrospective construct. The hagiography is a monument to this work, in which saints of different centuries are brought into contact with each other in the name of contemporary monastic politics. In particular, this served to justify large monastic federations known as 'paruchiae'. A saint could be associated with several churches but, in general, his burial place was at the leading church in the 'paruchia'. 
Most important saints are recorded in the monastic annals. While the annals of Ulster are contemporary from the second half of the sixth century, they have a distinct northern bias and are not always helpful for Munster saints. The first part of the Munster annals of Inisfallen was compiled about 1092, probably from documents emanating from the great monastery of Emly. Despite the relative lateness of compilation this set of annals does much to counter the northern emphasis of the annals of Ulster. Other important chronicles include 'Chronicum Scotorum', the annals of Tigernach, the annals of Clonmacnoise, and the annals of the four masters. The latter was compiled in the seventeenth century under the guidance of Micheal O Cleirigh. Like the martyrology of Donegal it contains early material, despite the late date of its compilation. 
Finally, one of the identifying characteristics of Irish hagiography is the importance of genealogy. Through genealogy a saint was often linked with powerful dynasties. Indeed, Irish saints were rarely of non-aristocratic origin. The Irish genealogies were being compiled from the seventh century, and perhaps earlier. Changes in a saintly genealogy usually represent changes in patronage and the rise and fall of dynasties. There is often some confusion over the names of the mothers of the saints; most can be taken from the tract 'On the mothers of the saints', preserved in the twelfth-century 'Book of Leinster' and later manuscripts. 
Ireland was Christianized mainly in the fifth century. Many were involved but the cult of St Patrick swallowed up the work of others. The hagiography of the Munster saints Ailbe, the elder Ciaran, Declan, and Ibar, however, centres on the important trope of pre-Patrician Christianity. All four are imagined as bishops. According to traditions elaborated in Latin lives, these saints were themselves Christian before the coming of Patrick during the fifth century (the precise date of his arrival is uncertain) and preceded him in his missionary activity in Munster. The annals, on the other hand, place these saints as either contemporary with or later than Patrick. Furthermore, pre-Patrician claims did not significantly impinge on Munster politics: the primacy of the see founded by Patrick at Armagh was accepted in Munster by the seventh century. 


The hagiographical material associated with Ailbe is quite extensive. The Latin life in 'Codex Salmanticensis' is the earliest recension, the other lives derivative. The Irish life is an abbreviated version of the Latin original. The 'Salmanticensis' life seems to be the innovator in regard to Ailbe's pre-Patrician status and his independence from Patrick, something downplayed in the other two recensions and directly contradicted by the date of his death given in the annals of Ulster. It has been argued that the original life was a relatively early production, perhaps as early as the eighth century; one commentator has suggested that it was composed about the time of the first promulgation of the Law of Ailbe in 784. This life consciously models Ailbe on Patrick, whom he at times surpasses. The picture is rather different from Tirechan's seventh-century 'Collectanea', in which Patrick ordains Ailbe. In Ailbe's life the founder of Emly is consecrated a bishop in Rome, is visited by Patrick's angel, Victor, and is acknowledged by the bishops Declan and Ibar. Patrick himself, contrary to most versions of his legend, especially that in the early tenth-century 'Vita tripartita', leaves the Munster king, Oengus mac Nad Fraich, in Ailbe's care. Emly's ambitions are fairly clear. Although the pre-Patrician motif is dominant, the saint is also associated with other traditions. Ailbe's father is named Olchu (or Olcan, or Olcnais; literally 'great hound'), his mother Sant or Sanclit. Ailbe, the son of the 'great hound' is abandoned as the offspring of illicit sex and raised by wolves, much like Romulus and Remus. In the later stratum of the Irish life of Mac Creiche, Ailbe is referred to as the warhound of 'Sliab Crot' (Slieve Grud, co. Tipperary). Ailbe is also mentioned in the context of an other-world voyage in a late eighth-century litany of pilgrim saints. It has been suggested that this was written at Lismore and is good evidence for the widespread nature of Ailbe's cult. Moreover, Ailbe's community, enjoying everlasting life on an other-world island, is encountered in the late eighth-century 'Navigatio sancti Brendani'. 
Emly itself maintained its importance right through the early middle ages. It was a literary centre and produced, for example, the late ninth-century 'Riagol Ailbi Imlecha', a monastic rule, authored retrospectively on Ailbe. The text of the west Munster synod suggests that the abbot of Emly has authority over all of Munster. Another sign of Emly's influence is the number of its abbots recorded in the annals. Flann mac Fairchellaig (died 825?) was undoubtedly the most famous. He was also abbot of Cork and Lismore. The church suffered an eclipse following the tenth- and eleventh-century rise of the Dal Cais. Marcan (died 1010), Brian Boruma's brother, became abbot of Emly and several other churches. The creation of a church at nearby Cashel was a further blow, but Emly recovered sufficiently in the twelfth century to become an episcopal see. 


Yet, there is an even older stratum to Ciaran's cult which hints at pre-seventh-century conditions. The genealogies and martyrologies point to an ancient tradition in which his father Lugna was of the Osraige while his mother Liadan was from the Corco Loigde. The latter claimed to be the first people in Ireland to receive Christianity. Despite his paternity he is raised among the Corco Loigde, a possible sign of his original affiliation. Furthermore, there is strong evidence for Corco Loigde suzerainty over Osraige in the early historic period. Indeed, Ciaran's life brings the saint and Conchraid mac Duach, one of the Corco Loigde kings of Osraige, together as allies. Another old tradition, contained in the late eighth-century litany of pilgrim saints, is that Ciaran went on a voyage to the other world. Whatever the saint's guise, however, his hagiographers do not hide the wealth and importance of Saigir. It was the burial place of the Osraige kings. The church ruins still contain some early grave slabs and the base of a high cross. Ciaran has been mistakenly identified with the Cornish saint Piran. 




While these lives give Ibar indelibly Munster associations, he was also a national figure. He is portrayed as the adviser of the Ulster saint Mo Ninne and the maternal uncle of the Leinster saint Abban moccu Corbmaic. According to the genealogies of the Loigse, Ibar baptized the sons of their early historic king, Barr. Ibar's father, Lugna, was of the Ulster Ui Echach Ulad (from modern co. Down), while his mother, named Bassar in 'On the mothers of the saints', was a member of the Desi Breg in the midlands. According to this text, Bassar was the mother of four saints including Ibar, a common but significant genealogical fiction. Clearly, Ibar was an important saint, the records of whose deeds may have been lost. Among these may have been a voyage text, for Ibar's quest is mentioned in the litany of pilgrim saints. 
Geographically and politically Iarmumu formed a discrete region within the province. Its kings were the Eoganacht Locha Lein, whose power-base was centred around modern Killarney. While the hagiographers implicitly recognized the separate entity of Iarmumu, they were explicitly concerned with linking west Munster both with the rest of the province and with Connacht to the north. Furthermore, the Eoganacht Locha Lein had influence over the old kingdoms of Corco Duibne (Dingle peninsula) and Ciarraige Luachra. The latter, in particular, valued its independence, both from the nearby, and therefore more threatening, power of Iarmumu and from Eoganacht Chaisil. The text of the west Munster synod, which emanates from Ciarraige and may have been composed at Ardfert, details the relationship between the Ciarraige and Eoganacht. These details are mediated through saints. 


Guaire is also associated with Cummene Fota and the latter's frequent companion, the Desi holy fool and saint, 
Cult dedications are particularly rich in Corco Duibne. One of the most impressive churches on the Dingle peninsula is Kilmalkedar (Cell Maele Cetair). The church is Romanesque and an ogham stone, alphabet stone, and early cross-pillar are among the remains still 'in situ'. The church is dedicated to 
The Clare coast north of the Shannon estuary was dominated by two ancient Munster peoples: the Corco Baiscinn and the more northerly Corco Mruad. From the tenth century they were subsumed into the O Briain region of Tuadmumu. One of the major saints of Corco Mruad was 
Mac Creiche is a saint of widespread attachments but no major monastery. In the notes of the martyrology of Donegal he is tutored by Mochta of Lugbad (Louth). According to the eighth- or ninth-century Latin life of Colum mac Crimthainn, Mac Creiche was the original incumbent of Inis Celtra, which at the request of an angel he handed over to Colum. His cult stretched from Corco Mruad to Araid Tire and Muscraige Tire. He survived as a saint on a popular, as opposed to a monastic, level. 
The greatest saint of Corco Baiscinn was 
Inis Cathaig was a wealthy and successful monastery. Senan was the patron of both Corco Baiscinn and the powerful Ui Fhidgeinte (modern co. Limerick). Much of his life concerns itself with relations with the latter. The monastery reached its height before the tenth century. One of its abbots, the Ui Fhidgeinte Olchobur mac Flainn (died 796), became king of Munster. Moreover, it has been argued that the Old Irish poem praising Senan, 'Amra Senain', was composed towards the end of the ninth century by the bishop-king of Munster, Cormac mac Cuillennain (died 908). Despite a decline, owing as much to the rise of Dal Cais as to viking depredations, the monastery remained important within the Shannon region. It was recognized as an episcopal see, representing Corco Baiscinn and Ui Fhidgeinte, at the Synod of Kells-Mellifont in 1152. This status was short-lived but Inis Cathaig retained rights over churches on both banks of the Shannon estuary. A fourteenth-century text, 'Morbuile Senain', provides a valuable and rare insight into the development of a cult during this era. The text is a list of Senan's miraculous interventions in contemporary affairs. As might be expected during this period, the O Briain lords of Thomond are prominent beneficiaries of the saint. Moreover, the text lists several churches in Clare owing allegiance to Inis Cathaig. A poem, following the prose account, brings Senan into contact with most major Irish saints. The medieval remains on Scattery Island are impressive, including the highest round tower in Ireland. The cult of Senan outlived Inis Cathaig, and is still of considerable importance in co. Clare. 
Inis Cathaig was also a famous burial-ground. Senan was not the only saint supposedly buried there. Another was 
The most westerly of the great Munster monastic sites was the church and burial site of 
In Irish tradition Enda is known as an 'athlaech', a former layman. His life claims that he was converted from warfare to religious life through his saintly sister Faenche. According to the Middle Irish notes to 'Felire Oengusso', another of his sisters, Cairech, founded the church of Cluain Bairenn (Clonburren) in Ui Maine (south-east Galway). Enda's religious education is not completely entrusted to a woman, however. His life also brings him into contact with a teacher of saints, Mo Nennus (Maucennus, Mugint, Mo-Nennius), at 'Rosnat', a British monastery identified, often though uncertainly, with Whithorn. 
Enda's successor at Aran, and companion in the life, was Pupu (Pupeus, Pubeus). According to the notes in 'Felire Oengusso' and a poem in the genealogies of the saints, Pupu was identical with Nem moccu Birn (died 655), a supposed brother of Ciaran of Saigir, commemorated in Tallaght on 14 June. His name may preserve the memory that Aran had been under Corco Loigde control at some early stage, as had Osraige, Ciaran's land. 
The monastic settlement suffered a decline. The exposed position of the Aran Islands on the Atlantic made them and their religious communities an easy prey for vikings. During post-Norman times they were caught between the rival Ui Briain and Ui Flaithbertaig, and Aran's monasteries and churches fell into ruin. 
Mid-Munster was dominated by the Ui Fhidgeinte in present-day co. Limerick, the Eoganacht Aine, Eoganacht Airthir Chliach, and Eoganacht Chaisil. Eoganacht traditions tended to be centred on the pre-Patrician saint Ailbe. The Ui Fhidgeinte, however, also claimed to be Eoganacht, although their artificial grafting onto the main Eoganacht stem is an obvious enough fiction. The Ui Fhidgeinte were broken into two major branches, the Ui Chonaill Gabra in west Limerick and the Ui Chairpri in east Limerick. To the north of Ui Fhidgeinte, Tuadmumu was subject to the rising power of Dal Cais. Close neighbours, the Ui Fhidgeinte were the more powerful of the two until the dramatic surge in Dal Cais power towards the end of the tenth century. 


Despite this apparently straightforward link between saint and dynasty, there is strong evidence that Ite was originally the patron of the Corco Oche, the weaker neighbours of the Ui Chonaill. Killeedy was situated at the foot of Sliab Luachra, which formed the natural southern boundary of Ui Chonaill, an area inhabited by the Corco Oche. The annals of Ulster under the year 552 record the battle of Cuilen won by the Ui Chonaill Gabra over the Corco Oche through the prayers of Ite. Yet, in a probably eighth-century account of a battle (probably the same although it is called the battle of Meinde) the Corco Oche are the victors over the Ui Chonaill, through the intercession of Ite. The difference between the two accounts represents the displacement of the Corco Oche by the Ui Chonaill, and the latter's absorption of the saint's cult. This is completed in the life's version of the battle, in which the Ui Chonaill are the foster people of Ite and she their fosterer. Her support for them in battle, at this stage represented as a struggle against the hosts of Iarmumu, is an extension of this role. Ite's status as foster mother gained her national recognition. She was imagined as the fosterer of the saints Brendan, Cummene Fota, and Mo Choemoc. Her maternal characteristics are best celebrated in the Old Irish poem 'Isucan'. The image of Ite, suckling the infant Jesus, fits in particularly well with the personality ascribed to her by the hagiographers. 
One of the odder aspects of Ite's cult is that while she founded a religious house for women, it seems to have passed at a fairly early date into male hands. Several of the abbots are recorded in the annals of the four masters. Ite may have been a second Brigit, but the women of her church did not emulate the success of the abbesses of Kildare. The monastery flourished, but was plundered several times by the vikings. It went into decline following the heavy Norman settlement of Limerick. A Romanesque church can still be seen on the site of the medieval monastery. 
The church of 


The heyday of Ui Fhidgeinte passed with the tenth century, when their Dal Cais neighbours rose to be the dominant power in Munster. The Dal Cais leader Brian Boruma became king not only of the province, but of the country. The chief church of Dal Cais was Killaloe (Cell Da Lua). Little is known of its founder Mo Lua (Da Lua); there is an isolated anecdote in the eighth-century life of Cainnech. More important was 
Killaloe rose at the expense of the rival Eoganacht monastery of Emly. That monastery and Ailbe, its patron, are denigrated in the life of Flannan. Ailbe is described as a demon rather than a saint. Killaloe was dominated by members of the Dal Cais royal dynasty. The first abbot to be mentioned in the annals, Scandlan mac Taidc (died 991), was succeeded by Brian Boruma's brother, Marcan. The latter took over the abbacy at Inis Celtra, Emly, and Terryglass, a clear sign of O Briain ambitions. Killaloe became the see of the O Briain diocese of the same name in the twelfth century. Flannan is an instructive example of the type of political motivations that could underlie a saint's cult, motivations which are often obscure in the earlier and more fragmentary material. 
The south coast of Munster was dominated by the Corco Loigde (west Cork), Eoganacht Raithlind (south Cork), Ui Liathain (east Cork), and Desi Muman. The Corco Loigde were among the most ancient inhabitants of the province, and seem to have preserved some of the oldest hagiographical traditions. Coastal trade was important in the region. This was extended by the growth of viking Cork as the most significant maritime focus in south Munster. The lands of Muscraige Mittine (mid-Cork) and Fir Maige Fene (mid-Cork, around Fermoy) lay further inland. The Muscraige seem to have originated as allies of the Eoganacht in early historic times. Fir Maige Fene, on the contrary, had many anti-Eoganacht associations. 
The Corco Loigde successfully maintained an honoured status 'vis-a-vis' their powerful Eoganacht neighbours during the early medieval period. Their major church was the foundation of 
One of the largest monasteries in the region, Cork (Corcach), lay east of Ros Ailithir and in the centre of Eoganacht Raithlind power. Its patron, bishop, and founder was 
The monastery flourished during the early medieval period, and claimed a large 'paruchia' under its hereditary Ui Shelbaig abbots. In Findbarr's Latin life Cork claims jurisdiction over Ros Ailithir, through the simple device of portraying Findbarr as Fachtna's teacher. Furthermore, the saint dies in neighbouring Cloyne, where he is clearly treated as having jurisdiction, but his body is brought back to be buried in Cork. 
The monastery flourished even after the creation of the viking town of Cork. Following the rise of Dal Cais and decline of Emly it became one of the principal churches of the Eoganacht. An attempted Dal Cais take-over was signalled by the intrusion of three Dal Cais abbots into the monastery in the second half of the eleventh century and first half of the twelfth. Cork, however, recovered and was recognized as an independent see in the synods of the twelfth century. 
Moin Mor (Bairnech, Baile Mhuirne, Ballyvourney), the church and nunnery of 
The great monastery of Cloyne (Cluain Uama) was located in the kingdom of Ui Liathain. Its patron and founder was 
The Fir Maige Fene were a prominent south Munster people. The most important church in their kingdom was Bri Gobann (Brigown parish in Mitchelstown). This was founded by 
Another important saint of the region was 


The real ecclesiastical tensions that are often subsumed into the glories of the age of saints are apparent in the career of 
Munster's northern and eastern boundaries were to prove fluid throughout the early medieval period. Muscraige Tire (north Tipperary), Ele (Tipperary), and Osraige bordered on Leinster, and Osraige was successfully to claim Leinster status in the ninth century. The lands of this region were dotted with monastic foundations large and small. The contested nature of Osraige politics, in particular, seems to have stimulated much intellectual activity. It is no surprise, then, that the lives of these major saints should look, Janus-like, two ways. The saints inhabited a borderland between the conflicting claims of Munster and Leinster. 
The monastery of Terryglass (Tir Da Glass), which lay very close to the border of Munster in Muscraige Tire, was one of the wealthiest churches in the midlands. Its founder, 
Colum's cult was promoted by the subsequent success of Terryglass. The monastery controlled a large 'paruchia', including Clonenagh and Inis Celtra. It had good relations with Tallaght and the Celi De reform movement in the ninth century. It also enjoyed similar relations with Lorrha, and Kildare, the chief church in Leinster. During the eleventh century it came under the influence of Dal Cais. Brian Boruma's brother Marcan became abbot of Terryglass and Clonenagh. Terryglass was noted for its literary production, the most notable achievement of which was the great twelfth-century codex known as the 'Book of Leinster'. Despite its illustrious history, the monastery suffered a precipitous decline in the latter half of the twelfth century and effectively vanished from the clerical scene. Its jurisdiction was passed to Lorrha. 
The large monastery of Lorrha (Lothra) lay only a few miles north of Terryglass in Muscraige Tire. Its founder was 
Ruadan's most famous association, however, was with the cursing of Tara during the reign of the Ui Neill king, Diarmait mac Cerbaill (died 565). This legend makes its appearance in saga and hagiography, although none of the accounts are later than the eleventh century. In these, Diarmait outrages Ruadan by violating Lorrha's right of sanctuary. In retaliation Ruadan, with a band of fellow saints, fasts against Diarmait and curses Tara before gaining satisfaction. Since this same king was so admired by Adomnan, it has been suggested that the story arose as Munster propaganda against the Ui Neill. This interpretation appears in the 'Book of Rights', which probably dates from the reign of Muirchertach Ua Briain (died 1119), the most powerful monarch of his day. Ruadan's reputation became fixed: an eleventh- or twelfth-century poem on the saints of Ireland notes that he loved cursing. The church at Lorrha flourished throughout the early middle ages. In the twelfth century it adopted the rule of the canons regular. The bases of two high crosses survive on the site of the ancient monastery, the crosses themselves having been destroyed during the Cromwellian invasion. 






There are several recensions of Mo Lua's life. The oldest, contained in 'Codex Salmanticensis', may date from as early as the eighth century. Even at this early stage the Corco Oche element of the cult is played down. The Corco Oche lose their independent character, being identified as part of Ui Fhidgeinte, on the advice of whose king Mo Lua is said to have founded his monastery. Otherwise, his career follows the normal route of pupillage under Comgall of Bangor and, for good measure, Finnian of Clonard, after which he follows in his contemporaries' footsteps by going to Rome. There is a notable Leinster element in the life. Besides Cronan of Roscrea, most of Mo Lua's associates are from Leinster, including the great St Maedoc. This reflects the border nature of Clonfertmulloe which lay almost exactly between Osraige, Ele, and the Leinster kingdom of Loigsi. It was sited near the Slieve Bloom mountains on one of the main passes into Munster, and was supposedly founded on land donated by the king of Loigsi. The conflict between Munster and Leinster is highlighted after Mo Lua's death at the unidentified 'Tuaim Domnich'. Drawing on the familiar example of Muirchu's life of Patrick, the hagiographer relates that the people of Munster and Leinster contended for the saint's body, which, however, made its way miraculously to Clonfertmulloe, where it was buried. Even in death he mediated between the two provinces. Indeed, Clonfertmulloe thrived on its strategic position. Cummene's seventh-century letter to Segene refers to the abbot of Clonfertmulloe as an authority. The change in secular and ecclesiastical politics in the twelfth century and the upheaval of the Norman invasion weakened the monastery, and little now remains of it. 


Cainnech's earliest hagiographer is intent on making his saint as well travelled and illustrious as possible. Cainnech journeys in Britain and in Italy as well as throughout Ireland. Surprisingly little of the life takes place in Cainnech's chief foundation of Aghaboe, where he was buried, and rather more on the island in Lough Cre, near Roscrea, a place of supernatural manifestations. Aghaboe became the most important church in Osraige, eclipsing even Saigir. It declined in the twelfth century, however, and its place as head of Cainnech's 'paruchia' was taken by Kilkenny. During the twelfth century Kilkenny became an episcopal see and eventually the stronghold of the Norman lords of Ormond. 


The Norman invasion stands as a caesura across the history of medieval Munster. The later medieval collections of lives were the work of a different type of scholar from those who animated the age of saints. The decline of the political dynasties that had underpinned the saints' cults resulted in literary stagnation. The saints survived, outside the monasteries, in popular traditions and folklore. With the final defeat of Gaelic Ireland in the seventeenth century holy wells replaced literary lives and great monasteries as the focus for the saints. 


@@@@@


doc= 51009


Leinster, saints of (act. c.550-c.800), were holy men whose cults are located in south-eastern Ireland. 'Leinster' here stands as the early medieval counterpart to the modern counties of Carlow, Dublin, Kildare, Kilkenny, Laois, Wexford, and Wicklow. Although all or most of counties Meath, Westmeath, Longford, Offaly, and Louth were at times considered part of Leinster, their saints are covered separately in this work ['see 'Meath, saints of]. 


The earliest biographical material for Coemgen probably dates from some two centuries after the saint's lifetime. There are two extant lives in Latin and three in Irish, dating in their present form to between the twelfth and the seventeenth or eighteenth centuries. The latest in date is like a pilgrim's guide to Glendalough. The earliest life upon which some of this extant material was based may date to approximately 800. Coemgen is credited with the foundation of a number of churches in the counties of Wicklow, Dublin, and Kildare. His biographers bring him into contact with twenty ecclesiastical figures and in his genealogy his mother and sisters are the mothers of other saints. Much of this information arose as a means of expressing the relationship between his principal church of Glendalough and churches dependent upon it or in alliance with it. In 790 Coemgen's relics were taken on circuit along with those of Mochua of Clondalkin (a dependent church). Glendalough became the seat of a diocese, its most famous abbot being St Laurence O'Toole (Lorcan Ua Tuathail). 


By the twelfth century, the centre of Maedoc's cult had shifted from Leinster to Drumlane (co. Cavan, in the diocese of Kilmore). The lives of Maedoc deriving from this area are written in Irish and provide important evidence for the relationship between the church and lay society in the Ui Ruairc territory of Breifne. In the fifteenth century the centre of Maedoc's cult moved again, for political reasons, to Rossinver in what is now co. Leitrim. 


An alternative origin for the saint is given by Adomnan, who reports in his life of Columba that one of his informants was a disciple of Finten. Adomnan says that Finten was the son of Tailchan, of the people of 'moccu Moie'. He says that Finten was devoted to studies of divine wisdom and wished to go to Iona on pilgrimage. While he was discussing the matter with a priest of his own people, Colum Crag, monks arrived announcing the death of Columba a few days earlier, on Sunday 9 June 597. Finten sailed to Iona and asked Columba's successor Baithene if he could be admitted as a monk. Baithene replied that Columba had prophetically revealed to him that Finten was destined to found his own monastery. He was sent back to construct his own religious house in south Leinster. 
Much of Finten's hagiography is garbled, but appears to present him as an arch conservative in Irish religious practice. A letter from Cummian to Abbot Segene of Iona written 'c'.633 describes how a 'whited wall' (Latin 'paries dealbatus') arose and argued for the old method of Easter dating, after it was thought that agreement had been reached on a new method at a synod held in 629 or 630 at Mag Lena, near Durrow. The 'whited wall' seems to represent Finten: he appears in the same guise in a record of a synod at Mag nAilbe (on the River Barrow), where he was opposed by Mo Laisse of Leighlin. 


The terms in which the manner of life at Clonenagh is described suggest that the arguments advanced by Cainnech may have resembled those put forward by Gildas a generation earlier against the more extreme ascetics of his day. Similarly, the description of the mode of life at Clonenagh, although very brief, resembles that given by Rhigyfarch in his life of St David, probably using an earlier source: of the two marks of extreme asceticism in Rhigyfarch's account -- renunciation of any use of the plough in agriculture and renunciation of any drink apart from water -- the first recurs in the life of Fintan. Fintan's separation from the world is portrayed in the life as virtually complete, and it is clear that this is the rhetorical stance of the hagiographer, though it may also have been the aspiration of the saint. Born in the desert, Fintan was almost immediately handed over to a priest to be fostered and educated; when he founded his monastery, the life makes no mention of any royal participation; kings are mentioned only once -- wicked kings who plundered the home of the dead father of one of his monks. The only appearance of the ordinary laity, once Fintan has been born, is as perpetrators of homicide, as the subjects of miracles, or as possible candidates for the monastic life. Fintan's feast day is given in the martyrologies of Tallaght and Oengus as 17 February; this may explain why his obit is given as the first entry under 603 in the annals of Ulster; but alternatively, since the source of the early annals was Iona, this may reflect the high esteem in which he was held by the Columban community. 
A somewhat later figure was 
The evidence for Mael Ruain may be divided into ninth-century texts written by his disciples and their allies, and other texts of much less certain date such as 'The Unity of Mael Ruain', a list of his monastic associates preserved in a twelfth-century manuscript. The most important ninth-century text is that called by modern scholars 'The monastery of Tallaght'. This is a collection of the sayings and practices of Mael Ruain and others, such as Mael Dithruib, 'Devotee of a Desert', anchorite of Terryglass, who died in 841. Some of its material also occurs in another collection of such sayings called 'The rule of the Celi De'. The relationship between the collections has not yet been fully elucidated, but it is clear that they owe much to the model offered by collections of the teachings of the monks of the Egyptian desert, notably a text well-known in Ireland, the 'Conferences' of John Cassian. Historians have seen Mael Ruain as the principal leader of a movement aiming at an ascetic revival within Irish monasticism in opposition to current laxity. They have also seen him and his allies as the originators of the 'culdees' or Celi De, who by the twelfth century were widespread in Scotland as well as in Ireland. It remains uncertain how far this picture will stand up to critical examination. It has also been claimed that the Celi De were instrumental in promoting vernacular religious literature, and it has been suggested that this Irish revival of the late eighth and early ninth centuries may owe something to monastic reform under Charlemagne. 


@@@@@


doc= 51010


Meath, saints of (act. c.400-c.900), holy men and women who were subjects of a cult within the lands of the southern Ui Neill, flourished mainly between the fifth century and the early seventh. The area (the early medieval Brega, Mide, and Tethbae) is approximately represented by the modern counties of Meath, Westmeath, the part of the old co. Dublin north of the Liffey (more recently co. Fingal and the northern part of Dublin itself), co. Longford, and parts of co. Offaly and co. Louth. In the case of saints who had churches both within and without the lands of the southern Ui Neill, only those who were probably buried within the area are included. The saints can be divided into three groups: early saints, generally associated, often falsely, with St Patrick; those saints who, in the mid- and late sixth century, were the founders of the principal monastic churches of the area; and, finally, the smaller group of seventh-century and later saints. The first group is known from the Patrician material, chiefly Tirechan's 'Collectanea' in the late seventh century and the tripartite life of St Patrick in the tenth; the main saints of the second group are the subject of lives and are all recorded in the ninth-century martyrologies; those in the third group are usually known only from the martyrologies and the annals (for more on these sources, 'see 'Munster, saints of). 
The evidence for the early saints is predominantly from the Patrician texts, beginning with Tirechan's 'Collectanea', written in the last quarter of the seventh century, but 




Cairnech was already, however, a saint of some importance in Ireland by the ninth century. In the later, probably ninth-century, prologue to the 'Senchas Mar', the principal early Irish law book, it was claimed that a panel of bishops, poets, and lawyers compiled the book; the three bishops were Patrick, his successor, Benen, and Cairnech. The origins of Cairnech's role as lawgiver may perhaps lie in local ecclesiastical rivalries. At much the same period, another Patrician text, the tripartite life, claimed that 
Both Dulane and Slane lay within the immediate territories of the Ui Neill rulers of Brega (the eastern part of modern Meath), namely Sil nAeda Slaine. Duleek, however, the church of 
The second major church of the Ciannacht Breg was Monasterboice (Mainister Buite), the monastery of 
The third principal church of Ciannacht Breg was Lusk, north-east of Dublin, said to be the episcopal see of 
The cults of the Ciannacht saints may sometimes, as in the case of Lusk, have gained in significance from the decline of local dynasties. They offer a striking contrast with the cults of the saints associated with churches closer to the centres of royal power among the southern Ui Neill themselves. It is broadly true of the midlands that the greatest churches were to be found in the minor kingdoms. The exception is Kells, and that church was not founded until the early ninth century, after the first viking attacks on Iona. The principal 'seat of kingship' among the rulers of southern Brega in the eighth and ninth centuries, one of whom suffered the unfortunate riding accident on 6 September 800, was the crannog -- or lake-fort -- of Lagore. Three churches were ringed around this royal seat: the old church of Domnach Sechnaill (Dunshaughlin), 2 miles to the west; Treoit (Trevet), just over 2 miles to the north-west; and Cell Fhoibrig (Kilbrew), just over 2 miles to the north-east. None of these churches was insignificant: bishops and scholars are recorded for Trevet in the eighth century and for Kilbrew in the ninth, while an obit of an abbot of Domnach Sechnaill is recorded in 833. Yet their cults were relatively weak: no saint was attributed to Cell Fhoibrig in the martyrologies; 
Sechnall may be contrasted with 
The most important churches of the southern Ui Neill were, however, strung out along their southern frontier, from Finglas just north of Dublin to Clonmacnoise on the Shannon. Finglas had three saints in the martyrology of Tallaght, of whom one is of historical importance, 
Clonard lay on the very frontier between Leinster and Mide. Indeed, it may have belonged more to Leinster in the lifetime of its founder, 
It has been argued that the Latin lives of Finnian go back to an Anglo-Norman text, whereas the two, closely related, Irish lives contain material of ninth-century date. The lost Irish life that was the parent of the two surviving versions was apparently written by a Leinsterman and thus stresses the saint's early connections with that province. A corollary of the view that Clonard was originally a Leinster house is that the annal entry recording the violent imposition of his authority over the monastery in 775 by Donnchad mac Domnaill, southern Ui Neill king of Tara, caused a decisive change of allegiance: from then on Clonard looked to the Cland Cholmain kings of Mide. Yet Clonard was already by 775 a house of wide connections and considerable wealth. When, in 788, 'Dub da Bairenn, abbot of Clonard, visited the 'paruchia' of the land of Munster' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 788), he appears to have been going on a visit round the churches and other property subject to Clonard in Munster. The tripartite life of Patrick mentions a church claimed by Armagh being exchanged by Clonard for other churches belonging to Clonmacnoise: by the ninth century there was a market in minor churches and the great monasteries such as Clonard might seek to rationalize their holdings. In the mid-ninth century, during the reign as king of Tara of the Cland Cholmain king Mael Sechnaill mac Maele Ruanaid, Clonard seems to have occupied a position as head of the churches of Meath on a level with the pre-eminence of Armagh among the churches of the north, the kingdoms subject to Cenel nEogain. At the period, therefore, when the earliest materials detected within the Irish lives may have been written -- materials concerned especially with the monastery's property interests in Leinster -- Clonard was already firmly part of the Cland Cholmain kingdom of Mide. Just as Dub da Bairenn's 788 visit to Munster was probably designed to protect the material interests of Clonard in that province, so the hypothetical ninth-century hagiographical material may have played a role in protecting Clonard's rights in Leinster. 
The hagiography of Clonard contains two further significant themes: the first is the reputation of Finnian as the teacher of many of the most famous Irish saints, including Brendan of Clonfert ['see under 'Connacht, saints of], Brendan of Birr ['see below'], and Columba of Iona. In the last case, at least, there is evidence to suggest that the claim is false, but it does imply the continuing intellectual aspirations of Clonard. If the later ascription of the scholar Aileran (died 665) to Clonard were correct, it would show that the monastery was already a centre of scholarship in the seventh century. The other major theme is the link between Finnian and the Welsh saint Cadog of Llancarfan in Glamorgan. The latter's importance for the Irish is suggested by the early life of St Cainnech, where he is mentioned as a teacher of the saint. The late eleventh-century Welsh life of St Cadog itself appeals to the authority of the scholars of Clonard. 
Immediately to the west of Clonard, the borderlands between Leinster and Meath were an area in which the cult of St Brigit of Kildare was solidly entrenched, both in the north-western part of the medieval Leinster kingdom of Ui Fhailgi and in the neighbouring kingdom of Fir Thulach subject to the Ui Neill. Beyond this cross-frontier extension of the cult of Brigit, further south-west, came two kingdoms dotted with major churches, Cenel Fiachach and Delbnae Bethra. Cenel Fiachach was a once-powerful branch of the Ui Neill, victim of more successful cousins, while Delbnae Bethra, in the low-lying lands of the River Clodiagh, was a lowly client kingdom. Their fate is demonstrated by the later name of much of the kingdom of Cenel Fiachach, Tir Cell or Fir Chell, 'the land [or men] of churches'. 
The great saint of Cenel Fiachach was 
Durrow was probably the burial place of 
Beyond Durrow, a few miles further south-west, lay Lynally (Lann Elo), the monastery of 
There is good manuscript evidence in favour of Colman Elo's authorship of the 'Apgitir Chrabaid' ('Alphabet of piety'), a vernacular text in verse and prose, both an exceptionally polished piece of writing and one of the central texts within the early Irish tradition of spiritual and moral teaching. If the text is indeed by Colman Elo, he would appear to have deliberately avoided the archaisms of language found in early legal texts, while at the same time employing most of the stylistic artifices, other than archaism, to be found in the laws. It has also been suggested that he may have been the author of the Latin hymn on St Patrick ascribed to Secundinus. 
Further south-west, on the southern boundary of the kingdom of Cenel Fiachach, was Kinnitty (Cenn Etig), the church of 
A distance of 8 miles west of Kinnitty is Birr, the site of the church of 
North of Birr and Kinnitty lay the three major monasteries of Delbnae Bethra: Rahan, Lemanaghan, and Clonmacnoise. The principal saint of Rahan, Mo Chutu ['see under 'Munster, saints of], died at his Munster monastery of Lismore on 14 May 637, having the previous year been expelled from Rahan on account of his paschal views. He was, however, largely to displace an earlier saint, 


None of the three Latin and one Irish lives of Ciaran is early. They fall into three main sections: first comes the saint's origins and education; then his period at Inis Aingin (Hare Island at the southern end of Lough Ree); and finally his foundation of Clonmacnoise and, only one year later, his death. The first section was mainly designed to buttress alliances between Clonmacnoise and other great churches; Ciaran was thus among the pupils of Enda of Aran and Finnian of Clonard. But the version edited by Charles Plummer, a thirteenth-century reworking of older materials, also reveals a political allegiance. Ciaran's father, initially working as a wright in Meath, left that province for Connacht because of the heavy taxes imposed by a king of Tara, Ainmire mac Setnai. This early tax exile then established himself in Mag nAi, where Ciaran was born. Ainmire, of Cenel Conaill in the north, was not king of Tara until well after Ciaran's death. He may have been chosen as a king associated both with Columba of Iona and Durrow, and therefore with the new monastery of Columba at Kells, to make tactfully coded suggestions to Cland Cholmain, the royal dynasty of Meath. The implication is, presumably, that the kings of Meath (Cland Cholmain) should forbear to impose heavy taxes, or perhaps taxes at all, on Clonmacnoise. The second section is centred on Inis Aingin, his first monastery, situated in Lough Ree (much favoured by monastic founders) and thus between Connacht and Meath. Finally, in the third section, with the foundation of Clonmacnoise, the saint returned to Meath from where his father had been driven by the tax collector. 
Plummer rightly noted the sentiments expressed by Ciaran before death as unusual for Irish saints. Many of the latter saw their own sanctity from afar, with angels anxious to escort them to heaven. Not so Ciaran for whom death was a subject of anxiety about the unknown and trepidation at the judgment of God. It is possible, as Plummer guessed, that this is a fragment of early, unformulaic material which survived into the late medieval text. Much of the matter in the lives, however, had more to do with the history of Clonmacnoise than with Ciaran; in placing the saint's birth in Mag nAi, they were probably seeking to align the monastery with the dominant dynasty of Connacht from the eighth century, the Ui Briuin Ai. 
Ciaran's first foundation, Inis Aingin, remained within the jurisdiction of Clonmacnoise to judge by an annal entry recording the profanation and insulting of the island in 899, where a synod was being held, headed by 
As the most important churches of the midlands were in the client kingdoms to the south of the main lands held by Cland Cholmain, so the church of 
The saint of Lemanaghan, 
Although it is a general rule that the more important churches of Meath lay on its borders, a partial exception is the monastery of Fore, to the north-east of Lough Leane in Westmeath, and within a client kingdom close to the centre of power of the Cland Cholmain kings. Fore (Fobar) was the monastery of 
A saint similarly closely identified with a client people was 
The only important female saint within the lands of the southern Ui Neill, and also one of the later saints to be given a cult, was 
The broad lines of her career as a nun are set out in the life. Samthann was given to a man in marriage by her foster father, put up stern resistance, and thus compelled him to accept that she should be betrothed to God. She thereupon entered the monastery of 'Airnaide' (perhaps the Urney near Lifford, modern co. Donegal, or the Urney of co. Cavan), where she was in charge of the material sustenance of the monastery. From there she was summoned by Funech to succeed her at Cluain Bronaig. Perhaps the most striking point made by the life is that Niall mac Fergaile (Niall Frossach), king of Tara (died 778), was so attached to her memory that he enshrined her staff. Niall was from Cenel nEogain, while Cluain Bronaig was within a client kingdom of Cland Cholmain of Mide. It suggests that a northern Ui Neill king of Tara might extend his power in the midlands, not his normal sphere of influence, by patronage of churches. 


@@@@@


doc= 51011


Ulster, saints of (act. c.400-c.650), were the foci of religious life in the north of Ireland. 'Ulster' is here an early medieval counterpart to the province of Ulster (consisting of the nine modern counties of Antrim, Down, Donegal, Londonderry, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, and Armagh); a tenth county, Louth, now part of Leinster, was part of Ulster until the mid-eighth century. A loss of territory, partly beyond the reach of historical record but recent enough to have left traces, left the province of Ulster confined to the lands east of the River Bann. The eastern part of co. Londonderry was lost in the late sixth century, most of co. Louth not until the battle of Faughart in 735. The lands said to have been lost to the Ulstermen were principally the kingdoms of the Airgialla; these covered most of the central counties of Londonderry, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Monaghan, and Armagh. The far north-west, Donegal, and parts of Londonderry and Tyrone, belonged to the two great northern branches of the Ui Neill, Cenel Conaill and Cenel nEogain, claiming descent from Conall and Eogan, two sons of Niall Noigiallach. The wider political context of northern saints' cults in the pre-viking period was, therefore, a long-term shift in power from the Ulstermen to the Ui Neill. 
The sources are relatively good. Apart from texts which cover the whole of Ireland, such as the ninth-century martyrologies of Tallaght and Oengus the Culdee, the Patrician material, especially Tirechan's 'Collectanea' from the late seventh century and the tripartite life from 'c'.900, reveals the ambitions of the community of Patrick in the northern half of Ireland. Patrick's principal church of Armagh and supposed burial church of Saul were situated in the lands of the Airgialla and the Ulstermen respectively. A section of the fourteenth-century 'Codex Salmanticensis' contains a fragment of a legendary of northern saints -- brief lives in the order of the saints' feast days in the calendar. The surviving lives come from August and the beginning of September. If the entire text had been preserved, there would have been exceptionally good information on northern saints. The textual history of this legendary has not been fully investigated; the standard view is that it consists of lives abbreviated not long before the date of the manuscript, using earlier texts of unknown and probably different dates. 
There is a serious possibility that some lives in the legendary preserve information from the eighth century. An example is Inis Cain Dega (Inishkeen on the border of counties Monaghan and Louth), the church of 
In what is now counties Antrim and Down, there were three main early political groups of kingdoms: the Cruithni of south and west Antrim and west Down; the Dal Fiatach of East Down; and the Dal Riata of north-east Antrim, east of the River Bush and north of Glenarm. The political hopes of Dal Riata lay increasingly in Argyll and elsewhere in Scotland, rather than in their Irish homeland -- a shift of power which had a harmful effect on their main Irish church at Armoy (Airther Maige) and on the cult of its saint, 
From the mid-seventh century the heavyweight powers were a branch of the Cruithni, Dal nAraidi, whose oldest lands lay near Antrim Town, and Dal Fiatach, around Downpatrick. The most powerful churches in local politics were, among the Cruithni, Connor (Conderi, Condaire), and, among Dal Fiatach, Nendrum (Noendruimm). A principal saint of the Cruithni was thus 
Local background to the story emerges from the dossier of another Ulster saint, 
As for Mo Choe of Nendrum, the tripartite life has a story suggesting an alliance between the community of Patrick and Nendrum, concealing the truth that Nendrum was, in reality, a greater church by far than Saul. The genealogies of the saints connect Mo Choe with Dal mBuain through his mother, Bronach, daughter of Miliucc maccu Buain. Both Nendrum and Connor were episcopal churches, and their bishops were among the leading churchmen from the northern half of Ireland to whom the pope-elect John wrote in 640. 
Influential in a rather different mode were two churches situated close to each other but belonging to different kingdoms: Bangor (Bennchor) and Movilla (Mag mBili). Both had strong intellectual traditions, while Bangor, and probably also Movilla, had wide links with other major monasteries, such as Iona. Admittedly the founder of Bangor, 
The monastery of Movilla (Mag mBili) was founded by 
Two earlier pieces of evidence lend further weight to these suspicions. First, Findbarr's name in his obit (very probably from the Iona annals) is 'Vinnianus' 'episcopus'. The initial V-rather than F-suggests a Briton rather than an Irishman; it also terms him 'son of a descendant of Fiatach', but this designation was probably added later to the original obit (it involves a reinterpretation of 'maccu' as 'macc ui'). Secondly, Adomnan gives the teacher of Columba of Iona three name forms, Findbarr, Finnio, and Vinnianus, using the Irish full name, an Irish pet name, and a Latin version of a British name. Unless an unnecessary emendation is made to Adomnan's text, moreover, this Findbarr was still alive as an old man in 563, which means that he cannot be identified with Finnian mac Findloga, or Finnian of Clonard ['see under 'Meath, saints of], who died of the great plague in 549 or 551. This casts doubt on the claim advanced in the life of Finnian of Clonard that Columba had been his pupil. The particular interest of the question lies partly in the indirect light the learning of the pupil, Columba, stressed by Dallan Forgaill's 'Amra Choluim Chille', may throw on the learning of the teacher. Columbanus refers in one of his letters to correspondence between Vennianus (a variant of Vinnianus) and Gildas. Since Columbanus's time at Bangor, a few miles north of Movilla, probably overlapped with the last years of Findbarr's life, it is plausible to suppose that Gildas's correspondent was the saint of Movilla. A further strong possibility is that Findbarr was the Vinnian who composed a penitential deriving from the British tradition of penitentials (exemplified by Gildas's penitential) and subsequently used by Columbanus. The upshot, then, is that Findbarr was probably British; that his learning was derived partly from Britain and was reflected in enduring British contacts; that he was the teacher of Columba and influenced Columbanus; and, finally, that he made Movilla one of the major episcopal churches of Ulster. He was the last great British missionary in sixth-century Ireland. 
Female saints were relatively common east of the Bann but their cults were, on the whole, only of local significance. A good example is 
A quite different church and cult was that of Mo Ninne (Dar Ercae, Monenna, Modwenna) ['see 'Moninne], founder of Killevy (Cell Shleibe on the north-west slopes of Slieve Gullion in south Armagh). Her floruit was placed by her first life within the first half of the sixth century; her feast day is 6 July. Mo Ninne was said to be the principal female saint of Ireland after St Brigit, a claim to which the only possible rival was the west Munster saint, Ite ['see under 'Munster, saints of], of Killeedy, Limerick: not only is Mo Ninne's feast day in all the Irish martyrologies, but she is included in the genealogies and a life is preserved in the late fourteenth-century compilation 'Codex Salmanticensis'. A later, eleventh-century, life by Conchubranus was then the basis of a further life by Geoffrey of Burton: St Modwenna was established as the patron saint of Burton. Her cult was thus exceptionally powerful for a female saint and quite exceptional also in being extended to England. The first life, was, however, firmly anchored in the area of her birth and her principal foundation, Killevy. Moreover the political geography is early: Killevy, south-west of Newry, was treated as part of the province of Ulster, as is Mag Muirthemne, the central plain of co. Louth. Mo Ninne is presented as one of the principal saints, perhaps 'the' principal saint, of three neighbouring territories, Mag Coba (west Down), Conailli Muirthemne (around Dundalk), and Cuailnge (the Carlingford peninsula). The first life does not confine her to these territories: instead she is presented as a pilgrim who later returned home. Not surprisingly she was said to have spent some time with St Brigit, but she also travelled to the south of Leinster to become the disciple of St Ibar of Becc-Eriu (Beggerin Island on the north side of Wexford harbour). The difference, therefore, between Killevy and the churches of Bronach and Ercnat was that Killevy continued over a considerable period to sustain a full community of nuns, while the other churches were probably local pastoral centres run by a combination of one or more nuns and a priest. The nuns of Killbroney and Duneane may have been in possession of their churches, but a major part of their role was to support a priest. 
In the lands of the Airgialla stretching from Lough Foyle to the southern part of co. Monaghan, there was usually not more than one major church in each kingdom capable of sustaining the level of cult likely to produce a saint's life. So, for example, 
Mac Cairthinn of Clogher, Tigernach of Clones, and Mo Laisse of Devenish were the principal saints of south-west Tyrone and co. Monaghan. Their churches all belonged to the two kingdoms ruled by the Ui Chremthainn: Fernmag, approximately from Clones to Monaghan Town (ruled by the branch of the Ui Chremthainnz known as Ui Nad Sluaig), and the area around Clogher, ruled by the other branch, Sil nDaimini. In between their principal areas of influence, on less good land on the edge of Slieve Beagh in the north-west of co. Monaghan, was a small area whose principal saint was a nun, Damnat of Tedavnet (Tech nDamnat, 'The House of Damnat'). Mo Laisse, Mac Cairthinn, and Tigernach all received due honour in lives written in their principal churches and preserved in the late medieval collections; Damnat's memory is preserved, other than in place names, only in the martyrologies and in the genealogies of the saints. 
The feast day of 
The most interesting aspect of Mac Cairthinn's dossier is his genealogy. Since the beginning of his life is lost, this is only in the genealogies of the saints. Given the close identification of the church with the kingdom, it might have been expected that the saint would have been claimed by the royal dynasty. Yet he is said to have belonged to the Cruithni and his pedigree fails to connect him even with the major dynasty of Dal nAraidi (the Ui Choelbad). There is room for suspicion, therefore, that the genealogical connections of Mac Cairthinn are early, going back to a period before the River Bann had become a major boundary separating the Cruithni to the east from the Airgialla to the west. 
If Mac Cairthinn was the dominant saint of Sil nDaimini, 
One of the themes in the life of Tigernach (evidently written for his last and principal foundation at Clones) was his relationship with the more advantageously situated Clogher, represented as a seat of kings as well as a monastery. For the life, the dynasty of the Ui Chremthainn had not yet split into the two branches, Ui Nad Sluaig and Sil nDaimini. Tigernach, like Mac Cairthinn, was of alien paternity: his father, Coirpre, was one of the soldiers of Eochaid (Eochu), king of all the Ui Chremthainn, with his seat near Clogher, but was himself a Leinsterman (of the Ui Bairrche, as the genealogies reveal). His mother, however, Der Fraich, was Eochaid's daughter. Not surprisingly, the king had not given his daughter in marriage to an alien retainer; Der Fraich had fallen in love with Coirpre and had given herself to him. Once Tigernach was born, Coirpre acknowledged paternity and removed his son to Leinster, where Brigit met the pair and gave the child his name: 'Because he is the sister's son of many lords and kings, he will be called Tigernach [princely]' (translated from the Latin in Heist, 108). Brigit received the child from the font and thus became his godmother, an example of a custom notably rare among the Irish, who were much more concerned with fosterage than with godparenthood. Both Tigernach and Eogan of Ardstraw had, therefore, strong links with Leinster, but whereas those of Eogan were with the less powerful Dal Messin Corb and with Coemgen of Glendalough, those of Tigernach were with Brigit of Kildare and, via his father's pedigree, with the Ui Bairrche. The life has no precise details on Tigernach's Leinster connections; such as are available are in the Leinster genealogies, which place the saint among the Ui Briuin, one of 'the three free kindreds of the Ui Bairrche', but not in the royal kindred, to which, by contrast, Mo Dimmoc of Killeshin did belong. In particular, the life fails to name the first foundation of the saint, a monastery within the kingdom of the Ui Bairrche. For the life, the saint's career before his return to his mother's country is a series of journeys enhancing the status of the patron -- to 'Rosnat' in Britain for his education, where his teacher prophesied that he would found a distinguished church in the native land of his mother, to Rome for relics, and a subsequent stay in Leinster where it is the connection with Brigit that matters most. It was Brigit who not only became his godmother but also commanded him to be consecrated bishop. 
Once Tigernach had returned to the lands of the Ui Chremthainn, his mother's people, the concern of the life was to situate the saint in relation to the royal dynasty and neighbouring churches before allowing him to make any new foundations. His mother's father, the king, 'driven by carnal love' (Plummer, 'Vitae sanctorum', vol. 2, referring to the love of kinsman for kinsman, 'condalbae'), wished to give him Clogher itself and to drive out the incumbent bishop. Tigernach was properly appalled by this proposal and removed himself to an unnamed and presumably small church on a mountain nearby (possibly Slieve Beagh). There his reputation as an ascetic grew, while he performed a significant miracle in bringing back to life Doach, archbishop of Armagh; the effect was 'a perpetual alliance' between their churches. Once these arrangements had been made, Tigernach was instructed by an angel to go to the limits of the kingdom ruled by his maternal grandfather where he founded Galloon. Subsequently Tigernach was said to be moved by divine grace to grant Galloon to Comgall of Bangor and to remove himself 'not far to the east to a broader and more fertile piece of land' (ibid.). There he founded Clones, and with the foundation the life takes Tigernach first into 'a quasi-eremitic life' of contemplation, encouraged by blindness, and then to a death attended by the angels who would conduct his soul to heaven. 
If Clones was in a peripheral position within the lands of the Ui Chremthainn, Devenish (Daiminis) near Enniskillen, the church of 
When Tigernach refused to accede to the king's proposal that he should be installed in Clogher, the incumbent bishop having been expelled, he retired for a time onto a neighbouring mountain. Damnat, however, the saint of Tech nDamnat (Tedavnet), was known as Damnat of Slieve Beagh, the mountain which Tigernach is likely to have adopted as a temporary retreat. Caldavnet (on the edge of Slieve Beagh) is also named after her. The enshrined 'bachall' or staff of St Damnat was kept by the O Luain family until the last of the line sold it to George Petrie (died 1866); it is now in the National Museum of Ireland in Dublin. She has been confused with Dympna, the saint of Geel in Flanders. Damnat, however, is the best example among the Airgialla of the type of local female saint of which, east of the Bann, Bronach and Ercnat were excellent instances. As Ercnat's church was in heavily wooded land near the boundary between two kingdoms and Bronach's church served a mountain valley remote from all centres of power, there is a contrast between the great churches, Devenish to the west, Clogher to the north, Clones to the south-west, and the lesser church of Tedavnet, lying on the wetter soils of northern Fernmag towards Slieve Beagh. 
West of the Foyle and the Mourne were the lands of Cenel Conaill and Cenel nEogain, the latter expanding, especially in the course of the eighth and ninth centuries, into former Airgiallan territory. Both these dynasties were branches of the Ui Neill, and their great saint was Columba of Iona, who had churches at Derry and Drumhome and on Tory Island. Another saint of almost equal rank was Adomnan, whose church at Raphoe lay within the minor Ui Neill kingdom of Cenel nEndai. An Ui Neill saint who was not abbot of Iona was Aed mac Bricc ['see under 'Meath, saints of], whose main churches lay in the midlands, at Rahugh and Killare, but who also had a church at Slieve League. With competition of this calibre it is hardly surprising that the north-west had almost no other major saints. 
One church which appears to have been of some importance, especially to judge by the sculpture surviving on the site and by the relics of the saint, 


@@@@@


doc= 51012


Connacht, saints of (act. c.400-c.800), holy men and women believed to have been buried within the province of Connacht, flourished in the period of the fifth century to the eighth. The province ruled by the Connachta, a group of dynasties claiming to be distantly related, had few outstanding saints. The only one of the front rank was Brendan of Clonfert ['see below']; and even he came from the Altraige of west Kerry, where his other principal church, Ardfert, ministered to his own people. The importance of Connacht for hagiography lies elsewhere than among the major saints, such as those who came to be designated in the genealogies of the saints and other sources as 'the twelve apostles of Ireland'. Because of the account of St Patrick's circuit round Ireland written by Bishop Tirechan 'c'.690, there is a large amount of information on the minor saints of Connacht who were believed to be of early date. Among them are several whose cults appear to have collapsed for political reasons. Elsewhere it is usually the successful cults that yield evidence; the particular interest of Connacht is, therefore, its failed saints. Another feature of significance, however, is its group of late arrivals. Most major Irish saints belonged to the sixth century; in Connacht, however, two considerable saints, Comman of Roscommon and Garald (Gerald) of Mayo ['see below'], belonged to the eighth. 
Connacht contains the only Irish site, 'the Wood of Voclut', later Caill Fochlad in north co. Mayo, securely associated with St Patrick in his own writings. An early church, Domnach Mor, was adjacent to Caill Fochlad; moreover Bishop Tirechan was a native of the kingdom to which Caill Fochlad and Domnach Mor belonged, and a member of its dynasty, Ui Amolngada. Domnach Mor, however, was later supplanted by Killala (Cell Alaid) as the chief church of the Ui Amolngada; hence the eclipse of the cult of the saint whose bones were said by Tirechan to lie at Domnach Mor, 
Mucnoe was said by Tirechan to have been the brother of a more important saint, 


Early Connacht saints' cults were, then, liable to be eclipsed for political reasons. Only Cethech among those already mentioned found a place in the martyrologies, and only his church, Cell Garad, retained any importance in the post-viking period, as shown by the remains of its round tower. Yet his principal advantage seems to have lain in his possession of the famous well Uaran Garad. Two early saints' cults, however, from north-eastern Connacht survived better. 
The cult of 
Beoaed appears to have been among the last of the early (that is, late fifth- and early sixth-century) saints who founded early episcopal churches within local kingdoms ('tuatha'). Most major saints belonged to the next two generations. The outstanding saint of Connacht was 
Brendan belonged to the Altraige, a minor client people of the area north-west of Tralee. The 'Navigatio', probably written in the eighth century, claimed Brendan for the Eoganacht, apparently intending the Eoganacht Locha Lein, centred around Killarney, the overkings of west Munster. Later, however, as the power of the Eoganacht Locha Lein declined, Brendan was claimed by the increasingly powerful neighbours of the Altraige, Ciarraige Luachra (who gave their name to Kerry). The point of change is marked by a propaganda document known as the 'West Munster Synod' (or 'Macc Ardae's Synod'), probably written in the late eighth or early ninth century. It was designed to rally ecclesiastical support for a move to curtail yet further the powers of the king of the Eoganacht Locha Lein. In this text, Brendan is still 'moccu Altai' (that is, a member of the Altraige), as he had been about a century earlier in Adomnan's 'Vita Columbae', but he was said to swear an oath on behalf of the Ciarraige Luachra. His southern church, Ardfert, was now within the power of the Ciarraige Luachra and he had become a Ciarraige saint. The true local affiliation of Brendan was thus partially obscured, since his cult and church were of sufficient importance as to attract the rapacity of the leading kings of west Munster. The various Latin lives seem to derive from an original which ascribed Brendan to the Ciarraige Luachra. Yet his connection with the Altraige is still recorded in the Middle Irish life. Moreover the Connacht connections of the Altraige were to be repeated a century later in the person of 
The 'Navigatio' combined together Clonfert, Brendan's principal Connacht church, and Ardfert. He appears to have set out on his journey from Clonfert but to have completed it by coming to the land of his fathers, namely Ardfert and Altraige. Indeed, the text has Brendan die shortly after his return and fails to mention that he had left Ardfert, thus insinuating that he died at his southern church and not at Clonfert. Another indication of the Munster provenance of the 'Navigatio' and its Eoganacht links is an episode in which Brendan and his companions visited an island called 'the island of Ailbe's community'. Since Ailbe ['see under 'Munster, saints of] was the principal patron saint of Emly, the leading Eoganacht monastery, the inclusion of the incident flattered the honour of the Eoganachta as a whole, and not just the Eoganacht Locha Lein. 
The importance of the links with the Eoganacht Locha Lein did not, however, exclude Clonfert. Not only did the 'Navigatio' begin Brendan's journey at Clonfert, but the latter's connection with Munster endured after the saint's death. 
Whereas Brendan's 'Navigatio' is likely to have been of Munster provenance, having probably been written at Ardfert itself, his lives are more concerned with Connacht. Not only is it made quite clear that Brendan's 'place of resurrection' was Clonfert, but the saint is said to have had angelic guidance on his rule in Mag nAi, by the eighth and ninth centuries the principal kingdom of the Ui Briuin, the ruling dynasty of the Connachta. While the saint's early years were moulded by his association with his foster father, Bishop Erc, whose presumed diocese may well have been the kingdom of Ciarraige Luachra, one of the principal characters of his Connacht career was 
Cummene Fota died shortly before the great plague of 664-5. One of the particular interests of Connacht for hagiography is the unusual importance of two eighth-century saints. The first was 
Surprisingly, no life of Comman survives, whereas there is a life of the other principal eighth-century Connacht saint, the Englishman 
Connacht, like other provinces of Ireland, had its share of local cults of female saints. 


@@@@@


doc= 51013


Lekeux, Peter (1648-1723), master weaver, was born in Canterbury, Kent, the third son of John Lekeux, weaver, and Antoine Le Quien. The Lekeux were a well-established family of weavers, who had first gone to Canterbury as Huguenot refugees in the late sixteenth century. Peter served his apprenticeship in Canterbury, then moved to London, being admitted to the Weavers' Company in 1675. He married Marie (died 1723), the daughter of Pierre Marescaux (Peter Marescoe), on 7 August 1681. As Marescaux was one of the leading master weavers in the rapidly expanding London silk industry, and a man of some wealth, it was an influential alliance for Lekeux's career, and on Marescaux's death in 1710 he inherited considerable property and one third of his estate. 
Peter Lekeux was the first of three master weavers of the same name to play a leading role in the Weavers' Company, making the Lekeux family among the most important in the English silk industry for nearly 100 years. In 1692 he was a founder member of the Royal Lustring Company, a joint-stock company set up to weave lustrings, glazed silks whose production and trade was previously a French monopoly. Its success was such that in 1695 legislation was proposed seeking to break the monopoly the company had rapidly established, Lekeux petitioning the House of Lords against the bill. He was active, too, on behalf of the Weavers' Company, helping to formulate its policy and standing as its spokesman in giving parliamentary evidence. A man of wide experience both of the London industry and overseas trade, he was as confident in presenting a detailed memorandum to the House of Lords on trade with Italy and Portugal as he was in explaining to the commissioners for trades and plantations what kinds of textiles were made in the different regions of England. His evidence was particularly significant during the anti-calico campaign of 1719-20, an episode of vigorous lobbying by members of the silk and woollen industries which helped to secure legislation prohibiting the sale, use, and wear of printed calico. 
Peter Lekeux bore the title of colonel, indicating his rank between 1710 and 1722 in the Tower Hamlets regiment of the London trained bands (in which he had served as captain from 1691 to 1697, and major from 1697 to 1708). He also served as a justice of the peace, commissioner of sewers, and commissioner for land tax in the county of Middlesex. At his death in Stepney, Middlesex, in 1723 he was able to leave substantial property to his sons and grandsons, but none appears to have entered the silk trade. 






@@@@@


doc= 51014


Peter Lekeux (bap. 1684, d. 1743), one of the executors of Lekeux's will, was his nephew; he was baptized on 17 February 1684 at the French church, Threadneedle Street, London, the son of his elder brother John ('b'. 1647) and Susannah Didier (died 1719). He had been apprenticed as a silk weaver in 1703 at the late age of nineteen, made free in January 1712, and later the same year went on to the livery of the Weavers' Company. This was the start of a long association which saw him become an upper warden of the company in 1728 and be elected to the court of assistants, the governing body, in 1734. His activity on company business included fighting legislation against the wearing of materials containing precious metal, the last attempt at sumptuary legislation in England, shortly before his death in London on 20 June 1743. He bore the rank of captain in the London trained bands. Peter Lekeux had married Sarah Bloodworth on 29 July 1712 and of their four children he left a sum to his son Peter 'in consideration of the care and management of his father's business' (will, fol. 78). 


@@@@@


doc= 51015


Peter Lekeux (1716-1768) had been apprenticed to his father in February 1730. He was not made free until 1745, perhaps because he had been working exclusively for his father, but joined the livery of the Weavers' Company immediately, and rose in its ranks to reach the highest office, upper bailiff, in July 1764. Also a distinguished master weaver in the London silk industry, living and working throughout his life in or close to Spitalfields, he left all his property at his death in London on 9 December 1768 to his wife, probably called Mary, naming no children or partners to continue his business. 


@@@@@


doc= 51018


Ecclestone, Alan (1904-1992), Church of England clergyman and communist activist, was born on 3 June 1904 at 233 Princes Road, Stoke-on-Trent, the second of the two children of George Henry Ecclestone (1867-1942), a pottery designer, and his wife, Emily Florence, 'nee' Heath (1872-1945). A scholarship to Newcastle high school set him on the road to Cambridge, while his English teacher introduced him to the Catholic Crusade, a radical form of Christian socialism headed by Conrad Noel. At St Catharine's, Cambridge, to which he went in 1922, he read history and English, gaining brilliant firsts in both in 1925. After a year's schoolteaching he was offered a lectureship in English at Durham, where he taught from 1927 to 1930. At the same time he began teaching courses for the Workers' Educational Association, a commitment he kept up for the rest of his working life. A desire to change rather than simply interpret events led him to leave university life and seek Anglican ordination. He trained at Wells -- an experience, he later said, designed to break one's spirit. He served a two-year curacy in Carlisle before moving to Barrow in 1934. On 17 July of the same year he married Delia Abraham (1902-1982), the youngest and most radical of the children of C. T. Abraham, the bishop of Derby. Delia, a teacher, shared both her husband's faith and his politics. A stormy but completely committed relationship was at the heart of much of Ecclestone's later thought on prayer. The couple had three children. 
In 1936 Ecclestone obtained his first living in Frizington, a Cumberland mining village where unemployment was high and poverty severe. Here he began to develop Catholic Crusade ideas, attempting to reorient church life around a weekly meeting where every facet of human life was up for discussion. Through a networking leaflet called 'The Leap' he sought to extend this idea throughout the area. These activities brought him to the attention of the bishop of Sheffield, Lesley Hunter, who asked him to come to Darnall, an inner city parish in the heart of the Sheffield steelmaking district. Ecclestone moved there in 1942, and stayed there for the rest of his working life, until 1969. Here he at once began what was by now called the 'parish meeting'. Politics, both national and local, were always high on the agenda, but so were art, literature, history, and theology. 
Although initially a supporter of the Attlee government of 1945, Ecclestone soon felt that it had reneged on its election commitments and had ceased to be socialist. He therefore joined the Communist Party in April 1948, followed by Delia two weeks later. The two remained faithful party members throughout the traumas caused by the invasions of Hungary (1956) and Czechoslovakia (1968). Ecclestone became a well-known party speaker and campaigned tirelessly on behalf of the Soviet-inspired Peace Conference. His activity here was instrumental in the choice of Sheffield as the venue for the second World Peace Conference in 1950, opened by a speech from Picasso. The hostility of the Labour government led to the refusal of visas for many delegates, including Shostakovich, Pablo Neruda, and Paul Robeson, and the conference shifted, after three days, to Warsaw, with Ecclestone in train. In 1955 he headed a delegation to Tashkent and in the 1960s he stood six times as Communist candidate for Darnall ward, losing his deposit each time. This activity scandalized even progressive bishops such as George Bell and made promotion, and even a change of parish, impossible. For most church people his stand seemed morally grotesque. Ecclestone always insisted, however, that the church was guilty of crimes equally as great as those of the party, and believed that commitment to a person, place, calling, or principle should not be lightly revoked. In the late 1960s he was a prominent member of the Christian Marxist dialogue then taking place throughout Europe. When he finally left the party, he almost instantly regretted his decision. 
Throughout his years in Sheffield, Ecclestone continued to teach for the Workers' Educational Association, mostly in English and history, and no class ever failed. In the parish he was an innovator liturgically, anticipating many later developments in his services for marriage, baptism, and the eucharist. After retirement in 1969 he settled down to write, and the first of his major books, 'Yes to God' (1975), won the Collins religious book prize. The book put the concept of prayer onto a completely new footing, understanding it as part of the fabric of human response to sexuality, art, literature, and politics. It was one of the truly creative works of spirituality of the twentieth century. None of the later books had the same success, although 'The Night Sky of the Lord' (1980), a book about Christian responses to the holocaust, won appreciation especially from the Jewish community. These books and his earlier reputation made him a much sought-after speaker at retreats and conferences. 
Delia died after a long illness in 1982. Ecclestone's home at Gosforth, Cumberland, remained a place of pilgrimage for students and seekers of all kinds; there they were met with a mixture of warm hospitality and relentless questioning. He died in London on 14 December 1992 after a series of strokes, and was buried in Gosforth on the 19th. As the primary exemplar of the union of 'mystique' and 'politique' in twentieth-century Anglicanism he remains a seminal figure, but it is likely that he will be remembered chiefly for his work on prayer. 


@@@@@


doc= 51023


Elliott, Denholm Mitchell (1922-1992), actor, was born on 31 May 1922 at 48 Lexham Gardens, Kensington, London, the second son of Myles Layman Farr Elliott (died 1933), barrister, and his wife, Nina, 'nee' Mitchell (died 1966), the daughter of an Ayrshire old colonial. Elliott, who had lost the tip of his right thumb in a lawnmower accident, began acting at his preparatory school, Ripley Court, Surrey. In 1933 his father was killed by terrorists while he was serving as a crown prosecutor in Palestine, and Denholm was packed off to Malvern College. Detesting public-school life, he resorted to kleptomania until a psychiatrist recommended his enrolment at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. Quitting after two terms, he joined the RAF as a gunner, only to be shot down off Denmark in 1942 and sent as a prisoner of war to Stalag 8B at Lansdorf, Silesia. Here he resumed his acting career as one of the No Name Players, taking roles as diverse as Macbeth and Eliza Doolittle. 
Still in uniform, Elliott auditioned for Amersham repertory after his release in 1945, going on, the following year, to make both his West End bow in 'The Guinea Pig' and his television debut in 'Mary Rose'. Great things were predicted for him after Laurence Olivier cast him in Christopher Fry's 'Venus Observed' (1950), and he wowed Broadway as the twins in Jean Anouilh's 'Ring Round the Moon' (1950). Yet he fell victim to the tumultuous changes occurring in British theatre in this period, not helping his situation by feuding with Binkie Beaumont of the all-powerful H. M. Tennent organization. At a time of 'angry young men', Elliott was 'tennis anyone?' (Elliott and Turner, 118), and so he sought refuge in cinema. Having made his screen debut in 'Dear Mr Prohack' (1949), he so impressed Sir Alexander Korda with his performance in David Lean's 'The Sound Barrier' (1952) that he was offered a five-figure contract and the lead in a mooted Lawrence of Arabia biopic. But, following his excellent performance in 'The Cruel Sea' (1953), he quickly became typecast as a gentleman cad in films such as 'The Heart of the Matter' (1953). This professional slough was exacerbated by a personal crisis following his 1957 divorce from actress Virginia Anne McKenna ('b'. 1931), daughter of Terence McKenna, an auctioneer at Christies, whom he had married on 1 March 1954. However, his fortunes revived in 1962 when his marriage, on 15 June, to American model Susan Robinson (1942-2007), daughter of Edwin Robinson, a magazine editor, was followed by his casting as 'a pompous, weak, opinionated creeper' (Elliott and Turner, 164) in 'Station Six Sahara', the first in a long line of unromantic losers that would make him one of cinema's most sought-after character actors. 
Writing in 'The Listener' in 1973, John Elsom described Elliott as 'one of nature's attendant lords' (Elliott and Turner, 244). Shy, sensitive, and easily discouraged, he resented authority without having the will or the anger to confront it. He considered acting a serious business, 'which I take seriously -- in an amateurish sort of way' (ibid., 273), and he was quite content to remain in support, because 'as a character actor you get interesting parts and are in a good position to steal the film' (ibid., 242). Gabriel Byrne, his co-star in 'Defence of the Realm' (1985), testified to this genius for shameless upstaging when he declared: 'Never act with children, animals or Denholm Elliott' (302). 
Feted for his cynical tutelage of Alan Bates in 'Nothing but the Best' (1964), Elliott revealed his talent for sleaziness and corruption as the abortionist in 'Alfie' (1966). Often accepting roles purely for the cash, he also delighted in rising above otherwise atrocious pictures, such as 'Percy' (1969). Notable as the director reduced to filming bar mitzvahs in 'The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz' (1974) and as the errant father in 'Brimstone and Treacle' (1982), he excelled at seedy, dishevelled types, whose ill fortune was rooted in some private torment. However, Hollywood tended only to exploit his eccentric Englishness, with Steven Spielberg pitting him as Harrison Ford's mentor in 'Raiders of the Lost Ark' (1981) and 'Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade' (1989); John Landis used him as a sneering butler in 'Trading Places' (1984). Yet he also possessed immaculate comic timing, as he demonstrated in 'The Missionary' (1980) and 'A Private Function' (1984), and he was eminently capable of the shabby gentility that brought him a best supporting actor Oscar nomination for his performance as Mr Emerson in Merchant-Ivory's 'A Room with a View' (1985). In addition to his seventy-three features, Elliott was also regularly on television, particularly impressing in 'School Play' (1979) and 'Blade on the Feather' (1980), for which he won a BAFTA award. However, he was reluctant to return to the stage, although his work in 'Hedda Gabler' (1972), 'The Father' (1972), and 'A Life in the Theatre' (1989) was much admired. Actively bisexual throughout his life, Elliott had already been identified as HIV positive by the time he was appointed a CBE in 1988. He died of AIDS-related tuberculosis at his long-time home of Santa Eulalia, Ibiza, Spain, on 2 October 1992. He was survived by his second wife and their two children, Jennifer (1964-2003) and Mark ('b'. 1967). His ashes were scattered in the garden of Santa Eulalia. 


@@@@@


doc= 51024


Ellison, Gerald Alexander (1910-1992), bishop of London, was born on 19 August 1910 at the vicarage, 9 Park Street, New Windsor, Berkshire, in the family of three sons and two daughters of the Revd John Henry Joshua Ellison (1855-1944), Church of England clergyman, and his second wife, Sara Dorothy Graham, daughter of Walter Ewing Crum. He was named Gerald Crum Ellison at birth, but shortly afterwards the middle name Alexander was substituted for Crum. He had a half-brother by his father's first marriage, to a daughter of Archbishop Tait. At the time of his birth his father was, and had been since 1894, vicar of Windsor (as his father, Canon Ellison, founder of the Church of England Temperance Society, had been), but from 1913 he was rector of St Michael Cornhill. He was at various times chaplain to Queen Victoria, King Edward VII, archbishops Tait and Davidson, the London stock exchange, and the lord mayor of London. 
Ellison was educated at St George's choir school, Windsor, where the foundations were laid of his lifelong love of music and his very considerable expertise, and he always retained his love of the chapel. From there he went to Westminster School, where he learned to row. At New College, Oxford, he was soon a member of the Oxford boat. He rowed in the university races of 1932 and 1933, but stood down in 1934, when he was president, due to lack of form. He retained his lifelong association with rowing and on occasion umpired the boat race and judged at Henley regatta. He graduated with a third-class degree in politics, philosophy, and economics in 1932. He then went to Westcott House, Cambridge, and was ordained deacon in 1935 and priest in 1936. 
From 1935 to 1937 Ellison was curate at Sherborne Abbey. From there he went to be chaplain to Cyril Garbett, bishop of Winchester. On the outbreak of the Second World War he volunteered at once for the navy and left Winchester at Christmas 1939, as Garbett recorded in his diary: 'he has been a first-rate chaplain... and will go a long way if life and health are spared. I shall miss him terribly' (Garbett diaries, York Minster Library, COLL/82/5). In the navy he was chaplain to the battleship 'Barham' in the Mediterranean, but after a disagreement with the captain over some alterations to divine service, he was posted to the cruiser 'Orion', on which he took part in the battle of Cape Matapan, and was mentioned in dispatches. His firmness over the incident on 'Barham' probably saved his life, for she was subsequently sunk with great loss of life, including that of his successor. 
In 1943 Garbett, who by then had become archbishop of York, obtained Ellison's release from the navy, and he went to Bishopthorpe as chaplain. Although he spent only three years there, they were very important, one might say seminal, in his development, and years later when bishop of London he could introduce himself in the vestry of St Paul's to Archbishop Runcie's chaplain with: 'I am the life-president of the Slope club' (a reference to the Revd Obadiah Slope, chaplain to Dr Proudie, Trollopian bishop of Barchester). It was not an easy appointment, as Garbett was a very different bishop from his predecessor, William Temple, and Ellison had to use all his tact in interpreting the new archbishop to a bewildered and sometimes unhappy diocese. The courage which he had displayed in standing up to the captain of 'Barham' was also called for in standing up to the archbishop, who could sometimes be somewhat overbearing. 
From Bishopthorpe Ellison went in 1946 to St Mark's, Portsea. While there he married, on 18 June 1947, Jane Elizabeth, the daughter of Brigadier John Houghton Gibbon, army officer. She became one of the pillars of his life. They had two daughters and a son. St Mark's was at that time almost the next step to a bishopric, and it was no surprise when in 1950 he was appointed suffragan of Willesden in the diocese of London, and after five years there became bishop of Chester in 1955. Many thought that he would proceed to Lambeth, but preferment at all levels in the Church of England is very much a matter of luck and politics, and he remained at Chester for the next eighteen years. 
While bishop of Chester, Ellison played a leading role in the church assembly during the debates on the Paul report (drawn up by the distinguished sociologist Leslie Paul), which he saw as destroying the parochial system in the Church of England. He was largely responsible for its rejection. It was soon a moot point whether he was right, for within twenty years the situation had changed out of all recognition, and it is not clear to what extent Paul's suggested reforms would have been of any great help. While bishop of Chester, Ellison also chaired the Archbishop's Commission on Women and Holy Orders (1963-6), and although women had nearly thirty years to wait before they could be ordained in the Church of England, he was convinced that it was right, a view from which he never wavered. 
In 1973 Ellison moved to London as its bishop, remaining there until his retirement in 1981. He was concurrently dean of the chapels royal, prelate of the Order of the British Empire, and episcopal canon of Jerusalem. As bishop of London he made a series of appointments which proved that he was not the arch-conservative that he was so often believed to be. Two of his suffragans were committed socialists, and all three of his appointments subsequently became diocesans. His lasting memorial in London was the area system, which he started to work on almost as soon as he arrived; with, at that time, more than five hundred parishes, the diocese was too large for one bishop, so he devolved a substantial amount of power to the five suffragans, and was scrupulous in not interfering with their decisions. He played a key role at the church commissioners, where he usually took the chair when the archbishop was not able to be present. He also became the spokesman for all church legislative matters in the House of Lords, where his meticulous preparation and grasp of detail made a great contribution. He was a uniquely respected figure there, and there was some talk of a life peerage when he retired, but lack of precedent was too strong; instead he was appointed KCVO. In the synod he became a more and more important figure, and his magisterial speeches, delivered in his strong firm voice, and not without humour, carried great weight; he played a particularly important role in the passage of the 'Worship and Doctrine Measure, 1975', paving the way for liturgical reform. With all this he also had a deep pastoral side to his character; as Lady Du Cann noted, 'he practised the Good Samaritan' ('The Times', 6 Nov 1992). 
After Ellison's retirement in 1981 the archbishop of Canterbury asked him to go to Bermuda as vicar-general, to set up a new constitution for the diocese. This he did with his usual efficiency and dispatch. He retired to Cerne Abbas, Dorset, and took an active part in local affairs until the onset of his final illness, which dragged on for several years. He died of cancer at his home, Billeys House, 16 Long Street, Cerne Abbas, Dorchester, Dorset, on 18 October 1992. He was survived by his wife and their three children. A memorial service was held at St Paul's Cathedral on 8 December 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51025


Eurich, Richard Ernst (1903-1992), painter, was born at 7 Lindum Terrace, Manningham, Bradford, on 14 March 1903, the second child in the family of two sons and three daughters of Frederick William Eurich, bacteriologist, and his wife, Margaret Gwendolyn, 'nee' Carter-Squire. His father was a celebrated research bacteriologist for the Anthrax Investigation Board and later professor of forensic medicine at the University of Leeds. His ancestors had migrated from Germany to Bradford in the early nineteenth century. Apart from four years boarding at St George's School, Harpenden, Eurich's childhood was spent in the centre of Bradford, a city whose bustling industrial life was to provide a rich visual source for some of his mature art. After two years at Bradford grammar school, his professional artistic training began at Bradford School of Arts and Crafts in 1920; four years later he entered the Slade School of Fine Art (1924-7). His training there under the remarkable professorship of Henry Tonks was almost entirely in drawing, and indeed his earliest successes after he left were with a series of highly finished, often large-scale drawings of figures in interiors. These came to the attention of the collector and founding father of the Contemporary Art Society, Sir Edward Marsh; not only did he buy several of them but he also introduced Eurich to Eric Gill, who, impressed, recommended him to his own gallery, Goupil. 
It was at the one-man show that the Goupil Gallery gave him in 1929 that Eurich met the only contemporary artist who ever exerted any major influence on his work: Christopher Wood. At this point Eurich was still uncertain of his future direction and was under doctor's orders to give up drawing because of deteriorating eyesight. Wood's straightforward advice to Eurich at this, their only meeting (Wood died a year later), 'to paint the things you love', changed the course of Eurich's career. For Eurich this came to mean, above all, painting the sea; childhood visits to Whitby and later to cousins at Weymouth, where he struggled to teach himself to paint on the windswept shingle bar of Chesil Beach, had instilled in him a profound fascination with the structure and movement of the sea. The immediate consequence was that he spent winter 1932-3 working in a cottage in Lyme Regis on the Dorset coast, where he evolved a style and subject matter based on coastal scenes and harbours. Lyrical and painterly in character, these brought him considerable success during the 1930s in a series of shows at Rex Nankivell's well-regarded Redfern Gallery. Now earning a steady living as a painter, he married, on 15 September 1934, Mavis Llewellyn Pope ('b'. 1906/7), art lecturer, and daughter of Frederick John Pope, Methodist minister. After their marriage they went to live at Dibden Purlieu, close to Southampton Water. There they built the house, Appletreewick, in which they lived together until Eurich's death nearly sixty years later. 
This pattern of life was sharply interrupted by the Second World War. A Quaker by upbringing, Eurich had strongly pacifist instincts and initially worked as an ambulance driver before an approach from the War Artists' Advisory Committee offered more regular work as a war artist. This came principally through his remarkable painting 'Withdrawal from Dunkirk' (1940) -- a complex, detailed work of astonishing technical assurance, painted in just six weeks only a month or so after the event itself. Exhibited at the National Gallery's war art exhibition in August 1940, it created a public sensation and led to Eurich being appointed a full-time, salaried war artist to the Admiralty in March 1941. There then followed a period of four years' intense work, during which his vividly imagined reconstructions of incidents at sea, shipwreck survivors, and naval raids, painted in a highly idiosyncratic manner that combined elements of J. M. W. Turner and Christopher Wood with Breugel, Cranach, and Northern Renaissance art, won him enormous critical admiration. 
A career as an artist recording public events and occasions beckoned but, in the years after the war, Eurich, exhausted by his efforts, turned his back on the prospect and, for a time, on sea subjects also. In the period of introspection that followed he started writing the massive autobiographical memoir that provided later scholars with an insight into his development as an artist. Its rich evocation of his Bradford childhood also provided a new vein of subject matter for his painting, consisting largely of lyrical evocations of childhood together with more surrealistic imaginings of children's stories and folk-songs, as well as more straightforward representations of the Yorkshire landscape of Wharfedale that he had explored as a boy. They were not so popular with the public, however, and Eurich, forced to take up teaching for the first time in his career, worked at Camberwell School of Arts and Crafts from 1949 to 1968. It was not a role he ever enjoyed particularly, though all the evidence is that he was an extremely conscientious and supportive teacher. Then a highly successful one-man show at Tooth's Gallery in 1968, his first in London for a decade, marked the beginning of a modest but steady revival in his critical fortunes that led to a first retrospective at Bradford Art Gallery in 1980, regular one-man shows at the Fine Art Society, and, in 1991, shortly before his death, an impressive show of his war art at the Imperial War Museum. 
Eurich continued to work more or less until his death. His late style developed a delicate pale colouring and feathery brushstroke, ideal for rendering the quirky observations of everyday life along nearby Southampton Water and mysterious poetic recollections of the past that formed the basis of his late work. The dedication to painting was typical too of the tenacious individualism of an artist who painted virtually every day of his working life, for the most part in a shed at the bottom of his garden, and only latterly in a purpose-built studio attached to the house. Though there was something of the reclusive in his temperament, there was, equally, nothing misanthropic about it. He was always a man of the sweetest temperament, a spry, sprightly, neatly built figure who drove a car very well right into his late eighties -- his only disability in later years being an increasingly serious deafness. This working life was, remarkably, sustained against a private life that involved several personal tragedies: the death of an infant daughter at the end of the war and the deaths of his only son, the gifted documentary photographer Crispin Eurich, in 1977, and, at the same period, of a much loved son-in-law. 
Eurich was elected ARA in 1942 and RA in 1953 and appointed OBE in 1984. His work is held in numerous public collections, principally the Tate collection, the National Maritime Museum, and the Imperial War Museum. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Bradford University in 1989. He died of cancer of the colon at the Royal South Hampshire Hospital, Southampton, on 6 June 1992. He was survived by his wife, Mavis, and two daughters, Caroline and Philippa. 


@@@@@


doc= 51027


Evans, Sir Geraint Llewellyn (1922-1992), singer, was born on 16 February 1922 at 55 William Street, Cilfynydd, Glamorgan, the only son of William John Evans (1899-1978), miner, and his wife, Charlotte May, 'nee' Thomas (1901-1923). His mother died in childbirth when her son was seventeen months old, and the daughter she then bore did not long survive her. His father thereupon returned to live with his own parents, and Evans was brought up by his maternal grandparents in Cilfynydd. The family was Welsh speaking, and Welsh was Evans's first language before he learned English. He was aged ten when his father remarried, and the boy moved with his father and stepmother to Hopkinstown, in the Rhondda valley. He attended local schools and Lan Wood School, Pontypridd, until the age of fourteen, when he returned to live with his grandparents and took his first job as a shop assistant and window-dresser in nearby Pontypridd. 
On his afternoons off Evans began taking singing lessons in Cardiff, sang with the Bethel Methodist Chapel choir in Cilfynydd (he remained a Methodist all his life), appeared in 'Lilac Time' with a local dramatic society, made his first solo broadcast for BBC Wales, aged seventeen, and took the title role in a Bethel Chapel costumed performance of Mendelssohn's oratorio 'Elijah'. He followed the local trend as a keen enthusiast for rugby football, but was prevented from active participation by the asthma from which he suffered when young. On the outbreak of the Second World War he volunteered for the Royal Air Force and was trained as a radio mechanic, serving in France, Belgium, and Germany, and taking part in forces entertainments at home and abroad. At the war's end he was posted to British Forces Network, broadcasting from Hamburg, where he sang regularly with the radio chorus and began professional vocal training with the lieder singer Theo Herrmann, a Viennese baritone of distinction then resident in Hamburg. 
On demobilization Evans took a gamble in deciding to pursue a singing career, and a reluctant local authority was persuaded to give him a serviceman's vocational grant to attend London's Guildhall School of Music and Drama. There he made his operatic debut in 1948 as Don Alfonso in a student production of Mozart's 'Cosi fan tutte'. After a successful audition at Covent Garden he was engaged as principal baritone at $12 per week. On the prospects of a regular income he proposed to Brenda Evans Davies ('b'. 1920), a neighbour and schoolteacher from Cilfynydd, and they were married on 27 March 1948 at Moriah Chapel, Cilfynydd. Their marriage remained steadfast until his death, and they had two sons, Alun and Huw. His wife was a constant source of strength and support throughout his career, giving perceptive criticism when she thought it was needed. 
Evans made his debut with the Covent Garden Opera on 21 January 1948 in the brief but exposed role of the Nightwatchman in 'Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg', the first Wagner production there since the war. A decade later he had progressed to Beckmesser, the crotchety town clerk in the same opera, which became one of the half-dozen roles most closely associated with him, of the seventy-three roles in fifty-three operas which he performed in his career. Before this he had already launched a Figaro at Covent Garden that proved ideally suited to his voice and personality, and which he would sing more than 500 times around the world. Together with his seedy Leporello in 'Don Giovanni' and his happy-go-lucky Papageno in 'The Magic Flute', this formed part of a trilogy of Mozart roles that always showed to advantage his sense of musical style and his talent for stage character. 
Evans acknowledged that he preferred the opera stage to the concert platform, the physical process of costume and make-up enabling him to take on another identity altogether. In search of a convincing portrait he would sometimes invent for himself backgrounds to the characters he sang, and these were always built 'from the feet up'. His Mozart characters were polished at the Glyndebourne Festival in Sussex, where he sang at ten annual festivals, from 1950 to 1959, and where, in 1957, he first assumed the title role in Verdi's 'Falstaff', a role that was to bring him lasting fame and launch him on more than two decades of international travel. 
Evans's engagements abroad included an unprecedented twenty-four consecutive annual seasons at San Francisco, for which he received the San Francisco Opera medal acknowledging his 'exceptional contributions'; the Vienna Staatsoper, where he was invited to join the resident company by the conductor Herbert von Karajan, but chose instead to remain at Covent Garden; the Chicago Lyric Opera, for several seasons from 1961; and La Scala, Milan, where the stage crew in 1960, puzzled by his fluent if Welsh-inflected Italian as Figaro and his strange name, decided he must be Sicilian (Evans, 149). The Salzburg Festival also engaged him for nine consecutive years. His debut role was, inevitably, Figaro, which had never previously been sung at Salzburg by anybody from Britain, so he felt not a little insulted that a BBC television crew, sent there to make a documentary feature, interviewed his co-stars and ignored him completely (ibid., 164). Ignoring the achievements of British singers abroad was, he found, endemic in the attitude of British officialdom. He would frequently be invited to receptions given for their singers by the German, Austrian, French, Polish, and other embassies, but he was able to reciprocate only 'a couple of times' at the British embassy. Yet he made sure that, whenever possible, he put in a good word abroad for fellow singers he knew in Britain (especially if they were Welsh), to a point where Britain's international operatic prestige had never been higher. 
At home Evans felt privileged to work with Benjamin Britten, creating roles in the premieres of 'Billy Budd' and the coronation opera, 'Gloriana', as well as singing in other operas including 'Peter Grimes' and a ripely seasoned Bottom in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. 'Peter Grimes' and 'Billy Budd' were two of his first choices when he was invited to direct his own productions in the USA, where he also directed 'Falstaff', 'The Marriage of Figaro', and 'Don Pasquale', and he harboured some regret that more was not made of his experience in this way among British companies. Much of his professional success was due to his sense of ensemble, of being part of a team working together in a combined artistic endeavour rather than in individual rivalry. Late in his career he appeared with both the Welsh National Opera and the Scottish Opera to sing several of his best loved roles, and added new roles in operas composed for him by Norman Kay and the Welsh composer Alun Hoddinott. He felt some disappointment that more use of his great talent was not made for recording purposes, although he recorded his 'signature role' of Figaro under both Otto Klemperer and Daniel Barenboim, Falstaff under Georg Solti, 'Die Meistersinger' with Herbert von Karajan, and 'Peter Grimes' with Britten. 
Evans made his farewell appearance at Covent Garden on 4 June 1984 as the quack Doctor Dulcamara in Donizetti's 'L'elisir d'amore', chosen so he could offer the doctor's supposed 'love-potion' all around as a token of thanks to fellow artists and audiences alike. In retirement at Trelawney, the harbourside house at Aberaeron, Cardiganshire, bought as a holiday home in 1966, he was occupied with programmes for Harlech Television, including master classes and occasional coaching. He was appointed CBE in 1959, was knighted in 1969, and, besides various academic fellowships, became a freeman of the City of London in 1984. He died of a heart attack at Aberystwyth on 19 September 1992 and, after cremation, his ashes were interred at the church of Llanddewi Aber-arth, near Aberaeron, on 11 November. He was commemorated by a service of thanksgiving at Westminster Abbey, London, on 27 November that year, for the life of a great artist and a lovable man. 


@@@@@


doc= 51028


Biggs, (Felicity) Jane Ewart-, Baroness Ewart-Biggs (1929-1992), politician, was born in India on 22 August 1929, the second child and only daughter of Basil FitzHerbert Randall, a major in the Indian army, and his wife, Rena. After her father died when she was only a few months old, her mother returned to England with her two children. Jane was sent as a border to Downe House School near Newbury and later attended secretarial college. She worked as a secretary at the Foreign Office before joining the Savoy Hotel. On 5 May 1960 she married Christopher Thomas Ewart Ewart-Biggs (1921-1976), a diplomatist; they had one son and two daughters. Marriage opened a new life to Jane Ewart-Biggs, and at successive postings in Algiers, London, Brussels, and Paris she happily combined the responsibilities of a mother with the duties of a diplomatist's wife -- a life that she described in her memoir 'Pay, Pack and Follow' (1984). 
This existence came to an abrupt end on 21 July 1976 when Christopher Ewart-Biggs, the newly appointed British ambassador to Ireland, was assassinated by the Provisional IRA, his car blown up by a landmine outside Dublin. Jane Ewart-Biggs learned of his death over her car radio while she was driving in London. After the memorial service in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, she found sufficient self-control to deliver a special broadcast on Irish television, in which she declared: 'I feel no bitterness, there is no hatred in my heart' ('The Times', 10 Oct 1992). Her message was 'a beacon at a dark time for Ireland' ('The Times', 15 Oct 1992), and she subsequently became involved in the non-sectarian peace movement founded by Mairead Corrigan and Betty Williams. She also launched a memorial fund in her husband's name which established the Christopher Ewart-Biggs literary prize, to recognize work that encouraged a greater understanding between the British and Irish peoples. 
Involvement in causes that her husband held dear, and in particular that of European integration, was one of the ways in which Jane Ewart-Biggs outwardly came to terms with his death. At a deeper level she struggled with a sense of 'desperate injustice, despair, loss and waste' ('The Guardian', 14 Sept 1988). She found an antidote in work and joined the Labour Party, a step that surprised some friends but which reflected a long-held commitment to socialism. Her hopes of selection as a candidate first for the European parliament and then the Greater London council were frustrated by selection committees wary of her background. But her energy, determination, and charisma made her an undoubted asset to the party, and in 1981 she was created a life peer. Tall and elegant, with striking good looks, Jane Ewart-Biggs was for some the epitome of 'radical chic'. In the House of Lords she impressed fellow peers as 'the only person here with a waist' ('Daily Telegraph', 9 Oct 1992). But media attention on her image obscured the seriousness with which she approached her new role. She was always meticulously prepared, and she became an effective speaker without ever being a natural orator. Her ability and industry were recognized when in 1983 she was appointed Labour front-bench spokesman on home affairs. In 1987 she was given responsibility for consumer affairs and overseas development as well, and in 1988 she became an opposition whip. 
Jane Ewart-Biggs was strongly critical of the social policies of the Thatcher governments and defended the 'new poor' -- single parents, the unemployed, and the elderly. She identified with 'alternative Britain' and was involved in prison reform, the Charter 88 movement, and the National Council for One-Parent Families. As a feminist she advocated the creation of a ministry for women. Her concern about world poverty and its effect on children led to her appointment in 1984 as the president of the British committee of UNICEF. She was especially proud of this connection and travelled widely to further UNICEF's work, making two visits to the drought-stricken regions of Sudan. With all of these competing claims she never lost sight of the cause that was her introduction to public life. She was a member of Lord Kilbrandon's all-party commission of inquiry on Northern Ireland in 1984 and supported its recommendation of an increased role for the Dublin government in the province. She also favoured the Anglo-Irish agreement of 1985 and opposed the reintroduction of internment. But she felt a lasting repugnance towards some of those involved in politics in Northern Ireland, and on one occasion she declined to share the platform at an Oxford Union debate with Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Fein. 
In 1991 Jane Ewart-Biggs was diagnosed with cancer, and her last appearances in the House of Lords, in 1992, were in a wheelchair. On 18 September 1992, three weeks before her death, she married her partner of fourteen years, Kevin Patrick O'Sullivan, a consulting engineer. The ceremony took place in the Charing Cross Hospital, Fulham, where she died on 8 October 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51029


Eyre, Ronald (1929-1992), theatre and television director, was born on 13 April 1929 at 1 Longcroft Cottages, Mapplewell, near Barnsley, Yorkshire, the only son of Christopher Eyre (1899-1970), a miner, and his wife, Mabel, 'nee' Smith (1902-1965). He was baptized at the United Methodist church, Mapplewell, on 12 May 1929. His father, who was poorly educated, was passionately committed to the idea of a good education for his son. This almost visionary determination encouraged Eyre to succeed, first at Mapplewell infants' and junior schools and Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Wakefield (1940-47), and then, after two years as a wireless mechanic in the Royal Air Force, at University College, Oxford (1949-52). His talents as actor and director were exploited by the Oxford University Dramatic Society (of which he became secretary in 1951), the Experimental Theatre Club, and the Univ Players. He wrote later that 'Acting, as I then understood it, and would probably understand it still if I tried it again, was an exercise in being beside oneself -- and raised alarming possibilities and questions. Hiding in public. Backing into the limelight. Directing seemed, for me, less dangerous. (Eyre to Humphrey Carpenter, 11 March 1984, priv. coll.)' After graduating with a second-class degree in English, Eyre became a teacher, first at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Blackburn, and then at Bromsgrove School. He was an inspiring master, but the classroom proved a frustrating arena for his talents, and in 1956 he took up a post at the BBC, where he remained until 1964. He was a founding director of BBC Schools Television, and his productions included 'Philoctetes', 'The Bacchae', and 'The Caucasian Chalk Circle', as well as his own play 'The Victim'. In Michael Marland's view, 'he was a pioneering and brilliant figure in bringing the study of television as a dramatic art form into the country's classrooms' ('The Times', 23 April 1992). Graduating to adult drama (although he would not have seen it that way), he wrote scripts for 'Z Cars' and twelve plays for radio and television, including a much praised adaptation of Leskov's 'A Crack in the Ice'. His television productions included 'Condemned to Acquittal', the first play to be broadcast on BBC2, and the television version of Michael Elliot's acclaimed Royal Shakespeare Company 'As You Like It', with Vanessa Redgrave as Rosalind. 
Eyre's first productions in the professional theatre were at the Birmingham Repertory: 'Titus Andronicus' and James Saunders's 'Next Time I'll Sing to You' in 1963, 'The Quare Fellow' in 1964, and 'Heartbreak House' in 1965. This production, together with his 'Widowers' Houses' at Stratford East (1965), were credited with starting the so-called 'Shaw revival' of the late 1960s. Productions of two plays by John McGrath at the Hampstead Theatre Club -- 'Events while Guarding the Bofors Gun' (1966) and 'Bakke's Night of Fame' (1968) -- took Eyre to the front rank of young directors. Interviewed by Montague Haltrecht after the first of these, he described the job of a director as 'putting actors in circumstances where the play works... creating an atmosphere in which people can function', and said that the special requirement of a director was 'the capacity to be surprised by people'. He disliked the kind of directing that 'showed off' at the expense of the play ('The Scotsman', 11 June 1966). This perhaps accounted for his immense popularity with those he directed and the consistently high praise his productions received. 
1970 was Eyre's 'annus mirabilis'. His production of Donald Howarth's 'Three Months Gone' at the Royal Court (starring Jill Bennett and Diana Dors) received excellent notices, and transferred to the Duchess. In June of the same year he directed his own reworking of Dion Boucicault's 'London Assurance' for the Royal Shakespeare Company, with Donald Sinden as Sir Harcourt Courtly and Judi Dench as Grace Harkaway. Critics were unanimous in their praise. Harold Hobson called the production 'one of the RSC's outstanding successes'. Success followed success in the early 1970s: 'Mrs Warren's Profession' at the National Theatre (1970), 'Much Ado about Nothing' at the Royal Shakespeare Company (1971), 'A Voyage Round my Father', starring Alec Guinness, in the West End (1971), and Charles Wood's comedy 'Veterans' at the Royal Court (1972), with John Mills and John Gielgud as two dyspeptic actors. In 1973 he directed 'Habeas corpus', the first of his two encounters with new work by Alan Bennett (the second being 'Enjoy' in 1980). 
Eyre's muse was essentially comic. He relished the absurdity of human relationships -- the strange postures and pretences men assume in pursuit of dignity or power or money. He keenly observed the world around him, and in rehearsal could cite a dozen incidents to help an actor find the truth of some comic moment. He was also very funny, a gifted clown with a sharp, at times impatient wit. Tragedy sometimes seemed outside his reach. His 'Othello' for the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1979 disappointed him, and it was this experience perhaps that made him suspicious of the Bard. He always claimed that the title of his great unwritten lecture was 'Shakespeare: not my friend'. 
From 1975 to 1977 Eyre worked on 'The Long Search', a landmark series for BBC2 on world religions. He was the programme's presenter, guide, and author. His research was tireless and exhaustive, his approach questioning but scrupulously non-judgemental. This project at once depended on and developed his interest in man's spiritual life, an interest that drew him to Shaw's 'Saint Joan' at the National Theatre in 1984, to Ronald Harwood's 'J. J. Farr' in the West End in 1987, and to a series of religious chat shows for television entitled 'Not on Sunday' (1990-91). 
Eyre directed Berlioz's 'Beatrice and Benedict' in 1980 at the Buxton festival. It was his first attempt at opera. One review described it as 'triumphant' ('Financial Times', 4 Aug 1980), and another was headlined 'Miracle at Buxton' ('Sunday Times', 10 Aug 1980). Again his instinct for comedy was sure. He edited the text, translated it into witty, accessible verse, set the whole thing 'a la' Jane Austen, and -- for the spoken sections of the piece -- transformed great singers into great actors. In 1982 his production of Verdi's 'Falstaff' for the Los Angeles Philharmonic, Covent Garden, and the Teatro Communale in Florence was hindered by a weight of expectation, and the grandness of Carlo Maria Giulini's return to the world of opera. Relieved of this double burden in a revival two years later, 'Ronald Eyre's exquisitely conceived production', according to 'The Times', had 'at last found itself'. 
The 1980s found Eyre in many places. There were plays, of course: the brilliant revival of John Osborne's 'A Patriot for Me' at Chichester, in the West End, and then in Los Angeles (1983); another collaboration with Alec Guinness in Lee Blessing's 'A Walk in the Woods' at the Comedy (1988); and one of his crowning achievements, 'When we are Married' at the Whitehall (1986). On television he conducted an unfashionably low-key survey of the generations called 'Seven Ages' (1987). And he taught: in California, at master classes in Oxford, and at the Hong Kong Academy of Performing Arts. One of his students at the latter recalled: 'He not only inspired us with regard to acting -- but taught us how to look at life, and face failure as well as success' ('Journal of the Hong Kong Academy of Performing Arts', 1989). 
Eyre felt lucky to be able to do so many different things, and believed that each part of his career gained from not being the exclusive occupation of his life. Fastidious in his choice of work, he gave the most scrupulous attention and commitment to those projects where he thought he might be 'useful'. He was never motivated by a maverick ambition. 'It's not a form of modesty', he once said, 'to say that I lack ambition beyond the success of the current job. It's a fact. And in an odd way, I'm aware of the strength that gives me' ('The Times', 30 Dec 1970). He was both explorer and guide. He wanted to understand things, and -- a wise and kind companion -- he knew how to share his discoveries with those around him. 
Eyre's immensely successful life might be defined by the glittering prizes he turned down. He declined invitations to become head of drama at the BBC, artistic director of the Birmingham Repertory, artistic director of the Royal Court Theatre, and associate director at the Royal Shakespeare Company. He was merrily critical of organizations, and believed that the corporate life of an institution invariably became a drag on the quality of work it produced. He became instead a dedicated and mischievously independent freelance, bringing his wit, intellect, and perception to bear on the directing of plays, on teaching, on comparative religion, on broadcasting, and on the production and presentation of television documentaries. 
Eyre died of cancer on 8 April 1992, at Southfield House, Vicarage Street, Painswick, Stroud, Gloucestershire, where he spent the last two months of his life. He was buried in the graveyard of St Mary's, Painswick, on 13 April. His gravestone recorded simply: 'Ron Eyre, 1929-1992. On the long search'. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 51030


Fagg, William Buller (1914-1992), ethnologist and art historian, was born on 28 April 1914 at 24 St Aubyn's Road, Upper Norwood, London, the elder son and first of two children of William Percy Fagg (died 1939), antiquarian bookseller, and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Buller. He attended nearby Dulwich College and then went to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he studied classics (1933-6) and archaeology and anthropology (1936-7), obtaining two BA degrees and prizes for Latin hexameters and epigrams. 
In 1938 Fagg started work as an assistant keeper in the ethnography department of the British Museum, which employed him until he retired, save for the wartime years 1940-45, when he monitored corduroy output for the industries and manufactures department of the Board of Trade. At the close of the war, when the British Museum reconstructed its exhibitions, the ethnography department decided that individual curators should take responsibility for the collections from specific continents. Africa was assigned to Fagg, probably because none of his superiors wanted it. As he reviewed the artefacts coming out of storage to choose the best for display, however, he developed a deep love for African art that led to his lifelong immersion in its study. West Africa had produced masterpieces of sculpture, he felt, whose greatness deserved acclaim without qualification. They received from him the kind of scholarly attention hitherto reserved for European works. One of his first concerns, indeed, was to establish that some of the finest examples were of purely African inspiration and execution. Seized during the British punitive expedition of 1897, the Benin bronzes in the British Museum appeared so sophisticated that European experts had tried to argue that the Edo-speakers who created them must have been influenced by the Portuguese. Fagg devised a chronology of the Benin treasures that represented the first serious attempt to classify African art historically and stylistically. 
Fagg led a quiet home life with his widowed mother in the suburb of Barnes, whence he cycled to the museum in Bloomsbury each day. He grew friendly with artists such as Jacob Epstein, Fred Uhlman, and Josef Herman, who shared his admiration for African art, and Leon Underwood taught him the practicalities of lost-wax casting, the process most often used in Africa. While accumulating an encyclopaedic knowledge of tribal pieces in other museums and private collections, he also secured much fresh information from fieldwork. The great majority of African sculptures surviving from past centuries came from Nigeria, so it was there that his endeavours were concentrated -- with visits in 1949-50, 1953, 1958-9, 1971, 1974, and 1981 -- though his research also took him to the Belgian Congo, Mali, and Cameroon. His brother, Bernard Fagg (1915-1987), a colonial service official, founded the first museums in Nigeria and then headed the federal department of antiquities in Lagos (1957-63). Bill aimed to identify the distinctive artistic styles, not merely of various tribes, but of villages, workshops, and individuals. Among the artists whose output he recorded were Bamgboye of Odo-Owa, Areogun of Osi-Ilorin, and, above all, Olowe of Ise ('c'.1875-1938), sculptor to the kings of Yorubaland. Where no name could be ascertained, he devised sobriquets which became widely accepted, such as the Master of the Buli or the Master of the Circled Cross. 
Promoted to deputy keeper of the ethnographical collections at the British Museum in 1955, Fagg was a long-standing member of the Royal Anthropological Institute, serving as honorary secretary (1939-56) and vice-president (1963-73) as well as meticulously editing its journal 'Man' from 1945 until 1965. The controversies that divided British anthropologists did not greatly exercise him, though the separation of physical and social anthropology into discrete disciplines seemed to him undesirable. He judged it the role of scholars to appreciate the achievements of other cultures as well as to analyse them: connoisseurship need never conflict with social science. He sought to place African art within the context of African social history. 
Fagg was a portly, bespectacled man with blunt, heavy features. The marked slowness of his utterance concealed his intelligence from strangers (and this had nothing to do with the mild stroke that he suffered in 1967). There was an air of torpor about him which could prove downright exasperating for people of vigorous temperament, along with his habit of whistling classical music. A dull lecturer, he came across best at small gatherings, where he enjoyed sharing his expertise in unhurried conversation. His interests included literature and religion. He was a practising Roman Catholic. 
A late riser by preference, Fagg wrote his articles and books at night, slowly and eloquently, making use of his large collection of photographs. 'The Sculpture of Africa' (1958), 'Afro-Portuguese Ivories' (1959), and 'Nigerian Images' (1963) earned him recognition as the principal English-speaking authority on African sculpture. In 1960 he organized an exhibition for the Arts Council to mark Nigerian independence, and his contribution in 1966 to the First World Congress of Negro Arts and Cultures held in Dakar, Senegal, led to his being appointed CMG in 1967. The Museum of Primitive Art in New York (later part of the Metropolitan Museum) engaged him as a consulting fellow (1957-70), and other major museums invited him to weed out fakes and 'tourist art' from their holdings. 
Fagg was keeper of the ethnography department of the British Museum from 1969 to 1974. With the help of Bryan Cranstone (1918-1989), his deputy, he oversaw its full relocation to 6 Burlington Gardens, off Piccadilly, where it reopened in 1972 as the Museum of Mankind. There it was possible to present changing exhibitions in specially made 'environments', starting with one of Benin art, set in a partial reconstruction of the Benin palace. 
After his retirement in 1974 Fagg acted as a consultant for Christies auction house until 1990. Unlike some museum curators, he had never shown any antagonism towards private collectors. He did insist, though, that catalogues refer to 'tribal art' rather than 'primitive art'. His last major publication was 'Africa and the Renaissance: Art in Ivory' (1988), written with Ezio Bassani to accompany a display at the Center for African Art in New York. He died of a cerebral thrombosis at his home, 6 Galata Road, Barnes, London, on 10 July 1992. He was unmarried. 
Fagg received some criticism from younger scholars for his adherence to the concept of tribality and his readiness to make 'objective' aesthetic pronouncements. It was natural that the pioneer should be challenged by his successors, but nobody disputed his status as an originator of the systematic study of African art. 


@@@@@


doc= 51032


Davies, Dame Gwen Lucy Ffrangcon- (1891-1992), actress, was born on 25 January 1891 at 195 Finchley Road, Hampstead, London, the daughter of David Thomas Ffrangcon-Davies (1855-1918), choral singer, and his wife, Annie Frances, 'nee' Rayner. Her father was said to have taken the name Ffrangcon from a Welsh beauty spot. She was educated at South Hampstead high school and then studied for the stage under Mrs L. Manning-Hicks and Agnes Platt. As a child she saw Irving act, auditioned for Ellen Terry, and later played Tess of the d'Urbervilles at a private performance given at his home for its author, Thomas Hardy. A lifelong Christian Scientist, she never married but lived for many years in both England and South Africa with the actress Marda Vanne; together in the Second World War they ran a notable South African theatre management. 
Ffrangcon-Davies made her stage debut as a fairy in a 1911 staging of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream'. She subsequently toured for some time, playing Kiki in 'The Glad Eye', Sombra in 'The Arcadians', and other roles. From 1917 to 1918 she worked in the censor's office. She sang the soprano lead in such choral dramas as 'The Immortal Hour' and 'The Birth of Arthur' at the Glastonbury festival (1919-20) and subsequently at the Old Vic. She joined the Birmingham Repertory Company in 1921, and won critical acclaim for her acting in such J. M. Barrie plays as 'Quality Street' (1921) and 'The Admirable Crichton' (1922). She first made her name in London in 1923, creating the roles of Eve and the Newly Born in the first staging of Shaw's 'Back to Methuselah'. 
In 1924 Ffrangcon-Davies first played Juliet to John Gielgud's Romeo, thereby starting a stage partnership that was to last for almost half a century; during that time she was to be the Queen to his 'Richard of Bordeaux' (1932) and Gwendolyn in his classic 1940 revival of 'The Importance of being Earnest', though two years later they had a rare joint failure in 'Macbeth'. One of her longest-lasting roles was as Elizabeth Browning in 'The Barretts of Wimpole Street', which she played intermittently throughout the 1930s at home and abroad. While living in Marda Vanne's native Johannesburg from 1943 onwards she also scored considerable successes in such comedies as Noel Coward's 'Blithe Spirit'. 
After returning to England in 1946, Ffrangcon-Davies played the Queen Mother in Terence Rattigan's unsuccessful 'Adventure Story' (1949), but soon reclaimed her reputation at home with the 1950 Stratford season, where she succeeded Peggy Ashcroft as Beatrice to Gielgud's Benedick in 'Much Ado about Nothing' and also played Portia in 'Julius Caesar' and Queen Katharine in 'Henry VIII'. She continued to tour at home and abroad, returning to the West End in 1954 to remind audiences of her considerable comic talent as Donna Lucia to the Charley's Aunt of John Mills. That same year she was an unforgettable Ranevskaya in 'The Cherry Orchard' at the Lyric, Hammersmith, and two years later she became a founder member of the new English Stage Society at the Royal Court, where she played Rose Padley in the opening production by Nigel Dennis, 'The Mulberry Bush', going straight from there to play Agatha in T. S. Eliot's 'The Family Reunion' at the Phoenix. Later she again replaced Peggy Ashcroft, a lifelong friend -- in Enid Bagnold's 'The Chalk Garden' at the Haymarket (1957) -- before giving what many believe was her greatest performance, as the doomed, drug-ridden Mary Tyrone in the first London staging of Eugene O'Neill's 'Long Day's Journey into Night' (1958) opposite Anthony Quayle. 
Ffrangcon-Davies became a founder member of a great theatrical company, Peter Hall's Royal Shakespeare Company, which she joined for its first London season in 1961 at the Aldwych, playing with Leslie Caron in 'Ondine' and also as the Queen Mother in Jean Anouilh's 'Becket'. In 1963 she made her Broadway debut (well into her seventies) as Mrs Candour in 'The School for Scandal'. Back home she played Amanda Wingfield in Tennessee Williams's 'The Glass Menagerie' at the Haymarket (1965) and Madame Voynitsky in Chekhov's 'Uncle Vanya' at the Royal Court (1970). 
Often rather too theatrical for film or television cameras, Ffrangcon-Davies was also unlucky perhaps in coming of the same unique theatrical generation as Peggy Ashcroft, Edith Evans, and Sybil Thorndike; all the same, her longevity ensured her a place in theatrical history, and her Shakespearian memory remained in such good shape that for a BBC television documentary, 'A Juliet Remembered' (1988), she recited lengthy extracts from 'Romeo and Juliet' without faltering. She also gave many memorable masterclasses in acting, and was a regular BBC radio broadcaster from the very early 1930s until a few months before her death. Asked by Nigel Hawthorne (who as a teenager had been inspired by her performances in South Africa) if she was frightened at all of dying, she merely replied 'One is always afraid of something new, dear.' As Hawthorne noted, 'Gwen had the ability to express wonder and girlish rapture even in old age' ('The Independent', 28 Jan 1992). Her career may well, in her own phrase, have 'come and gone a bit' (ibid.), but it was never less than remarkable, even when, in old age, both her sight and her hearing diminished so that she was, at the last, almost always playing from memory. Her last performance was as an elderly dowager in an ITV 'Sherlock Holmes' special, recorded in 1991; she was, belatedly, created a dame in the birthday honours of the same year. She died on 27 January 1992, two days after her 101st birthday, at her home for many years, Tagley Cottage, Dyers End, Stambourne, Essex, of bronchopneumonia. A memorial service was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 18 June 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51033


Fieldhouse, John David Elliott, Baron Fieldhouse (1928-1992), naval officer, was born on 12 February 1928 at 32 Wyther Park Road, Bramley, Leeds, the elder of the two sons of Sir Harold Fieldhouse (1892-1991), secretary of the National Assistance Board from 1946 to 1959, and his wife, Mabel Elaine (1900-1993), daughter of George Henry Elliott, of Conisbrough, Yorkshire. He went to Quainton Hall School, Harrow, and joined the navy as a cadet in 1941, going to the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth and later at Eaton Hall in Cheshire, and in 1945 to the training cruiser 'Frobisher'. His first ship as a midshipman was the cruiser 'Nigeria' in the East Indies fleet. He learned to fly as a sub-lieutenant but the Fleet Air Arm did not appeal. As he said, he 'did not join the Navy to do circuits-and-bumps on a grass strip' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 Feb 1992), and he was airsick, just as he was chronically seasick. A visit to a submarine decided his future. He joined the Submarine Service in 1948 and after service in 'Thule', 'Astute', and 'Aeneas' he was appointed first lieutenant of 'Totem' in 1952 (when he was nicknamed Snorkers owing to his fondness for sausages -- like the Australian first lieutenant in 'The Cruel Sea'). On 28 March 1953 he married Margaret Ellen Carey 
(Midge; 'b'. 1927/8)
, daughter of David Donington Cull, an accountant. She was then serving as an officer with the Women's Royal Naval Service, at Lee on the Solent, Hampshire. They had one son and two daughters. 
Fieldhouse passed the commanding officers' qualifying course (the Perisher) in 1955, his first command being 'Acheron'. He subsequently commanded the submarines 'Tiptoe' and 'Walrus' and, in 1964, the Royal Navy's first nuclear submarine, 'Dreadnought'. He served almost exclusively in the Submarine Service until 1966, when he took the joint services staff college course at Latimer and then joined the aircraft-carrier 'Hermes' in 1967 as second in command. 'Hermes', then the first 'all-missile' ship in the fleet, had a busy and successful commission east and west of Suez, which included the preparations for the withdrawal from Aden. 'Hermes''s Sea Vixen and Buccaneer aircraft provided a show of strength in the air. Her Wessex helicopters carried out sorties against 'dissidents' in Aden and, in August the same year, against communist agitators in Hong Kong. Fieldhouse took over command of the ship for some weeks when the captain fell ill at the end of the year. 
After his promotion to captain at the end of 1967, Fieldhouse's career began to follow the perfect 'critical path' to the highest ranks. From 'Hermes' he went in 1968 to Faslane in Scotland as captain of the newly formed 10th submarine squadron of Polaris submarines. In 1970 he commanded the frigate 'Diomede' as captain of the 3rd frigate squadron; and in 1972 he led NATO's naval standing force, Atlantic, in the rank of commodore. In 1973 he went to the Ministry of Defence, first as deputy and then as director of naval warfare. Promoted rear-admiral, he became flag officer, 2nd flotilla, in 1975 and then, the next year, flag officer, submarines, and NATO commander, submarines, eastern Atlantic -- in effect the first post-war officer to hold this post, and the first to have a nuclear command. He showed his political skills early on by adroitly handling a move from the traditional home at Fort Blockhouse, Gosport, to Northwood. Promoted vice-admiral in 1979, he became controller of the navy, responsible for the navy's ships, stores, and equipment. In the time-honoured way of seagoing officers, Fieldhouse always said he disliked Ministry of Defence jobs. 'I joined the Navy to go to sea,' he would say, 'not to drive a desk at the MoD.' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 Feb 1992). In fact, he was an excellent Whitehall warrior, but the most he would admit was that, having had good times at sea, he now had to pay something back. In 1981 he was made commander-in-chief, fleet, NATO commander-in-chief, eastern Atlantic area, and allied commander-in-chief, channel. It was a time when an aggrieved and resentful navy was trying to recover something from what was left after the swingeing cuts imposed by the then secretary of state for defence, John Nott. It was a measure of how well Fieldhouse restored both the navy's 'materiel' and its morale that it was able to undertake Operation Corporate (the recovery of the Falklands) so successfully less than a year later. 
Fieldhouse was commander-in-chief, fleet, at the time of the Falklands conflict in 1982 and, as the task force commander, was responsible for the planning and direction of Operation Corporate to recover the islands. He was responsible directly to the chief of the defence staff, Admiral Sir Terence Lewin, and his mission was to conduct military deployment and operations to bring about the withdrawal of Argentinian forces and to re-establish British administration as quickly as possible. In common with the then first sea lord, Admiral Sir Henry Leach, Fieldhouse never doubted that this task was possible. Their confidence was in the strongest contrast to the attitude of the Ministry of Defence civil servants. Late in March 1982, when the first rumblings of the diplomatic storm could be heard, Fieldhouse was in the Mediterranean where Royal Navy ships were exercising. Little was known about the Argentinian opposition; indeed, the planning for Corporate may be said to have begun with Fieldhouse and the flag officer, 1st flotilla, Rear-Admiral John (Sandy) Woodward -- who was to be the carrier battle group commander at sea -- kneeling on the deck of the admiral's day-cabin in the destroyer 'Glamorgan', studying the ships of the Argentinian navy in 'Jane's Fighting Ships'. Woodward was ordered to sail for the Ascension Island area with six destroyers and frigates and support from the Royal Fleet Auxiliary. Later in April Fieldhouse flew to Ascension to confer with Woodward and then returned to direct the war from commander-in-chief, fleet's headquarters in the concrete fortress at Northwood, Middlesex. 
Those who served with Fieldhouse at the time were greatly impressed by his imperturbability and good humour, even at times of the greatest stress. He had to fight a war under a most unusual degree of political pressure and exposure. He had to minimize casualties and to avoid losing public support for the venture. He had also to bear in mind the navy's traditionally abysmal handling of press relations, which could effortlessly make a victory look like a defeat. At Woodward's request he changed the rules of engagement to allow the submarine 'Conqueror' to sink the Argentinian cruiser 'General Belgrano', which was menacing the southern flank of Woodward's ships. But he was merciful in victory, specifically ordering 'Conqueror' not to attack ships picking up 'Belgrano''s survivors, although 'Conqueror' had herself been depth-charged by those same ships. Lacking the strength for an opposed landing, Fieldhouse accepted Woodward's decision to take a calculated risk in landing the troops at San Carlos. He knew he was thereby flouting one of the bitterest lessons of the Second World War -- that one must have at least local air superiority before attempting an amphibious operation. It was a gamble that succeeded triumphantly but could have resulted in terrible losses. 
Fieldhouse's leadership was at its best in the moments of high drama: the Exocet attack on 'Sheffield'; the loss of destroyers and frigates to bombs, showing that, despite all the money spent, the navy's ships were 'still' not capable of defending themselves against determined air attack; and the disaster to 'Sir Galahad' and 'Sir Tristram' at Fitzroy. Past economies and wrong decisions meant that the task force lacked long-range airborne early warning and heavy enough anti-aircraft fire, but in many ways Fieldhouse presided over a curiously old-fashioned war, with many of the tactics the navy has used for centuries: decoy and deception, blockade and bombardment, covert operations and convoy. In the end, the Falklands were recovered by what Fieldhouse called a triumph of military capability backed by resolute political will. 'All difficulties,' he said, 'of short notice, extreme range and appalling weather were overcome by the quality of our people. They were magnificent. I could not have been better served' ('Daily Telegraph', 18 Feb 1992). 
In December 1982 Fieldhouse became first sea lord and chief of the naval staff, only the second submarine officer ever to do so. As first sea lord he fought the navy's corner with great skill and guile, eventually restoring much of the position lost to Nott. He improved, if that were possible, as a politician, being more than a match for the slyest Ministry of Defence civil servant. He defended the choice of Trident to replace Polaris as Britain's independent deterrent, arguing that it was still by far the most cost-effective option. He accused the European nations, including Britain, of what he called 'sea blindness', and urged a much greater political appreciation of the virtues of worldwide sea power, especially for Britain, which was still an island. 
Fieldhouse was promoted admiral of the fleet in August 1985 (the first submarine officer to reach that rank) and in November that year he took over as chief of the defence staff and chairman of the chiefs of staff committee, a position normally rotated between the three services. It was thought that his appointment out of turn was due to Margaret Thatcher, in her gratitude to the architect of the Falklands victory. He retired in December 1988, and was a very strong contender for the post of chairman of the military committee of NATO. He was actually in Brussels for a bi-annual meeting at which the election of the new chairman was on the agenda, when he suffered a burst aorta in his heart, leading to a lengthy operation. He was appointed KCB in 1980, GCB and GBE in 1982, and created a life peer as Baron Fieldhouse of Gosport in 1990. In retirement he was a consultant to Vosper Thorneycroft (UK) Ltd. In 1990 he became chairman of the White Ensign Association. In spite of his face and figure (he enjoyed good food and wine) and the benign, avuncular, almost Dickensian aspect of himself which he liked to show to the world in his conversation and his jokes, other naval officers sometimes found Fieldhouse a difficult personality to read. There was a story of an officer who had gone to see him about some difficulty and come away convinced he had an ally -- 'but it's only when you look round and your head falls off that you realise your throat's just been cut' (private information). He liked sailing (he was a member of the Royal Yacht Squadron) and listed his recreations as 'home, family and friends' ('WWW'). Despite his eminence, he was the most unassuming of men, being on first-name terms with the staff of his local supermarket. He died at Southampton General Hospital on 17 February 1992; his ashes were buried at sea on 28 February. He was survived by his wife and three children. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 27 May 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51036


Fox, Leslie (1918-1992), mathematician, was born on 30 September 1918 at 9 Princess Street, Chickenley Lane, Dewsbury, Yorkshire, the elder of two children of Job Senior Fox (1892-1974), coalminer, and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Vincent (1896-1988). He won a scholarship to the Wheelwright Grammar School in Dewsbury, which was noted for the number of boys who went on to distinguished careers, especially as mathematicians. In 1936 he won a scholarship to Christ Church, Oxford. After taking a first-class degree in mathematics in 1939 he started research for the degree of DPhil under Professor Richard Vynne Southwell in the engineering department; most of his research was concerned with secret war work. After completing his doctorate in 1942 he joined the Admiralty computing service to work under the direction of Donald Harry Sadler (another former Wheelwright boy). There he learned the art of making mathematical tables, and the rigour and patience necessary to ensure that the result of every calculation was correct. 
In 1945 Fox moved, with a group of others, to the newly formed mathematics division at the National Physical Laboratory, where he remained until 1956. During this time one of the early computers was being built at the laboratory: Fox did not take a great interest in the detailed workings of the machine, but he realized that a great revolution in mathematical calculations was under way. These early developments convinced him of the need for those using computers for scientific calculations to have a sound understanding of the numerical methods involved, their limitations as well as their powers. When he was invited to take charge of the new computing laboratory at Oxford he seized the opportunity to begin a new career in education. 
After a year at the University of California, Fox moved to Oxford in 1957. At once he began to argue vigorously and successfully for the inclusion of numerical analysis in the undergraduate mathematics syllabus. He attracted a steady stream of graduate students, many of whom went off to spread the teaching of numerical analysis at other universities. His aim was much wider than university teaching: he organized a number of summer schools, where he and his colleagues instilled good practices in scientific computation into visitors from other universities, industrial firms, and government research establishments. His interest in education also extended to schools, and he was an active member of the Oxford branch of the Mathematical Association, of which he became president. In 1963 he was appointed professor of numerical analysis, and was elected to a professorial fellowship at Balliol College. On his retirement Balliol elected him an emeritus fellow, and he maintained close ties with the college to the end of his life. 
Fox wrote all or a major part of eight books and more than eighty articles. His first book, on boundary value problems, was unusual in this area in still being in print nearly forty years later. His lasting influence, on students, colleagues, and others, was more personal and at least as important. Always looking for opportunities to reach a wider audience, in 1970 he took up a one-year visiting professorship at the Open University. He wrote a good deal of course material, and made a number of radio and television programmes. In 1986 the Open University awarded him an honorary doctorate. 
Fox was a fellow of the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications from its foundation, and served on its council for some years, as well as acting as editor of its journals. In 1989 he was elected an honorary fellow of the institute. He travelled widely; the most convivial of men, he made new friends wherever he went. At various times he held visiting professorships in California, Illinois, Yugoslavia, India, and Australia, as well as at the Open University. 
Fox was married twice: first, on 10 July 1943, to Pauline Helen Dennis, from whom he was divorced on 4 April 1973; and second, on 20 July 1973, to Clemency Mary Holme Clements ('b'. 1937), journalist, elder daughter of Thomas Fox. There were no children by either marriage. 
Fox was a keen sportsman throughout his life. As a student at Oxford he played football for the university and for Oxford City Football Club. At the National Physical Laboratory he was club tennis champion and captain of the cricket team, and distinguished himself as a sprinter in the civil service championships. On his return to Oxford he joined the Barnacles cricket club. Later in life he was persuaded to take up golf; in 1979 he arranged an annual contest between the dons of Oxford and Cambridge, and was captain of the Oxford team until his death. 
Following his retirement in 1983 Fox's colleagues and friends founded the Leslie Fox prize for young research workers in numerical analysis. Awarded annually, it has attracted a worldwide entry of a very high standard. The winner of the first competition, in 1985, was an American, Lloyd Nicholas Trefethen. When Fox's successor, Keith William Morton, retired in 1997 it was appropriate that Trefethen should be appointed to the professorship of numerical analysis that had been created for Fox. 
Throughout his life Fox remained true to his roots, a forthright socialist and above all a Yorkshireman. After sixty years free of illness he suffered a heart attack in 1981. He was soon back at work, but decided to retire early, in 1983; sadly, his retirement was dogged by illness. Following more heart trouble he died from a ruptured aneurysm in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 1 August 1992. He was cremated and his ashes buried at St Nicholas's Church, Marston, Oxford, on 8 August 1992. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51037


Francis, Sir Richard Trevor Langford (1934-1992), broadcasting executive and public servant, was born at the Imperial Nursing Home, Harrogate, Yorkshire, on 10 March 1934, the son of Eric Roland Francis (1902-1987), production engineer, and his wife, Esther Joy Todd (1906-1999). He was educated at Malsis Hall, Crosshills, Yorkshire (1944-8), and Uppingham School (1948-53) before going to University College, Oxford, on an open scholarship to read natural sciences. In his second year, he switched from chemistry to politics, philosophy, and economics. At Oxford he acted with the Oxford Experimental Theatre and the Oxford University Dramatic Society. He graduated with a third-class degree in 1956. After two years' national service, commissioned in the Royal Artillery, he entered the BBC as a general trainee -- a highly competitive entry system which was one of the most prized undergraduate career entry schemes. 
After developing one of the BBC's first successful afternoon programmes, 'Table Talk', Francis graduated to 'Panorama', working with Britain's first-rank television reporters such as Richard Dimbleby, Ludovic Kennedy, and Robin Day. Apart from his command of the studio, he made some elegant films on subjects as diverse as Albert Schweitzer in Lambarene and the struggle for black emancipation in the southern states of America. Typically, matching his physical appearance (he could have been taken for a rugby international) he played a sturdy role in internal debates about 'Panorama' -- then the BBC's leading television current affairs programme, but under threat from heavy competition from ITV. In a cogently argued memorandum to Paul Fox, the BBC's head of public affairs broadcasting, he said: '
'Panorama' is losing its status... faced with increasing competition, we are no longer indispensable. The concept of the studio as the House of Richard Dimbleby has become dull and predictable. We must get more contracted experts as reporters in the fields of Defence, the Communist Block, Science. (BBC WAC, 732/1, 191/9, 11 Aug 1964)' This was the beginning of a long, almost theological debate about the role and structure of 'Panorama' in the 1960s. 
Francis became assistant editor of the BBC's late evening programme '24 Hours' in 1966, and ran the BBC's general election coverage in 1970 (and the coverage of the US presidential election in 1972). 'General Elections are to television as wars are to the aircraft industry -- they force development and invention', he said ('The Independent', 29 June 1992). The 1970 election programme was the first to use computer online processing. This complex, leading-edge studio responsibility was built on Francis's experience as the producer of global live coverage of the extraordinary American Apollo space programme (including the landing on the moon in July 1969). He was known to lapse frequently into NASA space communication language -- and once was presented with 400 feet of negative film when he responded to a question about its possible inclusion with the word 'negative' instead of 'no'. 
After a period as assistant head of BBC current affairs Francis became in 1973 BBC controller, Northern Ireland. This followed his production in 1971 of a special programme on Northern Ireland called 'The Question of Ulster' which, he said, was 'designed to be a long, cool programme of talk, not action' ('The Independent', 29 June 1992) -- giving considered background and context to the daily diet of news film of the troubles which had broken out in August 1969. The then home secretary, Reginald Maudling, urged the BBC not to transmit. The governors discussed the issue and decided to go ahead with the broadcast on 5 January 1972. Over two-thirds of the population of Ulster watched the programme, chaired by Lord Devlin. The dire warnings that had preceded the programme proved unfounded. As controller, Northern Ireland, Francis was courageous and clear, and 'established clear and effective ground rules' (Hussey). His five years covered a period of great trouble in Northern Ireland, and he won the admiration of his staff and the BBC management for his carefulness and calmness when faced with many conflicting political and social pressures. He deployed his Yorkshire determination in defence of high editorial standards. In a speech at Chatham House in February 1977 he said: 'The experience of broadcasting in Northern Ireland, for all the threats to society and to human life, suggests that the practice of free speech within a well tested framework of responsibility is the best -- if not the easiest -- way to cover extraordinary circumstances. I believe we have a contribution to make to the maintenance of democracy both by providing a forum where harsh differences of opinion can be aired, and by reporting and courageously investigating the unpalatable truths which underlie the problems in our midst. I am sure that if and when the communities of Northern Ireland reconcile their conflicts, it will be by understanding them rather than by ignoring them. (Francis, 'Broadcasting')' In 1977 Francis gained a seat on the BBC board of management, as director of news and current affairs. He guided a disparate group of news and current affairs producers, many of whom saw his role as a touch bureaucratic (as did some other members of the board). He construed his role as one of trying to set common standards, and as being a spokesman for policy. A speech at the Royal Television Society in 1981 captured the essence of his views: 'Any really democratic society is vulnerable to its own openness. That is, perhaps, the paradox with which all of us, as citizens and broadcasters, have to grapple. There are those who, for the best and most honourable of motives, believe that this very openness contains the seeds of democracy's self destruction. I cannot believe that our democracy is so fragile a thing that it has neither the will nor the strength to identify and withstand the pressures upon it. (Francis, 'Television')' During the Falklands War, he incurred the displeasure of Margaret Thatcher for saying, in a speech in Spain (about broadcasters' responsibilities in covering the conflict), that 'the widow of Portsmouth is no different from the widow of Buenos Aires' -- stressing the need for impartiality to underpin a reputation for telling the truth (Francis, address). The chairman of the BBC, Marmaduke Hussey, later said that 'Dick Francis set standards for BBC journalists while arguing a persuasive case for editorial freedom. His reward was the respect of both journalists and politicians -- chafing communities who rarely applaud the same man' (Hussey). 
Francis's career towards what some saw as the possible prize of the BBC's director-generalship took a step further when he became managing director, radio, in 1982. To some he was something of a technocrat, with more of a stubborn determination than a nimble, lightfooted wit. But he saw the BBC as a cause, and when he gave his loyalty to a task, he didn't let go. As managing director, radio, he embraced local radio and its separate management structure. (He had already shown his enthusiasm in Northern Ireland, by establishing Radio Ulster.) He also fought for the redevelopment of the Langham Hotel -- a prime property owned by the BBC for many years and sold by the governors (to the surprise of many staff) as part of a deal to buy the White City racetrack site. He involved many members of staff in helping to develop the architect Norman Foster's plans for the Langham Hotel. His deputy, Charles McLelland, said: 'More than anything else, this gave everybody working in Radio, the feeling that they had a boss who cared not just for the future of Radio, but for them as individuals. For the first time in many years they felt they were part of a dynamic future. ('The Guardian', 29 June 1992)' Francis's determination in the interests of local radio and the Langham redevelopment led him to be seen as something of a problem on the BBC board of management. He had the capacity to be relentless in his point of view. He was engineered out of the BBC, to the dismay of many, in 1986. (His departure set a blueprint for further sudden removals from high office a year or so later.) The process upset him badly. Like some others on the board of management, he had not realized that the BBC was beginning to be in the grip of forces which almost resented the public service successes of its past, and which needed to associate that past with managerial failure to justify its new accountancy-led, market-orientated thinking. 
Within a very short period of his departure from the BBC Francis became director-general of the British Council. He had bounced on the trampoline and emerged higher than the point from which he fell. In his five years as director-general, he managed to extend the council's programme by 20 per cent in real terms, and to increase its grant from the government each year. He introduced new planning mechanisms and efficiency savings, being 'convinced that the best way to protect the Council's independent but complementary role [to the Foreign Office] and its traditional values was to prove its worth by business criteria' (Orr, 'The Times', 3 July 1992). He travelled frequently -- as he had done with the BBC, where his reputation for enjoying jet travel and the comforts of the VIP lounge was legendary. Some British Council staff thought that he spent too much time away from base, but he believed in walking his global ship (in his interests in 'Who's Who' he listed 'off-shore sailing and listening to music six miles high'. Others admired his stamina and were energized by the excitement with which he reported on local achievements. He wanted to expand the council's activities in eastern Europe and, at home, he successfully relocated half the council's staff to new premises in Manchester -- a demanding managerial challenge. He was a doughty promoter of the English language and wanted to see the best of British art in all its forms exhibited abroad. The British Council was well served by him, and his own artistic enthusiasms for good music, opera, and photography underpinned what was to be his last professional achievement. 'His representation of the Council, at home and abroad, has lifted its standing throughout the world', said Marmaduke Hussey in his appreciation in 'The Times'. 
Francis was professionally self-assertive, and was well-versed in the art of presentation. He was implacable in his consistency for what he believed to be right. He was, above all, a public servant. His career began at a time when Britain strongly embraced the concept of the public services. It ended as that world, which was assaulted by Prime Minister Thatcher, had begun to crumble. In many ways, he was an intrepid figure, with great enthusiasms masking an inner shyness. His was a life of achievement in a competitive environment. He took risks, and could keep calm under the greatest pressure -- a characteristic that made him one of Britain's top (and pioneering) live studio television directors, and that served him well when he was responsible for all global television coverage outside the USA of the Apollo space programme which landed man on the moon. Equally, he brought his cool head to technically complex general election television programmes, as well as to the complexities of Northern Ireland as the BBC controller during a critical and dangerous period for journalists and staff. He conducted his hobby of offshore sailing with the energy (and occasional insouciance to danger) that marked his professional career. Privately, he was a kind and generous friend -- with little of the pomposity that some professional observers felt was characteristic. 
Francis was married twice: first, on 22 December 1958, to Beate Ella Paula Stientje Ohlhagen ('b'. 1931), air hostess, daughter of Karl Wilhelm Ohlhagen, from whom he was divorced in 1973; and second, on 1 October 1974, to Elizabeth Penelope Anne Fairfax-Crone ('b'. 1945), a television researcher and producer, daughter of Fairfax Chinnery Fairfax-Crone. There were two sons by each marriage. 
Francis was at various times a member of the 'D' Notice Committee and of the Press Complaints Commission, the Media Law Group, the UK-Japan 2000 Group, and the Franco-British Council; a council member of the Royal College of Art and of Voluntary Service Overseas; a governor of Westminster College; a trustee of the Charities Aid Foundation; a vice-president of the Royal Institute of Public Administration; and a deputy chairman of Visnews and of the International Press Institute. He was elected a companion of the British Institute of Management in 1984, honorary president of the Radio Academy in 1986, and a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts in 1988. He was made KCMG in 1989 and a fellow of Kings College, London, in 1991. He died, following a heart attack, at Queen Mary's University Hospital, Roehampton, on 26 June 1992, and was buried in Queen's Road cemetery, Richmond, on 3 July. His memorial service was held in St Paul's Cathedral on 17 November 1992 under the auspices of the two organizations he had served so well. It was attended by over a thousand people, and the BBC Symphony Orchestra played Elgar's 'Nimrod' and Richard Strauss's 'Also sprach Zarathustra' (which he had used for his Apollo space programmes). The music linked this quintessential Englishman with the creative inventiveness and expansive style that had marked his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 51039


Franks, Oliver Shewell, Baron Franks (1905-1992), philosopher and public servant, was born on 16 February 1905 at Woodbrooke settlement, Selly Oak, Birmingham, the elder son and oldest of four children of the Revd Dr Robert Sleightholme Franks (1871-1964), scholar and theologian, and his wife, Katharine 
(Kitty; 1875-1971)
, daughter of Joseph Shewell, of Redcar, Yorkshire, an engineer and iron bridge builder. Profoundly reasonable and publicly austere, a figure of immense moral authority, Oliver Franks lived an exceptional life. He did not seek his various careers of don, mandarin, diplomat, banker, provost, pillar of state. They sought him. He did not collect committees, as some men do. Committees collected him. He did not pine for public recognition. Recognition came to him. He bore an uncanny resemblance to Aristotle's magnanimous man, 'moderately disposed towards wealth, power, and every kind of good and bad fortune, however it befalls him'. Franks was made for magnanimity: 'He does not enter for popular contests, or ones in which others distinguish themselves; he hangs back or does nothing at all, except where the honour or the feat is a great one. The tasks he undertakes are few, but grand and celebrated. (Quoted in Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 195)' 

Franks was a philosopher king with a nonconformist conscience. 'The Establishment smites the Establishment', proclaimed a commentator on one of his multifarious Franks reports (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 198), a fine phrase but a doubtful verdict. When it came to establishments he was in them but not of them. In a life almost coterminous with the century -- he was highly attuned to the patterns of the past, especially to the 'longue duree' of Fernand Braudel, his favourite historian -- Franks swam peaceably in the two streams of English dissent that were his birthright: the Congregational church and the Religious Society of Friends. His father was a Congregational minister, like his father before him; his mother was a Quaker from a family of Quakers. His upbringing was uplifting. A mettlesome air of intellectual enquiry pervaded the entire household. Oliver and his sisters and brother were expected to think -- think hard -- for themselves. Mealtimes were feasts of conversation. Robert Franks did not read the newspaper at breakfast; the family talked -- talked about everything from the flowers in the fields to the Channel Fleet. They weighed words and knew their meaning. They analysed articles in 'The Times'. On Sundays they dissected the sermon they had heard. The opinions were sensible, but the talk was unrestrained. This was a liberal household in more senses than one. 
Politically they were staunch believers in the unimpeachable virtue of Mr Gladstone -- in moments of hilarity, the GOM (Grand Old Man). They voted Liberal, always; the children followed suit. Young Oliver, aged five, sported a loyal rosette at the general election of 1910. Old Oliver was not so ostentatious. In the 1930s he was politically engaged, briefly, in the Oxford Movement for the Propagation of Peace, a comprehensively lost cause. In the 1940s and 1950s he attended meetings of XYZ, a clandestine dining club of Labour supporters and sympathizers in the City, whose stalwarts included Hugh Dalton, Evan Durbin, Hugh Gaitskell, Douglas Jay, and the self-styled liberal-socialist economist James Meade, a close friend. XYZ had a strong Fabian flavour, and there was indeed something of the Fabian about Oliver Franks. He would build a new Jerusalem; and he would repine for its soul. Typically, he was not an XYZ member as such, more a benevolent assessor. In party political terms, during the period of his most active public service he was concerned to preserve his status as 'a neuter' as he put it (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 174). Ennobled in 1962, he took the Liberal whip, as expected, though in unmistakable cross-bench fashion his sponsors were a civil servant and a judge. Thereafter he permitted himself the occasional foray into national politics, chairing election meetings of the Oxford Liberals in 1963 and 1964, and addressing a Liberal Party rally at the Oxford Union in favour of a decisive vote to remain in the EEC in the referendum of 1975. In later life he was given to describing himself as 'an unreconstructed Gladstonian Liberal'; in playful mood he might even suggest that he and Lord Gladwyn (the former Gladwyn Jebb) were the only ones left, a conceit in which the latter was happy to share. Just how Liberal he was, or became, is a moot point. Unquestionably party meant little to him. Party politics was too much of a game, too often trivial or reprehensible -- not serious. There was a touch of disdain in Franks's contemplation of the political stew. During the intervals of his Falklands inquiry in 1982 he would sit back and listen as 'the parliamentarians cracked their silly parliamentary jokes' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 28-9). It was an attitude reminiscent of Demodocus on the Milesians: '
Milesians are not stupid, I aver; 

But they behave the same as if they were. 

' Franks was a mugwump. He disliked labels, but it may be appropriate to adapt the one he gave himself. He was, if anything, an unreconstructed Liberal internationalist. 
In 1910 the Franks family moved from Birmingham to Bristol, where Oliver's father became principal of the Western College, and Oliver became a west countryman. After a couple of dismal dame-schools he went to Bristol grammar school (1915-23). His progress offers no crumb of comfort to those who like their great men to be school dunces. Every year with monotonous regularity he carried off the form prize. He departed the classical sixth with prizes in English literature, Latin, and Greek testament. Inevitably, he was school captain. At his second attempt, to the delight of the whole family, he won an open scholarship in classics to Queen's College, Oxford (1923-7). 
To his fellow students he was Father Franks, preternaturally wise, solemn, seclusive, masterful. At the outset, however, he was not so secure, intellectually or financially. 'At Oxford in the 1920s we were either rich or poor', wrote Douglas Jay, a near contemporary (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 16). Franks was poor. He did not join the Oxford Union because he could not afford to. He went to the occasional free concert, and once a term to the sixpenny seats in the cinema. He took up rowing, frugally, and persevered, despite 'much 'algo ton orron' [pain in the arse]' (ibid., 16). On Sundays he went, 'all good', to chapel at Mansfield College, almost a family foundation. Two years into his degree came the event which confirmed him to himself: moderations -- the first public examination in 'literae humaniores' -- fifteen papers in everything from Aristophanes to Virgil. He prepared himself for this test with exemplary thoroughness. 'With the approach of Mods', reported his old school magazine, 'Mr Franks has withdrawn into an anchorite's seclusion, whence he only occasionally emerges, wearing the most remarkable stockings.' The results were spectacular: fourteen alphas and a solitary beta in Latin prose, some of the highest marks in the whole university, and the best first at Queen's since the First World War. 'Did not Mr Franks collect innumerable alphas in his recent encounter? Does he not now read paperbacks upon the river? Is not that the manifestation of real genius?' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 17-18). 
After that Franks never looked back. Moderations were followed by Greats -- two years of philosophy and ancient history. Franks read prodigiously, as usual, encouraged by his father's example and conversation: 'Mr Franks has become almost a legendary figure. There appear to be some doubts of his tangible existence at Queen's. One fact only has penetrated to us. Mr Franks, with characteristic wisdom, is reading St Thomas Aquinas for that most soul-destroying of all ordeals, Greats. We commend his example, for here is balm for the tortured spirit. (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 19)' In 1927, in swift succession, the wise Mr Franks took a congratulatory first, a fellowship at Queen's, and a year's leave of absence, 'to go to Europe and grow older'. He travelled in Germany, Austria, and Italy, where he was arrested by Mussolini's police in possession of Plato's 'Republic' -- the very book in which Socrates makes the argument that 'there will be no end to the troubles of states, or indeed... of humanity itself, till philosophers become kings in this world, or till those we now call kings and rulers really and truly become philosophers' (quoted in Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 24). The arrest of the tyro philosopher by the myrmidons of 'Il Duce' is a fine thing to contemplate. 
Back in Oxford, Franks began plying his trade. He wrote almost nothing, but he was an outstanding college tutor. One of his first pupils was a woman from Lady Margaret Hall -- Barbara Tanner -- reading the new combination of philosophy, politics, and economics (a combination which Franks did much to make academically respectable). It so happened that she and Franks were already acquainted. Their relationship developed, as it were, philosophically. They married at Redland Friends' meeting-house in Bristol on 3 July 1931, and remained the best of friends for nearly sixty years. It was a friendship of an appropriately Aristotelian cast. 


Oliver Franks and Barbara Tanner were fundamentally compatible people. They shared the same values in life and the same belief in religion as relevant to the living of it. For Franks that was what was most important in the marriage. At the heart of this was a certain simplicity, evident in the pastimes they shared: gardening, reading, walking, shrimping in the Isles of Scilly. Franks was proud of his wife's distinction on the bench, proud that she held the same office as her father and grandfather before her. It appealed to his sense of the fitness of things. They both took great pleasure in the generational continuity, and in the more equal opportunity it betokened. There was a mutual respect between them. If she was not his intellectual equal, in human terms he was if anything overmatched. In general she ranged further than he. Her Quaker sympathies were deeper, her pacifist leanings stronger. In middle age she lost her shyness but retained her modesty. She practised yoga and tai chi. She liked to meditate. At seventy-five she learned to stand on her head. She was her own woman, an expression she would probably have deplored. At the same time she supported her husband in everything he did, just as he supported her. This was not a matter of form, but a grave moral obligation. In the last ten years of her life she took up painting, with amazing success. She sought technical instruction and went on painting holidays in the south of France, revelling in the warmth and colour of the late summer. He supported her in that, making tea and chatting amiably to the assorted amateur artists who appeared in the house or set up their easels in the garden, before resuming his reading. 
Franks consulted her on anything of consequence. Together they determined that he should not become Oxford-bound. It was decided that he should apply for the first available (and interesting) philosophy post in the UK. This happened to be the chair of moral philosophy at Glasgow, a chair previously occupied by none other than Adam Smith. It was the only job for which he ever made unsolicited application. The application was successful. They left Oxford in 1937. The new professor of moral philosophy was thirty-two. He was not long for the life of the mind. 
Franks had been at Glasgow for barely a year when he received a terse enquiry from Whitehall. 'Do you undertake to go wherever you are sent in the event of a national emergency?' He replied in the affirmative. The question prompted some reflection, but no crisis of conscience. For Franks the Second World War was not a good war, but it was a necessary one. As he saw it, 'Hitler had to be squashed' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 39). If conscripted, he would have served. In the event he was immured for the duration in the Ministry of Supply (1939-46). After that, as he later remarked, life was not the same. Squashing Hitler launched Franks into a new orbit. By the end of the war, in spite of his amateur status, he was permanent secretary, a feat equalled only by John Maud (later Baron Redcliffe-Maud) in the Ministry of Food. Success brought recognition. It was in these years that he made his reputation as an adjudicator, his most natural and effective role on the public stage. Stuart Hampshire has written: 'The work of practical reason is never finished, never final and secure. Surveying any tract of history, and looking into our own minds, we see the ebb and flow of contrary passions and interests needing to be reconciled; in the mind by that form of inner adjudication which is called reflection, and in the state by the literal and visible adjudication of parliaments and law courts, (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 43)' and, one might add, Oliver Franks. 
In consequence Franks became hot property. He was besought to remain at the Ministry of Supply; coveted by the Board of Trade and the Ministry of Works; offered the National Coal Board, the flagship of the nationalized fleet. He wanted none of these. Approached with some trepidation, the new world of Whitehall had proved compelling, and in many ways congenial. Yet his kinship remained in some measure provisional. He was a temporary permanent secretary, as he liked to say, and he was in need of a restorative. The nationalized industries failed to light a spark. More than once in the post-war period he considered the possibility of working at the grindstones of politics and administration, most excruciatingly as governor of the Bank of England, only to reject it (after some hesitation) every time. In 1946 (the year in which he was made KCB), happily, he was offered a position he did want -- the only one, he said, that he ever really wanted -- a position for which he was apparently predestined, if not actually pre-elected, since before the war: provost of Queen's College, Oxford (1946-8). 
Free at last, Franks spent a year, in his words, 'frisking like a lamb in green pastures' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 57). Then came another summons. On 30 June 1947 he was given leave of absence from the college, 'to prepare a scheme for the comprehensive restoration of the economy of Europe on the lines adumbrated by Mr Marshall, the United States Secretary of State' (ibid., 57). The scheme was to be submitted by 1 September 1947. It was surely the largest long-vacation task ever undertaken. 
The summons had come from the foreign secretary. Any explanation of Franks's galvanic influence on the international transformations of the mid-twentieth century must begin with his role as the special agent of Ernest Bevin. The tall, spare don and the short, squat docker were an unlikely combination, as Bevin himself pointed out. 'You, Oliver, 'ad a university experience. My experience is in the 'edgerows of life' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 52). The dissimilarity mattered not at all. Bevin had encountered Franks during the war, as minister of labour. He liked this sure-footed scholar, who could be of such help to him. One could rely on Franks, without obligation. He had no history. He was at once judicious and resourceful, masterly and discreet. For Bevin this was an extremely attractive proposition. On Franks's side the chemistry was simple. He approved of Bevin, and of what he was trying to do. He made no allowance for him, as so many did. He even joked about him, an unusual public sign of affection. 'The Secretary of State', he once informed the waiting Dean Acheson, 'is doing his own version of hurrying to the meeting' (ibid., 53). 
It was Bevin who seized Marshall's lifeline and organized a collective response; Bevin who mooted a conference in Paris to determine how Europe should respond; Bevin who fingered Franks to get the job done; Bevin who left him to it. As chairman of the new-found Committee for European Economic Co-operation (the CEEC, later the Organization for European Economic Co-operation, OEEC, later still the OECD) and leader of the British delegation, Franks was given plenipotentiary powers and virtually no instructions. Essentially he had to shoehorn sixteen nations into one report, 'European availabilities and requirements', for the four years 1948-51 in a matter of six weeks. 
The exercise was a sore trial to all concerned (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the UK), regardless of the bounty it might bring. Among other things it called for figures and forecasts of a sophistication well beyond most national capabilities. At bottom, however, the problem facing the CEEC was not econometric but diplomatic. In William Diebold's words, 'the main job in Paris was finding some numbers that would pass muster in Washington' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 71): a problem of palatability, and hence of persuasion. That was where Father Franks came in. 
The numbers initially produced in Paris, by census and aggregation, were highly unpalatable. For the sixteen countries plus western Germany they showed an accumulated balance of payments deficit of $29.2 billion over the four-year period in question -- the headline figure of dollar aid required, in the CEEC's estimation, for a sustainable European recovery programme. Of this global deficit no less than $28.2 billion was with the American continent: $8.1 billion in 1948 reducing annually to $5.8 billion in 1951. These numbers were shocking, not only because of their order of magnitude, but also because of their pessimistic outlook. $29 billion was a colossal sum, far exceeding Britain's aggregate international lending throughout the nineteenth century. For the United States it was out of the question, as the imperious under-secretary of state, William Clayton, immediately informed Franks. Marshall planners might not know the size of the Marshall plan, but they knew it had to be smaller than that. As disturbing was the clear intimation that the aid programme would not be sufficient to restore equilibrium after four years, as Washington hoped and expected. A deficit would remain, and with it the prospect of further importunings. When would the Europeans finally be able to stand on their own thirty-two feet? 
Franks now had the measure of the problem. He held all the threads in his hands. Huddling separately with a small executive committee of the CEEC, a trusted member of Bevin's inner circle (Edmund Hall-Patch), and -- very privately -- key US officials offering 'friendly aid', he set about the necessary revising and recasting. With the help of a short postponement, this intensive diplomacy bore fruit. Miraculously the CEEC did produce a report, to which everyone was prevailed upon to subscribe. As to numbers, it was marvellously murky. The report dealt in dollar deficits. Dollar aid, it declared disingenuously, was a matter for the US. The 'tentatively estimated deficit' with the American continent had shrunk to an accumulated total of $22.4 billion over the four-year period: $8 billion in 1948 reducing to $3.4 billion in 1951. If most capital equipment were shown (and financed) separately, as agreed, then the numbers became $19.3 billion, $7.1 billion, and $2.8 billion respectively. Moreover there was a 'tentatively estimated surplus' with the rest of the world of $2.8 billion over the same period. For technical reasons the report doubted the possibility of offsetting this surplus against the dollar deficit, but merely to mention it was enough for enticingly small net figures to swim before the eyes. 
These numbers passed muster on at least two counts. First and foremost, their order of magnitude was no longer scary. In Franksian parlance the European antithesis to Marshall's thesis was $19.3 billion. The administration's synthesis was $17 billion. The European recovery programme was presented for congressional approval in December 1947. In April 1948 a first tranche of $5 billion was made available for an initial twelve-month period. Of this the UK received no less than $1.24 billion, an unexpected satisfaction owing something to the calming presence of Franks. Second, the CEEC's numbers provided at least a fig leaf of cover for the future. The report concluded with the positive reassurance that the Americans demanded: 'Certainly the deficit after the end of 1951, on these assumptions, should be of dimensions which will be manageable without special aid' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 83). On this occasion, perhaps, Franksian principles were overborne. 
The long vacation was over. The lines adumbrated by Marshall had been substantiated by Franks. It was a remarkable achievement. The foreign secretary's special agent had secured the first great transatlantic bargain of the post-war period. 
Franks was not allowed to rest, but was offered instead the plum of the Washington embassy (1948-52). The prime minister himself made the call. Franks accepted only after prolonged hesitation. He was loath to part with Queen's; Barbara was reluctant to leave Oxford. Yet they went. His own explanation is characteristic. 'In the end, the obvious dawned. Unless there is a proper objection of conscience, there are things it is not appropriate to refuse' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 89). The Stoic technical term for this is 'kathekon' or appropriate action. Franks was a lapsed philosopher, but he consciously attended to the philosopher's question -- how should one live? He returned a Stoic answer. To live well was to live virtuously. Franks was a virtuous man who did not cultivate virtue, except perhaps to take a quiet pride in his own power of right judgement. He did what he thought right: that is, in Cicero's words, honourable and seemly. It would not have been seemly to refuse Clement Attlee, or for that matter Ernest Bevin. 
Franks was sent to Washington with a specific purpose in mind. Bevin's attention had shifted from economic to military security. What he sought was an 'Atlantic pact' of mutual assistance among the Western democracies. Here too the Europeans needed help. An Atlantic pact required an American commitment, ultimately a commitment to use force. For the heirs of George Washington to make such a commitment it was axiomatic that some moral stiffening would be needed. Who better than Franks to provide it? 
The Atlantic pact became in due course the north Atlantic treaty (later the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO), signed with great fanfare in Washington in April 1949. It was the outcome of nine months of gruelling international negotiation. The principal negotiators were the ambassadors of Belgium, Canada, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the UK, partnered by the US secretary of state. In spite of his relative youth Franks swiftly attained a unique position in this company, becoming the unofficial moderator of the ambassadors, and ultimately the guarantor of the treaty on the European side -- a tribute to his qualities and his accomplishment. He was now a committee man of unbeatable experience. He had chaired not only the CEEC, but also the governing body of an Oxford college, compared to which, he observed, the Europeans were child's play. 
The crux of the treaty was the pledge, the provision for collective defence against armed attack: one for all and all for one. The form of words embodying this provision evolved through a number of sinuous but significant compromises, and occasioned the most rancorous (and fundamental) disputes between the Europeans and the Americans. The basic elements were well stated by the Canadian diplomat Escott Reid: 'The firmer the pledge, the greater the effect the treaty might be expected to have in deterring the Soviet Union and in restoring in Western Europe the confidence necessary for its recovery. The weaker the pledge, the less reluctant the senate would be to ratify the treaty. (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 100)' The Europeans tended to emphasize the first consideration, the Americans the second. By February 1949, after seven months of negotiation, they arrived at an impasse. Those who wanted a treaty (a majority) despaired of a strong pledge; those who wanted a strong pledge (another majority) despaired of a treaty. At this juncture the incoming secretary of state, Dean Acheson, made his famous 'unorthodox proposal' to Franks: 'On an experimental basis I suggested that we talk regularly, and in complete personal confidence, about any international problems we saw arising. Neither would report or quote the other unless, thinking it would be useful in promoting action, he got the other's consent and agreement on the terms of a reporting memorandum or cable.... We met alone, usually at his residence or mine, at the end of the day before or after dinner. No one was informed even of the fact of the meeting. We discussed situations already emerging or likely to do so, the attitudes that various people in both countries would be likely to take, what courses of action were possible and their merits, the chief problems that could arise. If either thought that his department should be alerted to the other's apprehensions and thoughts, we would work out an acceptable text setting out the problem and suggesting approaches. (ibid., 104)' In this spirit Franks and Acheson re-examined the pledge from first principles. They disassembled all the pieces and together constructed a new form of words -- 'a bit of redrafting to ease the constitutional sensibilities of the Congress', as Franks put it later (ibid., 104). It read: 'The Parties agree that an armed attack against one or more of them in Europe and North America shall be considered an armed attack against them all; and consequently that, if such an armed attack occurs, each of them in exercise of the right of individual or collective self-defence recognized by article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, will assist the Party or Parties so attacked by taking forthwith such action including the use of armed force, individually and in concert with the other parties, as it deems necessary to restore and assure the security of the North Atlantic area. (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 105)' This bit of redrafting did the trick. The impasse was broken. The negotiations were swiftly concluded. With one minor transposition, the draft concocted 'a deux' by Franks and Acheson became the keystone of the North Atlantic treaty. It has remained in place ever since. 
An entangling alliance had been created, against the weight of history. As Bevin reported to the cabinet, American readiness 'to enter into a commitment to defend Europe in time of peace marked a revolutionary step in their policy' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 107). Appropriately enough, it was the old firm of Bevin and Franks who signed for the UK. Bevin was exuberant. The North Atlantic treaty was his crowning achievement as foreign secretary. It was the second great transatlantic bargain of the post-war period. It too was secured by Franks. 
Just as Franks had been an amateur mandarin, so he was an amateur diplomat. It was a career refrain. He might have been a professional philosopher, but in retrospect the message is clear: philosophy was not enough. Franks was a lifelong layman -- the most distinguished of his day. He seems to have relished that status. He was interested in the subject at hand, whatever it was. He was unlearned but educable. He was knowledgeable on cognate matters. He was inquisitive, purposive, co-operative. He had a remarkable talent for finding the right level of detail. He was flexible (not biddable), and generally unprejudiced. He listened to what he was told; his opinions, however, were his own. This whole profile was immensely reassuring, in London and Washington alike. The consummate Dean Acheson, for one, was not easily impressed; but his unorthodox proposal tells its own story. The quality and scope of the relationship between Franks and Acheson, as ambassador and secretary of state, is unparalleled in American history, and likely to remain so. It meant that Franks could become a participant in internal American deliberations; it was in fact the hard currency of the much mythologized special relationship. Franks reflected: 'The special relationship was not a mystique of the shared inheritance of the English-speaking peoples. It arose out of common aims and mutual need of each other; it was rooted in strong habits of working together on which there was supervened the sentiments of mutual trust. (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 121)' He had no time for the patronizing game played by so many of his countrymen, the game of Greeks and Romans. Acheson and his advisers were not lacking in Greek wisdom. What they required was efficacy. 'In the Anglo-American relationship', Franks observed wisely, 'British policy has to pass the test: can the British deliver?' (ibid., 88). 
Franks was as efficacious as any. It was very largely on his urging and his argument -- 'the Americans will to some extent... test the quality of the partnership by our attitude to the notion of a token ground force' -- that the British government overcame its reluctance and committed a brigade group to Korea in 1950, as 'a valuable contribution to Anglo-American solidarity' (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 127). It was his formulations, delphic as they were, which governed nuclear consultation between the two countries, and which became part of the essential grammar of Anglo-American relations during the cold war. With regard to the delicate question of US bases in the UK, for example, he provided the 'joint decision' formula of 1951: 'The use of these bases in an emergency would be a matter for joint decision by His Majesty's Government and the United States Government in the light of the circumstances prevailing at the time.' From the British point of view these transactions surely left something to be desired, yet no one, not even Winston Churchill, was able to improve upon them. As Acheson's special assistant remarked of the joint decision formula, 'the agreement was as precise as anyone could make it -- as precise as anyone wanted it to be -- but there was still... ambiguity there that served everybody's interests... and needs' (ibid., 134). 
Franks chose to depart the diplomatic life in 1952. He was pressed to become the first secretary-general of NATO, a natural transition, but at length accepted a more unexpected offer, the chairmanship of Lloyds Bank, the largest of the London clearing houses (1954-62). Franks offered Lloyds his moral eminence, in Gordon Richardson's phrase, and his administrative gift. Lloyds offered Franks a vantage point from which to observe the world. It paid handsomely -- far more than any other position he ever held -- and it allowed full scope for his burgeoning practice of public adjudication. This took the characteristic form of an official inquiry, followed by a report. Soon he appeared to be in session almost continuously. He chaired two major inquiries -- on administrative tribunals and inquiries (1955-7) and on Oxford University (1964-6) -- and played a leading part in a third, on the working of the monetary system (1957-9), under Lord Radcliffe. More followed. In 1971-2, at the request of the home secretary, Franks inquired into the controversial catch-all section 2 of the 'Official Secrets Act' of 1911; and in 1982-3, at the request of the prime minister, into the government's handling of the Falklands conflict. In between, he kept his hand in with a number of smaller, solo productions on the development of India and Pakistan (1960), British business schools (1963), the Committee of London Clearing Bankers (1974), and a register of immigrants' dependants (1976). In 1975 he was briefly but happily reunited with Radcliffe on the publication of ministerial memoirs. 
Franks did not write these Franks reports, yet he was their author. They excelled in exposition. They exhibited a drive for clarity, rationality, efficiency. The reforms they invariably advocated were enlightened, ameliorative, improving in the sense that Gladstone understood. Franks's affinity for the fundamental meant that little was overlooked. Often he confronted taboos of various kinds: national sovereignty, official secrecy, college autonomy. Reasoned discussion of the taboo is already an enlightened step. The radical undertow of the reports is easy to miss. With the exception of official secrets legislation, moreover, Franks left nothing as he found it. Perceptions changed even when institutional practice did not. 
Franks had as much influence on people as on events. He was a natural exemplar. Clement Attlee's unreserved judgement was a representative one: for the majority of those who encountered him, Franks was the ablest man they ever met. There was a period, extending from the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s, when it seemed to his contemporaries that he could do almost anything -- chancellor of the exchequer or governor of the Bank of England, as Rab Butler put it. But these were paths not taken. Franks forswore further influence on policy making. After Lloyds he retreated once more to his beloved Oxford, becoming provost of Worcester College (1962-76) and Lockean under-labourer in the college garden. In the end he offered no lessons to others except that of a life well led. He died at his home, Blackhall Farm, Garford Road, Oxford, on 15 October 1992. A memorial service was held at the university church of St Mary the Virgin, on 13 December. He was survived by his two daughters, Caroline ('b'. 1939) and Alison ('b'. 1945). 
'He was a man of the greatest reticence, but with nothing to conceal; a man of intensely 'private life', but wholly transparent': Franks attained what T. S. Eliot self-referentially admired in Spinoza. The hallmark of his intensely private life was his simplicity -- a Quaker tenet. 'We nearly all of us have something of the sailor or gardener in us', he told the Pilgrim Society in 1948 (Danchev, 'Oliver Franks', 196). John Locke presented his patron, Lord Shaftesbury, with a delightful little volume of his own composition, 'The Growth of Vines and Olives'. Perhaps if things had fallen out differently Franks might have done likewise for his patron, Bevin. In every sense, he stood squarely in the tradition of looking after the garden he inherited. It is sometimes said that he was not creative. In diplomacy he was highly creative. Complex international negotiation suited Franks's temperament. Always deliberate, he could be deliberately cautious or deliberately adventurous as the need arose. Caution was what Franks sufficiently possessed to be able (judiciously) to throw it to the winds. It is true that the Marshall plan and the Atlantic pact were 'given' to him, but these were flying saucers -- grand ideas as yet unformed. Franks supplied the 'phronesis', the practical wisdom, to make them real. It was as if Marshall and Bevin sat, massively, on the bough of history while Franks worked the wood. He was not alone in this endeavour, but his coadjutors were few. Franks was one of the founders of the post-war world. 


@@@@@


doc= 51042


Colum mac Crimthainn (d. 549), was of the Leinster Ui Chremthannain. His father is named as Crimthann mac Nainnida and his mother as Minchloth. Colum is commemorated on 13 December in 'Felire Oengusso'. He died in the great plague of 549 along with several other important ecclesiastics. His Latin life dates from either the ninth or tenth century. During this period the annals record a number of abbots of Terryglass who were also abbots of Clonenagh (Cluain Ednech). The life is clearly dependent on the earlier life of Fintan, the patron of Clonenagh. Throughout Colum's life, Fintan is portrayed as his disciple, reflecting the dominance of Terryglass over Clonenagh. The life relates that Colum's main foundation is Inis Celtra, which had previously been inhabited by Mac Creiche; that a disciple, Mo Cheme, is associated with Terryglass; and that Colum's body was translated from Inis Celtra to Terryglass by his successor Nad Caem. It also links Colum with the so-called teacher of the Irish saints, Finnian of Clonard, and with Nessan, and Colum Cille. 


@@@@@


doc= 51043


Martin of Laon (819-875), scholar, was also known as Martin Scottus and called himself Martinus Hiberniensis in the Laon annals, where he recorded his birth date and where a colleague entered his death date. The same source designated Martin as the 'magister Laundunensis' ('master of Laon'). No other personal record of Martin survives and so it must be presumed that he spent his entire career as a master in the cathedral school at Laon. Nothing is known of his early intellectual formation in Ireland or of his arrival on the continent. Unlike most of his compatriots who continued to write Irish pointed minuscule script after they came to the Carolingian kingdoms, Martin mastered Carolingian minuscule, a trait suggestive of training somewhere on the continent. 
From the time of Josephus Scottus at the end of the eighth century to that of Israel the Grammarian in the middle of the tenth century, the names of some forty Irish masters are recorded in European sources. As one of these, Martin of Laon's scholarly interests and teaching exemplified the Carolingian reform's emphasis on a programme of studies that exalted the liberal arts as paths to Christian wisdom. 
During the third quarter of the ninth century Laon was an important political and ecclesiastical centre in the kingdom of Charles the Bald ('r'. 840-77). Along with nearby Rheims and Soissons, Laon served as a base for a peripatetic group of Irish masters associated with John Scottus (Eriugena), one of the most important and original scholars of the Carolingian renaissance. Martin incorporated excerpts from John's work into the teaching manuals he composed at Laon and may have known John personally. 
Martin was a teacher, not an author. Evidence of his scholarly interests and teaching survives in twenty-one manuscripts that bear his notes and comments. His manuscripts reveal Martin as a collector of books, a compiler of texts, a scribe, and a supervisor of scribes. His collection consists of books primarily in biblical exegesis, the liberal arts, medicine, and Greek. Martin's significance as an early medieval master rests especially on his tutelage in Greek as evidenced by the Greek-Latin glossary and grammar he composed and partially copied (Laon, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 444). This massive codex, acclaimed as 'the 'Thesaurus linguae graecae' of its century' (Bischoff, 2.266), reflects John Scottus's interest in Greek patristic texts and the interest of Charles the Bald's court in Byzantine culture. Excerpts from both the glossary and grammar appear in manuscripts copied at other centres and attest to the influence of Martin's Greek pedagogy. Martin also compiled and partially copied a handbook for the study of the liberal arts and of Virgil (Laon, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 468), a manuscript that remained in use at Laon for more than sixty years. Martin instructed his students in computus or time reckoning (Contreni, 'John Scottus and Bede', 111-31). His contribution to pedagogy in this highly complex and technical field can be traced in his commentary on Bede's 'De temporum ratione'. As a teacher engaged in the instruction of future priests, Martin also emphasized dogmatic and pastoral matters. He annotated Laon's copy of the prescriptions of the Council of Aachen (816) regulating the lives of cathedral canons (Laon, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 336) and put together a collection of texts which bear on the doctrine and practice of Christian life (Laon, Bibliotheque Municipale, MS 265). 
Martin's collection of books passed to the Laon masters, Bernard (847-903) and Adelelm ('c'.860-930), his successors and probable students. Bishop Dido of Laon ('c'.882-95) inherited one of Martin's books and might also have studied with the Laon master. 


@@@@@


doc= 51044


Gass, Ian Graham (1926-1992), geologist, was born on 20 March 1926 at 273 Whitehall Road, Gateshead, co. Durham, the son of John George Gass, mechanical engineer, and his wife, Lilian Robinson, 'nee' Peacock. Because his father worked abroad Gass was brought up by an aunt in Gateshead until the family returned to England at the beginning of the Second World War and settled in Huddersfield. He was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, transferring to the Free Grammar School of King James, Almondbury, Huddersfield, before joining the Royal Navy in 1944. The war ended before he finished his training as a Fleet Air Arm pilot, and he spent the next two years in Malaya in the Royal Army Service Corps, leaving with the rank of captain. He entered the University of Leeds, where William Quarrier Kennedy was professor of geology, and after graduating with a BSc in geology in 1953 he joined the staff of the Sudan geological survey. On 2 July 1955 he married (Florence) Mary Pearce ('b'. 1930/31), secretary, and daughter of Arthur Pearce, farmer, of Bamford, near Rochdale, Lancashire; they had a daughter, Katherine, and a son, Graham. He spent the next five years working for the Cyprus geological survey until the growth of the EOKA movement made field mapping dangerous: his work in the Troodos Mountains formed the basis of his Leeds PhD, awarded in 1960. 
In 1960 Gass was appointed assistant lecturer at the University of Leicester, returning to Leeds in 1961 as a lecturer. He led the Royal Society expedition in 1962 to investigate the eruption of the volcanic island of Tristan da Cunha, and another Royal Society expedition to investigate volcanoes in southern Arabia in 1964: he published his findings in a chapter in 'African Magmatism and Tectonics' (1970), which he co-edited, dedicated to Kennedy, who had set up the Research Institute of African Geology at Leeds in 1955. In 1963 he became a member of the Royal Society volcanology subcommittee, which he chaired from 1971 to 1979. His discovery that the Troodos complex in Cyprus was oceanic made a significant contribution to the theory of plate tectonics, which in the 1960s revolutionized ideas of the formation of the earth's crust, and he went on to investigate areas of similar rocks in Oman, bringing together the results in 'Ophiolites and the Ocean Lithosphere' (1984). 
In 1969 Gass was appointed foundation professor of earth sciences at the Open University, set up by the Labour government to provide distance learning. He prepared the earth sciences section of the science foundation course, first offered in 1971, and with his team wrote the introductory text, 'Understanding the Earth' (1971), the first textbook on earth sciences to be published after the plate tectonics revolution: this was widely used in British universities, and the third edition was published in 1992, with a new preface written by Gass. He developed three Open University courses in the 1970s: the introductory course, 'Geology', first offered in 1972, for which all students were sent thousands of specimens of rocks, and plaster casts of fossils, together with a collapsible microscope; 'The earth's physical resources' (1974); and 'Oceanography' (1977). He chose the University of Leeds as the venue for the very popular Open University summer schools in earth sciences, and when the Open University Geological Society, one of the largest student societies, was set up he was invited to become president. Very successful at attracting funding for advanced analytical equipment he was able to build up a research centre with an international reputation, especially for vulcanological studies, and the department of earth sciences became one of the leading departments of the Open University. In 1982 he gave up his position as head of department, accepting a personal chair, in order to devote more time to research. He retired in 1991. 
Gass was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1983, and was president of the International Association for Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's Interior from 1983 to 1987. He was awarded the Prestwich medal of the Geological Society of London in 1979, and the Murchison medal in 1988. He underwent a coronary by-pass operation in 1981 and suffered a stroke in 1987, from which he gradually recovered; he died on 8 October 1992 in Bedford General Hospital, following another stroke and was buried eight days later. He was survived by his wife and their two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51046


Galton, Dorothy Constance (1901-1992), university administrator and apiculturist, was born on 14 October 1901 at 66 Rathcoole Avenue, Edmonton, Middlesex, the daughter of Frank Wallace Galton, secretary to the Fabian Society and to Sidney and Beatrice Webb, and his wife, Jessie Jane Townsend, 'nee' Cottridge. She grew up in a political atmosphere, and was a lifelong supporter of the Labour Party. As a young woman she had critical surgery which deprived her of the ability to have children and altered the shape of her life. She was educated at home before going to secondary school at Wood Green, London, and then to Bedford College, London. She soon decided that university was not for her, and left after a few months, but she developed privately her gifts for the Slavonic languages. She worked for a time in Transport House and then for Count Mihaly Karolyi, the exiled socialist president of Hungary, travelling with the count and his wife to France, where she tasted the aristocratic life and at the same time developed her east European interests. 
In 1928 Galton returned to London as secretary to Professor Sir Bernard Pares, who was reputed not to be an easy man to get on with. He was a leading expert on Russia and director from 1922 to 1939 of the School of Slavonic and East European Studies, then based at King's College, London. The school was founded in 1915 by Robert Seton Watson and T. G. Masaryk. In 1932 it became an independent university institute with Galton, although lacking a formal academic training, promoted to be its administrative secretary. At the school her gifts for languages and administration, and her warm personality, stood her in good stead, particularly during the difficult years of the Second World War. She was able to make several visits to the Soviet Union, building valuable personal contacts. 
In 1939 Pares retired from the directorship, going to live in the USA where he remained until his death in 1949. Galton continued as secretary of the School of Slavonic and East European Studies under his successors Professor William Rose (1939-47) and Dr George Bolsover (1947-75) until her retirement in 1961. During the Second World War part of the school was evacuated to Oxford, with Galton the link between the sections. Onto her capable shoulders fell the work of maintaining an organization that lost its records during the bombing of central London. In 1941 she organized a seminal summer school in Oxford attended by some eighty students and in 1945, at the invitation of the Rockefeller Foundation, she visited several universities in the USA to further the cause of Slavonic studies. It then fell to her to reintegrate the institute as a single unit in London. 
Galton's other great interest, beekeeping, commenced in 1954 and was for a time a purely practical activity. Her leaving present from her colleagues at the School of Slavonic and East European Studies in 1961 was a honey extractor. After her retirement and move to Norfolk she brought her considerable intellect to bear on research into beekeeping in Russia. It was natural for her to use the resources of the London-based Bee Research Association, whose director, Eva Crane, was another 'grande dame' of the apicultural world. The fruit of her research was published by the association in 1971 as 'A Survey of a Thousand Years of Beekeeping in Russia', with a foreword by Professor Robert E. F. Smith. The International Bee Research Association in 1987 awarded her an honorary membership in recognition of her contribution to the Russian section of its library, through the translation of Russian apicultural materials. Her second book, 'The Bee-Hive: an Enquiry into its Origins and History' (1982), was an entomological study that ranged far beyond the borders of eastern Europe and Russia. Finally, she assembled in her closing years an unpublished study, 'Bees, honey and beeswax in early historical times'. Although her books were without doubt her major occupations, she also contributed to the beekeeping press on a wide range of topics, including studies of the Russian wax trade into Kings Lynn, Norfolk. 
Galton maintained her political interests until late in life, being active in the local Labour Party and involved with other voluntary bodies. It was an odd turn of the wheel of fortune that in her latter years she, who gave a low priority to wealth, had never owned a home, and had never had a bank account, inherited a house and capital, and thus found herself a minor capitalist. She never married, and died on 27 August 1992 at her home, 3 Hooks Hill Road, Sheringham, Norfolk, of cancer of the stomach. She donated her body to medical research. 


@@@@@


doc= 51049


Gittings, Robert William Victor (1911-1992), poet and writer, was born on 1 February 1911 at Southsea, the son of Surgeon-Captain Fred Claude Bromley Gittings and Dora Mary, 'nee' Brayshaw. He attended St Edward's School, Oxford, where he was influenced by an outstanding teacher, George Mallaby. While at school he had poems published, bringing him into contact with Christopher Fry, who became a lifelong friend. In 1930 he went to Jesus College, Cambridge, as a history scholar, and gained a first in 1933. During his undergraduate years his literary interests developed and he received encouragement from Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, whose college rooms were adjacent to his. In 1931 he was awarded the chancellor's gold medal for English verse. In 1933 he was made a research fellow of the college and in 1934 he married Katherine (Kay) Edith Cambell, a former student at Girton College. They had two sons. Gittings was history supervisor from 1938 until 1940, when he moved to the BBC as writer and producer. During his twenty-three years with the BBC his output was prolific and of consistently high quality. His schools broadcasts -- dramatized history and literary programmes -- are classics of their kind. He was a regular contributor to long-running and highly regarded programmes including 'Poets and Poetry', 'World History Series', 'Poetry Now', and 'The World of Books'. His marriage ended in divorce and in 1949 he married again; his second wife was Joan (Jo) Greville Manton, a colleague at the BBC, and herself a distinguished biographer and later collaborator with Gittings. They had one daughter. 
Gittings would probably wish to be remembered as a poet. His first major book of verse, 'Wentworth Place' (1950), was well received and held to be rich in promise and achievement with 'lines that hold fast in the memory' ('TLS', 31 March 1950). Here and in 'Famous Meeting' (1953) he showed a rare ability to bring alive the past. He published twelve volumes of poetry, disciplined and graceful in the Georgian tradition, but later volumes did not develop the earlier promise. Gittings was a good, minor poet of real talent and sound craftsmanship, a keen observer of the natural scene and the human condition capable of finely tuned and evocative verse, but not rising to the highest levels of perception and imagination. 
In 1954, Gittings's 'John Keats: the Living Year' was published and received with acclaim. In this book of freshness, originality, and excitement Gittings displayed the skills he was to refine in his later biographies -- meticulous scholarship combined with a keen literary sensitivity, an appreciation of social and historical context, and an infectious sense of the joys of detection. 'The Mask of Keats' followed in 1956, and an excursion into Shakespeare studies in 1960 ('Shakespeare's Rival'). 
Gittings left the BBC in 1964 and in the years that followed he established his reputation as a major authority on both Keats and Hardy. 'John Keats' (awarded the W. H. Smith literary award) was published in 1969. Gittings's studies of Hardy, though conscientious, scholarly, and eminently readable, are perhaps marred by a certain lack of respect for Hardy the man. In this Gittings did not wholeheartedly apply his own dictum that 'biography begins, in one sense or another, with praise' ('The Nature of Biography', 1978, 19). But as a literary biographer Gittings is masterly and he well illustrates his own definition of biography as 'poetry with a conscience' (ibid., 10), in his combination of clear observation, enthusiasm, search for truth, and felicity with words. 'The Young Thomas Hardy' appeared in 1975, followed by 'The Older Hardy' in 1978 and 'The Second Mrs Hardy' (with Jo Manton) in 1979. 
As playwright, Gittings was a master of radio drama. Less well known were the plays he wrote over several years for women's institutes. 'Son et lumiere' ('This Tower my Prison', 1961, and 'Conflict at Canterbury' for the 1970 Canterbury Festival) were much acclaimed while 'Introducing Thomas Hardy', his brilliant double act with Frances Horowitz, first performed in 1971, was in demand throughout the country until Horowitz's death in 1978. 
In 1985 Gittings turned to the Wordsworths and with Jo Manton wrote 'Dorothy Wordsworth', an engaging and revealing study. He also published his last collection of poems, 'People, Places, Personal', a title which fairly describes the wide range of his poetry. In the short poems 'The Bell Tolls' and 'In the Car Park', he digs below the surface of the mundane to expose human fragility and insecurity. 
Gittings was always an enthusiast for games -- squash, golf, and real tennis -- and was a dependable middle-order batsman until well into his seventies. He regularly recruited actors from the Chichester Theatre to play in cricket matches. Tall and trim, he had the high, bald dome of an intellectual, with a warm, friendly, and expressive face, always enquiring and slightly quizzical. He had an attractive personality. A man of strong principles, he was, nevertheless, unfailingly considerate and generous, with a gift for friendship and a warm sense of humour. 
Appointed CBE in 1970, Gittings was awarded the honorary LittD by Cambridge in 1970 and by Leeds in 1981. His election as honorary fellow of Jesus College in 1979 gave him particular pleasure. 
Robert Gittings died at Chichester on 18 February 1992. On the morning before he died, he read the first copy of his last book, 'Claire Clairmont and the Shelleys', fresh from the publishers. He commented: 'It's all right. It'll do, I think' ('Jesus College (Cambridge) Report', 47). The cremation took place on 24 February at Chichester crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 51050


Godfree, Kathleen (1896-1992), tennis player, was born in Kensington, London, on 7 May 1896, the younger child of John McKane, pianoforte dealer, and his wife, May. She was educated first at home and later at St Paul's Girls' School, London, and St Leonard's School in St Andrews, where she learned to play tennis. She excelled at several sports. At nine she cycled from London to Berlin as part of a family outing; at ten she was awarded the National Skating Association's bronze medal; and in 1918 she was selected for the English lacrosse team to play Scotland, although the match was cancelled because of the war situation. During that war she worked first as a clerk and then as a War Office driver. In the winter of 1919-20 she took up badminton and won the All-England singles title, which she retained for two further seasons and won again in 1924. 
As a tennis player Kitty McKane joined the Kew club and made her Wimbledon debut in 1919, when the championships were still being held at Worple Road. She reached the quarter-finals, where she lost to Suzanne Lenglen (the eventual winner). That year she won her first international title, the covered court women's doubles, with Mrs Beamish in Paris. In 1920 at the Antwerp Olympics she was a gold medallist in the women's doubles and silver medallist in the mixed doubles, with Winifred McNair and Max Woosnam respectively. She also gained a bronze medal in the women's singles, a feat that she repeated at the Paris Olympics of 1924, the last games to feature tennis until it was revived in Seoul in 1988, where Godfree attended as representative of the All-England Club. At Paris she also won a silver medal in the women's doubles, thus establishing a record for the most Olympic tennis medals won by any player. 
A tiny figure on court, McKane usually wore a calf-length white frock and white stockings, with her hair tied back in a silk bandeau. Fast on her feet, she developed an all-court game but preferred to attack, often using the volley as her major weapon. Her skill and tenacity, combined with a composed and placid temperament, took her to three Wimbledon ladies' finals. In 1923 she lost to Suzanne Lenglen, but she won against Helen Wills in 1924, revenge for her defeat by the seventeen-year-old American in the first Wightman cup match the previous year. She was the first British winner of the ladies' event since Mrs Lambert Chambers in 1914. In 1925 she was the losing finalist in the United States championships but won the mixed doubles with J. B. Hawkes; she also lost in the finals of the French singles and women's doubles. In January 1926 she married Leslie Allison Godfree, a solicitor who had been the first player to serve on Wimbledon's centre court after it moved to Church Road in 1922. Together they won the mixed doubles at Wimbledon in 1926, the only husband-and-wife team to do so, thus regaining the title that she had previously won with Jack Gilbert in 1924. In 1926 she also recaptured the Wimbledon ladies' singles title after a final against Lili Alvarez, by changing her tactics and abandoning attack for a match of attrition in which the Spaniard tired first. 
Kitty Godfree's last major title was the women's doubles in the American championships in 1927. She wrote two instruction books, 'Lawn Tennis: how to Improve your Game' in 1923 and 'Lawn Tennis Simplified' in 1928, the year before she retired temporarily from tennis to have her first child, David. Her second son, Martin, was born in 1937. She played in the Wightman cup from its inauguration in 1923 through to 1927 and again in 1930 and 1934, but never again was a prominent singles player. She reached the semi-final of the women's doubles at Wimbledon in 1934, the last of the 147 matches that she played in the championships. 
Kitty Godfree continued to play competitive tennis into her tenth decade, including an annual mixed doubles match for the International Club of Great Britain against its Parisian counterpart, in which she usually faced Jean Borotra. They last played against each other in 1988, sixty-four years after they had both won their first Wimbledon singles titles. She died on 19 June 1992 of a chest infection, at Viera Gray House, a nursing home at 27 Ferry Road, Barnes, London. She was survived by her two sons, her husband having predeceased her. 


@@@@@


doc= 51053


Friederike Gordon (1906-1992), bridge player, was born in Vienna on 25 January 1906 (she claimed 1916), of middle-class Jewish parents. She worked as a buyer for a Salzburg store before marrying Paul Gordon and moving to Graz. After the Anschluss she fled to London and supported her family through playing poker. Paul Gordon was an excellent bridge player, and her brother Hans Leist a gold cup winner. Fritzi represented Britain fifteen times in the women's European championship, winning seven gold medals. She shared many of Rixi's triumphs, notably in the world women's pairs (1962, 1974), mixed team Olympiads (1962, with Boris Schapiro), and women's team Olympics (1964 -- Britain's only Olympiad successes). She twice won the gold cup (1957, 1961), and was the second woman to attain world grandmaster status, Rixi being the first. Their last major tournament together was the Monte Carlo Olympiad (1976). Survived by one daughter, Fritzi died on 9 February 1992 in the Royal Free Hospital, Camden. 


@@@@@


doc= 51054


Grantham, Sir Guy (1900-1992), naval officer, was born on 9 January 1900 at Roman Bank, Skegness, Lincolnshire, the only son of Charles Fred Grantham, landowner and farmer, and his wife, Jane Marian, 'nee' Hildred. He was educated at Rugby School (1914-18) before joining the navy as a special entry cadet at the Royal Naval College, Osborne, in June 1918. He first served as a midshipman in the battleship 'Monarch', and then as a sub-lieutenant in the royal yacht 'Victoria and Albert' and the cruiser 'New Zealand', flagship of the admiral of the fleet, Lord Jellicoe. He joined the Submarine Service in 1923, his first boat being the giant 'M.1', which was armed with a 12 inch gun. He returned to general service in the battle cruiser 'Hood' in 1927, before going to the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, in 1931, as river officer in charge of sailing. He returned to submarines in 1933 and commanded 'L.56' and 'Regent'. After early promotion to captain in 1937, he joined the staff of Admiral Sir Dudley Pound, the commander-in-chief Mediterranean, and when Pound became first sea lord in 1939 Grantham went to the Admiralty as his naval assistant. Meanwhile, in 1934 he had married Beryl Marjorie (died 1991), daughter of T. C. B. Mackintosh-Walker, of Geddes, Nairn, Scotland. They had two daughters. 
In 1940 Grantham commissioned the new light cruiser 'Phoebe', serving in the Home Fleet and then in the Mediterranean, where she took off thousands of soldiers in the evacuation of the army from Greece in April 1941 and then from Crete in May. Grantham was awarded the DSO for 'Phoebe''s part in the evacuation from Nauplia in Greece on 24 April. In August 'Phoebe' was hit by an aerial torpedo on a run to Tobruk and was so badly damaged she was sent to America for repairs. Grantham was then sent by Admiral Sir Andrew Cunningham to be naval liaison officer to his brother, General Sir Alan Cunningham, commanding the Eighth Army, and was mentioned in dispatches for his services in the western desert. 
In January 1942 Grantham took command of the light cruiser 'Naiad', and was flag captain and chief of staff to Rear-Admiral Sir Philip Vian, commanding the 15th cruiser squadron. On 11 March, as 'Naiad' was returning to Alexandria, she was torpedoed off the harbour entrance by 'U.565' and sank in twenty minutes. Grantham had no lifebelt, having been preoccupied with his attempts to save the ship. Vian and Grantham were picked up half an hour later by destroyers, both of them cold and oily, Grantham at the end of his tether and quite exhausted. However, there was no question of survivors' leave. Three days later Vian hoisted his flag in the newly arrived 'Cleopatra', and took Grantham with him as his flag captain. On 22 March 1942 'Cleopatra' took part in one of the most celebrated naval actions of the war, known as the second battle of Sirte, when light cruisers and destroyers under Vian defended a convoy to Malta against a much stronger Italian force including heavy cruisers and the battleship 'Littorio'. Not at all abashed by their much larger and heavier gunned opponents, Vian's ships made skilful use of the weather gauge (as in Nelson's day), laying smokescreens, through which they advanced to attack with guns and torpedoes. At the height of the action 'Cleopatra''s bridge was hit by a 6 inch shell which Grantham saw coming straight for him. It struck the opposite corner of the bridge, where Vian normally stood, but luckily he had just gone to the chart house. Grantham escaped, but one officer and fourteen men were killed. Some ships besides 'Cleopatra' were damaged, but they held the enemy off until nightfall, when the convoy made good its escape. Grantham was appointed CB. 
In December 1942 Grantham took command of the carrier 'Indomitable' and went out again to the Mediterranean, to provide air cover for operation Husky, the invasion of Sicily in July 1943. After 'Indomitable' was damaged by an aerial torpedo Grantham transferred to the cruiser 'Euryalus' to serve once again with Vian as his chief of staff for operation Avalanche, the Salerno landing in September, after which Grantham was mentioned in dispatches for the second time. In 1944 Grantham went to the Admiralty as director of plans and attended the conferences at Quebec, Yalta, and Potsdam, on the staff of Cunningham, who had succeeded Pound as first sea lord. He was appointed CBE in 1946. 
From 1946 to 1948 Grantham was chief of staff to the commander-in-chief Mediterranean with the rank of commodore. Promoted rear-admiral in July 1947, he was flag officer (submarines) from 1948 to 1950. Early in 1950 he was appointed flag officer (air) and second-in-command Mediterranean Fleet, and promoted vice-admiral. In 1951 he went back to the Admiralty as vice chief of the naval staff. Following the change of government in October 1951 Duncan Sandys was put in charge of defence, and the navy's finances and traditional role came under fierce attack. It fell to Grantham to fight the navy's corner -- with only partial success, although probably no one could have done better. He was appointed KCB in 1952, promoted admiral in 1953, and went out to the Mediterranean once more in 1954 to relieve Lord Mountbatten as commander-in-chief Mediterranean and commander-in-chief allied forces Mediterranean. Grantham could have been first sea lord in 1955 but the senior admirals believed that the navy was then battling for its very existence, and the higher-profile Mountbatten was chosen instead. Grantham was appointed GCB in 1956. In July that year President Nasser of Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal. Had Britain and France taken immediate military action, world opinion might have been on their side. But it took time to assemble the necessary forces, the plan of attack was changed, and it was not until October that operation Musketeer, the assault on Port Said, was launched. It was a military success, but a political disaster. In May 1957 Grantham became commander-in-chief Portsmouth, hoisting his flag for the first time on the periscope standard of a submarine at Gosport. The next year, when Mountbatten was due to become chief of the defence staff, Grantham could again have been first sea lord. Again the post went elsewhere -- to Admiral Sir Charles Lambe, a friend and confidant of Mountbatten's. Grantham never showed or expressed any disappointment. 
Grantham retired in 1959 to become governor of Malta -- the first naval officer to hold the office since Sir Alexander Ball in 1800. He arrived in the middle of a political crisis. Dom Mintoff, the Labour prime minister, had just resigned over a British proposal for the island's future. Grantham had to govern in fact as well as in name until 1962 when Borg Olivier's Nationalist Party won the general election. He was principal naval aide-de-camp to the queen from 1958 to 1959; vice-chairman of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission from 1963 to 1970; governor of the Corps of Commissionaires from 1964 to 1992; and a lay canon of Portsmouth Cathedral. 
'It is difficult to write, without being fulsome, a description which would do Grantham justice,' Vian wrote in his memoirs. 'He is, and always has been, a very perfect knight, without fear and without reproach' (Vian, 81). Yet Guy Grantham had a remarkably non-heroic, unassuming, somewhat schoolmasterly manner, indeed he was sometimes known as Granny Grantham. One admiral's daughter said of him: 'Guy is family. You can see him in his wellington boots calling at the back door on Sunday morning with vegetables he has dug up for lunch' (private information). He was a fair horseman and was one of the five admirals who rode, with differing degrees of skill, in the coronation procession of 1953. He died of a heart attack at North Lodge, Syston Park, Barkston, Lincolnshire, on 8 September 1992. He was survived by his two daughters; his wife had died in December 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 51055


Greenham, Peter George (1909-1992), painter, was born on 9 September 1909 at 11 Conyers Road, Streatham, London, the second son of George Frederick Greenham (1874-1950), telephone engineer, and his wife, Isabel, 'nee' Duckworth (1878-1961). He was educated at Streatham and Dulwich College. From there he gained a demyship at Magdalen College, Oxford, to read history, but later changed to English. At Oxford, where C. S. Lewis was his tutor, he was not happy, and he later said that he would have much preferred to go to Cambridge and be taught by F. R. Leavis. After graduating with a fourth-class degree in 1931 he became a schoolmaster, first at Thame and later at Marylebone grammar schools. However, he had always wanted to be a painter and at the age of twenty-six he became an art student at the Byam Shaw School of Drawing and Painting, run by F. E. Jackson, a great teacher of drawing. Jackson's teaching, in which a classical approach to form was realized through a searching and sensitive touch, was exactly suited to Greenham, as was the free but dedicated atmosphere of the school. Greenham became a fine draughtsman who ever afterwards acknowledged the influence of Jackson. 
When the Second World War came the Byam Shaw closed, and Greenham had to take to teaching again, this time at Magdalen College School, Oxford. By now he was exhibiting landscapes and portraits at the Royal Academy and other venues. His reputation grew quickly and in 1951 he was elected an associate of the Royal Academy. He became a full academician in 1960. In 1964 he was made keeper and took over the running of the Royal Academy Schools. Until the end of his life he was closely involved with the Royal Academy, an institution he valued as much for its personalities and eccentricities as for its history. He had for some time been teaching drawing, both at the reopened Byam Shaw and at the Royal Academy Schools, and he now had full scope for his beliefs about art teaching -- unassertive, yet deeply convinced of the paramount importance of drawing. Though sympathetic to his students of whatever leaning, he insisted that they should all spend time in the life room. Such were his good relations with them that he was able to do this at a period of turmoil in art education. His attitude to teaching was very typical of the way his apparently easy-going manner was based on strong conviction; in his painting, too, his beautiful touch had nothing merely sensitive or vague about it, but was always a means towards greater precision of structure. 
On 21 August 1964, the year he took over the schools, Greenham married a fellow painter, Irene Mary (Jane) Dowling ('b'. 1925), daughter of Geoffrey Barrow Dowling, physician. The years that followed were particularly fulfilling, with his happy marriage, many commissions, a daughter, Mary, and a son, David, and a move to the Oxfordshire village of Charlton-on-Otmoor. His portraits during these years included ambitious full lengths, but he was most truly himself in the more intimate studies in which his qualities of sympathy and sensitivity of observation came out. Two of the most memorable were those of Lady Bonham Carter, a tender evocation of old age, and of F. R. Leavis. To be painted by Greenham was to accept that sittings might go on a long time, sometimes indeed for years; but his sitters seem to have enjoyed the experience, and he once said that he grew very fond of them all -- except a certain general. But it would be a mistake to think of Greenham as primarily a portrait painter. His landscapes were equally important to him, and the late seascapes and beach scenes, with their pearly, iridescent colour, are very beautiful. 
Greenham had a comfortable presence, his clothes well worn, his manner sympathetic. He had a warm and humorous sociability, his humour often self-deprecatory; but under this easy-going manner was always an incisive and watchful mind. He loved music, and the English language, which he wrote with style and relish. He only published one book, 'Velasquez' (1969), but his short articles, even the annual Royal Academy keeper's report, were composed and polished with equal care. He was appointed CBE in 1978. He died of prostatic cancer in Oxford on 11 July 1992, having been converted 'in extremis' to the Roman Catholic church, and was buried at Charlton-on-Otmoor on 15 July. He was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51057


Bion, Wilfred Ruprecht (1897-1979), psychoanalyst, was born on 8 September 1897 at Mathura, North-Western Provinces, India, the elder son (there was one daughter) of Frederick Fleetwood Bion (1870?-1949), civil engineer, and Rhoda Salter Kemp (1869?-1939). Bion spent his first eight years in India, described vividly in his autobiography, 'The Long Weekend' (1982), in which he recaptured both the vividness of India and some of his early psychological difficulties: his fear of his father's anger, his deeply felt hatred of both parents, the dreams in which 'Arf Arfer' (his father) made a terrifying appearance. These were compounded when, aged eight, he returned with his mother and sister to England for schooling at Bishop's Stortford College, a nonconformist public school, which he attended from 1905 to 1915. The period between the ages of eight and twelve he looked back on as appalling, subject to cataclysmic storms of confusion and religious guilt; only sex, 'wiggling' (Bion, 'Long Weekend'), redeemed him. From the age of twelve he spent holidays with the families of schoolfriends, where he found hospitable warmth, and began to appreciate the good qualities of school, its intellectual and emotional liveliness. Bion's youth was overshadowed by the First World War. He was of the generation who felt doomed, and who did not expect to survive military service, which he scarcely did, being one of the few survivors of the tank regiment at the battle of Cambrai. Bion's DSO celebrated his bravery in saving the crew of his disabled tank. He was also a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur and was mentioned in dispatches. In his 'War Memoirs' (1997) Bion recounts his prolonged, dangerous experiences over two years in the front line. His distinguished military career held him in good stead in military psychiatry during the Second World War. 
In 1919 Bion entered Queen's College, Oxford, to read modern history, graduating in 1921. The philosophical bent which marked his future writings was stimulated by his tutor, H. J. Paton, a Kantian moral philosopher. A good athlete, Bion was a rugby blue and a swimming half-blue. After graduating Bion returned to Bishop's Stortford College, where he taught history and French and stimulated enthusiasm for both rugby and swimming. His interest in psychoanalysis already aroused, he studied medicine at University College Hospital, London, in 1924, graduating MRCS LRCP in 1930, and was awarded the gold medal for clinical surgery. Bion worked for the great neurosurgeon and psychologist Wilfred Trotter, who was brother-in-law to Ernest Jones, the leading British psychoanalyst. 
From 1933 until 1948 Bion worked at the Tavistock Clinic where, in 1936, the writer Samuel Beckett was his patient. Bion did not train as a psychoanalyst until after the Second World War, though he had personal psychotherapy in the 1930s with J. Hadfield and one year of psychoanalysis with his future mentor and colleague, John Rickman, with whom he later had a productive working collaboration at Northfield Military Hospital. In 1939 Bion joined the Royal Army Medical Corps and was one of the psychiatrists appointed to a senior position by J. R. Rees, director of the pre-war Tavistock Clinic. He held the rank of major. His brief appointment to the training wing at Northfield Military Hospital led to a significant publication with Rickman on what was later known as the 'first Northfield experiment'. Bion introduced the leaderless group method of officer selection which significantly improved both the quality and the quantity of officers for the greatly enlarged post-Dunkirk British army. This period of his life was darkened by the death in childbirth, in 1945, of his beautiful actress wife Elizabeth (Betty) McKittrick Jardine ('b'. 1904), daughter of William James Jardine, cotton manufacturer, whom he had married on 17 April 1940. Their daughter, Parthenope (died 1998), became a psychoanalyst. On his return to the Tavistock Clinic, Bion was appointed chairman of the medical committee. Accorded great respect and authority by his colleagues, he was responsible for the radical reshaping of the clinic, which had followed an eclectic approach, to one strictly psychoanalytic. 
Bion had developed a theory of unconscious group processes as a result of his wartime experiences. He observed that individuals in a group unconsciously disown parts of their mentalities and contribute to a group mentality, then behaving as if in the grip of powerful unconscious forces. These he named as the basic assumptions of dependence, fight-flight, and pairing. These forces interfere with the work mentality of the group unless and until they have been made conscious. Bion's basic assumptions theory was adopted by his colleagues at the Tavistock Clinic and the Tavistock Institute of Human Relations, which was formed for psychological work in industry and organizations. Bion himself soon ceased to work with groups and for the rest of his professional life concerned himself with psychoanalytic training and the treatment of severely disturbed persons, schizoid, borderline, and psychotic. His experiences formed the basis of many influential papers and books in which he developed original ideas on the birth of the capacity for thought in earliest infancy and how this is lost in the psychoses. His insight into psychotic states of confusion, persecution, and appalling guilt arose from his recall of his own disturbed childhood where he was himself close to madness. His 'Experiences in Groups and other Papers' was published in 1968. 
Bion's analysis with Melanie Klein was a powerful influence on his personality and mind but he went on to develop his original ideas about thinking and its disturbances. Bion's concept of 'containment' advanced Klein's concept of projective identification (that an infant attempts to rid itself of unacceptable and unbearable parts of the self by projection into the outer world) into an interpersonal process. When the infant's unbearable experience is understood as communication and appropriately responded to by the mother, then the infant can regain the disowned part, now made bearable, transformed through the interpersonal relation. His work had great influence on psychoanalytic studies of schizophrenia. Though his writing style is often condensed, combining psychoanalytical thought and philosophical argument, which can make for difficult reading, his legacy, as in 'Cogitations' (1994), is a considerable addition to the study of mental processes of infancy and in severe mental illness. 
Bion was director of the clinic of the British Psychoanalytical Society in 1955-62, and its president in 1962-5. In 1968 he left Britain to live for eleven years in Los Angeles, which he left to return to England in his dying year. His period in North America allowed him the freedom of thought and action which he would not have had staying in London. His ideas were also influential in Latin America through his visits there. He considered that in London he would have either become a mystic in conflict with the establishment or 'loaded with honours and sunk without trace'. 
Bion was a large bulky man, round faced, red cheeked; his voice was deep and his manner shy. An encounter with him was a memorable experience; he possessed an original mind and focused his concerns and attention on deep and difficult psychic issues. His spontaneous humour was reserved for his family and can be seen in his letters to them published in his autobiography. He began a happy second marriage on 9 June 1951 to Francesca (Patricia Ivy) McCallum ('b'. 1922), a widow, daughter of Archibald John Purnell, schoolmaster. She was a researcher at the Tavistock Clinic, and together they had two further children, Julian ('b'. 1952) and Nicola ('b'. 1955). 
Bion died in the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, of myeloid leukaemia on 8 November 1979 and was cremated in Oxford on 12 November. His ashes were buried two days later at Happisburgh church, Norfolk, a county which he loved and in which he spent many holidays. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51058


Riviere, Joan Hodgson (1883-1962), psychoanalyst, was born at 52 Brunswick Square, Hove, Brighton, Sussex, on 28 June 1883, the eldest of the three surviving children of Hugh John Verrall (1854-1909), solicitor, and his wife, Anna (1854-1947), daughter of John Willoughby Hodgson, vicar of Chalgrave, Bedfordshire. Hugh John Verrall belonged to an established Sussex family with literary connections; an older brother, Arthur Woollgar Verrall, was an eminent classical scholar, fellow, and tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge. Joan Verrall's education was unconventional, even for late Victorian times: after being taught at home (1888-94) by her mother, a former governess, and a period at school at St Michael's Hall, Brighton, she attended Wycombe Abbey School. This was followed, when she was seventeen years old, by a year in Gotha, Germany. There she gained the remarkable command of German that enabled her to translate Freud's psychoanalytic writings into fluent and expressive English. In 1906 she married Evelyn Riviere (1876-1945), a barrister, the son of Briton Riviere RA (1840-1920), a well-known painter of his day. They had one child, a daughter, Diana (1908-1989). 
Although she did not go to university Joan Riviere took a great interest in intellectual, literary, and artistic endeavours. Before she became a psychoanalyst she worked for a time as a court dressmaker with the firm of Nettleship. She was also involved in movements for social change, such as divorce reform and suffragette activities. She attended meetings of the Society for Psychical Research and the Medico-Psychological Society. The aim of the latter was to alleviate nervous disorders with practices derived from psychoanalysis. Therapeutic psychoanalysis was developing in England during and after the First World War, mainly through the work of Ernest Jones, a close colleague, and later biographer, of Freud. Joan Riviere sought help for her own emotional problems, which had become acute after the death of her father, by having an analysis with Jones from 1916 to 1921. Jones was so impressed with Riviere's deep and sensitive understanding of psychoanalytic principles and processes that he referred patients to her in 1919, and she became a founder member of the British Psycho-Analytical Society, formed that year. 
Riviere's analysis with Jones was not straightforward. She fell in love with him but experienced a painful rejection when she made her feelings known to him. Jones referred her to Freud for analysis and wrote: 'I underestimated the uncontrollability of her emotional reactions and in the first year made the serious error of lending her my country cottage for a week when I was not there, she having nowhere to go for a holiday. This led to a declaration of love and to the broken-hearted cry that she had never been rejected before (she has been the mistress of a number of men). From that time on she devoted herself to torturing me without any intermission and with considerable success and ingenuity, being a fiendish sadist... The treatment finally broke down over my inability to master this negative transference, though I tried all means in my power. (Appignanesi and Forrester, 355)' Freud replied that he found her to be not 'half as black as you have painted her' (ibid.). Her analysis with Freud took place in Vienna in 1922; he later offered Jones his diagnosis: 'Let us turn to Mrs Riviere. If she were a sheer 'intriguante' she would have insisted on her sweetness with me until she had got out of me all she needed. Now she did not. She soon became harsh, unpleasant, critical even with me, tried to provoke me as she had done with you. I made it a rule never to get angry at her. Now I cannot give you the result of our analysis, it is not yet definite or complete. But one important point soon emerged. She cannot tolerate praise, triumph or success, not any better than failure, blame and repudiation. (ibid., p. 357)' Riviere had by this time already played a significant part in bringing Freud's work to the attention of the English. They had met for the first time in The Hague in 1920 and the first edition of the 'International Journal of Psycho-Analysis', published in the same year, contained an article by him that she had translated. She had translated other papers of Freud before she went to him for analysis. After she returned to London she translated many of the papers which constitute the five volumes of Freud's 'Collected Papers'. She is also noted for the stylistic sensitivity with which she translated his monumental work 'Civilisation and its Discontents'. Freud considered her to be the most sensitive and creative of his translators and preferred her work to that of all others ('Letters from Sigmund Freud'). It is also clear that he admired her, describing her as 'clever and clear-headed', 'a powerful helpmate', 'a real power and... a concentrated acid' (Appignanesi and Forrester, 354). 
Riviere played a very important part in the work of the British Psycho-Analytical Society. She became a training analyst in 1930; Susan Isaacs, John Bowlby, and Donald Winnicott were among those she analysed. As a supervising psychoanalyst she was an inspiring teacher as well as an original thinker, 'with a gift for articulating her understanding clearly and convincingly' as Hanna Segal found (Segal). Riviere set a high standard for herself and others in everything to which she turned her attention. She was generous in praise where she saw its appropriateness, although she could be scathing when she saw slipshod or careless work, as Ernest Jones discovered when she commented on his biography of Freud. 
Riviere's contribution to psychoanalysis as a translator of Freud's works is important, but the part she played in relation to the development and expression of Melanie Klein's ideas is of greater significance. Klein extended Freud's concepts of mental mechanisms and processes to the understanding of infancy. Her analyses of young children confirmed her theories relating to the importance of the first year of life for psychic development. Klein had arrived in London from Europe in 1926. As an established member of the British Psycho-Analytical Society Joan Riviere was in a position to provide the professional support that Klein was much in need of at that time. With her excellent command of English Riviere became the most articulate exponent of Klein's theories, the most able among her colleagues to express Klein's ideas clearly, vividly, and with conviction. Her remarkable ability to put Klein's theories into the context of Freud's discoveries is illustrated in her paper 'The genesis of psychical conflict in earliest infancy' (1936). She delivered the paper in Vienna in honour of Freud's eightieth birthday. 
Riviere's understanding of Klein's views on child analysis led her to criticize Anna Freud's approach to the analysis of children. Her contribution to a symposium on child analysis in 1927 made Sigmund Freud extremely angry. The differences in the two approaches are fundamental and concern the timing of the development of the superego and the child's relationship to the parents in its internal world. Klein's and Anna Freud's differences in theory and technique were further clarified by Riviere's contributions at the time of the British Psycho-Analytical Society's controversial discussions in the early 1940s. Riviere's ability to make complex theoretical insights persuasively straightforward helped to resolve the conflict, and was appreciatively described by Appignanesi and Forrester in their valuable chapter on Riviere in 'Freud's Women' (1992). 
Riviere contributed many bold and original ideas to the body of psychoanalytical thought. The most important and original of these is 'A contribution to the analysis of the negative therapeutic reaction' (1936). In this paper Riviere incorporates Klein's findings relating to the depressive position. That is, the stage in which the infant develops an awareness of his or her separateness from others, and understands that he or she has an emotional relationship with them. In this paper Riviere describes for the first time the concept of a defensive organization seen as a protection against psychic pain. This highly organized system of defence against a more or less unconscious depressive condition serves as a disguise to conceal the latter. The idea of an organized system of defence has commanded the interest of successive generations of psychoanalysts who continued to investigate the phenomenon for many years after it was first defined by Riviere. 
'Femininity as a masquerade' (1929) examines an area of sexual development in which the femininity of certain women can be found to be a mask, assumed to hide rivalry with and hatred of men. Fraudulent femininity covers a wish for masculinity that must be hidden out of a fear of retribution. In her paper 'Jealousy as a mechanism of defence' (1932) Riviere addressed further problems of female sexuality by describing the envious spoiling that underlies seeming Oedipal jealousy. In this she is paving the way for Klein's later work on envy and gratitude. Riviere greatly admired Freud's capacity to explore and to see what is unknown to us and yet what is so powerful in determining our lives, the unconscious. However, she could also take him to task for his views of women and for his emphases on their phallic insufficiencies, as in her incisive review of one of his books (1934). Although she was not directly involved in the emancipation of women, Riviere's contributions to the understanding of the complexities of women's sexual development came to be increasingly valued. 
Riviere was an impressively handsome woman, tall, elegant, and beautifully dressed. She had what some have called a rather aloof and, at times, formidable manner, but behind the aloofness lay an essential modesty and shyness. Riviere had a deep appreciation of the function of art, drama, and literature as a form of contact between internal and external realities. She wrote two important papers on the subject in 1952. In these she showed how, through poetry and prose, art and drama, the inner world of dreams, phantasy, and the unconscious, finds expression. 
As one of the pioneer group of British women psychoanalysts Joan Riviere played an important part in the acceptance of psychoanalytical ideas in the wider world. Her appreciation of the creative works of Freud and Klein, which she translated and interpreted with great eloquence, led her to her own considerable creativity. Through her innovative writings and teaching she originated many themes in psychoanalytical thought that continue to be explored. Riviere continued to work until her death at Flat 1, 199 Sussex Gardens, Paddington, London, on 20 May 1962. She was buried on 24 May. A memorial meeting was held later at the Institute of Psycho-Analysis. 


@@@@@


doc= 51059


Isaacs, Susan Sutherland (1885-1948), educational psychologist and psychoanalyst, was born on 24 May 1885, at 32 Bradshaw Brow, Turton, Bolton, Lancashire, the seventh of eight children of William Fairhurst, journalist and Methodist lay preacher, and his wife, Miriam Sutherland. Fairhurst's personality was significantly influenced by crucial events in her early childhood: her sudden weaning from the breast when her infant brother caught pneumonia and the loss of her mother's devotion, regained only through the death of that brother when Susan was eight months old. Her mother died when Susan was six and her father soon married the nurse who had attended her mother during her fatal illness; this led to an unforgiving alienation from her father who died when Susan was twenty-four. Through her Kleinian analysis she later recognized guilt at the death that had secured her mother's attention and further guilt occasioned by her mother's death. She became further alienated from her father through conversion to atheistic socialism. 
An intelligent, strong-minded child, eager to learn, frustrated at primary school, rebellious at Bolton secondary school, which she left after three years in 1900, Fairhurst resumed her education when she began training as an infant school teacher at Manchester University. Encouraged to enter graduate school she learned sufficient Greek and German in three months to meet the requirements. She obtained a first-class honours degree in philosophy under Professor S. Alexander followed by a year's scholarship to Newnham College, Cambridge (1910-11), which led to her life's interest in psychology. She taught infant school teachers for one year at Darlington Training College (1913-14), then logic for one year at Manchester University (1914-15). 
Fairhurst was a robust, rather short Lancashire girl of pale complexion, with a mass of fair hair and bright hazel eyes. She was challenging, tilting her head as she spoke, a little mischievous in her manner, but visibly friendly. She possessed a tautness of mind characterizing an able intellect which delighted in dialectic action. Trained in psychology, logic, philosophy, and psychoanalysis, her knowledge, which she used to the full, was tempered by humour. 
On 11 July 1914 Fairhurst married botany lecturer William Broadhurst Brierley ('b'. 1888/9), son of Charles Henry Brierley, a brass moulder. Moving to London with her husband she became tutor to the Workers' Educational Association and from 1916 tutor in psychology to the University of London. 
In 1922 the couple divorced and on 17 November that year she married Nathan Isaacs ('b'. 1894/5), the son of Isaac Isaacs, a retired general merchant. A manager of a metal merchant's, Nathan Isaacs became a brilliant collaborator in his wife's subsequent writings. Susan Isaacs's outstanding work on the intellectual and social development of young children was done at Malting House School, Cambridge, founded by Geoffrey Pyke, an eccentric genius who had made a fortune speculating on metal exchanges. He wanted to found a school as different as possible from Wellington, the public school where as a Jew he had suffered persecution and a rigid education. His ideal school would enable children to encounter the ideas of discovery through play. Isaacs's association with the school lasted from 1924 to 1927, during which time thirty-one pupils with a mean IQ of 131 were closely studied for both their intellectual and their social development. The school collapsed as Pyke's grandiosity increasingly interfered with Isaacs's running of the school. (Subsequently Pyke lost his fortune, had a severe nervous breakdown, and committed suicide in 1948.) At Malting House School children were given great freedom for their intellectual and emotional development, supported by loving firmness rather than given punishment. The child was seen as a research worker; the teacher was an observer and provider of material and equipment required. Her work there had great influence on the education of children under seven in state schools, establishing play as central for the child's means of living and of understanding life. 
Analysed by J. C. Flugel, Isaacs became an associate member of the newly formed British Psycho-Analytic Society in 1921, becoming a full member in 1923. Though already a full member of the society before her Malting House School days, she submitted herself to further analysis with Joan Riviere and to supervision to get personal experience and understanding of Melanie Klein's new ideas on infancy. 
Susan Isaacs was an enthusiastic and early expositor of Jean Piaget's theories on the intellectual development of young children, though she combined her enthusiasm with criticism of his schemas for stages of cognitive development, which to her were over-schematic, not based on observation of the child in his natural environment, unlike her own, which came from the close observation of children at Malting House School. She published 'The Intellectual Growth of Young Children' in 1930 and 'The Social Development of Young Children' in 1933. In 1933 Susan Isaacs was appointed head of the newly formed department of child development of the University of London under Sir Percy Nunn. Despite under-funding she built a department of great influence in the teaching profession, overcoming the profession's reluctance to consider psychodynamic theory which she could bring together with developmental psychology. 
Isaacs's influence as an educator extended widely. As Ursula Wise she answered parents' questions in the journals 'The Nursery World' and 'Home and School'. Her 'Nursery Years' (1929) was a widely read and influential book in which understanding of the child's mind replaced punitive discipline. Isaacs developed cancer in 1935 and struggled with ill health for the next thirteen years, but nevertheless in 1937 she made an influential tour of Australia and New Zealand. Moving to Cambridge in 1939 she conducted the Cambridge Evacuation Survey on the effects of evacuation on children. 
Isaacs was appointed CBE in 1948 for services to education; she had brought teaching and psychoanalysis into dialogue. Through her teaching she probably influenced the theory and practice of education in Britain more than any other person in the twentieth century. A pioneer, always a little ahead of her time, she introduced progressive educationist ideas to teachers and parents, wrote influential books on the intellectual and social development of young children, and responded generously to the needs of parents through journalism. A trained psychoanalyst, she supported and conceptualized the views of Melanie Klein on the fantasy life of children and introduced psychoanalytic ideas into general developmental psychology. Isaacs's great influence sprang from a combination of deep knowledge, sensitive observation and insight, robust common sense, and a sympathy which was extended not only to children but to those who care for them and bring them up. She died from cancer at her home, 30A Primrose Hill Road, London, on 12 October 1948. She was survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 51066


Heimann, Paula Gertrude (1899-1982), psychoanalyst, was born on 3 February 1899 in Danzig, Poland, the fourth and youngest child of Russian Jewish parents. Heimann would later reflect that she was a replacement for a sister who had died; indeed this family background is significant in the context of her subsequent analytic experiences. Heimann's medical and psychiatric training, which was classically Freudian, was conducted at several German universities (she took her MD in 1928 in Berlin), during which time she married Franz Heimann, a specialist in internal medicine; in 1925 she gave birth to their only daughter Mirza. While living in Berlin, Heimann was analysed by Theodor Reik with a view to formally treating patients of her own, and she qualified in 1932 as associate member of the Berlin Psycho-Analytic Society. 
Threatened under Nazism, Franz Heimann left for Switzerland while Paula and Mirza, denied the right to visit him, stayed in Germany. Mother and daughter left for Britain in July 1933 with psychoanalyst Kate Friedlander, shortly after charges which had implicated Heimann in the Reichstag fire had been dropped; Heimann had been arrested following a party she had thrown on the night of the fire, an act which was taken to be a sign of her complicity. Heimann was first given a licence to practise in the East End of London cheek by jowl with prostitutes and criminals, but eventually she became part of a more conventional psychoanalytic circle in west central London. Supported by colleague Ernest Jones and friends such as the novelist Winifred Bryher, Heimann continued her training, obtained British medical qualifications at Edinburgh University in 1938, and was elected to associate membership of the British Psycho-Analytical Society in November 1933, leading to full membership in 1939; in 1944 she was recognized as a training analyst. 
During her first few years in London, Heimann was assiduously courted by Melanie Klein as a confidant and disciple. Heimann had counselled Klein after the death of her son, but the roles were soon reversed when Heimann entered into a protracted analysis with Klein from approximately 1935 to 1953 (Heimann's marriage broke down in the early thirties). Colleagues saw the relationship between the two women as intense (replicating Heimann's relationship with her mother) and parasitical (Klein has been accused of stealing Heimann's ideas and passing them off as her own), and in the late 1940s Heimann staged a bid for independence. This was a courageous move given Klein's reputation and was to leave Heimann feeling 'traumatized'. 
Taking a role in the British Psycho-Analytical Society's 'Controversial Discussions' of the validity of Klein's theories in the early 1940s Heimann was enlisted as her spokesperson and 'crown princess' (King, 6). Members of the society debated whether Klein's work was faithful to Freudian dogma or sufficiently divergent as to constitute a new school. Classic Freudians particularly took issue with Klein's reliance on psychiatry to theorize psychosis and her manipulation of Freud's concept of the death instinct. Heimann herself was already feeling her allegiance to Klein on the wane. She unofficially abdicated her position with the publication of her classic paper 'On counter-transference' (1950), which was later seen as a major contribution to psychoanalysis. The paper, arguing, against the tide of prevailing opinion, that the analyst's emotional responses to the patient could be a useful tool rather than an obstacle to analysis, enraged Klein, who saw it as a negation of her theories. Heimann's revolutionary idea was that counter-transference could be used to probe the patient's unconscious: the analyst's emotional attitude to the patient could be treated as clinical evidence because this response could be judged to be based on a correct analysis of the patient's motivations or intent. Heimann later took issue with Klein over her concept of innate envy, and in November 1955 officially resigned from the Melanie Klein Trust, becoming an independent for the rest of her career. In a sense Heimann had always been part of the independent, or Middle, group, a position which allowed her to maintain a balance between the more traditional Freudians and the Kleinians. Many feel her best work emanated from the divergence and rift from Klein, but she subsequently coupled Freudian theories with developments in ego psychology to develop original theories on narcissism and creativity, forming a close theoretical bond with Donald Winnicott. In 1947 Winnicott had voiced similar ideas regarding counter-transference, most notably that analysts must 'contain' the hatred evoked in them by their patients. 
While Heimann is often portrayed as a passive pawn in Melanie Klein's power games this is to underestimate her own strong-mindedness, sense of humour, and charm. She died on 24 October 1982 at 42 Nottingham Place, Westminster, having continued to play a vital role in the society until her death. Her theories on counter-transference forever changed the relationship between analyst and analysand. 


@@@@@


doc= 51067


Gretton, Sir Peter William (1912-1992), naval officer, was born on 27 August 1912 at Dalhousie, near Simla, India, the elder of the two sons of George Foster Gretton (1878-1950), a major in the Indian army who, after 1919, became an active joint partner of Lillywhites, Piccadilly, developing its range of ski goods, and his wife, Teresa Anne (1875-1947), the eldest of eleven children of William McEnery (1839-1919), medical practitioner. His younger brother, Richard John 
(Dick; 'b'. 1915)
, was killed in action in north Africa in 1941. Four members in five generations were recognized by the Royal Humane Society: indeed Gretton also later became a vice-president. His mother, daughter of an Irish doctor, was a Catholic. So Gretton went initially to Ladycross, a Catholic preparatory school; and he sent his own three sons to Ampleforth, two under Basil Hume's housemastership. He himself went to Dartmouth and Greenwich Royal Naval colleges, where he was prone to overwork to exhaustion. In his examinations for the rank of lieutenant, he gained 'a full house of firsts in the Subs' course' (autobiography, 47), that is five certificates. In 1930 he was assigned to 'Renown', flagship of the battle-cruiser squadron. The following decade gave him a rich naval panorama -- fleet assemblies at Gibraltar and Palma, a West Indies cruise, seatime in 'Rodney'. He tried fleet flying, but found his pilot gifts wanting. His heart went to destroyers, where command responsibility came quickly; indeed he avoided specializing, preferring to remain a 'salthorse'. During the 1936 Arab uprising he was ashore at Haifa, protecting truck convoys by mounting a 2 pound ship's pom-pom on a hired lorry for night work. He later led a mixed platoon of seamen to help the local police firefighting and street-fighting, for which he was awarded a DSC, though on land. He spent his last two years of peace instructing at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. A timely anti-submarine course saw him into war no longer 'on the beach', but into east-coast convoys. He was just twenty-seven and an all-round athlete -- horses had long featured in recreation. 
In April 1940 Gretton became Captain Philip Vian's first lieutenant in the destroyer 'Cossack', in time for the second Narvik battle, where the battleship 'Warspite' and her escort destroyer sank 'U-64' and the eight survivors of the ten large German destroyers that reached port from the first Narvik battle. He was granted a mention in dispatches. The following year, commanding a destroyer kept at sea a year beyond its due life, he was appointed OBE for western approaches duties. One August night in 1942, commanding an escort destroyer, he rammed and sank an Italian submarine while screening a carrier, thus earning his first DSO. 
Each of the services had cause to fight and win a crucial campaign: in 1940 the RAF over Britain; in 1942 the army in the desert; in 1943 the navy in the Atlantic. Each had its remarkable heroes. As to the Atlantic, two convoy escort commanders shone by their inventiveness and fierce efficiency. The first was Captain Johnny Walker (second escort group), who won the CB and four DSOs, dying of exhaustion in Liverpool in July 1944: he had persuaded his Catholic son to defer priestly training in Rome to become a submariner, as which he died at sea. The second was Gretton (B7 group), who won three DSOs and the OBE, coming through the war with strains that caused his premature retirement as fifth sea lord. Where Walker's forte was in beating U-boat tactics by team technique, Gretton's was in trained expectancy of his captains' independence. Both showed unrelenting vigour, communicated to their teams. Walker had been Gretton's Captain D in 1942. Churchill afterwards wrote: 'The Battle of the Atlantic was the dominant factor all through the War' (Gretton, 'Convoy', 181). Support groups were formed first in 1942, and were gradually joined by escort-carriers, and distant land-based air strikes. The 'crisis of crises' came in the first twenty days of March 1943: in 10 days 41 ships were lost, in 10 more days 56 -- all in convoys. The New World and the Old were all but isolated one from another. During April a hundred U-boats left the Bay of Biscay against convoys. Seemingly Britain was on the edge of surrender -- leaving Europe without hope of liberation (for how might D-day have been launched from across the Atlantic?). 
After the last nightmare month -- March 1943 -- monthly shipping losses never again reached three figures, fast dipping away in the summer of 1943. The battle was specifically won during four successive convoy actions, three fought by Gretton's B7 group. Details were set out in his memoir, 'Convoy Escort Commander' (1964) and the May 1968 issue of 'Navy'. HX231 was a fast convoy of 61 ships sailing to the UK, attacked by a pack of 17 U-boats, which sank 6 ships at the cost of considerable damage to themselves. ONS5 was a slow convoy of 39 ships sailing to the USA, attacked by 4 packs of U-boats (16, 17, 24, and 16 successively) which sank a third of the convoy; B7 group sank 8 U-boats (2 collided), damaging several more. This proved the turning point. Gretton called it 'the fiercest convoy action of the War' (unpublished autobiography, 83); Stephen Roskill in 'War at Sea' called it 'as decisive as Quiberon Bay or The Nile' (Gretton, 'Convoy', 147). SC130 was a slow convoy of 39 ships sailing to the UK, attacked by 4 packs each of 20 U-boats. Five of these were sunk, one of them carrying Admiral Donitz's son, while others were damaged. The fourth such convoy was HX239. Donitz later wrote that Germany had 'radically to increase the fighting power of the U-boats... accordingly I withdrew the boats from the North Atlantic' (Gretton, 'Convoy', 161-2) -- on 24 May, as SC130 reached home waters. In May alone, an intolerable forty-one U-boats had been sunk. In 1974, soon after full sources had been released, Gretton published his study of a single action, 'Crisis Convoy: the Story of HX231'. That convoy was the first to benefit from long-range air escort from Liberators based in Iceland and Northern Ireland, combined with new support groups. Air support became crucial: HX239 had with it the first escort-carriers. 
On 29 May 1943 Gretton married Dorothy Nancy Gladys 
(Judy; 'b'. 1920)
, daughter of James Eastwood Du Vivier and his wife, Caroline Vau de Venne, of Belgium. She was at that time serving as a WRNS officer. There were four children: Anne ('b'. 1944), Michael Peter ('b'. 1946), William Philip ('b'. 1948), and George Richard ('b'. 1953). Later in that auspicious year Gretton, to the delight of B7, was given the role of commanding the support group, reinforcing convoy escorts. During a three-week spell at sea he supported five convoys, his ship sharing the destruction of two U-boats. His leadership, seamanship, training capacity, and grasp of problems at sea earned him his third DSO. He finished his war by writing a new 'Admiralty convoy instruction', on which he lectured around the Home Fleet, causing wonder. He was finally posted to the Admiralty, next to Churchill's chiefs of staff headquarters for joint planning. He was shifting from stale sailor to studied scholar, crystallizing what he had lived. He was privy to the fruits of Ultra and occasionally present at meetings of the chiefs of staff. His team estimated what U-boat design was reaching: if such boats got into action 'a new Battle of the Atlantic would be fought' (autobiography, 90) -- so Bomber Harris prevented production until too late. Gretton flew to Nuremberg to watch the war crimes trials: 'Admirals Raeder and Donitz were most dignified' (ibid., 92). 
Gretton reached the rank of captain early, aged thirty-six, in 1948. Until 1950 he was an observer at Washington's Naval War College, analysing S. E. Morison's new war history and arguing for large compact convoys professionally escorted. Against nuclear bombs, he advocated a full allied appreciation of Japan's collapsing economy in 1945. Until 1952 he was naval assistant to the first sea lord, Lord Fraser, who took him to allied co-ordinate meetings in Europe and the USA, showing him the nascent NATO (founded in 1949). In 1951 he represented Fraser at negotiations in Rome, finding himself overridden by the chief of the air staff. The Korean War loomed, US forces setting the pace. Churchill returned to power, overplaying his cards about Atlantic naval command. Gretton's meeting with him generated his 1968 book: 'Former Naval Person: Churchill and the Navy'. Gretton then commanded the cruiser 'Gambia', largely in peaceable Malta. It assisted after a Greek earthquake, supplying by sea. Then in 1955 he became chief of staff to the admiral of the naval mission in Washington. Mountbatten became first sea lord and in November visited, essentially to co-ordinate upon nuclear submarines: 'He knew everyone from the President downwards' (autobiography, 131). Then in 1956-7 Gretton was commodore in command of the naval task group for the British atomic tests at Christmas Island. There was no harbour there, and the anchorage enjoyed heavy swells. The USA claimed ownership, despite Captain Cook's discovery; so Gretton flew to Washington again to 'sort it out with Arleigh Burke' (ibid., 134) of the US navy. Three H-bombs were dropped on schedule. Then the scientists asked for more unscheduled tests, as Gretton's health broke. In 1958, losing health, he was promoted rear-admiral, and made senior naval member of the directing staff, the Imperial Defence College. He introduced a course on nuclear deterrent strategy. In 1960 he became flag officer, sea training; and was in 1961 promoted vice-admiral (his first son, Michael, following him in that rank). At Portland he trained thirty-three ships in fifteen months. In 1962 he became deputy chief of naval staff and fifth sea lord, being knighted KCB in 1963, when he retired because of his health. His legacy was to show all branches of the navy that their uncoordinated pipe dreams added up to massive financial unreality. Soon afterwards, defence budgets were hit by a wilting national economy. 
After a restful but busy 1964, when he completed two books, his war memoir and a study of current defence problems, 'Maritime Strategy' (1965), Gretton was appointed domestic bursar of University College, Oxford. There he brought high standards to the local administration. In his years there his college took in hand the creation of a science library, the erection of the Mitchell Building, the modernization of external student developments, and the refurbishing (with Judy) of college annexes. He was quickly elected a fellow, and on his retirement in 1971 a senior research fellow. His last book, initially published in Spanish, was a full-length study, 'The Forgotten Factor: the Naval Aspect of the Spanish Civil War' (1984). An exceptionally handsome man, Gretton died in Oxford on 11 November 1992. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51069


Glover, Edward George (1888-1972), psychoanalyst, was born on 13 January 1888 at Lesmahagow, Lanarkshire, the third son of Matthew Glover, a country schoolmaster, and Elizabeth Smith Shanks, who was of a farming family. His eldest brother, James, who died early, in 1927, was regarded as the genius of the family, taking after his father, whereas Edward was regarded as being more pedestrian. The middle brother died when Edward was four. Edward's intellectual capacities only appeared at fourteen when his father became his teacher. Before that he was 'a reluctant, rebellious, contumacious and obstinate schoolboy' (Kubie, 86). He followed James into medicine and qualified MB ChB Glasgow, aged twenty-one. Four years of good academic medicine (under a cardiologist, Professor John Cowan) honed his scientific bent, though his awareness of psychological forces when treating children brought to his attention the clash between the strictly organic approach to medicine and the scope of actual clinical experience. 
Glover spent some years in tuberculosis medicine, publishing some papers, until his elder brother James introduced him to psychoanalysis. Glover recognized both his identification with James and also the need of the young brother to copy and surpass his older sibling rival. Later, when they were both psychoanalysts they worked together without incapacitating rivalry, each acting as foil for the mind of the other. The brothers both went to Germany at the end of the First World War to study with Karl Abraham, the outstanding figure of the new Berlin Psychoanalytic Institute. Edward, then thirty-two, was honorary medical officer to an English Quaker relief commission. Both James and Edward were luminaries in early British psychoanalysis but James's life came to a sudden end from diabetes. 
Glover spent many years as the collaborator of Ernest Jones, the dominating life president of the British Psycho-Analytical Society, which he had formed in 1919. Successively he was director of research, later director, and chairman of the training committee of the Institute of Psychoanalysis. Glover was regarded as Jones's crown prince and successor but finally broke with him over his political manipulations within the Psycho-Analytical Society. 
Between 1926 and 1929 Jones and Glover represented the Psycho-Analytical Society on the British Medical Association's committee investigating the status of psychoanalysis, which was formed following public disquiet at its possible harmful effects. Together, against strong opposition, they received the association's recognition of psychoanalysis as a technique requiring professional training. During these years Glover took over Jones's functions in the society as Jones was grief stricken following the death of his daughter Gwenith. 
Glover described himself in adolescence as 'a little prig and have remained so' (Kubie, 86). He was very critical of his own writings and those of others as he had learned from his father how to aim for high academic standards and insisted on the importance of distinguishing metapsychology from metaphysics. His writing style was clear and fluent and he held no respect for persons in authority. He insisted that basic Freudian principles should be respected and tested before developing new ideas. Thus, though he had been a supporter of Melanie Klein's speculations on the early development of mind, he later launched trenchant criticisms on her work. In this he was joined by Melanie Klein's daughter, Melita Schmideberg, who had entered analysis with him; their alliance raised considerable hostility. He considered that Klein's speculations about the infant's early mental development were unscientific and incompatible with Freud's theories and that, therefore, the society, which he alleged was being taken over by Mrs Klein's followers, was no longer a Freudian society. His many contributions to the controversial discussions of the British Psycho-Analytical Society show his considerable polemical skills which he did not hesitate to use when challenged. Schmideberg was so exaggerated and hostile in her attacks that it was not possible to differentiate real causes for concern from mischief making. Glover himself, according to the psychoanalytic historian R. Steiner, became out of touch with historical reality, his forecasts being apocalyptic and ferociously one-sided. 
Glover resigned from the British Psycho-Analytic Society in 1944, no longer able to accept what he considered major deviations of Freudian psychoanalysis, particularly from the Klein school. Playing second-in-command to Jones for decades, his ambition to succeed Jones as president of the society was doomed by his polemics against those who did not agree with his views on what constituted Freudian psychoanalysis. He became a member of the Swiss Psychoanalytic Society and an honorary member of the American Psychoanalytic Association. 
Glover's achievements lay in four areas. First he pioneered psychoanalytic research on delinquency and criminology and was a founder of the Institute for Scientific Treatment of Delinquency, later the Portman Clinic. His 'Diagnosis of Delinquency' appeared in 1944. He was also the founder and editor of the 'British Journal of Criminology'. Second, he insisted on psychoanalysis taking a serious attitude to research, both theoretical and technical. His 1932 enquiry into the practice of the British Psycho-Analytical Society, not published until 1940, revealed a great variability of theory and technique within the society. His important text, 'The Technique of Psycho-Analysis', was published in 1928. Third, he argued for high standards in psychoanalytic training and was active nationally and internationally, being vice-president and honorary secretary of the International Psycho-Analytical Association. He was chairman of the training committee of the British Psycho-Analytical Society and acting chairman during the Second World War. Fourth, he attempted prematurely to develop a psychoanalytic diagnostic schema for mental disorders. His most original contribution was his theory of the early development of mind in which he postulated ego nuclei of experience gradually coalescing and integrating into a unitary ego. This work predated many later ideas in this area. His writings also included 'War, Sadism and Pacifism' (1933), 'Psychoanalysis: a Handbook for Medical Practitioners and Students of Comparative Psychology' (1939), and 'Exceptional Children' (1960). 
Glover's first marriage was in 1918 to Christine Margaret Speir, who died in childbirth the same year with a stillborn son; his second marriage, on 15 July 1924, was to Gladys (1887/8-1966), daughter of Robert Blair; their one daughter was born mentally handicapped. Her parents gave her great devotion, which, however, led them into a considerable degree of social isolation. Gladys Glover died in 1966 after three years of painful illness from a brain tumour. 
Glover and Ernest Jones fought for the acceptance of psychoanalysis within the scientific community of Great Britain; the British Medical Association report of 1929 achieved partial recognition. Glover's most permanent achievement, outlasting his polemics against Jung and Klein, was the establishment of psychoanalytic investigation and treatment of delinquency which was the origin of forensic psychotherapy. A formidable figure to those who knew him only in public, in private Glover was known for his kindness, cordiality, and Scottish humour. He died in London on 16 August 1972. 


@@@@@


doc= 51070


Khan, (Mohammed) Masud Raza (1924-1989), psychoanalyst, was born on 21 July 1924 at Jhelum in the Punjab in pre-partition India, the second of the three children of the fourth marriage of his father, Fazaldad Khan ('c'.1846-1943). Khan's father, a wealthy landowner, was seventy-six years old with several middle-aged children by the time he married Khan's mother, Khursheed Begum (1905-1971), a beautiful, illiterate singing-and-dancing-girl of seventeen, who had already borne a son out of wedlock before she met Fazaldad Khan. Due to his mother's background Khan's nuclear family became an alienated offshoot of a respected family in the established hierarchy of what later became Pakistan. 
Masud Khan was brought up as a devout Muslim on his father's vast feudal estates. He had an elder brother, Tahir (1923-1983), and a younger sister, Mahmooda (1926-1942). He was a solitary child, very handsome, but had to contend with a slight deformity, a disfigured right ear. At home the family spoke Punjabi but the household had an Oxford educated governess, possibly in an attempt to lift the status of the children and cleanse them of the putative stigma of their mother's reputation. Masud Khan grew up in an isolated, stigmatized yet privileged world; a world of polarities as to his parents' ages, social class, education, and demarcated sexual roles, a world where his leisure time was spent with horses and playing polo. From about 1942 to 1945 he went to the University of the Punjab at Lyallpur (Faisalabad) and Lahore, where he gained his BA and MA degrees. 
In 1946 he went to England and was due to attend Balliol College, Oxford, but was accepted for training at the Institute of Psycho-Analysis. He was a tall young man, remarkable for his good looks and elegant bearing, when he entered a world so different from that of his cultural heritage. At twenty-six, however, he became one of the youngest analysts ever to qualify. His psychoanalysts were Ella Sharpe, John Rickman, and, after each of them had died, Donald Winnicott. He was supervised by both Anna Freud and Melanie Klein. When he undertook the further specialist training in child psychoanalysis his supervisors were Donald Winnicott, Clifford Scott, and Marion Milner. 
Khan was a maverick in the analytic world. An omnivorous reader with an impressive library, he had a distinctive style and literary flair. With his concept of cumulative trauma, he established himself as one of the major contributors to psychoanalytic theory. That trauma could operate silently with its effect not becoming manifest until later in adolescence was an arresting thought. He, more than any other clinical writer since Freud, managed to convey the very texture and quality of what a true analytic encounter could achieve, the relief of being understood, of feeling knowable, particularly for those patients who were unable to use the more orthodox analytic situation in a meaningful way. However, this attempt to meet the vulnerability and resourcelessness in his patients by, at times, ignoring the accepted conventions governing the patient-analyst relationship, led Khan into repeated clashes with the psychoanalytic establishment. Increasingly his life aroused much comment and criticism particularly among his English colleagues. He had a more wholehearted following in France, Germany, and the United States. 
Despite a contemptuous disregard for many of his colleagues, Khan sponsored several new analysts in his successful term as editor of the 'International Psychoanalytical Library' and also in his role as associate editor of both the 'International Journal of Psycho-Analysis' and the 'International Review of Psycho-Analysis'. A frequent contributor to the 'Nouvelle Revue de Psychanalyse', he was also its foreign co-editor. He was particularly proud of his active role in editing Winnicott's work and was instrumental in publishing it and making him available to a wider public. Consequently Khan was devastated when he was not made Winnicott's literary executor on his death. 
Khan published papers extensively in the United States, France, and England. Concerned with the patient's experience of self, he had four books published on this theme; 'The Privacy of the Self' (1974), 'Alienation in Perversions' (1979), 'Hidden Selves' (1983), and finally and unhappily his controversial book containing some antisemitic passages, 'When Spring Comes' (1988), which caused his expulsion from the British Psycho-Analytical Society shortly before his death. 
A few months after Winnicott's death in January 1971 Khan's mother died. He had always had a difficult relationship with her. This double death was a repetition of an earlier trauma for Khan when, in his adolescence, his younger sister died, followed soon after by his feared but idealized father. Khan's whole style of being, both private and professional, seemed to be based on his caring and cruel father. Both brilliant and learned, Khan remained in essence an Eastern potentate. More than likely this was the self-same style of feudal rule that Khan's father exerted on his family and retainers. 
Since the mid-1970s Khan had been dogged by cancer and severe ill health, which, together with an increasing problem with alcohol, led to his removal from the position of training analyst and gradually forced him to give up his thriving practice and concentrate on writing. 
Although Khan had numerous affairs in his lifetime, he married only twice. On 26 July 1952 he married Jane Shore ('b'. 1928/9), a modern dancer, daughter of Bernard Shore, a well-known viola player, but the marriage did not last long. On 23 January 1959 he married the ballerina Svetlana Beriosova (1932-1998), daughter of Nicholas Beriozoff, director of a ballet company, a marriage which was dissolved in 1974. There were no children from either marriage. Although Khan was treated mainly at the London Clinic throughout his last years of illness, he died in St Mary's Hospital, Praed Street, London, on 7 June 1989. His body was returned to Faisalabad, Pakistan, for burial in the family graveyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 51071


Sharpe, Ella Agnes Freeman (1875-1947), psychoanalyst and schoolteacher, was born on 23 February 1875 at Garden Place, Cross Street, Sudbury, Suffolk, the daughter of Frank Sharpe, silk weaver, and Mary Ann Freeman. Owing to the premature death of her father, Ella Sharpe took on the responsibilities of an eldest son, forgoing the chance to study at Oxford in order to provide for her mother and sisters. She did, however, attend Nottingham University for three years, becoming an English teacher and co-head of Hucknall Pupil Teachers' Training Centre for boys and girls aged fifteen to eighteen. She held this post from 1904 to 1916, where she exhibited a profound skill in empathizing with and assessing the difficulties of adolescence. 
Sharpe gave up formal teaching in 1917 to study psychoanalysis at the Medico-Psychological Clinic at Brunswick Square, London. She entered the clinic as a patient and was later trained to be a psychoanalyst under James Glover. Like Glover, Sharpe went to Berlin in 1920, where she was in analysis with and trained by Hanns Sachs; analysis continued with Sachs over several years during the summer months. In 1921 she was elected associate member of the British Psycho-Analytical Society, and as a member in 1923. For Sharpe psychoanalysis was an adjunct to education, and she brought to it all the proficiency in understanding human behaviour she had developed while in Nottingham. One of the large group of women coming to prominence in psychoanalysis in the 1920s, Sharpe negotiated her own position between object relations theorist Melanie Klein, an early influence (she analysed Klein's daughter Melitta Schmideberg in 1934), and Anna Freud, whom she later supported. 
Disputes raged over the status of child analysis, and Sharpe was initially encouraged by Klein to treat children's play as the equivalent to the free associations of adults, finding Klein's conceptual tools useful in her own theories of pure art. In the 1940s debates continued between Freud and Klein (over the latter's interpretation of Freud's concept of the death instinct, for example), and Sharpe was an important voice in those discussions, taking issue with Klein over the depressive phase and the introjected love object. In the inter-war years she became an influential and highly respected training analyst, and a distinguished professional in the field of child development. Sharpe's prime contribution to this field was the recognition that imitation and play were symbolic activities structured according to 'interpersonal identifications' (Rayner, 50). In her work as a training analyst she was an inspiration to her students and was part of the movement to advocate the self-awareness of the analyst in the relationship with the analysand. Eschewing the path taken by the scientist, she preferred the more subjective route chosen by those 'who find obstinate problems within themselves for which they seek understanding and solution' (E. A. F. Sharpe, 'Collected Papers', 1950, 109). 
Like Sigmund Freud and Ernest Jones, Ella Sharpe believed that humanistic studies, rather than pure science, were vital to the development of both the analyst and psychoanalysis. For Sharpe, the 'dawn of civilization is the dawn of art' (E. A. F. Sharpe, 'Collected Papers', 1950, 126) and she urged would-be analysts to remember that '[o]utside the consulting-room we need to see life whole and to remember that our culture is inseparable from our conflicts' (ibid., 21). Sharpe's most original work lay in her psychoanalytic interpretation of literature, notably her essays on the religious poet Francis Thompson and Shakespeare's tragedies, in which she reconstructed Shakespeare's emotional life from the psychoanalytic evidence of the plays, and argued for the 'regressive movement of the libido' in Hamlet. Her skills as a literary theorist are attested to in her essay on metaphor and bodily discharge, 'Psycho-physical problems revealed in language: an examination of metaphor'. In 'Dream Analysis' (1937) Sharpe elaborated on the analogousness of poetic metaphor and the process of the dream work, originated by Freud and pioneered by F. C. Prescott in 'The Poetic Mind'. Sharpe was an innovator in theorizing the creative aspects of dreams, specifically the correspondences between dreams and metaphor. In Rayner's opinion her graceful prose 'succeeded in giving probably the best exposition of classical theory on dreams after Freud himself' (Rayner, 84). Sharpe was a forerunner of the psychoanalytic exploration of language developed by Jacques Lacan in the 1950s. 
Sharpe, with M. N. Searl, Mary Chadwick, and M. G. Lewis, was one of the 'ladies' of the 'Gordon Street menage' -- so called by James Strachey because the women shared both lodgings and a certain position on psychoanalysis ('Bloomsbury Freud', 43). She was referred to by James Strachey as 'the Sharpe', a remark elicited due to a wrangle over the logistics of an impending visit to London by Melanie Klein ('Bloomsbury Freud', 272). This use of her name also throws light on her skills as a debater which is borne out by a reading of the proceedings of the Extraordinary Business Meetings of the British Psycho-Analytical Society, in which Sharpe pointedly defends her ground and challenges her detractors. She is remembered vividly by Sylvia Payne for her dramatic performances in her lectures and seminars -- her audiences were often 'disturbed' by the physical nature of Sharpe's delivery in which both mind and body were fully operational ('International Journal of Psycho-Analysis', 55) -- most notably her reading of 'Sublimation and delusion' at the Oxford congress in 1928. Payne paints a sensuous and lively portrait of Sharpe, all deep rich tones, colourful dress, and mobile gestures. 
Sharpe embarked on many projects in the last few years of her life, including a manual on the training of analysts and a novel, and exhibited no signs of a waning in her intellectual energy. But the disturbances of war wreaked havoc on her physical health and she died from cardiac failure on 1 June 1947 at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. Her 'Collected Papers', edited by Marjorie Brierley, were published in 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 51075


Guntrip, Henry James Samuel (1901-1975), psychotherapist and Congregational minister, the son of Henry Richard Guntrip (died 'c'.1923) and his wife, Harriet Louise Jessop (died 1953), was born at 103 Dulwich Road, London, on 29 May 1901. His father, a commercial clerk, was the youngest of seven children. Before his marriage he was lively and enjoyed cricket. A Methodist lay preacher, he was founder of a breakaway evangelical movement, The Ranters. His liveliness declined after his marriage to Harriet Jessop, a harsh, dominating, and unmaternal woman whose own childhood had left her embittered. Because of her own mother's incapacity she had cared for many younger siblings. In marriage she had no more time for babies; she wanted to be a businesswoman, and was a shopkeeper. Harry was the first child; a brother, Percy, was born two years later. At sixteen months Percy died, when Harry was three and a half, and this trauma and his own and his mother's responses to it were central to his childhood illness. After Percy's death he became seriously ill but recovered by being sent away from his mother, who was incapable of keeping him emotionally alive. She dressed him as a girl and had him circumcised when he was five. Between three and a half and five he developed psychosomatic illnesses, later understood as attempts to gain his mother's love and attention. 
Guntrip's fight for independence began by joining the Salvation Army at the age of eight. From 1913 he attended Alleyn's School, Dulwich, where he was a vigorous athlete, particularly enjoying cricket. He was an enthusiastic member of the Salvation Army but, after two years of training to become an officer he left and in 1921 went to London University where he took a degree in philosophy and psychology; a degree in divinity at the Congregational New College followed in 1924. In his theological and philosophical training he was influenced by the personal relationship philosophy of John MacMurray and the philosophy of Martin Buber; he later found resonances of these in his psychoanalytic work. Guntrip entered the Congregational ministry, first at St John's Church, Ipswich, then at Salem Congregational Church, Leeds, where he spent the rest of his life. He was an energetic minister, a powerful orator, and a good communicator; he strove to integrate religion and psychoanalysis, seeing both of them as dedicated vocations to bring God's love and understanding. His marriage in the early 1920s to Bertha Kind, a shorthand typist and then nurse, whom he had met in the Salvation Army, was an invaluable support throughout his life. 
Guntrip's journey into psychotherapy began when he sought help for his own distress, insomnia, and psychosomatic symptoms. He began therapy with two Freudian-inclined therapists, Hugh Crichton-Miller and Clifford Allen, both of whom stuck to rigid Oedipal-level interpretations. He was not much helped by this therapy and it was a great relief when he was introduced to the object relations theory of Ronald Fairbairn. By now Guntrip had become a therapist himself in Leeds with patients referred both by Leeds University and by general practitioners. 
Fairbairn, a philosophically trained psychoanalyst, evolved a radical revision of psychoanalytic theory, replacing Freud's drive theory, that biological forces seek tension relief, with the relational theory, that human infants seek and need loving and caring responsiveness. Failing to get these, if the mother is not able to be appropriately loving, they turn inwards, feeling that their own love is bad and dangerous and that this is why they have been rejected. Living primarily within inner worlds with internal objects they are not able to experience full loving relationships. From 1949 to 1960 Guntrip worked with Fairbairn, travelling from Leeds to Edinburgh for his eleven hundred sessions, constantly overworking to make up for lost time at his ministry. In addition, he was treating many patients and lecturing in the university. Using his photographic memory Guntrip began his psychoanalytical autobiography, recording all his dreams and all his sessions. His analysis with Fairbairn enabled him to explore his relationship with his mother, not approached in his previous therapy, and the consequences of Percy's death. His mother, increasingly paranoid, insisted on living with him and Bertha for the last nine years of her life, which compounded his psychological difficulties. 
In Guntrip's account he was not only Fairbairn's patient, he became his collaborator in his revision of psychoanalytic theory and in the early 1960s began to write his own psychoanalytic papers. In 1960 Guntrip felt that his work with him had reached its limits as Fairbairn aged and had recurrent illnesses. In 1962 Guntrip began analysis with Donald Winnicott in London, who, he felt, would understand and cope with his needs to regress to very early stages of infantile dependence and helplessness; according to Guntrip's account he found what he needed. His healing relationship with Winnicott released him from his closed inner world. The analysis ended in 1969; Winnicott, in fragile health, died in 1971. 
In the years following this analysis Guntrip wrote the papers and books that made his international reputation and led to invitations to the United States. The first visit, in 1968, to New York and Washington came through the interest aroused by his papers on the schizoid personality, the books 'Personality Structure and Human Interaction' (1961), 'Schizoid Phenomena, Object-Relations and the Self' (1968), and the growing interest in America about British contributions to psychoanalysis. Though not a member of the British Psychoanalytic Society, Guntrip's importance was eventually conceded and he was invited to speak to the society, which greatly pleased him. 
Guntrip was a fluent, clear writer, able to articulate emotional conflicts and issues, to clarify psychoanalytic theory, and to insist on the need for continuing theoretical and technical developments. He saw the problem of schizoid isolation as the core of neurosis, the withdrawal from full relationships through fear and terror, the false belief that one's own love is bad and destructive. The only release from this is through a psychoanalysis in which these fears are understood, where the real loving attitude of the therapist to the patient gradually allows fears to surface and the patient can take the risk of entering into a fuller relationship with the therapist. Guntrip's writings have been influential and have made psychoanalysis, in particular object relations theory, more accessible. They are the writings of a man with a mission to communicate and to convert, and represent his own integration of religion and psychodynamic science. 
As well as Guntrip's rich legacy of papers and books there is a fascinating (unpublished) psychoanalytic autobiography, a record of his dreams of over thirty years and of his analyses with Fairbairn and Winnicott, subject of a famous paper (Guntrip, 'My experience'). Valuable as this legacy is, it has to be treated with reserve: we have only Guntrip's account, and the very fact of his writing accounts of all his analytic sessions indicates compulsive overactivity, a feature of his psychopathology. We do not know how much his accounts of Fairbairn's and Winnicott's interpretations represent what they actually were. With this reservation, this is a unique record of deep psychoanalytic experiences. 
Guntrip died in the General Infirmary, Leeds, from carcinomatosis on 18 February 1975. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51076


Balint, Michael Maurice (1896-1970), psychoanalyst, was born on 3 December 1896 in Baross Street, Jozsefvaros, a residential section of Budapest, Hungary. He was the first of the two children of Ignac Bergsmann, a general medical practitioner. Both his parents were descendants of German Jewish families who had been fully assimilated Hungarians for only two or three generations. He later changed his name to Balint. At secondary school Balint became a voracious reader and haunted Budapest's public libraries. His younger sister by eighteen months, Emmi, studied mathematics and was at school with two other future psychoanalysts, Margaret Mahler and Alice Szekely-Kovacs; the latter became Balint's wife. As a young man Balint enjoyed skiing, ice-skated in Budapest's municipal park, rowed on the Danube, and was keen on boxing. His initial ambition was to be an engineer but his father disapproved and insisted, in 1913, that he enrol in medical school. He was conscripted into the army when the First World War started, serving first at the Russian front and then in the Italian Dolomites. He was sent home, however, following a serious injury to a thumb, caused while trying to dismantle a hand grenade. He returned to his medical studies two years later and graduated MD in 1920. In 1918 he married Alice, whose mother was Vilma Kovacs. Alice was an ex-patient, and then a pupil of Sandor Ferenczi; she later become a psychoanalyst, well known for her work on analytic supervision. 
After reading Freud's 'Totem and Taboo' Balint attended courses in psychoanalysis given in 1919 by Ferenczi and came under his influence. As the political situation in Budapest was still unsettled, and Balint's future uncertain, he decided to live in Berlin, where he worked as an assistant research biochemist in the laboratory of Otto Heinrich Warburg. Balint demonstrated his astounding energy and drive by pursuing his growing interest in psychoanalysis at the same time. Balint and his wife began their analytic training with Dr Hans Sachs and decided to study what was later called psychosomatic illness. This was the start of Balint's lifelong interest in relating psychoanalytic concepts to clinical medicine. He was soon working part time at the Berlin Institute of Psychoanalysis. In 1923 he also joined the staff of the First Medical University Clinic in Berlin's Charite Hospital. After obtaining his PhD in chemistry and physics in 1924 Balint and his wife returned to Budapest, where their son Janos was born in March 1925. Balint spent two years as a research assistant in one of the departments of medicine at the University Hospital and both he and his wife went to Ferenczi for a further two years to complete their analyses. He became a full member of the Hungarian Psychoanalytical Society in 1926, was appointed a training analyst, and started in practice as a psychoanalyst at 12 Meszaros Street, Budapest, the headquarters of the Budapest Psychoanalytical Institute, where he and his wife also lived. Until the early part of 1926 Balint published papers on bacteriology and biochemistry. From then on he wrote on psychoanalytical subjects. The first of these were 'Psychotherapy for General Practitioners' (1926) and 'Psychotherapy and Psychogenesis of Physical Symptoms' (1926), which reflect the early development of his interest in the nature and content of the doctor-patient relationship. In 1930 Balint played an important part in establishing the Psychoanalytic Outpatient Clinic in Budapest at Meszaros Street, and in that year he was appointed vice-director of the Budapest Psychoanalytical Institute. Ferenczi was its director until his death in 1935, when Balint became its director, serving until 1939. 
Increasing political unrest in Hungary during the years 1932-8, and the 'Anschluss', put Hungarian psychoanalysts in a very difficult situation. John Rickman, president of the International Psychoanalytic Association, advised all Jewish analysts to leave Hungary, and was instrumental in gaining entry into the United Kingdom for many of them, including Balint and his family early in 1939. They took up residence at 1 Mayfair Cottage in Fielden Park, Manchester, where, within a few months, Alice collapsed and died from rupture of an abdominal aneurysm, which they had both known she had. Balint continued to look after their son and in spite of his grief he also worked for, and obtained, the British qualifications which he needed in order to practise as a doctor in the United Kingdom. He was appointed consultant psychiatrist at the Manchester Northern Royal Hospital, and director of the North East Lancashire and the County Borough of Preston child guidance clinics. 
Balint had a very difficult time until 31 July 1943, when he married Edna Henshaw, 'nee' Yates ('b'. 1903/4), a psychologist and former psychoanalyst, but this marriage broke down, and they separated in March 1947 and divorced in 1952. Early in 1945 he received the tragic news that his parents had committed suicide with lethal injections of morphine, when they were about to be arrested by the Hungarian Nazis, rather than face the certain fate of the gas chambers. Later the same year he moved with his son to live in London, first at New Grove House, Hampstead Grove, and after a short time at 7 Park Square West, Regent's Park. He worked as director of the Chislehurst Child Guidance Clinic from 1945 until he became a naturalized British subject in October 1947, after which he became a member of the British Psycho-Analytical Society, and started to practise as a psychoanalyst again. In 1948 Balint was awarded an MSc (Psychol.) by the University of Manchester for his medical sciences thesis on 'Individual differences of behaviour in early infancy', which was based on his researches into the patterns of infants' behaviour during feeding, and the mother-infant relationship. 
In the same year Balint was invited to join the staff of the Tavistock Clinic, where he stayed until his retirement from the National Health Service in 1961. He was then invited to join the staff at the University College Hospital, London, where he continued his work with his training- 'cum'-research groups for general practitioners, as well as participating in the scheme which had been started in 1958 for Balint-groups for medical students. 
Balint considered and commented on almost every topic of psychoanalytic research. He left a remarkable legacy of several major concepts in psychoanalytic theory, the first of which must be his recognition of the importance of the mother-infant relationship for the individual's future ability to relate to others. This led him to the concepts of 'primary love' (1952) and the 'basic fault' (1968), while other contributions about the theory and techniques of psychoanalysis relate to regression and its use as a therapeutic agent. 
In 'Thrills and Regressions' (1959) Balint develops his belief that human emotions can be understood only in relation to an object, and he describes two very different types of human functioning. In the first of these, when personal security is threatened there is a need to hold on to something familiar and well known, something firm, a form of functioning which he called 'ocno philic'; while, in states of emergency, the other type of individuals, whom he called 'philo bats', set a distance between themselves and those familiar things which represent safety, and tend to be self-reliant, and to thrive on independent, thrill-acquiring activity. As extreme examples he cites acrobats, lion tamers, pilots, mountain climbers, and skiers. 
Balint's eminence as a psychoanalyst was recognized by his election in 1968 to the presidency of the British Psycho-Analytical Society. During his presidency he initiated the popular biennial English-Speaking Conferences of the European Psycho-Analytical Federation. He had also been president of the medical section of the British Psychological Society. 
As important as his work was in the advancement of psychoanalysis, Balint will also be remembered for his work in his other main interest. After only a short time at the Tavistock Clinic he had been invited to join Enid Flora Eicholtz, 'nee' Albu ['see below'], who was working for the Family Welfare Association developing techniques for treating people with marital difficulties, and then training social workers in their use. She became Balint's third wife on 2 January 1953. A seminar for training social workers was formed in 1948 and became the Family Discussion Bureau. Together they devised the case discussion seminar, a method of parallel therapy of the two marital partners by two separate therapists to help them deal with their problems. After further development and growing success it became the Institute of Marital Studies in 1968 (later the Tavistock Marital Studies Institute). 
It was about 1948, possibly as a result of changes in medical practice brought about by the introduction of the National Health Service, that Balint returned to his earlier conviction that the essence of good medical practice lay in the doctor-patient relationship, and he sought to develop a better understanding of the emotional problems encountered by general practitioners in their everyday practice. So it was that Balint's timely invitation published in 'The Lancet' (1952) for doctors to attend a discussion group seminar on psychological problems in general practice at the Tavistock Clinic was so attractive to so many. This led to the writing of his classic book, 'The Doctor, his Patient and the Illness' (1957), which was translated into fourteen languages and proved to be extremely influential. Balint focused his attention on how the doctor's attitudes and approach had a vital impact on the patient's response and progress, so that he was able to show that 'the most frequently used drug in general practice was the doctor himself, i.e. it was not only the bottle of medicine or the box of pills that mattered, but the way the doctor gave them to his patient -- in fact, the whole atmosphere in which the drug was given and taken. (Balint, 1)' It followed that as with any other drug, it was necessary to consider its pharmacology, its indications, dosage, limitations, the best ways of administering it, and its possible side-effects. Balint also demonstrated how doctors were limited by what he called their apostolic function, the ingrained attitudes and biases due to their training at medical school, in addition to the effects of their own upbringing and life experience. 
Balint started seminar discussion groups with the Family Planning Association in 1952 for the treatment of psychosexual disorders. These were highly successful and the Institute of Psychosexual Studies developed from them. He was responsible also for setting up a workshop in 1955 for the development of brief focal psychotherapy with psychoanalysts from the Tavistock Clinic and the Cassel Hospital. Enid Balint reciprocated his earlier collaboration with her in her work with social workers and others, after his first few years organizing his training groups, and often joined him as co-leader. 
Balint was the first doctor to undertake research into the psychological aspects of general practice in a highly scientific way. In devising his method for training doctors in recognizing possible underlying psychological aspects of their patients' illnesses he stated clearly and firmly that there was a great need for research in this area, and that teaching and research had mostly been in the hands of specialists of various kinds, but the research needed in this context could be done only in general practice. Balint-groups and societies were formed worldwide. In Switzerland the Foundation of Psychosomatic Medicine and Social Medicine has a keen interest in Balint's work. An International Balint Federation was also established. 
For many years Michael and Enid Balint travelled a good deal to attend a variety of meetings and, frequently by invitation, to give lectures or lead groups. Although he was not known as a man who sought honours and awards he was happy with his appointment as visiting professor, and Enid's as associate professor, of the University of Cincinnati, Ohio, which they visited regularly from 1958 onwards. Balint's contribution to medicine was summed up by Lord Max Rosenheim, who wrote: 'By all reckoning, Michael Balint was a remarkable doctor and psychoanalyst, a man for all time, whose impact on general practice and on the understanding of the doctor-patient relationship has been felt all round the world' (Hopkins, 'In memoriam', vii). During the last few years of his life, Balint suffered the effects of diabetes and glaucoma, with resultant severe impairment of his vision, and, although very few people were aware of this, he depended very much on his wife's guidance for his mobility. Balint died on 31 December 1970 while being taken to Southmead Hospital, Bristol, and was cremated. 
Balint's third wife, known after a later marriage as 


@@@@@


doc= 51078


Griffiths, Sir Percival Joseph (1899-1992), administrator in India and businessman, was born on 15 January 1899 in Tooting, London, the second son of Joseph Thomas Griffiths (1862-1936), schoolteacher, of Ashford, Middlesex, and his wife, Rose, 'nee' Millward (1864-1967), also a teacher. Educated at the Central Foundation School, London, he was recommended by his headmaster, W. H. Wagstaff, to Peterhouse, Cambridge, to which he was admitted on 15 January 1917. He served as a rifleman in the Queen's Westminster rifles, and was then commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps, during the latter stages of the First World War. Released from the service, he entered Peterhouse on 15 January 1919 with a $50 entrance scholarship (later a foundation scholarship for $60), being allowed one term's grace for his war service. He took first-class honours in part one of the mathematical tripos in 1919, and was among the senior optimes in part two of that tripos in 1921, simultaneously gaining a BSc honours degree at London University. 
At the age of thirteen Griffiths had decided to go to India after reading a life of Nicholson. He now attempted to enter the Indian Civil Service. Successful in the entrance examination, he joined the civil service on 30 October 1922 and arrived in India on 13 December 1922 on the British India ship 'Mashobra'. During the voyage he met, and became engaged to marry, Kathleen Mary Wilkes (1899-1979), daughter of Thomas Richard Wilkes, of Burton Latimer, Kettering, Northamptonshire, a trained teacher going out to India as governess for two young girls. They were subsequently married at St Thomas's Church, Dacca, on 8 April 1924. Griffiths was first stationed in Dacca and afterwards spent most of his service in eastern India, being assistant magistrate and collector in Contai; in Kalimpong, from 1924 to May 1928 (and again from September 1933); chief manager of the estate of the nawab of Dacca from March 1929; magistrate and collector in Midnapore from 1934, where his three predecessors had been assassinated; and finally deputy commissioner in Darjeeling from May 1936. He took early retirement from the Indian Civil Service in August 1937 under the new proportionate pension scheme. He spoke Bengali fluently, knew Hindi and Urdu, Tibetan, Nepalese, and Sanskrit, and possessed a sound working knowledge of German, French, and Italian. He made many close Indian -- and Pakistani -- friends during his time as an official, and those friendships long continued. 
For someone to leave the 'Heaven-born' -- as members of the Indian Civil Service were familiarly known -- to become a 'box-wallah', or businessman, was extremely unusual, but Griffiths realized that Indian independence was coming and that prospects for promotion were likely to reduce rapidly. Always ambitious, with a wife and three children to support, Griffiths became political adviser to the Indian tea industry and took up one of the European reserved seats in the Indian legislative assembly as a non-official member, becoming leader of the European group in 1946. During the Second World War he was publicity adviser to Linlithgow's administration and acted as central organizer of the national war front. He was made CIE in 1943, and acted as the principal representative for European business interests then and in the discussions leading up to independence. Mountbatten paid tribute to his work and influence during this period and, always direct in his opinions, Griffiths was trusted by both Indians and British alike, although he later admitted to a mistrust of Jinnah. 
After independence Griffiths stayed in India, continuing to represent European business interests and travelling constantly between the UK and the subcontinent. In 1947 he was knighted and became adviser to the Indian Tea Association, based in London, his association with it continuing to 1976. He was also adviser to the newly formed India, Pakistan, and Burma Association, representing companies trading to the now independent countries, and was president from 1963 to 1973. He was appointed KBE in 1963. He was a director of numerous tea companies, and of the Inchcape Group and its subsidiaries, and undertook many overseas tours in Asia and Africa for those companies and the Federation of British Industries. He was a member of the governing body of the School of Oriental and African Studies from 1957 to 1983 (vice-chairman in 1965-76), and a member of its finance and general purposes and investments committees, being elected an honorary fellow of the school in 1971. 
Griffiths was a prolific author, report writer, journalist, and pamphleteer, his most important books being 'Modern India' (1957), which had run to a fourth edition by 1965; 'The History of the Indian Tea Industry' (1967); 'To Guard my People' (1971), a history of the Indian police; 'A Licence to Trade: the History of the English Chartered Companies' (1974); 'A History of the Inchcape Group' (1977); and the privately published, autobiographical 'Vignettes of India' (1985). He was an avid reader and pianist, and keenly interested in classical music. Lady Griffiths suffered ill health in later years and her husband's activities were curtailed as he cared for her assiduously from 1978, but she died on 25 February 1979. There were three sons from the marriage, Richard ('b'. 1925), Michael (1926-1983), and John ('b'. 1934). Griffiths married second, on 15 July 1985, Marie Shirley-Smith, 'nee' Lynden-Lemon, widow of Sir Hubert Shirley-Smith. Griffiths himself suffered a fall in 1982 and temporarily entered a nursing home to recover from that and the effects of a low blood count, down to 40 per cent of normal, but he recovered, although he resigned many of his voluntary activities. He died on 14 July 1992 at Dormy House, Ridgemont Road, Sunningdale, Berkshire, from old age peacefully in his sleep, and was cremated on 20 July at Woking crematorium. 
Griffiths was small, with short legs and a large head, his wavy hair parted on the left and smooth on his scalp. P. J., as he was generally known, and signed himself, was variously described as 'aggressive', the 'bravest man in India', the 'tiger of Bengal', and a 'defiant cocksparrow'. His initial response to any problem or difficult situation was to confront it and propose a solution. He was renowned for his integrity and sense of duty, and as a dogged and successful negotiator in political and commercial matters. Always active, and until his later years in good health (he maintained that he had never had a day's sickness in India), he seemed to have the secret of perpetual motion. He radiated trustworthiness and was liked even by those from whom he differed. 


@@@@@


doc= 51079


Groves, Sir Charles Barnard (1915-1992), conductor, was born on 10 March 1915 at 52 Park Hall Road, London, the only child of Frederick Groves and his wife, Annie, 'nee' Whitehead. His father, who had been invalided out of the trenches during the First World War, died when Groves was only six. His mother died four years later, and Groves was made a ward of court. His musical education began when he was sent to St Paul's Cathedral choir school as a chorister. Later he attended Sutton Valence School in Kent. He showed exceptional promise and entered the Royal College of Music (of which he was to become a fellow), where he studied piano and organ. In 1937, at the age of twenty-two, he accompanied the choral rehearsals for Toscanini's broadcast performance of Brahms's 'Requiem', an achievement which led to his appointment as chorus master of the BBC opera unit. He then graduated via the BBC Theatre Orchestra and the BBC Revue Orchestra to the conductorship of the Manchester-based BBC Northern (later Philharmonic) Orchestra, a post he held from 1944 until 1951. During this period, because he was in charge of a broadcasting orchestra, he began to acquire an exceptionally large repertory. It was in Manchester, in 1948, that he met and married a BBC colleague, Hilary Barchard. There were three children, Sally, Mary and Jonathan, the first and last of whom were to pursue careers in music. 
Success with the BBC Northern Orchestra brought Groves an invitation from Bournemouth corporation to become their director of music and conductor of the municipal orchestra. He made the move in 1951, and the orchestra was renamed the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra in 1954. During nearly ten years he greatly enhanced the standards and standing of the orchestra, and he played a large part in saving the orchestra from disbandment following the corporation's withdrawal of its grant. He moved in 1961 to Cardiff, where he took up the post of resident music director of the Welsh National Opera. Once again he contributed to the strong development of a company with high ideals and ever-expanding achievement. His own versatility was apparent in fine performances of 'Figaro', 'William Tell', and 'Lohengrin'. 
Groves was now formidably well equipped, and it was not surprising that he was engaged by the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, whose music director and resident conductor he was from 1963 to 1977. This period was the apex of his career. He made his home in Liverpool and committed himself wholeheartedly to the city's orchestra. It was a time when funding -- never lavish -- was at least adequate. As a consequence he was able to undertake grandiose projects -- a complete Mahler cycle, Messiaen's 'Turangalila-symphonie', and Berlioz's 'Te Deum' (complete with twelve harps) at the opening of Liverpool's Metropolitan Cathedral. He was a generous champion of living British composers, performing works by more than twenty of them, and he found space for some of the international figures, including LutosLawski, Henze, and Berio. Among a number of his innovations was a series of seminars for young conductors in which Andrew Davis, Mark Elder, and John Eliot Gardiner took part. On one such occasion Groves noted the presence in his orchestra, as an extra percussion player, of a young teenager named Simon Rattle. When he left Liverpool in 1977 he bequeathed to his successor an orchestra of character and quality; it had some important recordings -- Delius, Elgar, and Walton in particular -- to its credit. But the invitation, from Lord Harewood, to join the English National Opera as music director was one he should perhaps have declined: he was over sixty, and he found the stress of combining administration with conducting too much for him. He resigned after two seasons. 
Groves was in constant demand on the concert platform. In 1975 he had toured Japan with Pierre Boulez and the BBC Symphony Orchestra and, as a result of this, he was regularly invited to Tokyo, to which city he introduced Delius's 'A Mass of Life', one of his very finest interpretations. He toured extensively in Australasia and Latin America as well as Europe, invariably presenting British music. At home, in 1984, he joined the English Sinfonia as president and artistic adviser, later also becoming principal conductor of the Guildford Philharmonic (1987) and music director of the Leeds Philharmonic Society (1988). 
A respected figure in the music profession, Groves was generous with his time and experience where honorary commitments were concerned. He was president of the Incorporated Society of Musicians in 1972 and again in 1982, president of the National Federation of Music Societies from 1972 to 1980, and president of the National Youth Orchestra from 1977 to 1992, and was elected an honorary member of the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1990. He was honoured by the conservatoires: as companion of the Royal Northern College of Music (whose council he chaired from 1973 to 1990), as fellow of the Royal College of Music, Guildhall School of Music and Drama, Trinity College of Music, and London College of Music, and as an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Music. Passionately concerned with the welfare of musicians, he was prominent on the picket line outside Broadcasting House during the musicians' strike against the BBC in 1980. When it was over he gallantly agreed to 'mind' the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra until permanent arrangements could be agreed. Appointed OBE in 1958 and CBE in 1968, he was knighted in 1973. He received doctorates from Liverpool, Salford, and Surrey universities, as well as from the Open University, and he was a fellow of the polytechnics of Liverpool and Manchester. He was made a freeman of the City of London in 1976. 
Despite his status, his experience, and the respect which he commanded, despite also his firm Christian faith, Groves remained, privately, a man who constantly questioned his own standards. Fastidious in his preparation of even the most undemanding of concerts and a superb accompanist, he often suffered from a fear that he might let his colleagues down. It was a needless fear, but a real one, and there were indeed times when overwork, or nervousness, or some absence of the fire of conviction resulted in lacklustre performances. But when he was completely confident his work was compelling and authoritative. In the mould of Wood or Boult, rather than Beecham or Barbirolli, he shared with the first two a profound sense of duty towards British, and particularly living British, composers. Overseas he performed music by Elgar, Vaughan Williams, Holst, Delius, Britten, Walton, Tippett, Goehr, and Musgrave. His premieres included works by Lennox Berkeley, David Blake, Gordon Crosse, Jonathan Harvey, Robin Holloway, Daniel Jones, John McCabe, Edmund Rubbra, Edwin Roxburgh, Giles Swayne, Priaulx Rainier, and Hugh Wood. He recorded music by Arnold, Butterworth, Bliss, Bridge, Maxwell Davies, Hoddinott, Mathias, Grace Williams, and Williamson, among others. He was an admirable ambassador for British music. 
In person Groves was a reassuring figure: his straight back, firm bearded chin, and stocky build inspired confidence, despite his own self-doubts. His marriage was exceptionally happy and his Anglican faith was a constant source of strength. He was working when he suffered a heart attack early in 1992, and he died in London on 20 June 1992. There is a memorial stone to his memory in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 51080


Guinness, (Arthur Francis) Benjamin, third earl of Iveagh (1937-1992), brewing company chairman, was born on 20 May 1937 at Elveden Hall, Suffolk, the only son of Arthur Onslow Edward Guinness, Viscount Elveden (1912-1945), and Lady Elizabeth Cecilia Hare, younger sister of William, fifth earl of Listowel, a prominent Labour peer. On 8 February 1945 Arthur Guinness, serving with the allied forces at Nijmegen, was killed by a stray German V2 rocket. Benjamin, as he was always called, was then only seven, and became heir presumptive to a title, an immense fortune, large estates in England and Ireland, and the management of a major international commercial enterprise. He lacked the qualities necessary for shouldering such a burden. 
Benjamin Guinness's grandfather, Rupert Edward Cecil Lee Guinness, second earl of Iveagh and head of the dynasty, had lost a brother and two sons in tragic circumstances. He was determined that Benjamin should be groomed to undertake all the responsibilities that family tradition demanded, even though there were other male members of the extensive clan who could have shared these duties. As well as being chairman of the brewery, an active member of the House of Lords, and a prominent philanthropist, Rupert was a leading agricultural reformer. Thus at Eton, and later at Trinity College, Cambridge, the almost pathologically shy Benjamin, who had a passion for history and art, was steered into scientific studies. 
As soon as he was twenty-one he was taken onto the brewery board. In 1960 he was appointed assistant managing director of the parent company and two years later his 88-year-old grandfather yielded the chairmanship into his hands. On 12 March 1963 he married Miranda Daphne Jane, daughter of Major Michael Smiley of Castle Fraser, Aberdeenshire. They had two sons and two daughters. In 1967 Benjamin inherited the earldom. It was his misfortune to be thrust into commercial prominence at a time when a new, aggressive, acquisitive spirit was spreading throughout the world of international corporate business. Take-overs and mergers were the order of the day. The era of family concerns run by benevolent proprietors as personal fiefdoms was passing rapidly. Over the next decade Arthur Guinness, Son & Co. diversified and expanded into new markets in its efforts to maintain a lead role among the multinationals, but by the 1980s it was obvious that the company needed to recruit leaders from among the new-style dynamic and ruthless managers who understood the changed rules of the game. 
Lord Iveagh had already distanced himself from the brewery and his other English responsibilities. After 1974 he lived permanently on his estate of Farmleigh, near Dublin, for tax reasons, and he subsequently took out Irish citizenship. He was from 1973 to 1977 a member of the Irish senate, thus enjoying the rare distinction of being a member of both the British and the Irish legislature. In 1984 he sold (for $5.7 million) the contents of Elveden Hall, the Suffolk mansion where he had been brought up and where his grandfather and great-grandfather had regularly entertained the leaders of society. At Farmleigh he was able to escape the pressures of big business and enjoy those pastimes close to his heart -- racing, farming, and collecting antiquarian books. However, these panaceas could not preserve his health. He had been diagnosed as suffering from diverticulitis, and over the years underwent thirteen operations. 
In 1981 Lord Iveagh appointed Edward Saunders as chief executive of the Guinness conglomerate and was content to leave management entirely in the hands of this resourceful, go-getting entrepreneur. The new man restructured the company and dramatically revived Guinness fortunes. At the height of his power he masterminded a management reorganization which elevated himself to the position of chairman and Benjamin to the newly created post of president, effectively shorn of the last vestiges of real power. Within weeks the baroque edifice began to crumble. Saunders's major coup had been the takeover of the Distillers Co. Ltd, but soon afterwards a Department of Trade and Industry enquiry produced evidence of alleged financial misconduct. This led, in 1990, to one of the most sensational and acrimonious trials in British commercial history. It would be over-dramatic to claim that this was the last straw for Lord Iveagh. He was already a broken man. He had taken to heavy drinking and smoking and now succumbed to cancer of the throat. The Iveaghs' marriage had collapsed in 1984, but his former wife nursed Benjamin through the final stages of his illness. Death came on 18 June 1992, in London, three weeks after he had resigned from the Guinness board, the last member of the family to be associated with a company founded by his great-great-great-great-grandfather in 1759. 


@@@@@


doc= 51082


Habershon, Roy (1925-1992), police officer, was born at 38 Sylvester Street, Sheffield, on 15 May 1925, the son of William Habershon, table blade cutter, and his wife, Melia, 'nee' Cocker. Educated at Greystones elementary school, Sheffield, he left at fourteen, and worked in Sheffield railway offices until he joined the RAF in the Second World War. He was with Coastal Command, and served as a sergeant in a Wellington bomber, acting also as wireless operator and rear air gunner in Aden and Tobruk. He joined the Metropolitan Police on 14 October 1946 as a constable. On 7 June 1947 he married Edith Maud ('b'. 1922/3), Post Office telephonist, of Abertillery, and daughter of John Gallier, coalminer; they had one son, David ('b'. 1949). 
Habershon was recruited to the CID in 1948, and gained a reputation for integrity and honesty in his various posts, which included several years with the fraud squad. He became detective sergeant (second class) in June 1958, detective sergeant (first class) in June 1960, detective inspector in November 1963, detective chief inspector in February 1966, detective superintendent in November 1967, and detective chief superintendent in June 1969. When the Angry Brigade, a terrorist group, planted two bombs at the home of the secretary of state for employment, Robert Carr, in Barnet on 12 January 1971, Habershon was detective chief superintendent covering the area, having just been moved there after a two-year secondment as assistant director of command courses at Bramshill Police College, Hampshire. Habershon's qualities of leadership were respected, and he took command of the investigation with a small squad which within six months was moved to Scotland Yard and reinforced with officers from special branch and the flying squad. Its team of about forty was placed under the overall control of Commander Ernest Bond, and it became the bomb squad (later the anti-terrorist squad). Forceful, persistent, methodical, and determined in the face of libertarian protest, Habershon conducted extensive enquiries and produced evidence which soon secured the conviction of five members of the Angry Brigade. 
The IRA presented a new challenge in March 1973 with their first large-scale attack on London. Habershon's evidence at Winchester crown court helped to ensure the conviction of nine terrorists. Promoted to commander in January 1974, he was appointed MBE and left the bomb squad for a time, but he returned in March 1975 as commander, on the retirement of Robert Huntley, at the time when the dramatic six-day siege of a four-man IRA unit at Balcombe Street in London's West End led ultimately to the unit's capture without loss of life. Harold Wilson, then prime minister, telegrammed Sir Robert Mark, Metropolitan Police commissioner, after the arrests, noting that 'the Metropolitan Police have again demonstrated the very highest levels of skill and patience in bringing an incident of this kind to a successful conclusion. The whole nation is in the force's debt' ('The Guardian', 13 Dec 1975). The four men were released under the amnesty associated with the peace process in Northern Ireland in April 1999. 
The Balcombe Street siege was only one of more than a hundred terrorist incidents which Habershon investigated. By then bespectacled and balding, 'he was variously feared, revered and reviled by those with whom he came into contact' ('Daily Telegraph', 28 March 1992). He became head of Scotland Yard's serious crimes branch, but felt much less at home in 1976 when unsuccessfully probing the source of a leak about cabinet discussions on child benefit than when hunting earlier for terrorists. Nor did anything come of his enquiry in the same year into the bankrupt Cheshire businessman Jesse Robert Rennie's allegation that Harold Wilson had inspired a policeman's attempt to bribe Rennie into returning letters received from an unnamed MP. Habershon left the senior ranks at Scotland Yard in 1977 to become head of E division, responsible for both CID and uniformed men in north London, including the busy area of Camden Town. He retired in 1980 after earning twenty-three commendations. He then became a director of the firm Control Risks, advising on security. 
Roy Habershon was thorough, and liked to do a job well, but he was not keen on the political side of police work, and 'if something needed to be said, then he would say it' (private information). He was good company, with a dry sense of humour, and a good after-dinner speaker. Very much a man's man, he played football and cricket for the Metropolitan Police in his earlier years, and latterly golf. His son recalled him as an easy-going parent, and enjoyed going on fishing expeditions with him. In retirement Habershon took pleasure in his grandchildren and was fond of gardening. He died at his home, 6 Hoe Lane, Ware, Hertfordshire, from cancer on 18 March 1992. He was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 51088


Harris, Reginald Hargreaves (1920-1992), cyclist, was born Reginald Hargreaves at 7 Garden Street, Bury, Lancashire, on 1 March 1920, the son of Elsie Hargreaves, cotton weaver. He acquired the surname Harris following his mother's marriage to Joseph Harris, engineer and businessman. His first job was as an apprentice motor mechanic but he soon moved from the workshop to the showroom, which also sold cycles. He joined the Bury branch of the Cyclists' Touring Club and then the Lancashire Road Club, where his promise produced an invitation to train with the club star. He was soon cycling in every free moment, half-day closing afternoon, summer evenings, and Sundays. He began to enter competitions such as 100 mile reliability trials, and to win prizes at local events. His employers were obviously impressed because they gave him a new bike, but he soon moved to a slipper factory, where the pay was better and then to a paper mill where, with plenty of overtime, he calculated that he could earn enough during the winter to allow him to concentrate on his cycling in the summer. His first sprint races were on Lancashire grass tracks in 1936, and he began to compete successfully against men ten years older than himself. With the overtime and the sale of the prizes that he was beginning to collect he bought new and better machines, and in 1937 gave up his job in the paper mill to concentrate full-time on the cycling season. 
In 1938 Harris joined the Bury athletics club and won half a dozen races in the north of England, including the Wells bequest trophy, the first time he had beaten some of the best of the opposition. In 1939 he changed clubs again, to the prestigious Manchester Wheelers, and although disappointed by his performance in the British championship he was still selected for the world championships to be held in September in Milan. The team was withdrawn on the outbreak of the Second World War. 
Harris liked to say that he was one of the few people who came out of the army less fit than he went in. He drove a tank for the 10th hussars in north Africa but was wounded, invalided home, and transferred to the Royal Army Service Corps. He was then discharged from the army as medically unfit, but barely a year later he had won three titles at the national cycling championship in 1944: the 1000 yards, 5 miles, and quarter-mile. In 1945 he repeated the feat by winning the 1000 yards and quarter-mile on the track and the half-mile on grass. He was invited to race in Paris, where he excited the crowd and won several big races. It was after these successes that Claud Butler, the lightweight cycle manufacturer, agreed to provide him not only with all his equipment but also with a job. This was pushing up against the sports amateur-professional boundaries in Britain. But it paid off for both of them when Harris won the world title in 1947 in Paris, the first British rider to do so since Harold Johnson in 1922. 
Harris thought he might win three gold medals in the Olympic games in London in 1948, but three months before they were due to begin he fractured two vertebrae in his back in a car accident. Determined to get fit after several weeks in hospital he began training, racing, and winning, only to fracture an elbow after a fall in a 10 mile race at the Fallowfield track. Though still very sore, he continued to train with the elbow in a plaster cast and (perhaps to show his rivals and the selectors) rode a kilometre time-trial in the rain and equalled the British empire games record. But he had to be satisfied with Olympic silver medals in both the individual and tandem sprints. 
The next step for Harris was to turn professional, even though he was already running a Mark IV Jaguar as an amateur. He signed up with the Raleigh Cycle Company for $1000 a year, a $100 bonus if he became world champion, $50 for every grand prix victory, and $25 every time he broke the British record. He probably earned $12,000 a year from racing in the early 1950s. He won the world sprint title in 1949, the first Englishman to win a professional title and the first man ever to do it in his professional debut season. He also won in 1950, 1951, and 1954. In 1952 the rules were changed to allow three finalists instead of two, and in the final of that year the Swiss rider Oskar Plattner blocked Harris so that 'the flying Dutchman' Arie Van Vliet could win. At the end-of-season meeting of champions at Herne Hill, Harris destroyed Plattner in a revenge match before an ecstatic crowd. He retired in 1957 but returned in 1971 at fifty-one, and won the British title again in 1974, just to show what he thought of the younger generation of cycle racers. 
All forms of sport reached new levels of popularity in the years immediately following the Second World War, but British cycling had no great competitive tradition until Harris established one more or less single-handed. His physique was phenomenal, his training routines ferocious, and his will to win formidable. He had an indomitable spirit, and returned as sharp as ever after accidents that would have daunted lesser men. His five world records set as a professional stood for many years. Two years running he was named sportsman of the year, a star whose name was as familiar to the British and European public as Stanley Matthews or Stirling Moss. His debonair good looks dominated Raleigh's advertising campaigns for a decade. His sporting achievements were recognized with an OBE in 1958. Nevertheless he had little patience with what he saw as the amateurish administrators of British cycling. 
Harris married, first, on 7 April 1945, Florence Stage ('b'. 1923/4), the daughter of William Stage, licensed victualler, of Bury. The marriage ended in divorce, and on 29 March 1955 he married, second, Dorothy Hadfield ('b'. 1926/7), secretary, and the daughter of Henry Hadfield, master fruiterer. This marriage also ended in divorce, and on 25 September 1970 he married, third, Jennifer Anne Geary, 'nee' Brazendale ('b'. 1944/5), daughter of James George Brazendale, electrical engineer. Following his retirement from professional cycling he had a number of businesses, including running a garage and a cycle-building company, and becoming a director of a firm making plastic foam. His individualism made him a somewhat erratic businessman, with little taste for delegating or negotiating. He smoked a pipe and liked a glass of wine, but cycling was the most important thing in his life. Even at seventy-two, after an operation for a snapped ankle tendon, he was on his bike when he had a minor stroke. Two days later, on 22 June 1992, he died of another stroke, at Macclesfield District General Hospital. He was survived by his third wife, Jennifer. 


@@@@@


doc= 51089


Hart, Herbert Lionel Adolphus (1907-1992), legal philosopher, was born at Harrogate, Yorkshire, on 18 July 1907, the third of four children of Simeon Hart (1871-1953), master tailor and furrier, and his wife, Rose (1874-1953), who helped him in the business. She was the daughter of Samuel Samson and his wife, Fanny ('nee' Rosenthal). His father came of a Jewish family descended from Polish and German immigrants of the nineteenth century named Zadek, who were in the clothing trade in the East End of London. In 1900 the family moved to Harrogate. They had three sons and a daughter. Herbert, as he was known to his friends, always published as H. L. A. Hart. 
Hart's family wished their son to have an education suited to orthodox Jews. He was therefore sent to Cheltenham College, a boarding-school with a separate house for Jewish boys, from 1918 to 1921. He looked back on these years as the only unhappy period of his life. The school seemed dull, class-ridden, and obsessed by athletics. He disliked being labelled a Jew, though in later life he came to value his part in the Jewish heritage. Religion did not attract him. Despite a gift for languages he found Hebrew unpalatable. 
In 1921 a family set-back came to the rescue. Hart's father, whose business had gone downhill, could no longer afford to keep his son at Cheltenham. Herbert was sent instead to Bradford grammar school. In contrast with Cheltenham he found the school exciting. Good teaching and friendly companionship stimulated an expansion of thought and feeling, with freedom to explore the town and walk in the beautiful countryside on its borders. From E. H. Goddard, the classics master, an admirer of Spengler, he absorbed, along with an interest in the minutiae of language, a taste for large generalizations. In retrospect this period at Bradford (1921-6), where he became head boy, seemed a very happy one. Hart's passionate but opposite reactions to life at the two schools was in character, for he responded strongly to people, ideas, and places. 
At Gilbert Murray's suggestion Hart tried successfully in 1926 for a classical scholarship at New College, Oxford. He found the college a place of ravishing beauty, a joy in which to study and, later, teach. He was fairly well off, since his father's fortunes had revived. A tall, lean youth, with fine, intellectual features, rumpled clothes, and awkward gait, his appearance and way of life changed little over the years. Easy in conversation, with never a trace of vanity, his vitality and humour would light up almost any topic. Douglas Jay, a contemporary, noted his strong Yorkshire accent, later lost, and formed a friendship that lasted for more than sixty years. Hart found in H. W. B. Joseph a stimulating tutor, who steered his mind towards Plato and realism. H. A. L. Fisher, the warden of New College, invited him for walks and introduced him to such figures as Lloyd George, Virginia Woolf, and Dean Inge. With Jay and other friends he talked about history and philosophy; at times his friends got more from him than from their tutors. But with an eye to the examinations, in which he needed to prove his worth, he kept a notebook with secret nuggets of information. He had his reward, for in 1929 Hart obtained the best first class of the year in classical Greats. At the Jowett Society, of which he became president, he met in Isaiah Berlin another able young man who was to be a lifelong friend. Berlin was quick to appreciate what was rare in someone of his gifts: complete honesty; for Hart was always ready to modify his assertions, and later, to disavow his writings, in the face of what seemed valid objections. 
Hart made up his mind to become a barrister. He joined the Middle Temple and from 1932 until 1940 practised at the Chancery bar along with Richard Wilberforce, John Sparrow, and Duff Dunbar. Of this brilliant quartet Hart emerged as the front runner. The growth of his practice was continuous and increasing, and he much enjoyed the opera, hunting, and travel abroad that his earnings at the bar made possible. But war clouds were gathering and he did not share the prevailing illusions. As Wilberforce records (private memoir): 'In 1938 we were together when the news came that Mr Chamberlain was returning with 'Peace for our time'. There was applause; there was talk of going to the airport to cheer him home. We just looked at each other with tears in our eyes -- it was unnecessary to speak.' When war broke out Hart was turned down for military service owing to a mitral murmur, which turned out not to be serious. By then he had fallen in love with Jenifer Williams ['see below'], a civil servant in the Home Office. In May 1940 Hart was recommended at Williams's instance to MI5, in which he served throughout the war. He worked on the Ultra material and made an important contribution to the D-day disinformation plan in 1944. During lulls, when there was nothing to decipher, he made buttons in a factory. His devotion to the work of MI5 was absolute. No whisper of what he was doing escaped him. 
Hart, who had to overcome a feeling that he was not really heterosexual, became committed to Jenifer Williams from 1937 onwards and married her on 16 October 1941. They had a daughter and three sons. During the war Hart and Jay were for a time living in the same house, and he also saw something of the philosophers Gilbert Ryle and Stuart Hampshire. His interest in philosophy was rekindled. At the same time his political views moved closer to those of his wife, which were left-wing. He came to feel that his life should not be spent at the bar, minimizing the tax liability of the rich. He became a Labour Party supporter -- a democratic socialist with liberal leanings -- and remained one for the rest of his life. 
These developments led Hart in 1945 to accept what he had rejected before the war, the offer of a philosophy fellowship at New College. The warden of the college, A. H. Smith, engineered Hart's fellowship without advertisement because he saw in him a bulwark against the radical empiricism that was then fashionable. But he was mistaken, for Hart had, under the influence of J. L. Austin, come to abandon Joseph's views and to believe that linguistic analysis was of central importance in philosophy. He was a founder member of the discussion group led by Austin that, from 1947, met on Saturday mornings to discuss such topics as rules. For the first eighteen months at New College he agonized over his capacity to teach philosophy but by 1947, when his wife settled in Oxford, he was committed to academic life. They lived first in New College Lane, then from 1952 at 11 Manor Place, Oxford. Hart was an excellent tutor, who believed that his special gift was for smoothing the path of weaker students. The truth behind this modest self-assessment was that he esteemed clarity the chief intellectual virtue and was notably patient with pupils, whatever their ability. His method was to rub their noses in the two questions 'How do you know?' and 'What do you mean?'. But he was reluctant to commit himself to print until quite certain that what he had to say was correct. In these seven years he published only three papers and two book reviews. 
Hart's first paper (1948-9), 'The ascription of responsibility and rights', foreshadowed his later concern with legal philosophy. Its novel ideas, though he later rejected them, struck a chord both in Britain and the United States. In 1952, at the urging of J. L. Austin, he was persuaded to think of himself as a possible successor to Arthur Goodhart as Oxford professor of jurisprudence. He was not sure that he was good enough as a pure philosopher. Nor did the admiration that came to him later dissipate his doubts about the correctness of his views. His self-critical spirit accounted for the corrections and recorrections, scrawled-over notes, and bundles of paper held together by clips that cluttered his rooms. But he had come to see that many philosophical distinctions could be applied to law and that, given his practice at the bar, he was the person to apply them. Conversely, examples drawn from the law suggested new paths for philosophy to explore. 
Hart was elected to the chair of jurisprudence at Oxford in 1952 by a slender majority, on what was by any standards a thin contribution to the subject: three articles and two reviews, one of each being about law. But the choice was inspired. During his tenure of the chair (1952-68) Hart rescued English jurisprudence from its century-long decline and restored it to a central position in moral and political philosophy. He revitalized the positivist tradition stemming from Hume, John Austin, and Bentham. His writings in turn provoked restatements of other currents of opinion. R. M. Dworkin revived the eighteenth-century philosophy of rights that underlay the United States constitution, J. Finnis the still older natural law tradition. Along with positivism went a measured liberalism in political philosophy. Echoing J. S. Mill, Hart called in question the right of the state to force the individual to conform to even the most strongly held moral views of the majority. 
As a professor Hart had to overcome his natural diffidence and to lecture and publish more freely. In his mature years the intellectual vigour of his talks could electrify an audience. It did not matter that his notes might be jottings on the back of a chequebook. In the long vacation of 1952, staying at his wife's family property in Cornwall, the new professor scribbled the first draft of the lectures that came out nine years later as 'The Concept of Law'. Reflection on John Austin's view that a law was the command of a sovereign habitually obeyed led Hart to question the value of definition in law. It prompted his inaugural lecture in 1953, 'Definition and theory in jurisprudence'. Instead of trying to define terms such as 'law', 'right', and 'corporation' one did better to explain the conditions under which sentences in which they occur are true. He came later to think that this lecture was flawed, but it swept away much futile debate. 
In 1952-3 Hart laid the foundations for nearly all his later work. He lectured on rights and duties. The lectures were crowded and were heard with rapt attention, though with some apprehension, as the audience saw the lecturer shuffle from distance to reading glasses, wipe them, mislay them and rediscover their whereabouts, all the while expounding a complex argument. But he was never willing to publish his lectures on rights since, while rejecting the view of Austin and Bentham that only law could create rights, he could not see his way through to a satisfactory alternative. 
Another project begun in this year was the study of causation. To take this concept, so central in philosophy, and see how it looked within the law, was the sort of enterprise that had attracted Hart to the chair of jurisprudence. He and A. M. Honore gave seminars on causation in this year and the next, and together wrote a book that came out in 1959 as 'Causation in the Law'. They wrote separate chapters, but mulled over each other's drafts until they agreed on every detail. The work defends common-sense causal distinctions inside and outside the law against the philosophical reproach of being unscientific and the scepticism of some lawyers. 'Causation', though a joint enterprise, was Hart's first and largest book and, in retrospect, one of the most substantial volumes to emerge from linguistic philosophy. A second edition, which has been translated into Japanese, was published in 1985. The themes it incorporates have since been taken further by Honore. In the same year Hart began a discussion group in A. R. N. (Rupert) Cross's rooms in Magdalen College, which alerted many members of the law faculty to their stultifying neglect of theory. In 1954 he published an edition of John Austin's 1832 classic, 'The Province of Jurisprudence Determined', in the introduction to which he insisted on the central place of rules, and the acceptance of rules, in the law. 
Hart's visit to the United States in 1956-7 at the invitation of Harvard was a landmark in his career. He was welcomed equally by lawyers and philosophers, who in the past had had little contact. America stimulated him -- the noisy, unregulated life of cities; the students, unblase, with a vast desire for knowledge; the disdain of Americans for privacy and precision of language; their passion for taking part in decision making. These and other aspects of life in the New World relaxed his neuroses. Five papers stemmed from his US visit. The most important was the Oliver Wendell Holmes lecture at Harvard in April 1957, 'Positivism and the separation of law and morals'. A 'succes de scandale', recognized at once as an enduring contribution to legal philosophy, it drew from Lon Fuller an eloquent critical response. The two were published together in the 'Harvard Law Review' in 1958. Hart was a positivist only in the limited sense which insists that laws need not reproduce the demands of morality. He thought it essential, in the interests of clarity, to distinguish between law as it is and as it ought to be. Demonstrably iniquitous laws are still laws. But Fuller pointed in reply to an internal morality of law, to which it typically conforms, so that laws that violate this morality are not fully law. 
In 1959-60 Hart was president of the Aristotelian Society, a signal honour for a law professor. In the same year two other debates were launched, both concerned with the functions of criminal law. In September 1957 the Wolfenden committee had recommended that homosexual practices between consenting adults should cease to be criminal. Sir Patrick Devlin, giving the Maccabaean lecture in jurisprudence in 1958, widened the debate by attacking the committee's view that there was a realm of private conduct that was not the law's business. A community had the right to defend the morality which bound it together against attempts to undermine it. Hart counter-attacked with a talk on the BBC, published in 'The Listener' for 30 July 1959. He reformulated J. S. Mill's argument that the only purpose for which power could rightfully be exercised over a member of a civilized community was to prevent harm to others. Thus began a wide-ranging debate about the proper limits of both criminal and civil law. Hart's views, effectively confined to the criminal law, were developed in two short books, 'Law, Liberty and Morality' (1963), delivered at Stanford in 1962, and 'The Morality of the Criminal Law' (1965), given in Jerusalem in 1964. He was moved by a dislike of cruelty masquerading as moral rectitude, which led him to be specially severe on attempts to enforce sexual morality -- a view that struck a chord with the young. 
The controversy with Devlin made Hart a public figure in Britain. Each was well equipped to fight his corner and their contest has become a classic. But Hart never sought publicity and he eschewed public honours apart from those honorary degrees traditionally conferred on scholars. In 1966 he declined a knighthood. In private debate he was tenacious, but his manner was courteous and impersonal. He excelled in the demanding skill of presenting an opponent's argument cogently. The same quality made him an excellent research supervisor. He read and reread his pupils' drafts with close attention and made dozens of critical comments, but at the same time knew how to foster the promise inherent in their line of thought. A consequence of his intellectual detachment was that Hart's pupils, though deeply influenced by him, never formed a school. Instead they displayed an engaging spectrum of views, ranging from J. M. Finnis's 'Natural Law and Natural Rights' (1980) to W. J. Waluchow's 'Inclusive Legal Positivism' (1993). 
Hart's 'Prolegomenon to the principles of punishment' was also published in 1959. The paper argued that the general aim that justified punishment, that of keeping deviance within bounds, should be distinguished from the conditions in which it was proper to punish a given individual, which should include the fact that the offender had knowingly chosen to break the law. In 1968 eight of his papers on criminal responsibility were collected and published in a volume entitled 'Punishment and Responsibility: Essays in the Philosophy of Law'. These masterly essays owed a good deal to his friend Rupert Cross, Vinerian professor of English law at Oxford (1964-79). Cross, with his energetic mind and buoyant character, was his closest colleague among lawyers. Hart wrote a memoir of his friend for the 'Proceedings of the British Academy' (70.405-37). 
From 1960 to 1974 Hart was a delegate of the Oxford University Press. Here his most important initiative was to set up a new series of law books, the 'Clarendon Law Series'. He was struck by the lack of works that introduced students in untechnical language to the problems of the subjects they were to study. The series did much to fill this gap. Hart took great trouble with the manuscripts submitted, and would suggest dozens or hundreds of additions and corrections. 
The impulse that led Hart to found the 'Clarendon Law Series' induced him to publish in 1961, under the title 'The Concept of Law', the general course of lectures he had been giving for the last eight years. His aim was to give beginners in jurisprudence a book that was more than a catalogue of great names spiced with superficial comments on their theories. Instead they would be introduced to the main issues in the subject, of which two stood out: the relation of law to brute force on the one hand and to morality on the other. Judged by the pragmatic test of sales 'The Concept of Law' was a brilliant success. Some 150,000 copies were bought over the next thirty years. The work aroused interest in many countries and has been or is being translated into more than a dozen languages. Its influence extended to people who were not specially interested in law. For Anglo-Saxon writers on jurisprudence criticism of Hart at once replaced criticism of John Austin as the starting point of their thinking. 

'The Concept of Law' belongs to the genre 'general jurisprudence'. It seeks to lay bare the structure of modern legal systems and to show what it is that separates them from other forms of social control such as morality or brute coercion. The central concept is that of a rule. Rules have internal and external aspects, and every legal system needs a rule by which other legal rules can be recognized. 'The Concept of Law' is in no sense a work of linguistic philosophy. It concentrates instead on behaviour, on people's attitudes towards rules and their violation. Critics argue that an account of a legal system in terms of behaviour cannot be adequate, for laws at least 'purport' to be morally binding. Hart disagreed. To him legal duties and obligations need be duties and obligations only from the legal point of view. 
In 1961-2 Hart spent a year at the University of California at Los Angeles and gave the Harry Camp lectures at Stanford. In November 1961 he met and debated with the octogenarian legal philosopher Hans Kelsen (1881-1973) at Berkeley. They tackled three topics, including the question whether legal and moral norms can conflict. Kelsen was thought to have had the better of the debate, but Hart made some telling points. At one stage he was so startled by Kelsen's insistence, in stentorian tones, that norms were norms and nothing else that he fell over backwards. 
In 1964 Hart delivered the Lionel Cohen lectures in Jerusalem. For this, his first visit to Israel, he was at the height of his powers, a dominant figure in legal and political philosophy and the standard-bearer of moral liberalism. He now came to appreciate the richness of Jewish culture. He was captivated by Jerusalem, one of the four cities, he thought, which had made modern culture what it was, the others being Constantinople, Athens, and Rome. Without them 'life for me at any rate would be a howling wilderness' (Wilberforce). Hart was intellectually anchored to the British empirical tradition and, though he loved Greece and Italy for their luminous, southern qualities, he was passionately attached to the English countryside. But his Jewishness shone through in his personal warmth, his sense of humour, and a rich, earthy, unsnobbish view of the world. On this visit he met Joseph Raz, later his doctoral student and the legal philosopher who has succeeded him as the standard-bearer of legal positivism. 
Not a natural administrator or committee man, Hart threw himself with zest into those offices that presented an intellectual challenge. From 1967 to 1973 he was a member of the Monopolies Commission. On it his intelligence and legal acumen were much appreciated. He regretted his lack of training in economics, but filled the gap as best he could by reading. He put searching questions to those who appeared before the commission. These could be disconcerting both for their complexity and from Hart's habit of lowering his head as the question unfolded. 
In 1968 Hart was asked by Oxford University to chair a commission on relations with junior members. Lord Franks's commission on the university, reporting in 1966, had dismissed student affairs in three lines. Two years later students were in uproar throughout the Western world. Even in Oxford there were sit-ins, though the 'enrages' were neither particularly numerous nor able. Hart's left-wing views commended him to the student body, his intellectual rigour to the university authorities. He turned the inquiry into a miniature royal commission, to which some 30 dons and 200 students gave evidence. The report suggested reforms of the disciplinary system and the creation of standing joint committees of students and dons, the students to have access to but not membership of the decision-making bodies. Hart wrote a penetrating appendix on student revolt, in itself a significant contribution to political theory. The report was implemented and helped to bring students peacefully into the governance of Oxford, though the unrest would largely have died down in any case, as it did elsewhere. 
By the time the commission reported in 1969 Hart had resigned from the chair he had held for sixteen years in order to devote more time to editing the 'Collected Works' of Jeremy Bentham. He had already begun work on the text of Bentham, poring over his predecessor's scrawl with an enormous magnifying glass. He and J. H. Burns published in 1970 new editions of Bentham's 'An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation' and 'Of Laws in General'. He wanted to make available to a wider public the work of his great predecessor. For the next twelve years he concentrated on Bentham, on whom he planned a big book. This did not come about, but in 1982 he published 'Essays on Bentham', containing ten essays. It seemed odd that Hart should be devoted to the man whom Marx pilloried as the pedantic, leather-tongued oracle of bourgeois intelligence. But he was fascinated by Bentham's willingness to plunge into enormous detail to promote a proper understanding of the greatest happiness principle. While Hart turned his attention to Bentham, his successor as professor of jurisprudence in Oxford, R. M. Dworkin, proved a formidable critic of his legal philosophy, though in an epilogue to the second edition of 'The Concept of Law' published posthumously (1994) Hart contends that Dworkin misrepresents his views. 
A number of Oxford colleges made approaches to find out whether Hart would consider presiding over their affairs. In 1973 he accepted an offer from Brasenose College, of which he was principal for the next five years. He enjoyed the new role, and threw himself with energy into the wide range of activities it called for. His brief reign made a mark on the college, whose fellows were at the time rather demoralized. Hart labelled them 'Old Turks and Young Fogeys'. He was made uneasy by what, with his austere temperament, he saw as the 'Lucullan feasts' enjoyed by the fellows. But he liked talking to the students and was quick both to see their point of view and to take steps to widen their intellectual horizons. Supervising research by a relative of the Tanner family he won the admiration of Obert C. Tanner of Salt Lake City, founder of the Tanner Trust for Human Values. Tanner consequently established an annual lectureship at Oxford to be attached to Brasenose College. The series continues and has been a success. 
After he retired from Brasenose in 1978 Hart resumed his association with University College, of which he was an honorary fellow, and where he had a room until his death. The 1980s were for him a period of honour interspersed with distress. As early as 1960 Hart had received his first honorary degree in Stockholm. It was followed by twelve other such honours, including two in Israel, three in the United States, and one in Mexico. The Tanner trustees established at University College an annual lecture on jurisprudence and moral philosophy in his honour, the first being given in 1985. A series of essays in his honour, entitled 'Law, Morality and Society', edited by P. M. S. Hacker and J. Raz, had been published in 1977. A volume edited by Ruth Gavison, 'Issues in Contemporary Legal Philosophy: the Influence of H. L. A. Hart', containing papers for a conference given in his honour in Jerusalem in March 1984, was published in 1987. In 1983 seventeen of his essays were collected and published under the title 'Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy'. 
But Hart was not to enjoy an untroubled old age. His wife, more radical than he, a member of the Communist Party from 1935, had by the outbreak of war become disillusioned with communism, to which Hart was strongly opposed. In the early 1980s the press and the BBC, matching her pre-war communism to his wartime work for MI5, wounded them both by imputations of disloyalty. The distress this caused Hart, together with groundless worries about the provision he had made for his youngest son, who was brain damaged at birth, led to a nervous breakdown in 1983. He recovered, but it was a sad ordeal for a loyal citizen who had done sterling work during the war, had always been opposed to communist totalitarianism, and held in contempt the activities of Philby and Blunt when it emerged what they had done. Moreover by the late eighties arthritis and injuries suffered in cycling and motor accidents made him less mobile, and brought to an end the long country walks that had meant so much since his schooldays. He died peacefully at Oxford on 19 December 1992, at the age of eighty-five, and was buried in Wolvercote cemetery, Oxford. 
Hart doubted the value of his contributions to legal and political philosophy. Introduced at a gathering in the United States as an 'intellectual giant' he told his audience that he did not feel like an intellectual giant. By the highest standards the doubts were justified. His achievement was to develop the ideas of Hume, Bentham, John Austin, and J. S. Mill in original and ingenious ways. If his work was less profound than that of Bentham or Kelsen, the two legal philosophers whom he thought most worth studying, in clarity he surpassed them. Critical studies of his work have been or are being published in America, Scotland, Ireland, Germany, Japan, Argentina, Italy, and Poland. Those who came across him as pupils, friends, or colleagues, at lectures, in seminars, or reading what he wrote might suddenly find their view of the world transformed. Almost to the end he retained a boyish enthusiasm for new experiences. He liked people and their foibles, appreciated natural beauty, was widely read in fiction and poetry, and enjoyed classical music. A man of the Enlightenment, his mind was firm and clear, unshakeably hostile to intellectual muddle and the political oppression it fosters. With this uncompromising rigour went the gift of pure human goodness. The intellectual and moral qualities were inseparable. There were of course weaknesses. Hart was naturally inaccurate; at times his enthusiasm for a person or idea led him astray. He was untidy and absent-minded beyond the professional norm. But these were the faults of a man of generous mind, impatient with trivia, who was by common consent the outstanding British legal philosopher of the twentieth century. 
Hart's wife, 
Two years after the return of peace Jenifer Hart resigned from the civil service, despite her promising career, to join her husband in Oxford. She initially took charge of the programme of university extension lectures in adult education organized by Oxford's extramural department. The department was then a noted centre of socialist intellectuals and teachers opposed to British policy in the early stages of the cold war, and during the two years Hart was there it was the subject of a controversial university investigation into the conduct of certain tutors. A Gwilym Gibbon fellowship at Nuffield College, Oxford, in 1950 enabled her to publish 'The British Police' (1951), on the strength of which, in 1952, she was elected to a fellowship in modern history at St Anne's College, Oxford. She published little while at St Anne's, but her article 'Nineteenth-century social reform: a tory interpretation of history' in 'Past and Present' (1965) was an important contribution to the academic debate on the development of the British state. Her demonstration of the intellectual and ideological factors influencing the growth of government in the nineteenth century -- as opposed to the so-called tory interpretation, which emphasized the role played by well-meaning bureaucrats guided by their experience -- was widely accepted by historians. She was a college tutor until her retirement in 1981. In 1992 she published her second book, 'Proportional Representation: Critics of the British Electoral System, 1820-1945', an important scholarly study of the development of ideas of electoral reform. 
In 1983 Jenifer Hart's unguarded remarks to a 'Sunday Times' journalist led to an article alleging that she had been a spy, and suggesting that her husband might have passed her information during his wartime work with MI5. Following legal proceedings the 'Sunday Times' issued a half-hearted apology, but the episode contributed to Herbert Hart's nervous breakdown. In 'Spycatcher' (1987) Peter Wright alleged that Phoebe Pool (a Soviet spy who committed suicide in 1971) had named Jenifer Hart as a member of an 'Oxford ring', a supposed covert communist cell. In 1998 Hart published her autobiography, 'Ask Me No More', in which she revealed that friends in the Communist Party had urged her to join the civil service as a 'mole' (p. 70), though she claimed that she had not been 'involved in any deception' (ibid.), that she had never been asked to pass on any secrets, and that she had left the Communist Party by 1939. She died on 19 March 2005 at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, of heart failure, and was survived by her four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51090


Whetstone, Sir Thomas (1630/31-1668?), naval officer and adventurer, was the eldest son of Roger Whetstone (died before 1656), a professional soldier, and Catherine Cromwell ('bap'. 1597), favourite sister of the protector. Whetstone was born abroad, probably in the Netherlands where his father served, and naturalized by act of parliament in 1656. He owed his rise wholly to the protector's misplaced patronage. He first appears as a volunteer serving on Penn's flagship in the expedition to Hispaniola in 1654, and Penn soon yielded to Cromwell's pressure by promoting him lieutenant. On the homeward voyage in 1655 Whetstone was advanced to command the 'Golden Cock'. Despite his lack of experience he was then rapidly advanced to the fourth-rate 'Phoenix' in 1656 and the third-rate 'Fairfax' in October 1657, and further distinguished by being chosen to carry English diplomats abroad. He joined the fleet under Stokes at Lisbon late in 1657, and after it moved into the Mediterranean in late December Stokes made him commander of a squadron plying between Malta and Candia (Crete). The results were disastrous: Whetstone flouted orders, and sold for his own use a prize carrying grain desperately needed by the fleet. In exasperation Stokes revoked his command, whereupon Whetstone deserted his force and sailed for Algiers. He was still able to rely on his connections at home, however, and when Stokes was directed in May 1658 to assign a squadron to join with French naval forces at Marseilles for a combined operation against Spain, he reluctantly gave its command to Whetstone. Stokes hoped to tie him down by a set of very restrictive instructions, but in the event Whetstone indulged in junketing ashore while quarrelling with his officers and sending bitter complaints to England. The joint operation did not materialize. On receiving news of Cromwell's death in September 1658 Stokes at last found the courage to dismiss Whetstone, and sent him back to England as a prisoner, with the approval of the new protector, Richard. Whetstone was examined by the council of state, and a court martial nominated to try him, though in April 1659 he complained that he was still waiting for a chance to clear his name. In June Whetstone threw in his lot with the royalists, who believed, falsely, that as Cromwell's nephew he would be a valuable tool to win over the fleet. He crossed to Brussels, where Charles II knighted him and dispatched him to Copenhagen in late June with a promissory letter to Mountagu, commanding the English fleet in the sound. But Whetstone was too well known, and too unpopular, to be able to make direct contact, and his cover was blown when he bumped into Mountagu and the republican commissioner Sidney in the street. Mountagu had him conveyed secretly back to Flanders, and the intrigue ended in farce. Whetstone returned to England at the Restoration, destitute, and was languishing in a debtors' gaol in Marshalsea by 1661. He bombarded the government with petitions for employment, and also begged the estates of his late stepfather, the regicide Colonel John Jones, who had been executed for treason in October 1660. The king eventually agreed to pay him $100 to set him up as a planter in Jamaica, and he sailed in the spring of 1662. Shortly before, in December 1661, he obtained a licence to marry Anne Dehuberlant ('b'. 1630/31), a widow. Whetstone quickly established himself as a leading figure in Jamaica, with the support of its governor, Sir Thomas Modyford. By 1663 he was commanding a force of thirteen privateers, and he served as speaker of the Jamaica assembly in 1664. In 1666 he led a force which seized the Spanish colony of Providence Island, but the Spaniards recaptured the island in August and Whetstone was sent prisoner to Panama, where he was held in irons for seventeen months. Though eventually released, he was never heard of again, and probably died soon afterwards. A flood of complaints in the late 1650s had characterized Whetstone as insolent, arrogant, greedy, and idle, and his short-lived naval career remains an object-lesson in the dangers and temptations of nepotism. 


@@@@@


doc= 51091


Cox, Owen (d. 1665), naval officer, came probably from a seafaring family in north-east England, though nothing certain is known of his origins. He first appears in 1646, commanding a small prize on the north-east station, where he continued in other hired merchantmen. Early in 1648 he was nominated to command the 'Phoenix', a fourth-rate vessel under construction, but the move was aborted when the squadron in the Downs mutinied in May 1648 and declared in favour of the king. His ship, the 'Pelican', was among those to defect, but he himself escaped and a few days later he and several other commanders declared their continued loyalty to parliament. He was given a new command, the 'Recovery', and sailed in autumn 1648 with the earl of Warwick's expedition to confront Rupert and the rebel fleet at Helvoetsluys. Thereafter he served in the North Sea until 1650, when he was promoted to the 'Constant Warwick', a powerful privateer part owned by Warwick and hired by the state, and sailed with Henry Appleton's squadron to protect English shipping in the straits. Cox proved a successful commander, capturing several prizes and achieving some notoriety. On the outbreak of the First Anglo-Dutch War in 1652 Appleton's squadron took refuge at Leghorn. Cox found himself with another squadron under Richard Badiley, trapped at Elba, but Badiley soon sent him back to Leghorn to Appleton and his colleagues, 'to put some life into them' (Badiley, 1), and he was appointed to command the 'Bonadventure' there. But Appleton opposed Cox's plan to recapture the 'Phoenix', which had been captured by the Dutch in August and was now among their ships at Leghorn, and when Cox persisted Appleton tried to sack him to scupper the plan. Cox ignored him and Badiley, who had now received overall command from England, backed the project. On 20 November 1652 Cox led a party of volunteers in a daring dawn raid, boarding the 'Phoenix' as she lay at anchor amid the Dutch fleet, and carried her away to Naples after fierce hand-to-hand fighting. The exploit was long remembered. At Naples he was briefly gaoled after clashing with the Spanish viceroy over the sale of a prize, and then rejoined Badiley at Elba. Together they mounted an operation to relieve Appleton's squadron, planning to approach Leghorn to draw out the Dutch, whereupon Appleton would follow and the two small English squadrons would engage the larger Dutch force simultaneously. In the action that followed, on 4 March 1653, Appleton's force came out prematurely and was totally destroyed before the other squadron was near enough to help. On his return to England, Appleton blamed the disaster on Badiley and Cox, who had led their own force safely home, but an official inquiry vindicated them, and in December Cox was awarded $500 as reward and compensation for his losses. Cox retained his command of the 'Phoenix', in 1653-4, and fought in the great actions against the Dutch off the Gabbard and Texel, of which he sent an account to Cromwell. 
Following the peace of 1654 Cox withdrew or was dropped from naval service, but failing to prosper appealed in vain to Cromwell in January 1656 for relief and employment, pleading his six children, the costs of medical treatment for his earlier injuries, and $400 he had lost by the capture of the 'Bonaventure' at Leghorn. He may have commanded a merchant vessel in the straits later that year, but in 1658 with Sir George Ayscue he entered the service of the king of Sweden, and the two commanders and 700 seamen crossed to Sweden in November that year with William Goodsonn's expeditionary force. Cox's pugnacious spirit served the Swedes well. Commanding a fleet of ten ships in July 1659 he encountered a Dutch-Danish squadron at Ebeltoft, seized the larger vessels, burnt thirty transports, and captured 1000 Brandenburg and Imperial troops they were carrying. After firing more ships at Arhausen he returned to Sweden in triumph. His exploits had ruined Danish and Dutch plans to invade Swedish territory, and he was ennobled by Charles X of Sweden, appointed vice-admiral, and 'vastly rewarded' (Manley, 57). Following Sweden's peace with Denmark he returned to England in the summer of 1661, commanding the Swedish ship 'Raphael' (70 guns). Though ostensibly bound for Portugal, he lay in the Downs for four months, allegedly denouncing the Restoration, commending Venner's recent Fifth Monarchist rising and predicting the speedy destruction of Charles II. He was arrested and gaoled in the Gatehouse, and Lord Chief Justice Foster hoped to find a second witness so that he could be tried for treason. None materialized, and when the Second Anglo-Dutch War broke out Cox was granted letters of marque in February 1665 as commander of the frigate 'Nathan'. Dissidents urged him to use it to bring back republican exiles from the continent, or free General Lambert from Jersey. Cox was in fact planning to sail for the Mediterranean, but the ship foundered in a storm in Yarmouth road on 14 August, with the loss of all hands. The astrologer John Gadbury claimed to have warned him that the stars foretold disaster. Cox was certainly a long-standing devotee of astrology, and a client of both John Booker and William Lilly, to whom he had brought a gold chain in 1658 from the king of Sweden, as a reward for Lilly's propagandist writings. 
Though Cox's independent spirit and tendency to ignore orders barred him from the highest positions in the Commonwealth navy, he was among its most successful and enterprising commanders. 


@@@@@


doc= 51092


Hatch, John Charles, Baron Hatch of Lusby (1917-1992), author and politician, was born in Stockport, Cheshire, on 1 November 1917, the son of John James Hatch (1864-1939), temperance advocate, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' White (1886-1980), headmistress. Although Lancashire-born he was brought up in Yorkshire, and his early education was at Keighley Boys' Grammar School. He graduated from Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1942 and, rejecting military service, became a tutor with the National Council of Labour Colleges. From 1944 to 1948 he was national organizer of the Independent Labour Party and a lecturer at Glasgow University. On 1 November 1941 he married Laura Alberta Brown ('b'. 1915), a nurse, and daughter of Jonathan Brown, an engine driver. There were two sons of the marriage, which ended in divorce. 
In 1954 Hatch was appointed head of the Commonwealth department of the Labour Party, and in 1961 he became director of the extra-mural department of the University of Sierra Leone. From 1964 to 1970 he was the founder director of the African studies programme at Houston, Texas, and from 1980 to 1982 director of the department of human relations at Zambia University. Later he became honorary lecturer in the school of development studies at the University of East Anglia. He knew most of the African leaders before they were leaders, and he became political adviser to men he had taught as students, including Julius Nyerere and Kenneth Kaunda. He recognized the quality of Nelson Mandela and was tireless in demands for his release from prison long before the true stature of the man was generally accepted. Later Mandela invited him to the first post-banning meeting of the African National Congress, where he was greeted as an honoured guest. He had, of course, been banned from South Africa during the years of apartheid. On this last visit to Africa he also stayed with Kenneth Kaunda, accompanied by his second wife, Evangelia (Eva) Grant ('b'. 1924), a divorced lecturer and guide and daughter of Theodore Copellos, a stage manager, whom Hatch had married on 29 May 1991. Hatch was Commonwealth correspondent of the 'New Statesman' from 1950 to 1970, and his books included 'The Dilemma of South Africa' (1953), 'A History of Post-War Africa' (1964), 'The History of Britain in Africa' (1966), 'Tanzania' (1969), 'Nigeria' (1971), 'Africa Emergent' (1974), and 'Two African Statesmen' (1976). 
Hatch's life, however, was not confined to political endeavour. He was keen on sport, particularly cricket and rugby football, and was a referee for rugby union at senior level. Needless to say, when a tour of the Springboks from South Africa was arranged Hatch made it publicly clear that he would not be available. Some of his fellow members of the county championship panel thought he was being immodest in supposing himself to be on the shortlist of referees for the tour, but others agreed with him that in avoiding a possible choice and refusal scene he was simply being sensible. Certainly there were few people less interested in personal publicity. 
The shape of Hatch's career precluded parliamentary candidature for the Commons, but he was delighted when in 1978 he was created Baron Hatch of Lusby and thus enabled to further, at the place of government, causes dear to his heart while still in full possession of his considerable, indeed exceptional, abilities. He was a formidable presence in the Lords, calm and burly, but not fat. When he spoke in his deep voice from his place high on the top back bench, noteless and unhurried, the house listened. Even those irritated by his explicit exposure of cherished beliefs as questionable if not fallacious could only put their heads in their hands, for experience showed that Hatch would seize on interruption to argue his case at even greater length. He would not sit down until he was good and ready, even when his own front bench was showing signs of becoming restive. On one occasion his fellow peers were forced to use a little-known device, 'that the Noble Lord be heard no longer'. We had adjacent desks in a room with eight others, which was said to contain the nearest thing to a left wing the Lords was likely to experience. There John explained to me that in a time-limited debate he would always take slightly less than his allotted five minutes, or whatever it was, but if he took part in an unrestricted discussion he alone would determine the extent of his contribution. As he did his homework and seldom strayed outside the range of his own expertise that seemed reasonable, even if it sometimes strained the patience of the less tolerant or more percipient. 
Hatch remained active until his death from heart failure on 11 October 1992 in a London hospital. He donated his body to London University for medical research, and his remains were subsequently cremated. He was survived by his second wife, and by Stuart and Barrie, the two sons of his first marriage. Although personally agnostic, Hatch respected and enjoyed the friendship of many believers, and a memorial service was conducted by the Revd Lord Soper at St Mary Undercroft in the Palace of Westminster, on 19 January 1993. Among those who spoke were the Most Revd Trevor Huddleston, the Zambia high commissioner, lords Pitt and Judd, the dean of the school of development studies at the University of East Anglia, and Hatch's fellow agnostic, the present writer. Hatch will be remembered as a man of total integrity, a true internationalist of proud commitment to his socialist conviction. 


@@@@@


doc= 51093


Havers, (Robert) Michael Oldfield, Baron Havers (1923-1992), lawyer and politician, was born on 10 March 1923 at 126 Mortlake Road, North Sheen, Surrey, the second of three sons and third of four children of Sir Cecil Robert Havers (1889-1977), barrister and High Court judge, and his wife, Enid Flo (died 1956), daughter of William Oldfield Snelling. His sister Dame (Ann) Elizabeth Oldfield Butler-Sloss ('b'. 1933) also practised at the bar, and became president of the Family Division of the High Court. 
Educated at Westminster School, Havers joined the Royal Navy in October 1941. While he was serving as a cadet, the converted Belgian cross-channel ship in which he was serving received a direct hit. Fortunately he was uninjured. This was the first of three occasions on which he 'came to' in the water, after the ships in which he was serving were destroyed. He was appointed midshipman in October 1942 and commissioned a lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in 1943. He served in the Mediterranean, Normandy, and the Far East. The first of these gave him, he claimed, unrivalled knowledge of the brothels of Alexandria -- not on his own account but from having to extricate his sailors and return them to his ship. The final posting gave him his first experience of advocacy, defending in courts martial. 
In 1946 Havers left the navy to attend Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, for two years, where he read law. He was called to the bar in 1948 and joined the chambers of Fred Lawton as pupil to Gerald Howard, who became an MP shortly thereafter. On 3 September 1949 he married Carol Elizabeth ('b'. 1928/9), daughter of Stuart Lay, company director. They had two sons. 
Havers's attractive and vigorous style as an advocate enabled him to build up a substantial civil and criminal practice on the south-eastern circuit, primarily in East Anglia. There, in successive summers, he prosecuted a number of heavy frauds, including the Suffolk lime fraud trials, which ended with the Court of Appeal laying down guidelines as to the number of counts to be included in an indictment. His most famous client was probably Mick Jagger, whose sentence of three months' imprisonment for a minor drugs offence, promptly set aside by the Court of Appeal, produced a public outcry. Havers was appointed QC in 1963. From 1962 to 1968 he was recorder of Dover, and then until 1971 recorder of Norwich. He was chairman of the west Suffolk quarter sessions from 1965 to 1971, having been vice-chairman for the previous four years. He also served as chancellor of the dioceses of St Edmundsbury and Ipswich from 1965 to 1973 and of Ely from 1969 to 1973. 
Havers entered politics comparatively late, when he was elected for the then safe Conservative seat of Wimbledon in succession to Sir Cyril Black, with a majority of 13,000 in June 1970, a seat he held until his appointment in 1987 as lord chancellor. He was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1971. In November 1972 he was appointed solicitor-general by Edward Heath, succeeding Sir Geoffrey Howe, who had moved to the cabinet, and he worked closely with Sir Peter Rawlinson, the attorney-general, until the fall of the Conservative government in February 1974. He was knighted on assuming office in 1972. 
Following the Conservatives' defeat, Havers was appointed shadow attorney-general and continued to serve in that capacity and as legal adviser to the shadow cabinet throughout the period of Conservative opposition in 1974-9. Nineteen seventy-four saw his first and, in his own memory, his greatest parliamentary occasion, in the attack on the Labour attorney-general, Sam Silkin, over the 'Housing Finance (Special Provisions) Bill'. This granted retrospective immunity to the Clay Cross councillors who faced surcharges and disqualification from office for having refused to increase council rents under the 'Housing Finance Act' of 1972. The roar of support from the Conservative benches behind him as he laid into the attorney-general for advocating this legislation in the teeth, as was known from a leaked letter, of even his own advice, was something he never forgot. 
On taking office on 4 May 1979, Margaret Thatcher immediately appointed Havers attorney-general. That office had, in the words of Professor J. Ll. J. Edwards, been 'no sinecure throughout its long history' and frequently the subject of stormy controversy (Edwards, 57). This was equally true of Havers's period in office. Those eight years from 1979 to 1987 were the longest unbroken tenure of the office since the eighteenth century, and included the Falklands War, where he was a member of the small inner 'war cabinet', the miners' strike of 1983, and the Westland crisis. 
The first significant controversy of Havers's long period of office came in the autumn of 1979. The Rhodesia sanctions affair, in which his stout endorsement of the decision of the director of public prosecutions not to prosecute anyone for breaching sanctions occasioned some criticism. It related, however, to events involving ministers and senior officials of both major parties in the late 1960s and early 1970s, in circumstances where witnesses were very unlikely to be available, although there were strong grounds for suspecting that at least some in high places both in government and in the oil industry must have known very well what was going on. No one, however, suggested that there had been any political involvement in the decision. Havers was always scrupulous to prevent any attempt at such interference. He believed firmly in the constitutional convention that has applied ever since the Campbell case which brought down the first Labour government in 1924, that the attorney-general, though of cabinet rank, should not be a member of the cabinet, and that the independence of his legal advice and of prosecution decisions should be beyond question. 
Two major issues, which were to arise continually during Havers's term of office, were the need to prosecute on several occasions under the 'Official Secrets Act' of 1911, and the growing difficulty of effectively prosecuting cases of serious financial fraud. The latter was a problem highlighted in particular by the Lloyds cases of Peter Cameron-Webb, and the so-called gang of four case involving Kenneth Grobb, Ian Posgate, and others, which took some seven years from initiation by the Department of Trade until conclusion of the unsuccessful prosecution. It was Havers's initiative in setting up and encouraging the fraud investigation group concept, whereby for the first time hand-picked teams of lawyers, accountants, and police officers worked together as dedicated teams on such cases, which began to turn the tide, and led, following the report of Lord Roskill's commission in 1986, to the subsequent establishment of the Serious Fraud Office. 
On those difficult issues, particularly those involving prosecution under the 'Official Secrets Act', which required his express authorization, Havers demonstrated not only his personal skills as an advocate but also his pre-eminent recognition that his duty as her majesty's attorney-general was owed not to the government of which he was a member but to the crown and to the upholding and impartial administration of the law. He was centrally involved in Thatcher's decision to expose in the House of Commons the government's knowledge of Anthony Blunt's treacherous links with the Soviet Union. His forensic skills were engaged in the prosecution of the traitors Geoffrey Prime and Michael Bettany, and, most dramatically, in 1982 when his cross-examination of Professor Hugh Hambleton, a Canadian economist, culminated in Hambleton's confessing in court to having passed NATO secrets to the Soviet Union. He was also closely involved in the prosecution of Sarah Tisdall, a Foreign Office clerk. She had leaked details of cruise missiles arriving at Greenham Common and, despite her plea of guilty, was sentenced by the lord chief justice to nine months' immediate imprisonment. He was likewise closely involved in the unsuccessful prosecution of Clive Ponting for disclosing secret information concerning the sinking of the 'General Belgrano'. 
Meanwhile the danger of his involvement in high-profile terrorist cases, both as attorney-general and as former prosecutor of the Birmingham six and Guildford four, had been vividly brought home to Havers when his flat in Wimbledon was bombed by the IRA, fortunately at a time when he and his wife were on holiday in Spain. He reacted publicly with insouciance, being reported as saying to his wife, 'Darling, we seem to have had a slight accident at home' ('The Times', 3 April 1992). But the narrowness of his escape was not lost on him. He described how he went to his clothes cupboard to find his row of suits hanging apparently untouched, until he felt one and the material simply lifted away in his fingers like cotton wool. He kept his small steel safe from the flat, the one he used to store secret documents, in his room at the law courts. It was crushed like a beer can and he kept it on a high desk like a memento, a St Jerome's skull. Thereafter he had to put up with the burdens of round-the-clock protection. 
Echoing an earlier tradition in which the attorney-general would prosecute personally in major criminal cases, Havers led for the crown in the case of the Yorkshire Ripper, where he found himself embarrassed by the refusal of Mr Justice Boreham to countenance the crown's acceptance of the defendant's plea of diminished responsibility. However, he proceeded calmly to cross-examine all four psychiatrists who propounded that defence, including the two called by the prosecution, to the effect that a conviction for murder was obtained. The net result was the same, detention for life, but justice was at least seen to be done. However, such tactics would not have been open to him had the option of capital punishment still been available. 
The episode which Havers regarded as the most fascinating of his career was his involvement as a member of the small inner cabinet appointed by Thatcher to supervise the conduct of the Falklands War. His experience was engaged in particular in relation to the deployment of and rules of engagement for the nuclear-powered submarine HMS 'Conqueror' in relation to the 26,000 ton Argentine cruiser the 'General Belgrano'. Thatcher valued not only his legal expertise, especially in relation to international law and the actions available to Britain under article 51 of the United Nations charter, but also because he was the only member of the inner cabinet with firsthand naval experience. 
It was a significant disappointment to Havers when, following the general election of June 1983, Lord Hailsham continued as lord chancellor and the promotion for which he had hoped was not forthcoming. His second parliament as attorney-general, from 1983 to 1987, saw the groundwork for the major change in the prosecution system nationally which came with the advent of the crown prosecution service, though the detailed preparation for this major change fell, on account of Havers's illness, on the solicitor-general, Sir Patrick Mayhew. 
In the autumn of 1985 Havers was taken ill while out shooting and was obliged to undergo major heart surgery to correct aortic stenosis. The operation was performed on the National Health Service at St George's Hospital, Tooting. It was during that illness that the Westland helicopter crisis, in which his courage and independence were put to their sternest test, took place. The protagonists were Leon Brittan as secretary of state for trade and industry, backed by the prime minister, and Michael Heseltine, the secretary of state for defence. In the course of the dispute it had fallen to Havers's deputy, Sir Patrick Mayhew, to write to Heseltine with advice on legal aspects of the problem, and passages from this confidential letter, harmful to Heseltine's political case, were published in the media. There was little doubt that the leak, by a civil servant to the Press Association, must have been authorized at a high level and that it had taken place after exchanges between Leon Brittan's department and 10 Downing Street. Havers returned to work, contrary to medical advice, at the heart of this crisis. He was quite clear that to breach the confidentiality of the letter of a law officer of the crown was a gross impropriety, and secondly that the leak had to be treated as an offence under the 'Official Secrets Act', just as much as the one which had sent Sarah Tisdall to prison. When the suggestion was made that he was taking an unduly legalistic approach, he replied that unless the leak were taken seriously, he would order the police to enter Downing Street the next morning and conduct a criminal investigation. After this it became almost inevitable that heads would roll, and Leon Brittan accepted ministerial responsibility and resigned. 
The last of the famous cases with which Havers had to deal as attorney-general was the attempt to suppress the book 'Spycatcher' (1987), written by the former MI5 agent Peter Wright, or at least to prevent his profiting from it. Havers not only accepted responsibility for the overall conduct of this difficult case but, despite criticism, pursued the matter with determination. It led at one point to a contretemps with the cabinet secretary, Sir Robert Armstrong, who in giving evidence in the Australian court had indicated that Havers had been party to an earlier decision not to prosecute the author of another book on the security services, a point which Havers insisted be retracted. 
Following the general election of 1987 Thatcher showed her loyalty to Havers by promoting him to be lord chancellor. Sadly his health was not good enough to enable him to continue and in October 1987 he resigned. His heart surgery had never really succeeded and he suffered far more pain than he ever made known to any but his closest family and confidants. 
Key features of Havers's character were his ebullience and his determination to live life to the full. About 5 feet 10 inches tall, with a distinguished head of grey hair, he was friendly, gregarious, and a noted bon viveur with a considerable appetite for fine wines and good cigars. His favourite clubs were the Garrick and Les Ambassadeurs. At the Garrick he enjoyed the company not only of many lawyers and actors but also of several members from Fleet Street, and it is from his conversations there that a number of the indiscretions for which he became celebrated, and some of which got him into hot water, were said to have come. 
Havers loved the theatre and was interested also in literature. He co-authored, with different writers, three books on famous trials, which included 'The Poisoned Life of Mrs Maybrick' (1977), about the Liverpool poisoner, and 'Tragedy in Three Voices: the Rattenbury Murder' (1980), about Alma Rattenbury, who was acquitted for the murder of her husband. His book 'The Royal Baccarat Scandal' (1977), written with his fellow lawyer Edward Grayson, was turned into a successful West End play by Royce Ryton. In 1987 he was a judge on the panel for the Whitbread literary awards. 
Following his retirement from the woolsack Havers became chairman of RHM Outhwaite, the Lloyd's underwriters, the Solicitors' Law Stationery Society, and the Playhouse Theatre, London. He died of heart failure on 1 April 1992, at St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, London. He was survived by his wife, Carol, and their two sons, Philip ('b'. 1950), a barrister, and Nigel ('b'. 1951), an actor. A memorial service was held on 8 June 1992 at the Temple Church, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 51094


Hawkes, (Charles Francis) Christopher (1905-1992), archaeologist, was born on 5 June 1905 at 35 De Vere Gardens, Kensington, London, the elder child and only son of Charles Pascoe Hawkes (1877-1956), a lawyer, soldier, and author, and his wife, Eleanor Victoria (1874-1966), daughter of Charles Davison Cobb, a wine shipper, and his Spanish wife, Victoria. Christopher was a precociously clever child, and after preparatory school in Surrey he went to Winchester College in 1918. He flourished as a classical scholar, also showing a talent for music and drawing. His father's military service included postings in the north-east of England and on Salisbury Plain, and Hawkes became familiar with monuments such as Hadrian's Wall, the monastery church at Jarrow, and Stonehenge. At Winchester he wrote to O. G. S. Crawford, the newly appointed archaeology officer of the Ordnance Survey, whose encouragement to him to explore the field monuments of the district led to his first published work. 
In 1924 Hawkes went up to New College, Oxford. He became increasingly interested in ancient history and archaeology, studying Roman Britain with R. G. Collingwood and acquiring his basic training in excavation with Mortimer Wheeler at Brecon in 1925 and with Donald Atkinson at Wroxeter in 1926. In 1925-6, with Nowell Myres and Charles Stevens, he began to excavate the medieval chapel on St Catherine's Hill, Winchester; in 1927-8 this work was extended to the Iron Age hill fort there. 
After taking a first-class degree in 1928 Hawkes moved to the department of British and medieval antiquities at the British Museum, as (successively) assistant, assistant keeper (second class), and assistant keeper (first class). He was responsible for compiling the accessions register, and though this was often behind schedule his scholarship and talent for drawing made the registers of this period a mine of information. His intellectual ambition spread far beyond the museum, however, and he continued busily writing, researching, and excavating. His excavation in 1930-32 with Rex Hull at Colchester was the first serious attempt to understand the complexities of a late Iron Age town. From 1935 to 1939 he excavated three more Iron Age hill forts in Hampshire. 
Hawkes's work launched a new phase of Iron Age studies. His article on hill forts ('Antiquity', 5, 1931, 60-97) reviewed the evidence for this type of site, and introduced a new chronological and cultural scheme for the Iron Age, linked to a theory of cultural change by migration, which dominated the subject for the next forty years. Another article, written with Gerald Dunning, on the Belgae ('Archaeological Journal', 87, 1930, 150-335), provided detailed documentation of the continental background to the final period of the Iron Age in Britain. With Thomas Kendrick he produced 'Archaeology in England and Wales, 1914-1931' (1932), a major synthesis of recent archaeological work which offered a new formulation of later prehistory. 
At Colchester Hawkes had met (Jessie) Jacquetta Hopkins (1910-1996) ['see 'Hawkes, (Jessie) Jacquetta]. They were married on 7 October 1933, and collaborated fruitfully in several subsequent projects. Their only child, Nicolas, was born in 1937, but the marriage ended in June 1953. Strained by his intellectual ambition, his heavy workload, and his lifelong inability to start the day promptly, Hawkes's relationship with his departmental keeper, Reginald Smith, became increasingly sour. Matters improved after Smith's retirement in 1937, but it was clear that Hawkes's future lay elsewhere. Further progress was stalled by the Second World War, when he was seconded to the Ministry of Aircraft Production. He returned to the museum in 1946, but was soon appointed to the new chair of European archaeology at Oxford. He took up the post on 1 October 1946, and held it until his retirement in 1972. On 30 January 1959 he married the archaeologist Sonia Elizabeth Chadwick ['see below']. After a brief period living at Dorchester-on-Thames, they settled at 19 Walton Street, Oxford, which with the later inclusion of no. 20 remained their home until his death. 
Hawkes did not have an easy ride at Oxford. His informative and entertaining memorandum submitted in 1965 to the Franks commission on the plight of new subjects at Oxford (Franks commission, written evidence, part 11, 55-64) was tartly reminiscent of Cornford's 'Microcosmographia academica'. With mock puzzlement it described the ingenuity of Oxford's devices for politely blocking change, and boldly sought a remedy in 'a period of directorial government' (ibid., 61). Beneath the humour lay Hawkes's deep frustration at the complex structures and short-sighted priorities which caused Oxford to lag behind other universities in its research and teaching. The frustration born of long years spent in trying to advance his subject also stood out in Hawkes's oral evidence to the committee. In the time spent writing memoranda during his eighteen years at Oxford he said, 'I could have written at least one archaeological book'. When asked if there had been rows, he replied: 'A good many... some of them exceedingly fierce, of which I have been the centre' (Franks commission, oral evidence, O. 33, p. 12). 
Hawkes made Oxford a centre for postgraduate teaching and research in archaeology. His interest in the later prehistoric and early historic periods were complemented in 1956 by the appointment of Ian Richmond to a chair in the archaeology of the Roman empire. These developments culminated in the establishment of the Institute of Archaeology in 1961. Hawkes was an inspiring teacher; though there were never many students the proportion who went on to prominent positions in archaeology was remarkable. He quickly appreciated the potential contribution of the natural sciences to knowledge of the past, and responded enthusiastically to Lord Cherwell's suggestion that Oxford should found a research laboratory for archaeology; it came into being in 1955. He was also instrumental in founding its journal 'Archaeometry' (a word he claimed to have invented). 
Hawkes continued to publish well into his eighties. He declined to revise his one major work of synthesis, 'The Prehistoric Foundations of Europe' (1940), because his interests were now firmly in the first millennium BC, but a stream of articles on Bronze Age and Iron Age Europe confirmed his position as Britain's leading authority on these periods. He did not accept a divide between prehistory and history, and believed firmly in the value of the written sources. His work was characterized by a detailed familiarity with the textual and material evidence and by a firm commitment to understanding the past on a pan-European scale. From the 1930s he was a regular visitor to Europe, and he was greatly respected by his continental contemporaries. Though some of his ideas, especially the explanation of culture change by a series of migrations, became unfashionable, the rapid progress made in Iron Age studies would have been impossible without his pioneering efforts. 
Hawkes was a striking figure, despite his spare build and his increasingly severe limp. He had penetrating pale eyes behind his thick glasses, and a shock of dark hair, which later turned to silver. He was a good listener, but also an intimidatingly well-informed, though always witty, talker. His distinctive handwriting was matched by an idiosyncratic English style, which, though always accurate, could be highly compressed. He died in Oxford on 29 March 1992. His funeral took place on 3 April 1992 at St Cross Church, Oxford. 
Hawkes's second wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 51095


Hayek, Friedrich August (1899-1992), economist and political philosopher, was born in Vienna on 8 May 1899, the eldest of three sons of August Josef Gustav von Hayek (1871-1928), physician and botanist, and his wife, Felicitas Johanna Valerie, 'nee' von Juraschek (1875-1967), daughter of Franz von Juraschek, statistician, professor, and senior civil servant. His great-great-grandfather, Josef von Hayek (1750-1830), gained a minor title of nobility as an enterprising steward for an aristocratic landowner in Moravia. Hayek's English-language opponents insisted on calling him in later life von Hayek. In fact such titles were abolished in the inter-war Austrian republic. The 'von' got back into his name only by an accident, when he submitted his birth certificate for his British naturalization in 1938, and was in too much of a hurry for a passport to correct it. Hayek's mother called him Fritz, an appellation also used by friends and contemporaries, but which he never liked. He was educated at two different 'Volkschuler' and two different 'Gymnasia'; he later explained his frequent changes of school by saying that he 'ran into difficulties with my teachers, who were irritated by the combination of obvious ability and laziness and lack of interest I showed' ('Hayek on Hayek', 42). In March 1917 he joined a field artillery regiment in Vienna, and at the end of 1917 he was sent to the Italian front. There he contracted malaria and encountered his cousin Ludwig Wittgenstein. Returning to Vienna, he enrolled at the university in November 1918. 
Hayek's father never achieved his ambition to hold a university chair, which helps to explain his son's belief that that was the most desirable of all positions. He afterwards remarked that the decisive aspect of his own student years was that 'you were not expected to confine yourself to your own subject' ('Hayek on Hayek', 51); and indeed he wavered between psychology and economics, which at the time had to be combined with law. During winter 1919-20 (when the University of Vienna was closed for lack of fuel for heating) he went to Zurich, where he worked briefly in the laboratory of the brain anatomist von Monakow. He once said that he might well have become a biologist had not his father given him two 'heavy volumes' by August Weismann (the biologist who rediscovered Mendel's genetics) at a time when he was too immature to appreciate them. He also remarked that the qualities he had admired in the University of Vienna had disappeared by the Second World War, and he avoided returning to the city. 
Hayek graduated with a Dr Jur in 1921, completing his degree in three years rather than the usual four. In October that year a letter of recommendation from his university teacher Friedrich von Wieser to Ludwig von Mises led to a post with the 'Abrechnungsamt', an agency concerned with clearing debts arising from the First World War. While working there he also studied at the University of Vienna for the DScPol., completing his second degree in 1923. His real opportunity came when he gained a research assistantship in New York in 1923-4. While there he investigated statistical time series and, more characteristically, wrote a critique of proto-Keynesian under-consumption theories. He also unearthed from American accounts facts about the First World War which had largely been kept from the Austrian population. This may well have been one of the origins of his scepticism about government and all its works. 
Back in Austria Hayek became a participant in the economics seminar organized by von Mises, who in 1927 secured for him the post of director of the Austrian Institute for Economic Research, a newly established institute for business cycle research. He also held a lectureship in economics at the University of Vienna, from 1929. Some of his papers caught the attention of Lionel Robbins, professor of economics at the London School of Economics (LSE), and one of the very few British economists who could read German. In 1931 Robbins invited him to give a series of lectures in London, published later that year as 'Prices and Production'. Recalling his arrival, Robbins wrote: 'I can still see the door of my room opening to admit the tall, powerful, reserved figure which announced itself quietly and firmly as 'Hayek'' (Robbins, 127). In the same year Hayek was appointed visiting professor at the LSE, and in 1932 he was appointed Tooke professor of economic science and statistics, a post he held until 1950. As he subsequently remarked: 'If you are offered a chair in the University of London at the age of 32 you take it.' He was naturalized in 1938. 
Robbins himself had been appointed in 1929, at thirty, the youngest economics professor in the UK. He wanted to establish the LSE as a centre for economic theory; to counteract the insular emphasis of Cambridge; and to combat the influence of John Maynard Keynes, with whom he had already clashed on an official committee in 1930. He believed Hayek could help on all three fronts. Hayek did indeed bring many cosmopolitan contacts to the LSE. He was, for instance, instrumental in the appointment of Karl Popper, the philosopher and author of 'The Open Society' (1945). He subsequently looked back on his own work at the LSE in the 1930s as 'intellectually [the] most active and satisfying of my life' ('Hayek on Hayek', 81). 
Hayek's technical work at the LSE had three main but related aspects: capital, monetary, and business cycle theory. He promoted the 'Austrian' capital theory, which emphasized that lower interest rates promoted a more 'roundabout' structure of production -- what later would be described as a capital-deepening one. But he eventually abandoned the earlier Austrian concept of an average period of production in favour of the more complex idea of the structure of production. He was himself dissatisfied with his final effort in this direction, 'The Pure Theory of Capital', which appeared in 1941 and which he subsequently said he had rushed out too quickly under the erroneous belief that the war would soon make such publications impossible. An intended sequel covering money and business cycles was never written. 
American writers who attempted to relaunch 'Austrian economics' towards the end of the twentieth century tended to treat 'The Pure Theory of Capital' as an unfortunate divergence and preferred to base themselves on 'Prices and Production' and related works. The issue of 'Austrian economics' did not loom large in the 1930s because during that time the differences between the Austrian and other branches of neo-classical economics were less than at any time before or since. The main intellectual battle line was between neo-classical economics of all kinds and the increasingly heretical work of Keynes at Cambridge which culminated in the latter's 'General Theory' (1936). By the time that the large divergencies between post-war mainstream economics and the Austrian tradition had emerged into daylight Hayek had largely switched his interest to political philosophy and broad questions of economic policy. Nevertheless his policy recommendations still had their roots in his earlier work on capital and monetary theory; and he did write the occasional short clarificatory paper well into the 1960s, sometimes in response to queries from John Hicks. 
It was ironical that media critics later described Hayek as the 'father of monetarism'. From his early studies of business cycles onwards, he emphasized how difficult it was to define the money supply and that, in any case, variations in velocity were at least as important as changes in quantity. But the special characteristic of his cycle theory was his stress on the divergent movement of different prices during the business cycle, so that general price indices could not convey useful information for policy. In view of his insistence on the importance of changing relative prices in so many contexts, and throughout his career, it is surprising that he never sought to measure or estimate such relative price changes. This cannot be completely explained away by his distrust of index numbers. 
Hayek's insistence that, while inflation is a monetary phenomenon, there is no such thing as 'the quantity of money', and no sharp boundary between money and other financial assets, has stood the test of time. The experience of the British governments in the 1980s, which changed their monetary targets so much and to so little avail, was much less puzzling to a Hayekian than to a true monetarist believer. So, too, was the high unemployment cost of reducing inflation, which Hayek insisted was inevitable while labour markets were dominated by the collective bargaining mentality. 
Hayek's own business cycle theory started out from the 'natural rate of interest', a concept invented by the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. This was the rate at which savings and investment were equal and the economy was in equilibrium. In an upturn or downturn the market rate of interest diverges from the natural one and the economy becomes unco-ordinated. In the boom phase banks expand credit, and consumption goods are pushed up in price; thus 'forced savings' are extracted from consumers. A neutral monetary policy would attempt to smooth out the cycle by keeping the market rates equal to the natural rate. But as the latter was unknowable this would, in Hayek's view, be an impossible undertaking. Any attempt to use monetary policy to keep the general price level stable would make matters worse -- for instance, central banks would raise interest rates near the top of a boom, thus aggravating the ensuing recession. During the 1970s, when the main questions were no longer those of smoothing the business cycle, but double-digit inflation that threatened world prosperity, Hayek changed his views, at least by implication. He then roundly castigated governments, central banks, and, above all, economists for having allowed inflation to soar out of control, from a misguided 'Keynesian' desire to give priority to output and employment. 
During his visit in 1931, Hayek was invited to Cambridge. Richard Kahn, Keynes's closest collaborator, asked why if in the middle of a slump he went out and bought an overcoat he would not help to increase output and employment. Hayek replied that it would take a long mathematical demonstration to explain why not; and according to local reports this incident destroyed Hayek's chances of a Cambridge chair. 
Looking back seventy years later, the analyst is struck by the similarity rather than the differences of the business cycle theories of Hayek and Keynes at the time of the latter's 'Treatise on Money' of 1931. The controversy between the two is admirably set out in volume 9 of the Routledge edition of the collected works of Hayek. This contains papers by Keynes and others as well as Hayek; and the editor, Bruce Caldwell, contributes a lucid and non-partisan introduction concluding that both men promoted theories with specific application to particular times and place, but that neither produced a 'general' theory of the trade cycle. (The Cambridge economist Dennis Robertson quipped that what Hayek called a boom Keynes called a slump.) Ironically, Hayek's over-investment theory of the cycle was least applicable to the depressed 1930s when it was launched, but could have found its application in Japan in the 1980s and 1990s, when excessive investment helped trigger a long-lasting recession. Any attempt, however, to revive the theory in a globalized economy would require an analysis of the effects of supporting investment by overseas capital inflows, as well as by forced domestic savings. 
The underlying divergence between Hayek and Keynes was rooted in the latter's growing conviction that a frequent and perhaps normal condition of capitalism was one of unused resources, a doctrine which was not fully set out until the 'General Theory', published in 1936. Hayek on the other hand tended to assume as a first approximation full employment of resources. Keynes's rapid victory was above all due to the fact that his theory was primarily directed to explain severe and persistent unemployment during one of the worst depressions of all time. In addition Keynes's theory was more easily translated into mathematical models which bore the hallmark of what was regarded as serious economics. Last but by no means least, Keynes was able to promote the 'General Theory' by various means (including offering the book at an especially low price). By the end of the 1930s even the LSE was largely Keynesian. 
Hayek wrote a long review for 'Economica' of Keynes's earlier 1931 'Treatise on Money', only to be told by the author (who was by then working on the 'General Theory'), 'Oh, never mind; I no longer believe all that' ('Hayek on Hayek', 90). Hayek often declared that his greatest regret was his failure to write a critique of the 'General Theory', which after his earlier experience he was initially inclined to dismiss as a mere 'tract for the times'. Nevertheless in the last few pages of 'The Pure Theory of Capital' there is in fact a sketch of Hayek's unwritten critique. In a section entitled 'Mr Keynes's economics of abundance', Hayek insisted that abundant reserves of all resources are unlikely except in the depths of a severe depression. This still left open the question of where between the two extremes an economy would tend to be. The answer did not appear until Milton Friedman launched the concept of the 'natural rate of unemployment' (later rechristened the 'non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment', or NAIRU) in 1967. The implicit answer was that the sustainable limit to economic activity was the point at which inflation began to accelerate. 
Hayek himself came to regard a different and less technical essay, 'Economics and knowledge', first published in 'Economica' in 1937 and later, with related papers, in 'Individualism and the Economic Order' (1948), as 'the most original contribution I have made to the theory of economics' ('Hayek on Hayek', 79); and it does indeed form the link between his economic ideas and his wider social philosophy. It set itself to answer the question: 'How can a combination of fragments of knowledge existing in different minds bring about results, which if they were to be brought about deliberately would require a knowledge on the part of the directing mind which no single person can possess?' According to Hayek, a market system is a discovery technique. No computer can predict the emergence of new knowledge, original ideas, or innovations -- and people's reactions to them. His scepticism about the use of econometric relationships was based on a wider epistemological view. For he insisted that the most important kind of knowledge was not of propositions or theories, but of practical skills and dispositions governed by rules which we may imperfectly discover afterwards, but not formulate in advance. 
Contrary to popular repute, Hayek always believed that mathematics had an important role to play in economic theory as 'a beautiful way of describing certain patterns' ('Hayek on Hayek', 148). But he remarked that mathematical economists usually understood so little real mathematics that they believed their subject had to be quantitative and numerical. Unlike many mainstream neo-classical economists Hayek saw the market as an example of human institutions, like language or law, which have evolved without any conscious plan on anyone's part. Whereas mainstream economists were preoccupied with the optimal allocation of resources in given conditions, Hayek was concerned with the effect of the market system on the evolution and stability of society. He insisted that wants, techniques, and resources are not given, but are constantly changing -- in part because of the activities of entrepreneurs who open up possibilities which people did not know existed before. (The dynamic and entrepreneurial aspect was also emphasized by another economist of Austrian origin, Joseph Schumpeter, thus providing a so-called Austrian critique of mainstream neo-classical economics, which overlaps with the objections of 'radical' political economists.) 
It was this turn in his economic thinking, quite as much as any political differences, which was responsible for Hayek's growing estrangement from the mainstream economics profession. It was not that they disagreed with his depiction of the market as a signalling and incentive device. It was much more that it was difficult to formulate it in terms of the models fashionable among the new generation of economists. A more legitimate criticism was that just as there could be market failures in traditional economics, due to the divergence of private from social costs, so could there be failures in signalling systems, which policy might try to improve. But Hayek had little to say on these, apart from his specialized work on business cycles which he did not revisit. Another problem was that his depiction of markets did not seem to lead to a research programme for further work. (A reasonably sympathetic critic described it as 'poetry'.) This deficiency was beginning to be remedied at the end of the twentieth century by researchers developing the mathematical theory of complexity, originally derived from physics and applied to phenomena such as earthquakes or biological cataclysms, but which they felt could be developed for the study of social events. 
During the war years the LSE was evacuated to Cambridge; and Keynes took care that Hayek had comfortable rooms in King's College. Keynes himself spent weekends in Cambridge and the two became friends, despite differences of outlook. Unlike Keynes, Hayek was in no sense a charismatic personality. But they had many shared interests, for instance in antiquarian books and biography. It was then that Hayek came across the correspondence between John Stuart Mill and his future wife Harriet Taylor, which he subsequently published in 1951. 
Contrary to widespread belief, Hayek did not suddenly 'leave economics' to write a political polemic. His inaugural lecture at the London School of Economics in 1933 was partly devoted to what he saw as the error of socialists who, from the best of motives, were liable to bring about results the very opposite of what they intended. But he was no more happy with conservatives 'who never felt the urge to reconstruct the world and who frequently supported the forces of stability only for reasons of selfishness' (F. A. Hayek, 'The trend of economic thinking', 'Collected Works', 3.34). 
The basic idea that a planned economy could not work because it would provide no basis for deciding what to produce and by what methods (the so-called calculation problem) was due not to Hayek but to his mentor von Mises. Hayek became involved through his role as an editor of a book on this debate, 'Collectivist Economic Planning' (1935), which also contained essays by socialists who wanted to use the market mechanism. Hayek's main contribution was to explain why it would not be possible for socialist enterprises simply to copy private enterprise principles, while remitting their profits to the state. The unexpected collapse of the Soviet Union and its satellites in 1989-91 supplied a belated vindication of his thesis. 
The genesis of 'The Road to Serfdom' was a memorandum Hayek wrote in the late 1930s for William Beveridge, then director of the London School of Economics, protesting against the frequent depiction of Nazism and fascism as forms of capitalism. He viewed them as collectivist systems, much closer to Soviet communism than to anything in the USA or Britain. This memorandum was enlarged in 1939 for the 'Public Policy Pamphlets' series of the University of Chicago Press. Hayek was induced to expand it further as a tract for a wider market by his alarm at the number of well-intentioned English writers who naively wished to continue wartime planning systems to direct the economy for conscious purposes in times of peace. He saw such centralized control as a threat not only to prosperity but to freedom. He did not pretend that most people enjoyed choice. The question was rather whether people should be left themselves to make inescapable choices or whether the decisions should be made for them by someone else. 
A reader several decades later would have had to make some allowance for the historical circumstances. But that would have been all to the good. For Hayek had indeed seen all the supposedly progressive ideas he castigated advanced a generation earlier among German militaristic as well as socialist circles. Although central planning fell into disrepute among political elites in the last twenty or thirty years of the twentieth century, there is always a danger that, faced with seemingly intractable problems, there will be a cry for a strong government 'to take a lead'. Hayek afterwards regretted that, because of the wartime alliance with the Soviet Union, he had to choose all his examples from German thinking and policy. But it was fortunate that he did so. He thereby removed the work from cold-war polemics and also provided a perennially needed reminder of the roots of collectivism in German metaphysics, which exalted society over the individual and poured scorn on the selfish and commercial motivation of the Anglo-Saxons. 

'The Road to Serfdom' was far and away the most eloquent and straightforward statement of his political and economic outlook that Hayek ever achieved. It also seemed something of a miracle, given the sometimes tortuous nature of his other writing. Perhaps the greatest miracle was his choice of title, which is so important to the success of any popular work of political economy. 'The Road to Serfdom' was a very clear statement of certain economic verities, which mainstream economists would find it difficult to deny, but which rarely come out in their work. For instance, it analysed what would happen if a planning authority tried to regulate the numbers in different employments by adjusting pay and other terms of work. Is not this an enlightened application of market principles? No, it is not. When a government authority fixes remuneration for a category of worker and supposedly selects them by merit, 'the strength of their desire for the job will count for very little. The person whose qualifications are not of the standard type, or whose temperament is not of the ordinary kind, will no longer be able to come to special arrangements with an employer.' Someone who prefers irregular hours or even a 'happy-go-lucky existence with a small and perhaps uncertain income to a regular routine will no longer have the choice'. People will 'no longer be free to be rational or efficient only when and where we think it worthwhile' ('Road to Serfdom', 1976 edn, 71-2). The individual would be used by authority to service such abstractions as the social welfare or the good of the community. These few sentences are worth more than all the 'research-based' studies of minimum-wage laws of later decades. 
In his preface to the edition of 1976 Hayek explained that he subsequently 'tried hard to get back to economics proper' but he could not free himself of the feeling 'that the problems on which I had so undesignedly embarked were more challenging and important than those of economic theory; and that much that I had said in my first sketch needed clarification and elaboration' ('Road to Serfdom', 1976 edn, vii). Not all who criticized Hayek for leaving 'economics proper' were political opponents. Some just did not believe that such questions on the borders of politics, philosophy, and economics lent themselves to academic study, and that they were best discussed over coffee when economists were challenged by sociologists, politicians, or journalists. 
With 'The Road to Serfdom', Hayek achieved what the editor of his collected works subsequently called his 'fifteen minutes of fame', and he was invited in 1946 to give a lecture tour of the United States, where he was not always received as politely as in Britain. Although the book became an international best-seller, Hayek dated his ostracism by many fellow economists to that work, which they shunned as a popular polemic. Nevertheless his critique of 'planning' was more sympathetically received in Britain than it was in America. For instance, one leading British Fabian, Barbara Wootton, took pains to try to show that democratic planning need not be a threat to freedom. Some of Hayek's disciples have, however, made too much of Keynes's letter in which he said that 'morally and philosophically' he was 'in deeply moved agreement' with 'The Road to Serfdom'. More indicative of their underlying differences was Keynes's remark: 'Dangerous acts can be done safely in a community which thinks and feels rightly, which would be the way to hell if they were executed by those who think wrongly' (Keynes, 'The Collected Writings', 27, 1980, 385-8). 
Although no politician, Hayek did indeed try to rally intellectual support. With aid from Swiss and American sympathizers he founded in 1947 the Mont Pelerin group of scholars dedicated to the revival of classical liberalism, of which he was president for the next thirteen years and which continued to meet for the rest of the century and beyond. His most lasting practical legacy was probably the network of free-market think-tanks he helped to inspire all over the world. He later remarked that if he had followed his natural inclination he would eventually have become active in public life; but his migration from one country to another made that impossible. 
To add to his problems, Hayek remarried in controversial circumstances. Owing to some misunderstanding, his youthful first love, Helene Bitterlich, had married someone else, and Hayek himself went on to marry, in 1926, Helene Berta Marie (Hella) von Fritsch (died 1960), with whom he had a daughter, Christina Maria Felicitas ('b'. 1929), and a son, Lorenz Josef Heinrich Erich ('b'. 1934). But when he returned on a private visit to Vienna after the Second World War he found that he was then free to marry Helene Bitterlich, which he did, in 1950, after divorcing his first wife. This led to estrangement from many of his closest associates in London, and especially from Lionel Robbins, whose actions have been condemned by some as an example of 'illiberal liberalism' and explained by others as sympathy for Hayek's first wife. It was this combined personal and professional distancing which helped to explain his move to Chicago, where he went in 1950 to take up a chair of social and moral science established by the interdisciplinary committee on social thought, a post he held until 1962. (He had earlier been turned down by the economics faculty.) 
Hayek's initial years in Chicago saw the publication in book form of two earlier works. 'The Sensory Order' (1952) was the final form of a thesis he had developed in Vienna in the 1920s on philosophical psychology. In oversimplified form, the thesis was that there are inherent limits to the human mind's capacity to understand itself, and that human beings know much more than they can ever explicitly explain. The second book, 'The Counter-Revolution of Science' (1952), was based on wartime papers attacking 'scientism', by which he meant the pitfalls which arise when the social sciences believe they can ape too closely the methods of the natural ones. His scepticism was initially based on the 'Austrian' belief that the data of the social sciences were inherently subjective. In later papers, reproduced in 'Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics' (1967), he shifted his ground -- partly under the influence of Popper -- somewhat away from subjectivity towards the more persuasive one of the 'complexity' of social phenomena. He maintained that the social sciences -- in common with biology -- dealt with complex phenomena which are susceptible only to predictions of pattern and not to specific forecasts. 
For Hayek the cardinal sin of his time was something known under the ungainly label of 'constructivism'. This was akin to what Michael Oakeshott called 'rationalism', and is the error of believing that any order we find in society has been put there by a designing mind -- and can be, accordingly, redesigned from scratch. His continuing concern was 'with the results of human action but not of human intention', a phrase which he took from the Scottish philosopher Adam Ferguson (1723-1816). This led him away from the Benthamite utilitarianism which he had originally imbibed from von Mises, towards a version of rule utilitarianism. 
The main achievement of Hayek's Chicago years was 'The Constitution of Liberty', published in 1960. His concern in that book was for 'that condition of men in which coercion of some by others is reduced as much as is possible' (p. 11). However, he did not in fact provide any easily recognizable criteria for identifying state interventions of the harmful type. The free-market arguments in 'The Road to Serfdom' were based on the incompatibility of central planning with personal liberty. But Hayek now approached the issue indirectly. He argued that the main condition for a free society is what he called 'the rule of law'. By that he meant a presumption in favour of general rules and against discretionary power. He attempted to derive from this conception not only the fundamental political and legal basis, but also the economic policies, of a free society. Many writers of the most diverse political persuasions accepted that general rules were an important protection -- perhaps the most important single protection -- for freedom. But Hayek was criticized for suggesting that general laws were a 'sufficient' condition for a free society. Many policies involving a high degree of coercion can be imposed by general rules -- for example, a ban on the teaching of evolution, or on any literature or music which flouts the principles of Marxism-Leninism. 
There is no one philosopher's stone for minimizing coercion in society. Hayek's concern to restore a government of laws rather than of men can be seen from his later writings, which warned of the degeneration of democracy into a struggle for spoils among competing groups. He saw the source of interest-group domination in what he called majoritarian or unlimited democracy. This is the belief that a government elected by a majority of voters (usually a plurality) should be able to enact what it likes without any check -- a system which Lord Hailsham was to call an 'elective dictatorship'. Some of Hayek's own later constitutional proposals struck even his admirers as far-fetched. But their underlying aim was important. It was to recover an older idea of a state, which has no purposes of its own, but provides a framework of rules and arrangements under which people can pursue their own individual aims without getting in each other's way. This ideal -- which is a long way removed from the practice of any modern government, even of the radical right -- has been labelled by Oakeshott as a 'civil association', as opposed to the more usual idea of the state as an 'enterprise association', with its own aims and purposes. The close similarity of the later work of Hayek and Oakeshott, pursued in relative isolation, is a theme which deserves a study of its own. 
Politics apart, Hayek ascribed his isolation from post-war economics partly to the fact that he never sympathized with either macroeconomics or econometrics. At a time when most go-ahead economists were raring to equip themselves with forecasting models and computer printouts, Hayek, in contrast to Milton Friedman, seemed an armchair thinker, preoccupied with problems such as the limitations of human knowledge. But in the longer haul the contrast did not necessarily tell against Hayek. A disadvantage of late twentieth-century methodological orthodoxy, carefully explained in 'Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics', is that many economists acquired a vested interest in the existence of stable, discoverable, numerical relationships between phenomena such as income and consumption, or short-run changes in the money supply and the price level. Hayek warned that one could not guarantee the successful discovery of such relationships, but that scientific method could still be applied to predict certain general features of interacting systems -- as it is, for instance, in biology and linguistics. Despite his friendship and ideological sympathy with Milton Friedman, he regarded the stress on prediction in Friedman's 'Essays in Positive Economics' as 'quite as dangerous' as anything that Keynes had written ('Hayek on Hayek', 145). 
Although Hayek spent over a decade in Chicago, he never really felt at home in the United States. He was also growing increasingly deaf and had ceased to go to the theatre -- thus leaving mountaineering as his main extra-curricular interest. In 1962 he accepted a professorship of economic policy at the University of Freiburg im Breisgau in Germany, where he enjoyed a pretty free rein. This was followed by a less happy period as a professor at the University of Salzburg from 1969 to 1977; he then returned to Freiburg, where he spent the rest of his days. 
Hayek suffered more than one fit of depression in later life. The first was in 1960, which he ascribed to his cessation of smoking because of a medical false alarm. A subsequent depression occurred in the early 1970s, which he attributed to a doctor erroneously treating him for diabetes. But his disappointment with the initial reception of 'The Constitution of Liberty' and his own recognition that after his seventieth birthday in 1969 his mental powers 'began noticeably to decline' ('Hayek on Hayek', 131) could also have been relevant. 
The award of a Nobel prize for economics in 1974, jointly with the left-inclined Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal, was followed by a rejuvenation. Even that award had its bitter-sweet side. His Nobel address, 'The pretence of knowledge', was rejected by 'Economica', the journal of the LSE of which he had previously been editor; and it was eventually published by the free-market Institute of Economic Affairs. But among political theorists and sociologists, even those critical of the new right, he was studied more seriously than the more fashionable economic technicians. (A good example of such studies is Andrew Gamble, 'The Iron Cage of Liberty', 1996.) 
Hayek's last major work of social philosophy was entitled 'Law, Legislation and Liberty' (3 vols., 1973-9). He originally described it as a tailpiece to 'The Constitution of Liberty'. But what attracted most attention was a postscript in which he ascribed the success of human institutions to their evolutionary success in the struggle for survival. This came dangerously near to justifying whatever system happened to exist -- including by inference the communist order which still prevailed in Russia. Some of his strongest earlier supporters, such as Norman Barry, complained that his previous critical rationalism had been 'almost completely jettisoned in favour of a curious, neo-Darwinistic form of social evolutionism' (Barry, 'Classical Liberalism', 3). 
There were thus great ultimate differences between Hayek and some others who shared a similar outlook. Unlike most classical liberals, Hayek's espousal of liberty turned out to be based neither on ultimate judgements, nor on considerations of welfare, utility, or happiness. He did not even accept the methodological individualism of most mainstream economists. For him, the key to institutions was natural selection among competing traditions. This evolutionary approach remained in the background in the classic politico-economic works of his middle period. But its roots went back to his student reflections on biology. 
Meanwhile, in the world of public affairs, Hayek's return to public attention also owed something to the proclaimed adherence of Margaret Thatcher, Britain's 'radical right' prime minister from 1979 to 1990. It was sometimes said that if she was, as she proclaimed, 'a conviction politician', the convictions were those of Hayek. Yet the conclusion was not quite fair to either. Although the former UK Conservative leader was an admirer, Hayek mainly provided articulation and confirmation of convictions she had already reached. The admiration was reciprocated, yet some saw much in his writings that was at variance with Thatcherite practice. 
Hayek never ceased commenting on topical economic issues. He had always distrusted the idea of purely national currencies floating against each other. In a pre-war work, 'Monetary Nationalism and International Stability' (1937), he came out in favour of a fixed international standard. This would probably be gold, but he had no particular preference for that over any other reference point. During the Second World War he published, in the 'Economic Journal' for 1943, a proposal for an international currency which would be convertible into a basket of commodities on a pre-determined basis. He was here supporting and amplifying similar proposals put forward earlier by Benjamin Graham and Frank D. Graham. Such ideas faded from public view, as the Bretton Woods system developed at the end of the war came to be based on national currencies linked by 'fixed but adjustable' exchange rates. It may or may not be a coincidence (most likely it was common causality) that the breakdown of Bretton Woods coincided with the 'great inflation' of the 1970s, probably the largest peacetime inflation of the twentieth century, apart from the hyperinflations following the two world wars. 
In the 1970s Hayek went on to propose free competition, not only between national currencies, but between privately issued ones as well. This started 'as a bitter joke' directed against what he regarded as the chronic inability of governments to provide sound money. But it led him into the 'fascinating problem of what would happen if money were provided competitively' ('Hayek on Hayek', 150). His analysis of this topic, in 'The Denationalisation of Money' (1978), proved to be his most detailed pronouncement on monetary matters for several decades. A number of economists devoted serious attention to these proposals. Indeed, competition between different official (but not private) currencies was the main alternative put forward by the British government, in various guises, to the plan for a European currency -- the euro -- which was finally launched in 1999. Notions of competitive currencies enjoyed a certain vogue, especially but not only among opponents of European monetary union. But what their exponents could never explain was what prevented this competition from developing in countries such as the UK, where legal tender laws were not restrictive, and people could contract in whatever currencies they chose. 
Much more was likely to be heard of competitive private enterprise currencies during the twenty-first century. The progress of electronic money and instant communication via the internet was a long-term threat to the central bank monopoly of base money -- cash and bank reserves. Electronic transactions could reach a point where the private sector might make settlements 'without the need for clearing through the central bank'. This threatened the whole concept of an official national money, a possibility outlined by the deputy governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, writing in the 'Bank of England Bulletin' (November 1999). 
In 1988 Hayek produced a final book, 'The Fatal Conceit', which some readers found a refreshingly straightforward guide to his teachings. It needs, however, to be stressed that this book emerged near the end of his life, after an illness, and that it was heavily edited by W. Bartley with the aid of a host of scholars apart from Hayek himself. 
Whatever the status of this last volume, Hayek remained to the end much more iconoclastic than his more conventional supporters would have liked. He never subscribed, for instance, to any religious belief; and late in life he reiterated in an interview that he found monotheistic religions more objectionable than some others because they tended to be more intolerant of competition and dissent. As far as the economy was concerned, he never imagined that there was anything just in market rewards. These depended on an unpredictable mixture of effort, ability, and luck. Quite apart from the adverse economic consequences, it was not desirable even to try to reward merit through public policy, which would involve some authority deciding how much pain and effort a task had cost, and how much of a person's achievement was due to outside circumstances. 
Hayek was mainly known in the 1930s for technical studies of monetary, business cycle, and capital theory. These were subsequently overshadowed by the 'Keynesian Revolution', but were being re-examined towards the end of the twentieth century. He had a brief period of fame in some circles and notoriety in others for 'The Road to Serfdom', his tract of 1944 against centralized economic planning in time of peace. He was held to have inspired a controversial election broadcast by Winston Churchill a year later, in which the latter warned of a socialist 'gestapo'. He re-emerged in the public eye in the 1970s and 1980s at a time of widespread disillusion both with Keynesian methods for securing full employment and with the apparently relentless expansion in the role of government. The breakdown of the post-war boom, triggered by the oil price explosion of 1973, was no surprise to Hayek -- except that he had never expected it to last nearly as long as it did. In the last twenty years of the twentieth century many dozens of books and articles on Hayek appeared, although mostly by political theorists and historians of ideas rather than economists. His most important contribution to political and economic philosophy was almost certainly 'The Constitution of Liberty'. 
Hayek's own inability to resolve the ultimate conundrums of human conduct should not obscure the range of his achievements. His writings asserted the case for general rules over discretionary authority. They exposed the misleading identification of liberal democracy with the divine right of temporary majorities. They demonstrated the connection between economic and personal freedoms. They showed that the domination of both the political and economic market place by interest group struggles is a source of evil; and they explained why pecuniary rewards neither can nor should reflect merit. In presenting him as a revered thinker with a complete system, his followers may have made his work neater, simpler, and less interesting than it really was. In all these matters Hayek, like Keynes or Friedman or the American philosopher John Rawls, or other such seminal figures, is best treated as an intellectual iconoclast rather than a pundit with all the answers. 
Hayek died in Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany, on 23 March 1992. He was survived by his second wife, and the two children of his first marriage. A memorial meeting was held at the London School of Economics on 23 September 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51098


Latham, Sir John Greig (1877-1964), politician and judge in Australia, was born on 26 August 1877 in Ascot Vale, then an outlying suburb of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, the eldest of five children (four sons and a daughter) of Thomas Latham, a native-born tinsmith, and his Scottish-born wife, Janet Scott. He was brought up in the Melbourne suburb of Ivanhoe. 
Thomas Latham served as a JP and local councillor, as well as secretary of the Victorian Society for the Protection of Animals, which he founded. He was a devout Methodist who instilled into his children an ethos of hard work and moral rectitude, discernible in John Latham throughout his life. From Gore Street primary school in Fitzroy, inner Melbourne, the serious, studious boy won a scholarship to Scotch College, one of the trio of prestigious private schools set up in Melbourne along denominational -- in its case Presbyterian -- lines. From there a scholarship took him to the University of Melbourne; he graduated BA in 1896 with high distinction in philosophy and logic. Following a period teaching at Hamilton Academy, a private school in rural Victoria, he returned to the university, where he graduated LLB in 1902. He was admitted to the Victorian bar in 1904 and commenced practice in the following year. On 19 December 1907 Latham married, in a Methodist ceremony, Eleanor Mary 
(Ella; died 1964)
, daughter of Richard Tobin of Northcote, Victoria. They had two sons and a daughter. 
Briefs came slowly, and between 1904 and 1920 Latham combined his legal work with teaching at the university: first as resident tutor in logic and philosophy at one of its constituent colleges, then as lecturer in inductive and deductive logic, and finally as lecturer in the law of contract and personal property. He also supplemented his income by writing for the 'Argus', the more conservative of Melbourne's two morning dailies, and in 1908 became Australian correspondent of the staunchly imperialistic London 'Standard'. He served as secretary of the Imperial Federation League's Victorian branch and joined the Victorian group of the Round Table, the think-tank set up by Viscount Milner to explore the link between motherland and dominions. Having rejected his father's Methodism, Latham assisted in 1907 in setting up an Education Act Defence League to oppose teaching scripture in Victoria's state schools. Two years later he helped to found the Rationalist Society of Victoria and subsequently served as its president; until his death he was connected with its successor body, the Rationalist Association of Australia. 
When the First World War broke out Latham volunteered for service and simultaneously held commissions in both the army and navy. In 1915 he became secretary of the Victorian branch of the Universal Service League, crusading vigorously for conscription. Two years later, in the wake of allegations of sabotage in Australia's naval dockyards, he was appointed head of naval intelligence with the honorary rank of lieutenant-commander. As staff officer and adviser to the Australian minister for defence, Sir Joseph Cooke, Latham attended the Imperial Conference in London in 1918. In 1919 he went to the Paris peace conference as assistant secretary of the British empire delegation and as British secretary of the inter-allied commission on Czecho-Slovak affairs. He took part in framing the various classes of mandate, including that under which Australia became responsible for New Guinea. He was also attached to a subcommittee of a commission dealing with the League of Nations, and as such became convinced of the need for Australians to be better informed regarding international affairs. In 1920 he was appointed CMG for his services overseas. 
Having returned to the bar in 1919, Latham saw his practice expand. He specialized in taxation and commercial and arbitration issues, yet important constitutional cases came his way. In 1922 he took silk. In the previous year, owing to his growing involvement in public affairs, he declined appointment as a judge of Victoria's supreme court. Before the war he had been an activist in Alfred Deakin's Liberal Party and in 1918 considered entering federal politics as a National Party member. At Versailles he had conceived an enduring personal and political detestation for prime minister William Morris Hughes, and in 1922 -- campaigning as an independent Liberal Union candidate with the slogan 'Hughes must go' -- he won the federal seat of Kooyong and entered the house of representatives. There the rural-based Country Party held the balance of power; Latham was invited to its deliberations to plot the downfall of Hughes, who resigned early in 1923. Latham's entry into parliament entailed substantial financial sacrifice, and he seemed ill-suited by temperament and attitude for the political maelstrom. He was scholarly, with an austere, aloof manner; he unswervingly refused to compromise his principles for the sake of pragmatism or popularity; he had no empathy with machine politics. That he did not return to the bar once his aim of removing Hughes was accomplished is attributable to his abiding sense of public duty. In debate he commanded from the outset respect for his cogency. But the legacy of voice and elocution lessons taken to overcome a childhood stammer was a stilted, high-pitched way of speaking better suited to a law court than to a parliamentary chamber: it was much ridiculed. Eventually he managed to vary his tone and peppered his speeches with dry witticisms. 
In 1925 Latham joined the Nationalist Party, whose leader, prime minister Stanley Melbourne Bruce, appointed him attorney-general. As such, Latham demonstrated strict impartiality, and he accompanied Bruce in 1926 to the Imperial Conference in London, where he almost collapsed through overwork. He also led the Australian delegation to the League of Nations general assembly in Geneva. As seen in his book 'Australia and the British Commonwealth' (1929), comprising lectures delivered during 1928 at the University of Queensland, he took a cautious approach to the Imperial Conference's attempt to redefine formally the relations between Britain and the dominions. In the federal election of 1929, against a background of worsening economic recession and industrial strife, the Australian Labor Party led by James Scullin was swept to power. Bruce was unseated, and the Nationalist presence in the house of representatives depleted. Latham's sense of public duty induced him reluctantly to accept leadership of the opposition. Harrying the government relentlessly, especially on its inability to fulfil its promises to the electorate, he proved remarkably effective. 
Beset by the great depression and dissension in its ranks, the government suffered a setback with the defection of a prominent figure, Joseph Aloysius Lyons, and four Labor colleagues; they left the party in 1931, having supported a narrowly defeated motion of no confidence in the Scullin administration introduced by Latham. Lyons subsequently became associated with the extra-parliamentary and avowedly non-partisan All for Australia League, the most important among several organizations of concerned citizens formed to counter left-wing extremism with its perceived threats to Australia's security, institutions, and links with Britain. The Nationalists, realizing that they were in danger of being eclipsed by the league as a political force, decided that they should co-operate with Lyons, and authorized Latham to ask Lyons and Country Party leader Earle Page if they would agree to form a single opposition party, with one leader and a common programme. Page demurred, but Lyons agreed, accepting Latham's offer of its leadership on condition that the Nationalists unanimously concurred. This they did, and Lyons's praise for Latham's readiness to place the nation's welfare above his personal aggrandizement was widely echoed in non-Labor circles. 
The resultant United Australia Party was formed in May 1931 and, having won the December federal election, took office in January 1932 with Lyons as prime minister. Latham -- deputy prime minister, attorney-general, minister for external affairs, and minister for industry -- played a major part in formulating policy. Among his contributions were the 'Financial Agreement Enforcement Act', the 'Crimes Act', and the 'Transport Workers Act'. He ensured that certain sections of the statute of Westminster should not apply to Australia until specifically endorsed by the federal parliament (which occurred under John Curtin's Labor government in 1942). In 1932 he represented Australia at the League of Nations and attended the Geneva disarmament conference as well as the Lausanne conference on reparations. He was appointed privy councillor in 1933. A steadfast champion of the white Australia policy, he was nevertheless keen to develop his nation's links with south-east Asia and in 1934 led a goodwill mission to countries of that region, the first such tour undertaken by an Australian minister for external affairs. Latham retired from politics later that year and was appointed GCMG. He became chief justice of the high court of Australia in October 1935 and served until April 1952. From 1940 to 1941 he concurrently held the post of Australian minister to Japan, but since he arrived in Tokyo after that nation's pact with the axis powers had been concluded his effectiveness was blunted. As chief justice he took a strictly legalistic view of constitutional problems and was deeply interested in constitutional reform, especially in the industrial sphere. He was much concerned with issues relating to the defence power of the federal government in war and in peace. Sometimes, as in his final important case, the 'Communist Party Case' of 1951, his judgment differed from that of his colleagues. Following his retirement he testified before the joint committee on the constitution (appointed 1956, reported 1958). 
Latham died in the Melbourne inner suburb of Richmond on 25 July 1964. Despite his rationalist views, the cremation was preceded by a funeral service at Wesley Church. His wife had predeceased him by four months. Of his children, Richard Thomas Edwin (1909-1943), a fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and author of 'The Law and the Commonwealth' (1937), was killed while serving in the Royal Air Force; Winifred Mary (Freda) died in 1953; and Peter Greig, a lieutenant-colonel, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51099


Davidson, Harold Francis (1875-1937), Church of England clergyman and circus performer, was born on 14 July 1875 at Sholing House in the suburbs of Southampton, the son of the Revd Francis Davidson and his wife, Alice Selina Augusta Hodgkin. From the age of six he attended Banister Court School, Southampton, going on to Whitgift School, Croydon, early in 1890. Despite his father's desire that he should become a clergyman, Davidson wanted to go on the stage, and got his first role in a comedy sketch at the Steinway Hall in London in 1895. He nevertheless decided to seek ordination and gained admission to Exeter College, Oxford, despite a lack of formal qualifications. 
Davidson's academic performance continued to be disappointing: forced to leave Exeter College in March 1901, he was nevertheless allowed to persevere with his studies at Grindle's Hall, Oxford, and finally obtained a degree. Contemporaries noted that he had pictures of actresses on the walls of his room, and that he continued to undertake occasional theatrical engagements. His connections were undoubtedly excellent, however, as he served as curate in prestigious parishes; first, Holy Trinity, Windsor, and then from 1905 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. In May 1906 Davidson was appointed to the living of Stiffkey-with-Morston in Norfolk. With an income of perhaps $800 p.a. he was able on 9 October 1906 to marry an Irish actress, Moyra (Molly) Cassandra ('b'. 1878/9), the daughter of Michael James Joseph Saurin. They had two boys and two girls. 
Molly Davidson had a strong temper, and made her feelings known about the 'waifs and strays' with whom Davidson increasingly populated the large vicarage. Their fourth child was born while Davidson was serving as a naval chaplain during the First World War: he later admitted knowing that the child was not his. In addition, despite the income of the rectory, it never proved enough to fund all of Davidson's activities; and he unfortunately fell into the clutches of a swindler called Arthur John Gordon, whose dubious financial schemes continued to cast a shadow over the vicar of Stiffkey until his death. In October 1925 Davidson was forced to file for bankruptcy: the settlement with his creditors disposed of much of the income of the rectory for years to come. 
In the early 1920s Davidson began spending more time in London. With his bishop's permission, he undertook a ministry as a chaplain, accredited to the Actors' Church Union, in and around the theatres of the West End of London. In that twilight world he seems to have been especially drawn to vulnerable women, often as young as fifteen or sixteen years old. He realized that such girls, working as assistants in shops or as 'nippies' in Lyons teashops or ABC restaurants, were easily led into casual prostitution. He later recalled having saved such a teenager from drowning herself in the Thames, adding that 'I have ever since, whenever I had any spare time in town, kept my eyes open for opportunities to help that type of girl, namely, the country girl stranded on the alluring streets of London' (Cullen, 32). It became a consuming, if, perhaps, innocent, passion; but his need to seek out and maintain such relationships increasingly dominated his life. Living in rented rooms and battling with suspicious landladies over unpaid rent, Davidson would often return to Stiffkey only at the weekend; but he remained a popular incumbent. 
'I was picking up roughly, as my diaries show, an average of 150 or 200 girls a year', Davidson later recalled (Cullen, 129). There is no doubt that Davidson actively approached likely girls (many of whom gave him the brush-off, as he did not always wear his clerical collar). He may at times have seemed a pest, but there is little evidence of wrongdoing: he would take them for a cup of tea and get them theatre tickets; would listen to their problems, and through his influential contacts, help them with accommodation and employment. Davidson found places in domestic service for some of those he befriended: others successfully made careers on the stage before marrying. He paid for Rose Ellis -- later his chief accuser -- to receive medical treatment for syphilis. 
In the summer of 1931, for reasons which are still not entirely clear, the bishop of Norwich decided to take action: a firm of private detectives was hired to collect evidence of Davidson's 'slackness'. Rose Ellis, who was to be the key prosecution witness, proved willing to testify that for several nights they had slept in the same room, and that he had once tried to have 'connection' with her. Presented with the evidence, the bishop of Norwich decided to press charges that Davidson had offended against public morality under the 1892 'Clergy Discipline Act' by adultery and accosting young women in London. Supported by his wife and family, Davidson determined to fight the case. It is hard not to believe him when he protested to his bishop that his activities, if not perhaps seemly in the eyes of 'the icebergs of chastity', were still worthy of a man in holy orders (Cullen, 141). 'For years I have been known as the Prostitute's Padre', he wrote, and it was 'the proudest title that a true priest of Christ can hold' (ibid., 13). 
The consistory court hearing, which opened at Church House, Westminster, on 29 March 1932, was given immense coverage in the press. Newspaper articles were filled with salacious details of Davidson's dealings with young women: the fact that he had keys to their rooms, and often called to see them late at night, being especially heinous in the eyes of the prosecution. Most of the evidence proved to be inconclusive and, but for a startling 'coup de theatre', the prosecution might have failed. However, a shocking photograph was produced of Davidson with a fifteen-year-old girl standing with her back to the camera: although clutching a black shawl, it revealed she was naked. 
One newspaper led with the headline 'Nude photo bombshell', and it turned opinion against Davidson. His protestations that he had been 'entrapped' by two press photographers were in all likelihood true. Offered money for posing with one of his young fifteen-year-old friends, he may naively have believed that publicity photos would be beneficial after the trial. The verdict of the court on 8 July surprised no one: guilty on all five counts of immoral conduct. Although formally deprived of his holy orders, Davidson continued to protest his innocence, and appealed twice to the privy council. He also tried to state his case at a meeting of the church assembly in 1936: Cosmo Gordon Lang, the archbishop of Canterbury, told him he had no right to speak. 
Notoriety unfortunately dogged Davidson until his tragic death. Faced with the need for another source of income, and showing how deep-seated was his theatrical bent, Davidson decided to use his reputation to draw the crowds at fairgrounds and circuses. He was first employed as part of the freak show on Blackpool's golden mile, and was exhibited in a barrel or roasted in a glass oven while a devil prodded him with a pitchfork. 'While I am in the barrel I shall be occupied in preparing my case' he told the press (Parris, 'The Times'). In 1937, as his popularity was starting to wane, Davidson was forced to sign up with a menagerie at Skegness amusement park. Billed as 'A modern Daniel in a lion's den', he was expected to enter a cage holding two lions, and talk for ten minutes about the lack of justice in his case. Unfortunately, Davidson was badly mauled by one of the lions on 28 July. He was rescued, but died on 30 July 1937, in Skegness. He was buried in the churchyard at Stiffkey. 
What exactly motivated the vicar of Stiffkey will never be known. A judicious leading article in the 'Church Times', soon after the verdict, criticized the way the trial was handled, but also stressed that Davidson was 'foolish and eccentric' (Cullen, 171). Recent studies suggest he suffered from 'multiple personalities', but do not entirely do justice to the curious mixture of the sacred and profane in his life. A. J. P. Taylor remarked in 'English History, 1914-1945' (1975) that the case was 'the sensation of the decade', and that he attracted more attention while he lived than Archbishop Cosmo Gordon Lang. 'Which man deserves a greater place in the history books?', asked Taylor (p. 316). What is still clear is that the vicar of Stiffkey was indeed foolish and eccentric, both in his life and in the manner of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 51101


Bancroft, William James (1871-1959), rugby player and cricketer, was born on 2 March 1871 in the Carmarthen Arms, Waterloo Street, Swansea, Glamorgan, the eldest of the eleven children of William Bancroft (1848-1906), cobbler and cricket professional, and his wife, Emma Jones. At two years of age William junior went to live with his grandfather in the groundsman's cottage in the south-west corner of St Helen's football and cricket field in Swansea (he attended St Helen's elementary school). He lived there until his marriage in 1892 to Harriet Florence Turner (died 1934), with whom he had four daughters and three sons. 
Reared in the atmosphere of the famous rugby ground, Bancroft came into regular contact with footballers and cricketers, and by the age of sixteen was playing rugby for the local Excelsiors. He soon progressed via the established Bryn-y-mor team to the senior Swansea side, for whom he played his first game against Newport on 5 October 1889. After only seventeen games with 'the whites' he won his first international cap, without a trial, when the player originally selected, Newport's Tom England, broke his leg and was forced to withdraw. Bancroft stepped in to make his debut against Scotland at Cardiff Arms Park on 1 February 1890, and went on to win an uninterrupted sequence of thirty-three caps, a record for a Welsh full-back not broken until 1975, by J. P. R. Williams. 
Known variously as Billy, Banky, or W. J., Bancroft captained the Swansea club in 1893-4 and for a further five seasons between 1896 and 1901 in a playing career that ended only in 1905 when he received a testimonial of $322 from his admirers. By then he was recognized as one of the leading Welsh sportsmen of his time. He captained Wales on eleven occasions and was the first Welsh player to be a member of two triple crown sides, those of 1893 and 1900. In 1893 on the occasion of England's first ever visit to Cardiff Arms Park, his combination of total self-confidence and assiduously practised goal-kicking enabled him to drop-kick a last-minute penalty goal virtually from the touchline to score a 12-11 victory and set Wales on the road to its first triple crown. He took every free kick, penalty, and conversion awarded to Wales between 1890 and 1901, scoring sixty points in all. 
At 5 feet 51/2 inches in height, and weighing little over 10 stones -- albeit 'ten stones of fencing wire fitted with the electricity of life' according to the 'Bristol Evening News' in January 1903 (Farmer, 71) -- Bancroft was not best equipped to meet the stern defensive requirements of the full-back position. But he was sturdier than he looked, and this, allied to speed and 'a cock-sureness that terrified selectors and aggravated anxious spectators' (Owen), more than compensated. Reckoned to be the fastest man over 25 yards in the Swansea team, he possessed a change of pace, a sidestep, and a sharp eye for an opening. He also had a rare ability to kick long and accurately from the hand while running at speed; he was perhaps the first running full-back the game had seen, even if his running was aimed more at tiring the opposition than linking with his team-mates. His favourite ploy was to tease lumbering forwards into chasing him from one side of the field to the other until he eventually banged the ball into touch over their exhausted heads. Well groomed and dapper, even something of a dandy with his trim moustache and jaunty walk, he was the inevitable target of less fastidious opponents, and when the boisterous Ryan brothers eventually caught him in the Irish match at Cardiff in 1899, they threw him into the crowd, cracking a few of his ribs in the process. 
Like his father, Bancroft played cricket as well as rugby for Swansea. Both his father and his grandfather were professional cricketers with the Swansea club, established in 1850, and Bancroft himself became in 1895 the first regular professional to be employed, at $2 a week to supplement his meagre income as a cobbler, by the recently founded (1889) Glamorgan County Cricket Club. His quick reflexes and sure catching at full-back in rugby owed a good deal to the safe hands of the cricketer who enjoyed fielding in suicide positions close to the wicket. A right-handed batsman, medium-paced bowler, and wicket-keeper, he was a fine all-rounder whose services were crucial to Glamorgan's survival in the minor counties' championship in the early 1900s. In a cricketing career of 230 matches between 1889 and 1914 he scored over 8000 runs, making his first-class debut in June 1910 for the west of England at Cardiff, and playing for south Wales against the South African tourists at Swansea in June 1912. He retained his association with St Helen's after retiring by opening a sports shop close to the ground, and in the inter-war years acting as steward in the members' enclosure, invariably sitting at the bottom of the pavilion steps. 
William's brother Jack Bancroft (1879-1942) followed him in playing cricket for Glamorgan from 1908 to 1922 and winning thirteen caps for Wales at full-back between 1908 and 1912, scoring 88 points. When the writer A. A. Thomson told a Welsh friend that as a boy he had 'seen and admired the great Bancroft' in 1912, he was told in return that 'maybe the man you saw was wonderful... but he was not the great Bancroft. He was merely the great Bancroft's little brother.' Thomson concluded that 'if W. J. was all that better than J. he must have had wings as well' (Thomson, 59). Bancroft died at the house of his eldest son, Reginald, Killeen, Higher Lane, Langland, Swansea, on 3 March 1959 and was buried at Oystermouth three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 51104


Green, Aaron Levy (1821-1883), rabbi, was born in Middlesex Street (popularly known as Petticoat Lane), Aldgate, London, in August 1821, the youngest of the eight children of Levy Ephraim Green (1784-1858), a local tradesman, and his wife, Amelia Hyams (1779-1854). He was educated at the 'Talmud Torah' section of the Jews' Free School in Bell Lane, Spitalfields. He became a leading member of the generation of English-born preachers who transformed the profession of a Jewish minister from that of a mere servant of the congregation and reader of services, spoken entirely in Hebrew, to that of a leader of the congregation, whose sabbath sermons in English became an integral part of public worship. 
A precocious pupil, Green had a fine voice, and at the age of fourteen was permitted to conduct a service in the Great Synagogue, Duke's Place, London. In May 1838, three months before his seventeenth birthday, he was appointed minister to the Bristol community. On 31 July 1844 he married Phoebe Levy, a native of Bristol, who cried throughout the ceremony -- occasioned, it was later discovered, not by emotion but by an oncoming attack of measles. They had seven sons and five daughters, all of whom survived him. Though a great success at Bristol, he felt that his talent required greater scope, and in 1851 applied for and secured the post of second reader at the Great Synagogue, Duke's Place. He remained there until his appointment in June 1854 to the prestigious post of reader and preacher at the newly established West End branch of the Great Synagogue in Great Portland Street, where he served for the remainder of his life. It was a wealthy congregation, and there was scarcely a communal institution, charitable or educational, whose honorary officers did not belong to the synagogue, and he acted as almoner for many of their charitable donations. 
In addition to his ministerial duties Green threw himself wholeheartedly into the work of communal institutions involved in education, religious culture, and the state of the Jewish poor. A supporter of the establishment of Jews' College, he served as its honorary secretary from 1859 until his death. His library of about 6000 books, his most cherished possession, was donated to the college after his death and formed the nucleus around which the library expanded. He was an instigator of the industrial department and visitation committee of the Jewish Board of Guardians, a founder of the Jewish Association for the Diffusion of Religious Knowledge, a member of the council of the Anglo-Jewish Association, and was on the committee of the Mansion House Relief Fund. His firm friendship with Professor David Marks of the Reform synagogue smoothed away many of the differences that divided the Orthodox from the Reformers. 
A brilliant columnist, Green's impressive contributions to the 'Jewish Chronicle' under the pseudonym Nemo were widely discussed and particularly influential. Though he could be impatient with those slower of thought, and particularly those slower of action, and sometimes showed it, by 1870 he had established himself as a figure of outstanding authority in the community. Though his formal education ended before he was seventeen, he never ceased to be a student. He devoted his nights mostly to the study of Jewish learning, and once a month stayed up all night to review his studies of the previous four weeks. 
Green died unexpectedly on 11 March 1883 at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and was buried three days later at Willesden Jewish cemetery in a grave adjacent to the one he had consecrated on the morning of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 51105


Haffkine, Waldemar Mordecai Wolff (1860-1930), zoologist and bacteriologist, born Vladimir Aronovich Chavkin in Odessa, Russia, on 15 March 1860, was the son of Aaron and Rosalie Chavkin (died 'c'.1866), members of a Jewish merchant family formerly of Landsberg. Shortly after his mother's death, which occurred when Haffkine was only six, the family moved to Berdyansk, 300 miles from Odessa, where his father found employment as a schoolteacher. After early education at home and at the county school in Berdyansk, in 1872 Haffkine entered the 'Gymnasium' at Berdyansk. Here he excelled in both sports and academic subjects, showing a particular aptitude for natural sciences -- the subject he later chose to study at Novorossiysk (later Odessa) University from 1879 to 1883. During his time at Odessa, Haffkine came under the formative guidance of the zoologist and pioneer of immunology Ilya Mechnikov, with whom Haffkine was later to collaborate. He also became active in politics, joining a populist-socialist revolutionary organization called Narodnaya Volya ('Will of the people'). 
Haffkine remained at Odessa until 1888, obtaining a position in the Zoological Museum, but since he refused to be baptized into the Christian faith there was no prospect of his ever obtaining a university professorship in Russia. Indeed, a series of pogroms against Jews in southern Russia -- some of which affected Haffkine personally -- induced him to emigrate to Switzerland; his mentor, Mechnikov, had left for Paris earlier that year. Haffkine remained in Geneva for one year, where he taught at the university medical school. In 1889 he joined Mechnikov at the Institut Pasteur, though in the junior capacity of assistant librarian. However, he was able here to pursue his interest in the hereditary characteristics of unicellular organisms, and published work on the protozoan 'Paramecium' in the 'Annals de l'Institut Pasteur'. 
While at the institute Haffkine became interested in bacteriological research and particularly in immunization against cholera. In 1892 he published a brief paper in which he demonstrated that immunity could be induced in animals by inoculating them with attenuated cholera bacilli. By July he had conducted successful experiments on human subjects, including himself, thus raising the possibility of preventing one of the most dreaded diseases of the nineteenth century. News of Haffkine's work spread quickly and soon came to the notice of Lord Dufferin, a former viceroy of India. Dufferin wrote to the secretary of state for India requesting that Haffkine be permitted to pursue his studies in what was regarded by many as the 'home' of the disease. 
Haffkine arrived in Calcutta in 1893. After injecting himself and four Indian doctors, he was able to induce some villagers in the cholera belt of Bengal to come forward for inoculation. Encouraged by his early success he set off on an expedition through northern India which was to last almost two and a half years. However, he met with far more opposition than he had anticipated, not only from the Indian population, which was often suspicious of Western medicine, but also from the Indian Medical Service (IMS), whose members were dubious about the efficacy of his inoculation (which was then, as now, far from completely effective). Medical scepticism was reinforced by racial prejudice and Haffkine's Jewish-Russian origins made him doubly suspect in the eyes of the Anglo-Indian establishment. While touring the North-Western Provinces Haffkine was denounced by some newspapers as a Russian spy. He found that his only true friend and supporter in India was the health officer of Calcutta, W. J. Simpson, who had achieved almost pariah status in Calcutta through his trenchant criticisms of both the government and the Indian-dominated municipal corporation. 
Despite the limited success of mass inoculation in India, Haffkine was persuaded to continue, and tens of thousands were inoculated before his work was interrupted in 1896. But while he received support at the highest level, there remained considerable antipathy towards him and his methods. This became evident when he was called upon to investigate the plague epidemic which swept India following its first appearance in Bombay in the summer of 1896. Haffkine established a plague laboratory at Grant Medical College, Bombay, and began to work on a vaccine to prevent the disease using the same immunological principles which underlay his inoculation against cholera. This time, however, Haffkine found that immunity could be conferred by using killed bacilli, rather than merely attenuated ones -- a method which was subsequently to be used by Almroth Wright in his inoculation against typhoid. By December the vaccine was ready, and Haffkine's success in immunizing rats against the disease was published in a scientific paper in the following year. By January 1897 Haffkine was confident enough to test the vaccine on himself, and in the coming months successful trials were conducted in prisons and among Indian volunteers. Advocates of inoculation were also cheered by the report of the Indian plague commission, in 1900, which concluded that Haffkine's inoculation 'can and does exercise an immune effect' and that there had been no sign of any serious side-effects. 
However, the report of the plague commission did little to reassure sceptics that the vaccine was safe and effective. Even those who admitted its efficacy warned against relying too heavily on inoculation, and continued to urge more general sanitary reforms. They pointed out, quite reasonably, that it was not feasible to inoculate the entire population of India in time to prevent the spread of the disease. There was also considerable hostility among Indians to the idea of inoculation and initial reservations deepened after November 1902 following a tragic incident in the village of Malkowal in the Punjab, where 19 out of 107 villagers developed tetanus after inoculation and later died. A commission appointed by the government of India found that the vaccine had been infected before the bottles had reached Malkowal, which led many to conclude (rather too readily) that this had occurred at Haffkine's laboratory. 
The Malkowal incident left Haffkine a disappointed if not broken man. He left India in 1904 with the controversy still hanging over him, though Simpson -- now editor of the 'Journal of Tropical Medicine' -- and prominent bacteriologists in London had taken up the cudgels on Haffkine's behalf. Firm evidence against Haffkine and the Bombay laboratory was not found, and in 1907 he was invited to return to India. This he did, but cut a solitary and unhappy figure until retiring in 1914. The remainder of his life was spent in Europe, and he lived in Paris until moving to Lausanne, two years before his death. He died there aged seventy on 25 October 1930. Although not by upbringing a religious man, Haffkine had become a devout Orthodox Jew in later life and had contributed generously to the endowment of Jewish schools in eastern Europe. Never fully recognized during his lifetime, his contribution to health care in India was nevertheless memorialized in 1925 when the government of Bombay renamed the plague laboratory as the Haffkine Institute -- a name it retained to the end of the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 51106


Jacobs, Joseph (1854-1916), historian and folklorist, was born on 29 August 1854 in Sydney, New South Wales, the son of John Jacobs and his wife, Sarah. After attending Sydney grammar school and the University of Sydney, he journeyed to Britain and, in 1873, after a short spell at London University, entered St John's College, Cambridge. While at Cambridge, Jacobs stayed with the family of future Anglo-Jewish historian and foreign affairs activist Lucien Wolf. It was an association that was to prove fruitful. In the early 1880s the two joined the group of north-west London Jewish intellectuals known as the Wanderers -- which in 1891 became the Maccabeans -- and in 1887 collaborated on the Anglo-Jewish Historical Exhibition and its accompanying catalogue; the following year they jointly produced the 'Bibliotheca Anglo-Judaica'. 
After graduating from Cambridge as a senior moralist, Jacobs, 'the prince of goodfellows', as Israel Zangwill later described him ('Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England', 131), spent a year in Berlin studying under the renowned Jewish scholars Moritz Lazarus and Moritz Steinschneider. On returning to Britain he furthered his interests in human development as a student of the eugenist Sir Francis Galton. Jacobs then proceeded to carry out a phenological and demographic study of English Jews as a means of confirming his theory that environment rather than biology was the determining factor in the development of racial characteristics. During the 1880s Jacobs published his findings in a series of articles in the 'Jewish Chronicle' which he later compiled into two volumes: 'Studies in Jewish Statistics' (1891) and 'Statistics of the Jewish Population in London' (1894). 
Parallel with his scientific studies, the polymath Jacobs was developing his literary talents. He served as secretary of the Society of Hebrew Literature between 1878 and 1884, having in June 1877 published his first literary essay, a study of George Eliot's 'Daniel Deronda', in 'Macmillan's Magazine'. Subsequently he published in 'The Athenaeum' several articles and obituaries -- on Matthew Arnold, Robert Browning, and John Henry Newman -- and 'with efficient editorship and masterpieces of introduction' ('Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England', 132) edited several classics, including Jane Austen's 'Emma' and the 'Arabian Nights'. 
However, Jacobs never lost sight of the Jewish past and present. In 1888 he visited Spain -- one of the first Jews to do so since the expulsion -- and returned with over 1700 documents, which he published as 'An Inquiry into the Sources of Spanish-Jewish History' (1893). That he won the approval of the elite in Spain is confirmed by his appointment as a corresponding member of the Royal Spanish Academy. Jacobs was also an ardent student of English Jewish history, and was a founder member and one-time president of the Jewish Historical Society of England. He believed that the Jewish experience, particularly in the historical context, was only one part of a much wider picture and should always be viewed as such. To this end he published a number of articles on the Jews of medieval England in the 'Jewish Quarterly Review' and the 'Jewish Chronicle', together with a book on 'The Jews of Angevin England' (1893). 
The plight of Jewish people in the modern world was not neglected. In January 1882 Jacobs published articles in 'The Times' appealing for an end to the persecution of the Jews and the pogroms which had followed the assassination of Tsar Alexander II in 1881; the attention these pieces attracted resulted in the setting up of the Mansion House Committee and Fund to help the Jews of Russia. During the 1880s Jacobs became increasingly aware of the rising tide of 'anti-alien' feeling in England, which coincided with the influx of immigrants from eastern Europe. He sought to dispel some of the myths and stereotyping that were part of the diasporic baggage by producing a volume which would demonstrate that once assimilated Jews made a valuable contribution at all levels of society. The first 'Jewish Year Book' appeared in 1896. It was a celebratory and didactic volume in which successful Jews -- by birth and/or association -- were listed in a style reminiscent of 'Burke's Peerage'. Jacobs's apprehensions about antisemitism continued and in 1914 he requested a meeting with G. K. Chesterton to discuss the latter's antisemitic publications and statements. 
Joseph Jacobs was a westernized citizen of the Mosaic persuasion who saw no conflict between nationality and religion. Pursuing this belief, and as a way of 'ironing out the ghetto bends', in 1897, together with Leopold Greenberg (editor of the 'Jewish Chronicle', 1907-31), he launched 'Young Israel', a monthly journal for Jewish youth which combined 'the ideals of Englishmen with Jewish values' (Cesarani, 107). Jacobs's separation of the temporal and the spiritual is evident in his attitude to political Zionism and its advocate Theodore Herzl. Jacobs considered that Herzl 'was out of touch with the soul and faith of the Jewish people', and that on a personal level he was 'paltry and materialistic' ('Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England', 142). 
In spite of his prolific output, Jacobs still found time to marry Georgina Horne, and they had three children. Perhaps it was the presence of young children around him that encouraged the scholarly Jacobs to turn his attention to the world of folklore and fairy tales. In 1888 he published 'The Earliest English Version of the Fables of Bedpai' and one year later an edition of Caxton's 'Fables of Aesop'. In 1890, with 'English Fairy Tales', he began a series which was to include 'Celtic Fairy Tales' (1892), 'Indian Fairy Tales' (1892), 'More English Fairy Tales' (1893), and 'More Celtic Fairy Tales' (1894). Jacobs was honorary secretary of the International Folklore Council and editor of 'Folklore Magazine'. His work appealed to all ages; as Zangwill said of this side of his talent, his 'books delighted equally the nursery and the drawing room' ('Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England', 138). His final folklore work, 'Europa's Fairy Book', appeared in 1916. 
In 1896 Jacobs published a collection of his essays on Jewish history and philosophy under the title 'Jewish Ideals'. In that same year he went on a lecture tour of America, where he visited Philadelphia, New York, and Chicago. Four years later that 'laughing joking man always with new projects and theories to pursue' ('Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England', 148) emigrated with his family to New York to take up the position of reviewing editor of the 'Jewish Encyclopaedia', a post he held until 1905. He contributed 400 articles to the work and, in 1906, published a companion under the title 'The Jewish Encyclopaedia: a Guide to its Contents, an Aid to its Use'. This was followed by a six-year professorial appointment as English and rhetoric professor at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York. In 1908 Jacobs became a member of the board of editors of the Jewish Publication Society and, in 1913, took on a full-time appointment as editor of the 'American Hebrew', a position he held until his death. In 1915 Jacobs edited the 'American Jewish Year Book'. His final literary work, 'Jewish Contribution to Civilisation', was published posthumously in 1919. 
Joseph Jacobs was a man of intellect and humour, of insight and scholarliness. A humanist who was always 'bubbling over with fun' ('Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of England', 131), he could be scientific 'yet as simple and fresh as a child' (ibid., 140). He had perhaps too many interests; and concentration on one theme, one topic or one discipline, might have produced a weightier, more intellectually reputed and acknowledged scholar and elicited greater respect for his 'Wissenschaft des Judentums'. But it would have denied many the joy of his folklore, the benefit of his historical and scientific research and analysis, the urgency of his concerns, and the enthusiasm which he gave to every project. 
On 30 January 1916, following a bout of pneumonia, Joseph Jacobs died of heart failure at his home in New Rochelle, New York. He was buried in Mount Hope cemetery, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 51107


Joseph, Morris David (1848-1930), Jewish minister and theologian, was born on 28 May 1848 at 17 Green Street, Long Acre, London, one of the seven children (four girls and three boys) of David Joseph and his wife, Amelia Levi. The son of a schoolmaster who was also the minister of Maiden Lane Synagogue in central London, Morris Joseph spent his professional life as a member of the Jewish clergy, following a path which travelled from Orthodox to Progressive Judaism. 
Joseph was educated at the Westminster Jews' Free School, a co-educational school located in the heart of London's Soho district. From there he graduated to Jews' College, a seminary which was established in 1855 following a proposal by the chief rabbi, Nathan Adler, for the setting up of a college where aspiring rabbis in Britain could receive the 'requisite theological and scholastic education and the necessary preparation for their future offices' (Lipman, 24). It was during his time at Jews' College, under the tutelage of the principal, Dr Michael Friedlander, that the young Joseph developed his love of learning. Following his period at the college Joseph -- who did not receive 'semichah' (the ordination of rabbi) -- was appointed minister-secretary to the newly established Orthodox North London Synagogue, situated in the comfortable working- and middle-class area of Barnsbury. 
On 30 October 1872, while still at North London, Joseph married Frances Amelia Henry (1851-1914), daughter of Michael Henry, a merchant, the marriage ceremony being performed by Chief Rabbi Adler. Two years later Joseph took up the post of minister to the Orthodox, though progressive, Old Hebrew Congregation of Liverpool, which had just moved to its newly opened synagogue in the city's Princes Road. A previous incumbent of the post had been David Woolf Marks, who in 1841 left Liverpool to become first minister of the newly created West London Synagogue of British Jews. Joseph was to follow in Professor Marks's footsteps yet again when, in 1893, he was appointed senior minister of west London when Marks stepped down. It was while at Liverpool that Joseph developed the oratorical and intellectual skills for which he became renowned. Sadly his term in office in Liverpool was cut short. In 1881 he was forced to return to London and enter into semi-retirement due to ill health. But these were no years in the wilderness: he wrote regularly for the 'Jewish Chronicle' and taught homiletics at Jews' College, while freedom from the demands of clerical office enabled him to sit back and examine his beliefs and determine his future direction. 
By 1890, fully restored to good health, Joseph was eager to re-enter his chosen profession. He began by arranging religious services for those Jews who had moved to the rarefied and intellectual middle-class pastures of Hampstead in north-west London, an area at that time void of synagogues. He organized a series of sabbath afternoon services which began at 3 p.m. at the Town Hall, Broadhurst Gardens, West Hampstead; these attracted Jews of all shades of opinion. Joseph tried to combat the growth of religious apathy within the Jewish community, many members of which perceived Orthodox Judaism as medieval and the cause of gradual intellectual alienation. He recognized that there was a need to inject spiritual uplift into the services while at the same time bowing to progress, although he stopped short of accepting the suggestion of a shared Christian-Jewish service. 
It was Joseph's modernism, his concern about the 'melting away' (Joseph, ix), and his support for the use of instrumental music at sabbath services that determined his future and the appointment which was to be his for the remainder of his active life. In 1892 an Orthodox synagogue was opened in Hampstead. It was a foregone conclusion that Joseph would apply for, and be appointed to, the position of minister. However, his published views, which were at variance with traditional Judaism, resulted in the new chief rabbi, Hermann Adler, refusing to sanction the appointment. The rejection coincided with the semi-retirement of David Woolf Marks, now senior minister of the West London Synagogue of British Jews. Joseph was encouraged to apply for the post at the same time as a collection of his Saturday afternoon service sermons was published under the title 'The Ideal in Judaism' (1893). In the volume Joseph's beliefs in a return to Israel without the restoration of the sacrifices and that the 'Messiah is always moving amongst us' received a public airing, as did his conviction that 'True religion is reason'. While the collection of sermons was favourably reviewed by the national press and an article in the 'Jewish Chronicle' pronounced the sermons to be powerful aids to devotional faith and practical Judaism, the members of the West London Synagogue reacted to the publication with mixed feelings. Some were approving but others were sceptical, stating that the sermons were 'interesting but not Jewish' (Kershen and Romain, 112-13). However, when the other contender for the position, the Revd Simeon Singer, dropped out of the running these concerns were overruled and Joseph was appointed senior minister to the West London Synagogue of British Jews. 
In his inaugural sermon Joseph called upon his congregants to 'be devoted to the principles of enlightened religion'. He also stated his intention to narrow the rift between Reform and Orthodox Jewry which had been a distressing facet of the Jewish community's life for the past fifty years ('Jewish Chronicle', 15 September 1893). That he achieved this latter aim was manifest when, in 1911, he was given the honour of delivering the 'hesped' (memorial sermon) at Chief Rabbi Hermann Adler's funeral. 
Joseph served west London as senior minister until 1925, during which time he earned a reputation as a 'forceful and lucid preacher' who was 'no orator in the ordinary sense' but a man whose sermons were 'literary gems' ('Jewish Chronicle', 25 April 1930). These sermons were published in a series of volumes: 'The Ideal in Judaism' (1893), 'Judaism as a Creed' (1903), 'The Message of Judaism' (1907), and 'The Spirit of Judaism' (1930). In addition to the published volumes of sermons Joseph wrote articles for the 'Jewish Quarterly Review', 'Jewish Chronicle', and the 'Hastings Encyclopaedia of Religion', and translated the introduction to the 'Rokeach' (a collection of medieval religious writings). Joseph also took a concerned interest in current affairs and to this end, in 1895, established the West London Synagogue Association as a 'religious and philanthropic Centre and as a forum for debate of topical issues' (Kershen and Romain, 124). 
Joseph personified the Englishman who followed the Mosaic religion. He was determined that immigrant eastern European Jews should become part of the mainstream as rapidly as possible; indeed he saw it as their duty to do so. In the same way he was totally opposed to the concept of political Zionism, and 'abhorred the notion of a nationalist Jewish state' (Kershen and Romain, 116). Anti-Zionism created strange bedfellows: Chief Rabbi Adler and the Revd Morris Joseph joined forces to attack pro-Zionists at the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, and London. In addition to his anti-Zionist beliefs Joseph was a pacifist and chairman of the Jewish Peace Society. He was also a member of the executive committee of the League of Religions and sat on the council of the Metropolitan Hospital Sunday Fund. 
Joseph retired from the West London Synagogue in 1925, aged seventy-seven. He lived for a further five years and though denied the pleasure of grandchildren, as he and his wife were childless, he was cared for by devoted nieces and nephews, his wife having died in 1914. He died at his home, 11 Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 17 April 1930 from carcinoma of the bladder, and was buried on 21 April at the Golders Green Jewish cemetery, Middlesex. He was remembered as 'a scholar in the finest sense of the word', as a 'lover of peace', and 'a man of optimism whose oratory was most outstanding'. In his eulogy at the burial the Revd Vivian Simmons recalled how Joseph 'spoke often with the insight of a prophet... fired with the spirit of the greatest rabbis of old' ('Jewish Chronicle', 23 April 1930). 


@@@@@


doc= 51109


Leitner, Gottlieb Wilhelm (1840-1899), educationist and orientalist, was born at Pest, Hungary, on 15 September 1840. His name at birth, which was registered with the Jewish community of Pest, was Gottlieb Sapier. He was the only son (there was a younger daughter) of Leopold Sapier, a woollen merchant of Pest, and his second wife, Maria Herzberg. (The father also had four children by a first marriage: most other members of his family spelt their surname Saphir.) Leopold Sapier was the elder brother of Moritz Gottlieb Saphir (1795-1858), a renowned German-language satirist and editor. He was also the elder brother of Israel Saphir, a merchant of Budapest, whose son Adolph Saphir (1831-1891) converted to protestantism, moved to Britain, and became a well-known Presbyterian minister and theologian in London. In 1845 Leopold Sapier died and, possibly for reasons connected with the failure of the 1848 revolution in Hungary, his widow moved with her two children to Constantinople. There she married Dr Johann Moritz Leitner (1800-1861), a Hungarian-born physician who had converted from Judaism to protestantism and was serving as a medical missionary to the Jews of the Ottoman empire, chiefly in Palestine, under the auspices of the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. Dr Leitner adopted his wife's two children, and Gottlieb Wilhelm Leitner (as he was henceforth known) always referred to him, inaccurately, as his real father. In 1861, in his petition for British naturalization, Leitner stated that he was an Anglican. Although he invariably shrouded his early life in considerable mystery, it was widely known in the Anglo-Jewish community that he was of Jewish origin. His obituary notice appeared in the 'Jewish Chronicle' newspaper as did entries on his life in several Jewish biographical dictionaries. 
It was as a youth in Constantinople that Leitner's gift for languages became evident; his abilities were so remarkable that 'The Times' in its obituary (25 March 1899) stated that 'as a linguist he probably had no living rival in the area of his knowledge'. He had learned fifteen languages by the time he left school and apparently knew fifty at the time of his death. For several years he also studied Islamic learning in Constantinople schools. At the age of fifteen he was appointed first-class interpreter to the British commissariat at Constantinople with, extraordinarily, the rank of honorary colonel. He was a student for seven months at the Malta protestant college and, about 1858, moved to London. He became a student at King's College, London, receiving a certificate in divinity in April 1859. In the same year he became a lecturer in Arabic, Turkish, and modern Greek at King's College and two years later, at the age of only twenty-one, was there appointed professor of Arabic with Mohammedan law. Soon afterwards he received an MA and a PhD from the University of Freiburg. In May 1862 he was naturalized as a British subject. He was admitted a student at the Middle Temple in November 1869 and was called to the bar in November 1875, but did not practise. 
In 1864 Leitner was appointed to the post of principal of the Government College at Lahore, and spent the next fifteen years in India. His achievements in that country in the fields of both education and scholarly research were very considerable. He helped to raise $32,000 to transform the Government College into the Oriental University of the Punjab. He attempted, with considerable success, to convince the local government and religious leaders, both Hindu and Muslim, to support Western science and the type of Western learning taught at the new university. He founded a number of schools, literary societies, and free public libraries on the English model, and published journals in English, Urdu, and Arabic. The best-known of these, founded in Lahore as 'Indian Public Opinion', changed its name to the 'Civil and Military Gazette'. It had the distinction of employing Rudyard Kipling as an assistant editor, and Kipling published many of his earliest verses and stories in this periodical. In 1865-6 Leitner, accompanied only by one English companion (who died in the Himalayas), conducted a series of important ethnographical expeditions to the previously almost unexplored mountain regions of Kashmir, an area he termed 'Dardistan', recording and attempting to classify the hitherto unknown languages of the area, tongues of great linguistic obscurity. In 1866 he barely escaped alive from an attack by warring Kashmiris. He later published a number of works on his explorations, notably 'Results of a Tour in Dardistan' (1877), 'The Languages and Races of Dardistan' (1889), and 'Dardistan in 1866, 1886, and 1893' (1893). Widely acknowledged in Britain as one of the greatest experts on India's languages and cultures, Leitner in 1876 first suggested the famous Hindustani title of Queen Victoria as empress of India, kaisar-i-Hind, which became the accepted translation throughout India. 
Leitner had always been notable as one of the few Europeans who mixed freely with the native Indians, treating them as social and intellectual equals. In 1879 he left India to pursue research at Heidelberg University and in 1881 returned to England, where he attempted to found a centre for the study in Europe of the culture and history of India and the Islamic world. In 1882 he wrote a 'History of Indigenous Education in Punjab' which dealt with controversial subjects such as women's education. In the following year he succeeded in purchasing the vacant building of the Royal Dramatic College in Woking, Surrey, and established the Oriental Institute. This body, which by the 1890s was accredited for the purposes of granting degrees recognized by the University of Lahore, trained Asians living in Europe for the learned professions and taught Asiatic languages to Europeans wishing to travel in the East. It also contained an Oriental Museum and a notable art collection. Perhaps its most significant feature was the fact that it contained the first mosque to be founded in Great Britain, the well-known Shah Jahan Mosque at Woking, opened late in 1889 with a bequest from Shah Jahan, the begum of Bhopal, and designed in a charming oriental style by W. I. Chambers. Leitner was a tireless advocate of the fair treatment of Islam by the West, in 1889 producing a pamphlet entitled 'Muhammadanism' which attempted to refute the baseless attacks made upon that faith by Englishmen and other Westerners. Leitner's genuine sympathy for the cultures of Asia marked him out as an early advocate of what is now termed 'multiculturalism', many decades ahead of its time. Lacking sound funding, the Oriental Institute regrettably did not survive Leitner's early death, closing in 1899. The Woking mosque was closed between 1899 and 1912, when it reopened on a permanent basis. 
Leitner received many honours during his lifetime. He was made a knight of the order of the Iron Cross of Austria, and an honorary member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, of the French Ecole des Langues Orientales, and of the German Hochstift. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws by the University of Heidelberg, and was generally known as 'Dr Leitner'. He also won a diploma for the promotion of education at the 1873 Universal Exhibition in Vienna, and was an honorary member of many learned societies throughout Europe. He had a number of devoted followers, among them J. H. Stocqueler, editor of 'The Orientalist', who published a biography of him in 1872. Leitner was a man of some means (he probably inherited money from his Hungarian relatives) and, from the 1880s, served as a director of the Delhi and London Bank. In appearance, he was a short, dark-haired man with very prominent bushy sideburns. While some regarded him as headstrong, wilful, and conceited, few questioned his energy or intellectual competence. 
In October 1869 Leitner married, in Frankfurt am Main, Olympia Caroline, daughter of Heinrich Schwaab, a merchant who acted as the German and American consul at Broussa, near Constantinople. They had one son, Henry, who became an electrical engineer. In 1873 Leitner's sister Elisabeth married Charles Frederick Amery, an official of the Indian forestry commission. Their eldest son, Leopold Charles Maurice (formerly Moritz) Stennett Amery (1873-1955), became a prominent Conservative politician and cabinet minister, serving from 1940 to 1945, appropriately in view of his uncle's career, as secretary of state for India. 
In 1898 Leitner fell ill and, early in 1899, travelled to Bonn to take the waters at the Godesburg spa. There he contracted pneumonia, and he died at Bonn on 22 March 1899; his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51111


Abrahams, Israel (1858-1925), Jewish scholar and historian, was born on 26 November 1858 at 10 Finsbury Square, London, the second son in the family of four sons and two daughters of Barnett Abrahams (1831-1863) and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Brandon (1834-1895). His father was principal of Jews' College, London, from 1858 until his death. Abrahams's two brothers became ministers (Moses at the Leeds Old Hebrew Congregation and Joseph at the Senior Synagogue, Melbourne). He acquired his Hebrew education from his father, and was educated from 1872 at Jews' College and University College, London; he graduated MA in philosophy in 1881. He was a lecturer in English, mathematics, and homiletics at Jews' College from 1881 to 1903, and was a founder and president of its literary society. In 1894 he married Frederica 
(Freda; 1869-1959)
, only daughter of Simeon Singer, minister of the New West End Synagogue, London. They had two daughters, one of whom, Phyllis (1900-1973), was a noted Hebrew scholar and librarian. 
In 1902 Abrahams succeeded Solomon Shechter as reader in Talmudic and rabbinic literature at the University of Cambridge, and moved to 11 St Barnabas Road, Cambridge. In 1906 he was also made curator of Oriental literature in the university library. He preached regularly in the (Orthodox) synagogue and was outstandingly helpful to his students, encouraging their observance of the Jewish sabbath and invigilating when an examination fell on a sabbath or festival; his home was the centre of university Jewish life. He also lectured regularly at King's College, London. In 1907 he was president of the University of Glasgow theological society, and he was twice president of the society of historical theology at Oxford. 
From 1889 to 1908 Abrahams co-edited with Claude Montefiore the 'Jewish Quarterly Review', and in it he published a number of important articles, such as one in 1891 critical of the views of Emil Schurer (author of the influential 'History of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ'). With Montefiore he wrote 'Aspects of Judaism' (1895). In 1896 he published his major work, 'Jewish Life in the Middle Ages'. In this he presented much new information, including some about the Jews' daily routines and basic beliefs and practices, as well as their relations with other Jewish and non-Jewish communities. He insisted that the Jews did not eschew contacts with Christians except when the political climate made them impossible. The book was arranged not according to countries but into sections that dealt with the home, family relations, personal rites, synagogue and school, business dealings, and relations between Jews and non-Jews. It was frequently re-issued, and updated after his death. His other publications were numerous, including 'Chapters on Jewish Literature' (1899), 'Judaism' (1907), 'Studies in Pharisaism' (1917 and 1924), 'Essays on the Future of Palestine' (1918), 'By-Paths in Hebraic Bookland' (1920), 'Poetry and Religion' (1921), and 'Jewish Ethical Wills' (in which he presented with English translations a vast range of spiritual wills over the ages), published posthumously in 1926. His books on Jewish history and Jewish life were accepted as standard works. Devoted to the Hebrew language, he also co-wrote in 1903 a Hebrew reading book, 'Hebrew Lessons'. In addition he was a gifted journalist and made many contributions to the press, especially the 'Jewish Chronicle', including the 'Books and bookmen' column, the (anti-Zionist) 'Jewish Guardian', and 'The Times'. He also contributed to encyclopaedias. 
Abrahams was involved with many Jewish and historical societies. In 1891 he was a founder of the Society of Maccabaeans, for Jewish professional men. In 1893 he was a founder of the Jewish Historical Society of England; he also edited its transactions and was its president in 1904. He served from 1893 on the committee of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, set up to organize teacher training, and he was a governor of the Jewish Religious Education Board established in 1894. In 1902 he was a mover in the founding of the Union of Jewish Literary Societies. He was a member of the Anglo-Jewish Association and its council, and president of its Cambridge branch. In 1898 he visited Palestine during Passover, and was interested in the educational work of the association there. The visit gave him a lasting interest in that country. He advocated in 1908 the founding of a university in Jerusalem, but was always opposed to political Zionism. He was also a founder member of the London Society for the Study of Religion. In 1912, at the invitation of Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, he visited the United States, was the first Lewisohn lecturer, and made an extensive lecture tour, giving over a hundred addresses. He also visited America in 1923 and 1924, when he was given honorary doctorates by the Hebrew Union College and the University of Western Pennsylvania. 
Abrahams was sympathetic to the views of Lily Montagu in the founding of Liberal Judaism. In 1902 he became a member of the first committee of the Jewish Religious Union, together with his father-in-law (whose 'Literary Remains' he later edited). He helped to draft the first prayer book and defended the union's legitimacy in a letter to the Orthodox chief rabbi, Herman Adler. Thereafter he remained involved in the Liberal movement and the Liberal Jewish Synagogue, London: he conducted its first service in 1911. He was an elegant and fluent preacher. He was committed to religious pluralism, favouring the individual conscience over collective rabbinic authority. The breadth of his Jewishness is shown by his publishing in 1913 an annotated version of the Orthodox 'Authorized Daily Prayer Book' originally edited by his father-in-law (and widely known as 'Singer's Prayer Book'). He was sympathetic (like Claude Montefiore) towards Christianity. 
In July 1925 a presentation was made to Abrahams in recognition of his services to students at Cambridge. On 6 October that year he died in Cambridge. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium on 8 October; memorial services were held at the Liberal Jewish Synagogue on 11 October and, unusually, in the senate house, Cambridge, on 21 October. The library of the Liberal Jewish Synagogue is named after him. He was survived by his wife and daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 51112


Solomon, Saul (1817-1892), newspaper proprietor and politician in Cape Colony, was born on 25 May 1817 at St Helena, the son of Joseph Solomon, merchant of Solomon, Moss, and Gideon and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' De Mitz. Born into a Jewish merchant family, his parents, in the absence of a synagogue, were married in the island's Anglican church where their children were later baptized, though their liberal dualism meant that the marriage was recorded in the family's Hebrew prayer book and the eldest sons briefly attended a Jewish boarding-school in Ramsgate, Kent. In Cape Town, Solomon's brothers became members of the Congregational church but there is no record of Saul formally joining them even though he was a friend of its leading clergyman and missionary, Dr John Phillip. Nor, though a friend of Cape Town's Jewish minister, did he practise Judaism. 
Solomon's liberal political views were respected in Cape Town, even by those opposing them. It was believed in the colony that any legislation he found unacceptable had little prospect of endorsement by the Colonial Office or the Westminster parliament. In practice he was far more radical than either body. Although he read the classical political economists, much history, and the blue books of metropolitan and colonial legislatures, Solomon was as likely to have acquired his beliefs in political representation, personal freedom, and social justice from Cape Town newspapers of the 1830s and 1840s. His influence and standing are best understood in the context of metropolitan and colonial societies of his time. 
Solomon's convictions, though they made him a British patriot, did not make him an imperialist. He was often highly critical of the metropolitan government and its representatives in South Africa, and of the majority of settlers. Nevertheless, for thirty years, up to the early 1880s, Solomon was extolled as the colony's pre-eminent parliamentarian. When he rose to speak in the colony's parliament word flew around Cape Town, 'Saul is up', and the public galleries filled (Solomon, 206). Solomon's eminence was the more remarkable given his physical frailty. He had contracted rheumatic fever and rickets at school in England and his legs had been encased in iron supports which possibly had stunted their growth. This required him to mount a stool in the legislature in order to be seen. Poor health determined that he never held office, and he declined Governor Henry Barkly's 1872 invitation to become the first prime minister of the Cape. Yet, according to W. E. Gladstone Solomon, he 'served on every committee, framed nearly every Bill, and virtually led the House on every great occasion' (Solomon, 71). 
The Cape to which Solomon was sent in 1829 was stratified by ethnic, racial, religious, and linguistic distinctions. British settlers were outnumbered by the Dutch and at variance with them. Initially, therefore, crown colony rule, without elected representation, was seen as a way of ensuring that Britain's primary interests, whether economic or strategic, remained paramount. This did not satisfy those under whom Solomon served. His political and commercial apprenticeship began when, aged fourteen, he left school because of his father's straitened circumstances. His seniors wanted greater control over their own affairs; however, although they aspired to representative government, they nevertheless recognized the need to establish a diverse coalition to ensure that when it came, it would not result in British economic and strategic interests being overthrown. Solomon attended the South African College from 1829 to 1831, after which he joined the printer and publisher John Greig; this led to a lifelong association with the colony's liberal and radical journalists, missionaries, and businessmen. In 1834 the 'South African Commercial Advertiser', published by his firm, called for 'English, Irish, and Scotch mechanics, the Malays, and freed Coloured people of every description... the English and Foreign merchants... and the better educated and more liberal portion of the Afrikanders' to unite to 'extinguish the last remnant of the high Dutch Oligarchy' ('South African Commercial Advertiser', 18 Oct 1834). There was no question of power passing out of British hands. 
Nevertheless, by the late 1840s Cape Town's British and Dutch middle classes had begun to form a homogeneous capitalist class with the printing and publishing firm of Solomon & Co. as one of its leading members. The consolidated settler middle class had become increasingly resentful of the colony's still unelected legislative council, which was dominated by officials but contained a minority of nominated members drawn from an older, more entrepot-orientated British mercantile class who shared government patronage with a small cabal of officials surrounding the Cape's colonial secretary, John Montague. Montague's opponents saw this as undermining the colony's probity and consequently its creditworthiness in the City of London. Opposition became a mechanism for intensifying the colony's social and constitutional crisis, threatening stability and helping to advance the milieu which proved so conducive to Solomon's liberal political philosophy. In addition, the destabilizing effects of the colonial government's frontier policy gave cause for alarm, being seen as provocative of external wars with the independent Xhosa and of disaffection among the increasingly creolized Khoisan. Thereafter, the refusal of colonial militias to serve in the 1847 Cape Frontier War meant the maintenance of an expensive metropolitan army at the Cape. Colonial apprehension about this army, when combined with the anti-convict movement, encouraged a territory-wide coalition crossing ethnicity, class, and race. A leading Cape Afrikaner called for unity between 'Africanders of Dutch, French, German, English, Danish, Portuguese, Mozambiquan, Malay, and Hottentot extraction' ('Cape Town Mail', 16 April 1852). 
The coalition fell short of threatening revolution, but ultimately persuaded the colonial administration that representative institutions would be the cheapest way to restore consent for British rule. In this political climate, Saul Solomon made his address to the Cape Town electors: 'I shall consider it a sacred duty', he told them, 'to give my decided opposition to all legislation tending to introduce distinctions either of class, colour or creed' (Solomon, 22). The coalition broke up, but Solomon's liberal opinions continued to gain respect long after it ceased to dominate Cape politics. His reforming zeal incorporated the advocacy of the abolition of state aid to the two privileged Christian churches and promotion of the economic and political rights of women. He endorsed a proposal for suffrage in 1870 and established a workshop for women printers, bringing a qualified craftswoman to the Cape to instruct white and coloured women apprentices. Confronting considerable opposition, in and out of parliament, he persuaded fellow legislators to repeal a 'Contagious Diseases Act', writing to Josephine Butler, his great admirer, that the act practised, 'injustice to an outcast class', created a system of 'police espionage', and was 'pernicious and degrading' to the 'unhappy women who came under its operation' (Butler, 67-8). On 21 March 1874 he married Georgiana Margaret Thomson ['see 'Solomon, Georgiana Margaret (1844-1933)], a schoolteacher and afterwards headmistress of advanced feminist views. 
Although he did not question the initial colonization of the Cape, Solomon opposed almost any extension of its existing borders, believing that this must lead to an arbitrary and despotic system for the control of the populations brought under the colonial state. When African peoples suffered from the capricious rule of colonists or administrators, he used the legislative assembly to denounce such actions. He opposed the illegal trial of Chief Langalibalele and attacked British policy in Natal and the Transvaal. He was, nevertheless, one of the earliest proponents of a South African federation. 
While unable to determine the programme of the Cape parliament, Solomon was perceived as an arbiter of what was acceptable to the Colonial Office and the British parliament. Visiting the Cape in 1878, Anthony Trollope claimed that, 'it would have been nearly impossible to pass any measure of importance through the Cape parliament to which he offered a strenuous opposition' (Trollope, 95). This was borne out in 1881 when Solomon led the successful opposition to Cecil Rhodes's attempt to introduce flogging into a bill aimed at curbing illegal diamond sales. Rhodes acknowledged Solomon's eminence in seeking to make him, along with General Gordon and himself, members of a three-man commission to determine the fate of Basutoland. 
Yet times were changing. In the late 1870s, as the diamond fields began to transform the economic potential of South Africa, settlers and the imperial government became increasingly bent on expansionist policies determined to break the independence of the chiefdoms. Solomon and his newspaper the 'Cape Argus' were extremely critical of the wars and atrocities which followed. The Cape ministry, largely supported by eastern Cape British settlers, became hostile to Solomon, causing him to lose the government printing contract and to suffer a drastic decline in his commercial well-being. Financial disaster was followed by personal tragedy when a child was drowned. His health deteriorated and he withdrew from parliament, retiring to Kilcreggan, Scotland, where he died on 16 October 1892. His widow afterwards became an important campaigner for women's rights in South Africa and a suffragette who went to prison in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 51114


Moscheles, Ignaz (1794-1870), pianist and composer, was born in Prague on 23 May 1794, one of five children of a Jewish cloth merchant, Joachim Moscheles (died 24 April 1805). He was given the Jewish name Isack, but used the name Ignaz. His main studies were with the director of the Prague conservatory, Bedrich Divis Weber. In 1808, partly impelled by what was to be a lifelong admiration for Beethoven, he moved to Vienna, where he studied further with J. A. Streicher, Albrechtsberger, and Salieri. By 1814 he was established as one of the most successful of the city's young piano virtuosos. His tours took him to many European cities, and on 26 May 1821 to England, where for a quarter of a century he was at the centre of British musical life. 
Moscheles was first heard in England at a Philharmonic concert in London on 11 June 1821, when he played his popular variations 'La marche d'Alexandre' and his second piano concerto (in E[flat], op. 56). A brilliant improviser, he based his technique (as his widely used studies show) on the classical precepts of Clementi and others while anticipating the new developments of Chopin and Liszt. The best of his music is to be found in his sonatas rather than in his concertos or virtuoso ephemera. In London he formed friendships with Clementi (whose pianos he favoured), J. B. Cramer, Ries, and Kalkbrenner, and was soon a central figure in London music-making and in the world of other visiting and immigrant musicians. Further appearances followed, and on leaving England in the following year he was given a new passport by Prince Eszterhazy with the title 'Kammervirtuos'. He spent the summer in France, returning to London after the Paris concert season, and making his first reappearance with Cramer in a duet sonata to which he contributed a movement (on this occasion using a Broadwood piano to suit Cramer's style). He was taken up again by fashionable London and played at many soirees but also gave his own concerts; he was elected an honorary member of the London Academy of Music and, by his own account, came to feel increasingly at home in England. After another winter in France he returned in January, spending time in Bath and Bristol as well as in London. He gave lessons, played at the oratorio concerts, and, though much of his time was taken up with trivia, worked on compositions including his fourth piano concerto (in E major, op. 64). He left England again at the end of the season, in August. 
Further European tours brought Moscheles into contact with many musicians, among them the young Mendelssohn, to whom he gave lessons and who became his closest friend. In Hamburg he met and, on 1 March 1825, married, an amateur pianist, Charlotte Embden (1805-1889); they moved to England on 2 May 1825. Country visits included stays at Stoneham Park, Southampton (where he was a guest with Palmerston), Cheltenham, and Oxford, before they settled at 77 Norton Street, London; here their household belongings included a piano presented by Clementi. In 1830 they moved to 3 Chester Place, Regent's Park. A happy and mutually supportive couple, they were generous hosts, and Moscheles always lived up to his principle that colleagues should play for one another without a fee. He showed great kindness to the dying Carl Maria von Weber, in London in 1826 for the first performance of 'Oberon', then helped Sir George Smart with Weber's funeral arrangements; and Mendelssohn, on his first visit to England, wrote in detail of the couple's careful attention to his wants, adding 'Beide sind die Freundlichkeit selbst' ('They are both kindness itself'; letter to his father, 25 April 1829). Moscheles was often host to Mendelssohn, who stood godfather to his son Felix; they gave a number of concerts together, and shared the conductorship of the Birmingham Festival in 1846. Among many other artists visiting London who benefited from his hospitality were Paganini, Spohr, and Liszt. He also toured widely, including a visit to Ireland (he found the Irish more musically receptive than the English), and wrote as a consequence his 'Souvenirs d'Irlande' (op. 69, 1826). This was followed by 'Anklange aus Schottland' (op. 75, 1826) and a 'Fantaisie sur des airs des bardes ecossais' (op. 80, 1828). The latter arose partly from a visit to Edinburgh and to Sir Walter Scott. Despite differences over the musical capabilities of the bagpipes, their friendly exchanges included translations of Burger and Grillparzer which Scott made for Moscheles's album; he later gratefully accepted the dedication of the 'Fantaisie'. 
The pattern of Moscheles's London life continued in similar fashion for some years, with residence in England sometimes interrupted by summer tours on the continent. Much of his time was taken up with recitals in grand houses and at court. In 1828 he played at Kensington Palace to the duchess of Kent, the young Princess Victoria being sent to bed after his second piece. On many occasions he was irked by the English lack of respect for those performing, as demonstrated at a soiree on 14 April 1832 after the passing of the 'Reform Bill' where the audience included the duke of Wellington and 'the whole Tory party', and at another on 12 December before the king at Brighton Pavilion. He taught the piano at the Royal Academy of Music and developed a circle of talented pupils, including Litolff and Thalberg; he had many aristocratic pupils, but others included a greengrocer's daughter who had been rejected elsewhere. He conducted the Philharmonic Society (1821-46, co-director 1832-41), and, having raised a subscription of $100 from the society to send to the dying Beethoven, continued his services to the composer he admired above all others by conducting the English premiere of the 'Missa solemnis' in 1832 (a private performance on Christmas eve at the house of the amateur musician Alsager in Queen Square). He also translated Anton Schindler's 'Biographie von Ludwig Van Beethoven' (1840) into English (1841) (the jealously protective Schindler later wrote a mendacious attack upon him). His concerts included, from 1837, pioneering 'historical soirees' at which, well in advance of his time, he would play Bach and Scarlatti on the harpsichord. Thanks to Sir George Smart, he was enabled to attend Queen Victoria's coronation on 28 June 1838 by singing as a bass in the choir. He began to withdraw from public performance in 1840. 
To widely expressed regret, Moscheles and his family left England in 1846 on his acceptance of the post of professor of piano at the Leipzig conservatory (though they made brief return visits). His contribution to English musical life was substantial, at least as much for his encouragement of foreign artists as for his own compositions and concerts. He was very companionable, at ease in English society, and in turn was held in warm regard: he and his wife, who was also very well liked, 'held weekly receptions on a large scale, at which 'society', musicians, painters, and literary people of distinction, were wont to foregather' (Kuhe, 76). The diaries and letters copiously quoted in his wife's biography of him, 'Aus Moscheles' Leben' (1872, trans. 1873), give a lively and sympathetic account of English musical life in the twenty-five years between 1821 and 1846. Moscheles died in Leipzig on 10 March 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 51115


Isaacs, Nathaniel (1808-1872), trader and author, was born in Canterbury. His father, a merchant and inhabitant of Chatham, was married to Lenie Solomon, one of the many children of Nathaniel Solomon of Margate and Phoebe Mitz, a Dutch Jew; Saul Solomon, the merchant king of St Helena, was his uncle. Isaacs's father died during his early childhood and in 1822 the boy was sent to join his uncle Saul Solomon at St Helena. In 1825 he sailed for the British Cape Colony in the vessel 'Mary', commanded by Lieutenant James King, who aimed to join Lieutenant F. G. Farewell at Port Natal in order to participate in the ivory trade from that region. In October 1825 the 'Mary' was wrecked on the sand bar at Port Natal and the crew left stranded. Isaacs was in contact with other members of Farewell's trading party, including Henry Fynn, Henry Ogle, and Thomas Halstead. James King's apprentice Charles Rawden Maclean ('John Ross') was also known to Isaacs. 
In the absence of reliable evidence it is difficult to establish an accurate historical context for the white traders at Port Natal during the 1820s. Isaacs's early biographers noted his 'pioneering' qualities and his presence as a white explorer in the Shakan Zulu state. However, more recent researchers have moved away from this kind of depiction and have noted various kinds of interaction between the trading group and indigenous communities, based on trade in ivory. The South African historian Julian Cobbing has suggested that the Europeans were involved in the east African coastal slave trade, though this is still a debatable topic. While Isaacs and King were rivals with Farewell and Fynn for control of ivory supplies, this group later changed and after the death of King in 1828 Isaacs became Fynn's trading partner. By 1830 these traders had set out a business prospectus for their future economic activities at Port Natal. Isaacs did not, however, remain in the region; he left Natal for the Cape in 1831 aboard the American brig the 'St Michael'. 
Although he returned to England in 1832, Isaacs continued to show an economic and political interest in Natal and he wrote to the Cape governor, Sir Lowry Cole, asking for a land grant at Port Natal. This request was turned down and Isaacs then turned his attention to the idea of persuading the British government to annex Natal formally. He wrote to Fynn, suggesting that the latter publish his writing in which he could stress the savage nature of the Zulu in order to secure formal British intervention in defence of the white traders at Port Natal. In 1834 Isaacs and other Cape traders composed a 'merchants' memorial' which was sent to Governor D'Urban and then to London. This petition, which requested British annexation, was rejected by the Colonial Office on the grounds of expense. 
Having failed to achieve annexation through these methods, Isaacs published in 1836 the book for which he is best known, 'Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa'. Despite encouragement from Isaacs, Fynn's reminiscences were only printed in Bird's 'Annals of Natal' in 1888 and the 'Diary of Henry Francis Fynn' was not published until 1950. Isaacs's publication thus became the earliest European writing on Shaka and the Zulu in the Natal region. Dan Wylie has suggested that Isaacs's writing, like other narratives on Shaka, was more in the nature of a character assassination than an objective account. His negative depiction of Shaka was clearly motivated by his desire to secure Natal as a political and economic sphere of British imperial expansion. 
After his return to England in 1832 Isaacs formed a partnership with C. G. Redman in London for the purposes of commerce in the Senegal coastal region, and in 1835 petitioned the British government against French competition in the area. He also maintained his interest in Natal, and wrote to Fynn in 1840 stating that he planned to leave west Africa and return to southern Africa to control his commercial interests in the Natal coastal region. However, following the official British annexation of Natal in 1843, Isaacs was again refused a land grant in the colony and from this date he seems to have abandoned any further attempts to establish himself in South Africa. 
During the early 1840s Isaacs established his trading headquarters in Old Calabar and bought property in Freetown in Sierra Leone. In 1844 he sold his Freetown properties and bought the island of Matacong, north of the Melakori River, as a trading post. The island was within the jurisdiction of the colony but remained outside customs. Isaacs took advantage of this fact and set up depots to ship goods to the mainland. He also acted as consular agent for the French government. From the 1850s he moved away from the European settlement where he cultivated arrowroot for export to England. He was suspected of being involved in the slave trade and in 1854 Governor Kennedy of Sierra Leone tried to have him arrested but he escaped to England. The evidence against Isaacs was later lost at sea while Kennedy was 'en route' for Australia. In 1856 the British authorities dropped the prosecution against Isaacs. Isaacs lived in London from 1854 to 1858 but left England again in 1860 when he visited Matacong. He was in Freetown in 1863. He retired to Liverpool in 1868, and in 1870 he moved to 8 Church Street, Egremont, Cheshire, where he died in a coma on 26 June 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 51116


Levinstein, Ivan (1845-1916), chemical manufacturer, was born on 4 July 1845 in Charlottenberg, Berlin, the eighth of seventeen children, eight boys and nine girls, of Levin Jacob Levinstein (1803-1865), and his wife, Bertha Liebermann. Levinstein senior was variously owner of a calico printing factory, political correspondent, and agent of the German branch of the Rothschild Bank. He fell out with Bismarck at the end of the 1850s, and subsequently encouraged his older sons to emigrate. Some of them became established in London as dye merchants, and started the manufacture of aniline dyes. Ivan was educated at the Royal Prussian Gymnasium, Berlin, and then at the Gewerbeinstitut, where he studied aniline dyes. By 1864 he was involved in a family dye-making business at Neu-Schoneberg, near Berlin. Later in 1864 he followed in the footsteps of his brothers, and arrived in Salford, Lancashire, where he began the manufacture of the aniline red known as magenta. When the original patent, owned by a London firm, was declared invalid in 1865, Levinstein took up its manufacture on a large scale at Blackley, Manchester, where he set up a works at Hulton House. 
In the meantime, Levinstein's brother Hugo in London was sued for patent infringement over the magenta derivative known as aniline blue. Hugo lost the case, but Ivan circumvented the patent monopoly in 1869 by employing the intermediate known as toluidine. With these and similar products, an aniline salt used in aniline black printing on cotton, and the first of what were later known as azo dyes (derived from diazonium intermediates), Ivan Levinstein became a successful manufacturer. In 1871 he launched the trade journal 'Chemical News', which he edited for several years, and which was published until 1891. By 1874 his firm had offices and agencies in London, Birmingham, Glasgow, on mainland Europe, and in the United States. Expansion at Blackley continued with the acquisition of the adjacent Crumpsall Vale works, and by 1887 Levinstein's factory had been reconstructed. He employed several German chemists, though few appear to have remained for long periods. 
In 1881 Levinstein became engaged in patent litigation with Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik (BASF) over the azo dye fast red AV (Levinstein's version was known as roccelline), patented in London early in 1878 by Heinrich Caro, technical director of the German firm. Though judgement went against Levinstein in 1887, he subsequently developed a close business alliance with BASF, and friendship with Caro. By this time a class of novel azo dyes, the benzopurpurines, which attached directly to cotton without the aid of a mordant, was available. In 1889 Levinstein joined BASF against the powerful benzopurpurine convention of Agfa and Bayer. This failed, and Levinstein was forced into partnership with his adversaries. Agfa and Bayer controlled his firm from 1890 until 1895, during which time it traded as I. Levinstein & Co. Ltd. It came under Levinstein's control again from 1895, and the name changed to Levinstein Ltd. Other business interests included a partnership in the alkali manufacturers Murgatroyd Company Ltd, of Middlewich, and Ammonia Soda Company Ltd, of Northwich. 
From about 1880 Levinstein became actively involved in public affairs, especially through the Manchester chamber of commerce. From 1885 he participated in management of the chemical and dyeing and printing departments of the Manchester Technical School, of which he was a councillor during 1888-91. He was also a member of Manchester city council's education committee, and chairman of the technical instruction committee of the Municipal School of Technology (later part of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology). Subsequently Levinstein became a member of the court of the Victoria University and a governor of Owens College. He promoted utilitarian studies, and application of science to industrial problem-solving along German lines, which was opposed by some academics in Manchester. He was chairman of the 1887 Manchester Royal Jubilee Exhibition. 
When the Society of Chemical Industry, founded in 1881, set up a Manchester section in 1883, Levinstein became a member of the committee. He was chairman of the section (1883-4 and 1889-94), vice-president of the society (1897-1900 and 1903-6) and president (1901-3), and vice-president of the Society of Dyers and Colourists (1884-1916). 
From the end of the 1890s Levinstein lobbied for patent law reform and commercial protectionism. Following the introduction of German synthetic indigo in 1897 he implored dyers and printers of his adoptive country to support the colonial trade in the natural dyestuff. He was a member of Chamberlain's tariff commission and is given much credit for the steps leading to the 'Patent Act' of 1907. Levinstein published widely in the chemical and dyeing trade literature, especially in the 'Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry', on matters relating to new industrial chemical developments, education, and patents. Early in the First World War he joined the Board of Trade's chemical supplies committee. 
Levinstein became a British subject on 25 April 1873. About 1874 he married Hedwig Abeles of Vienna; they had three sons, Edgar ('b'. 1876), Herbert ['see below'], and Edward Gerald (1887-1916). The first of six family homes was Hillside House, Prestwich Park, and Levinstein's final home was Parkfield, Hale Road, Hale, Cheshire, where he died on 15 March 1916. His wife, who suffered from poor health, had previously returned to her family in Austria, where she died in 1908. 

Herbert Levinstein (1878-1956), who was born on 2 February 1878 at Prestwich Park, Prestwich, Lancashire, took over his father's business on the latter's retirement at the end of 1915. Herbert was educated at Rugby School, Owens College, Manchester, and Zurich Polytechnic, where in 1900 he received a PhD in organic chemistry. His name appeared on twenty-five patents, either jointly or alone. Under his direction the first British-made synthetic indigo was produced in 1916 at the sequestered Ellesmere Port factory of Hoechst, where novocain and the antiseptic acriflavine were also produced. During the First World War Levinstein's highly qualified technical team, led by Arthur G. Green, developed close links with academic institutions. The Blackley factory continued with the production of dyes and engaged in the manufacture of mustard gas. Levinstein was a member of the Chemical Warfare Committee, the Hartley mission to Germany, and the economic section of the Paris peace conference. In November 1918 Levinstein Ltd was merged, under government influence, with British Dyes Ltd to form the British Dyestuffs Corporation. Herbert Levinstein was joint managing director, and from 1921 sole managing director. Levinstein was highly critical of the Huddersfield division, his erstwhile rival, and in 1922 was voted off the board. Subsequently he became involved in the manufacture of viscose rayon, as founder director of Neura Art Silk Company Ltd (formed in December 1925) and, from 1928, technical director of Lansil Ltd. From the late 1920s he was closely involved with the successor to the Murgatroyd Company, in which his father had held an interest; in 1950 he was appointed life president of Murgatroyd Salt and Chemical Company Ltd. British Dyestuffs Corporation was one of four major British chemical corporations that merged in 1926 to create Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). The Blackley site later became the regional headquarters of Zeneca plc. 
Herbert Levinstein was at various times president of five institutions and societies, and published numerous articles concerning the chemical industry. In 1937 he endowed the Ivan Levinstein memorial lectures, the first two of which were given before the Manchester Chemical Club. The lectures were reintroduced after the Second World War under the aegis of the Society of Chemical Industry, and a further five were given until 1970. In 1949 Levinstein gave the inaugural George Douglas memorial lecture of the Society of Dyers and Colourists. In 1953 he received the Hinchley medal of the British Association of Chemists. His last home was Baddow, Pinkneys Green, Maidenhead. Herbert Levinstein was perhaps the only person to have attended both the 50th and the 100th anniversary celebrations of the discovery of William Perkin's mauve. He died on 3 August 1956 at King Edward VII Hospital, Windsor, Berkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 51119


Foulds, John Herbert (1880-1939), composer and author, was born on 2 November 1880 at 49 Dorset Street, Hulme, Manchester, one of the four children of Fred Foulds, a bassoonist, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Greenwood, who were both members of the Plymouth Brethren. Self-educated musically, yet later an apprentice conductor to Halle, Richter, Nikisch, Mahler, and Lamoureux, Foulds initially earned a living as an orchestral cellist in the Halle Orchestra from 1900 to 1914 and as a practical all-round musician, lecturing, playing, arranging music, and teaching, while constantly composing music. 
Foulds was soon regarded as an efficient and charming light-music composer -- the 'Lament' from the 'Keltic Suite' (1911) remained popular long after his death -- and he wrote much incidental music for contemporary plays, including Bernard Shaw's 'Saint Joan' (1924). Despite championship by Granville Bantock, Elgar, and Richter, Foulds's serious works fared less well, though in 1906 Henry Wood conducted a successful Proms performance of his symphonic poem 'Epithalamium'. Meanwhile he reacted against his strict religious upbringing by showing a growing interest in theosophy and the occult, which was reflected in his music; for instance, the score of the symphonic poem 'Mirage' (1910) is headed by a representation of the occult symbol of a pentagram. 
In 1909 Foulds married a Llandudno girl, Maud Woodcock; they had a son, Raymond, in 1911. Then in 1915 he met the charismatic violinist Maud MacCarthy (1882-1967), who shared his theosophical interests but broke up his marriage. After a period of living together they married and had a son, Patrick, and a daughter, Marybride. Maud MacCarthy was a pioneer ethnomusicologist, played many Indian instruments, and was able to pitch precisely the twenty-three 'srutis', or microtonal intervals, characteristic of Indian music. These skills influenced Foulds's experiments with quarter-tones and non-Western modes, and her profound knowledge of Indian spiritual beliefs strengthened his esoteric convictions. 
The turning point in Foulds's life was conducting the first performance of his 'A World Requiem' (1919-21) on armistice night 1923 to an emotional audience in a packed Albert Hall. Encouraged by the British Legion, it was repeated annually until 1926, when it was boycotted inexplicably by both concert promoters and the emergent BBC; by the late twentieth century it had not been performed in its entirety since. Unfortunately public enthusiasm was countered by critical disdain, and there is evidence that there was a jealous conspiracy against the work, possibly because its immediate popularity was distrusted by the musical establishment; it was known in the Foulds family as the 'Wreck 'Em'. Its relegation undermined Foulds's confidence; he fled to Paris, where he earned a living as a cinema organist before returning to London in 1930. 
In 1935 the whole family moved to India, and Foulds joined his wife in collecting Indian folk music. From 1937 he worked for All-India Radio while learning to play Indian instruments, and he formed an Indo-European orchestra, hoping to further his aim of a synthesis of Eastern and Western music. This goal was never realized, for he died suddenly of cholera in Calcutta on 25 April 1939. 
Throughout his life Foulds had become increasingly convinced of the occult nature of musical inspiration, maintaining that sections of 'A World Requiem' and the prophetically minimalist piano piece 'Gandharva-Music' (1915) were clairaudiently heard. In his lively and provocative book 'Music To-Day op 92' (1934) he discussed the occult effect of quarter-tones, which he first used in 1898, then later in 'Mirage', 'A World Requiem', and the fine and idiomatic 'Quartetto intimo' (1931-2) and other works. He felt that another way for composers to break away from Western diatonicism lay in experimenting with Indian modes. He demonstrated their effectiveness in the set of piano pieces 'Essays in the Modes' (1920-27), the piano concerto 'Dynamic Triptych' (1929), and the orchestral 'Three Mantras' (1919-30), which had served as preludes to each act of his lost opera 'Avatara'. 
Foulds's interests were alien to the English musical culture of the inter-war years, and his compositions thus remained largely unperformed until the 1980s, when they enjoyed a modest revival of interest. In 1998 an enormously enthusiastic response to a Proms performance of the 'Three Mantras' seemed to indicate that Foulds's multicultural concerns were more relevant to late twentieth-century audiences than to those of his own time. 


@@@@@


doc= 51120


Weldon, George Anthony Thomas (1908-1963), conductor, was born on 5 June 1908 at Herondean, Newfishbourne, Sussex, the second of the two children of Francis Harry Weldon (1869-1920), army officer, and his wife, Eveleen (died 1955), amateur artist and daughter of Thomas Fielden Campbell of Devonshire Place, London. Weldon entered Sherborne School in 1921. Exclusion from physical activities through a lower leg withered from birth allowed him to concentrate on his established instrument, the piano. He won the school's Halliday music prize in 1925 and, the following year, left for the Royal College of Music to study piano under Arthur Benjamin. Conducting, an extra with Billy Reed and Aylmer Buesst, became Weldon's main subject under Malcolm Sargent. 
From 1930 until 1943 Weldon conducted the Tunbridge Wells Symphony Orchestra. The Choral Society elected to join the orchestra under his leadership in 1942, and under his baton the orchestra grew in numbers and reputation. Between 1931 and 1943 Weldon also conducted the Newbury Amateur Orchestral Union. In 1937 he was appointed deputy conductor of Hastings Municipal Orchestra. Rejected for military service after the outbreak of war, he subsequently worked for ENSA, the Entertainments National Service Association. From 1942 Weldon conducted the London Symphony Orchestra on tour and in London theatres and, after the war, abroad and in the Albert Hall. He was one of the five fiftieth jubilee concert conductors (1954) and made at least twenty-eight recordings with the orchestra. 
One of eight selected candidates for the conductorship of the City of Birmingham Orchestra, Weldon gave his trial concert in 1943. In spite of appreciation from audiences and also from music critics, he was not offered a full contract until the following year. By then he had formed the city's first salaried orchestra, which gave its initial concert in September. Through ENSA contacts he obtained recording work for it and introduced a wide range of concerts. In addition, the orchestra undertook educational work and toured extensively, using Weldon's wartime venues. In 1947, following his conductorship of the BBC Symphony Orchestra, the City of Birmingham Orchestra gave at least twenty-one BBC broadcasts. In 1948, prior to the orchestra's Albert Hall debut, he initiated its name change to the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra. However, its financial problems were aggravated when its committee responded to critics' demand for more modern and unfamiliar music. Weldon, believing programmes should be balanced, did not renew his contract after 1951, although he returned to conduct Birmingham's 1951 music festival and, as guest conductor, fill the town hall. 
His busy schedule encouraged Weldon to freelance, but classical music was a shrinking market. In 1952, therefore, he accepted an invitation from his friend Sir John Barbirolli to become associate conductor of the Halle, which was still expanding its audiences with Promenade and industrial concerts. During Barbirolli's illness in 1955 Weldon successfully conducted performances, including the Halle's first television appearance, at short notice. According to Barbirolli, Weldon had two great loves, music and very fast cars. The latter included two revolutionary Atalantas (in one of which, as 'Gat' Weldon, he had won the 1937 Lewes speed trials). 
A financially conscious music director, Weldon was an ingenious improviser, producing remarkable music under difficult conditions. He promoted the work of English musicians, including Elgar, Bliss, Bax, Vaughan Williams, Walton, and Sullivan (whose music he introduced to the concert platform). His recordings were mainly of popular classics, which offered an outlet for his flair and professionalism but failed to reveal his full potential. However, his arrangement of 'Suo gan', for a long time concluded every Halle promenade season. Another work, 'Mice', composed for performance at Newbury (1937), also played in Birmingham, Manchester, and broadcast, now is lost. A popular figure abroad, Weldon notably conducted in Turkey, Yugoslavia, Germany, and Africa. 
In 1963, suffering from asthma, and against medical advice, Weldon toured through Athens, Istanbul, Ankara, and on to Cape Town, for his third winter concert series there. He died of heart failure in the West County Hotel, Cape Town, during the night of 16/17 August. Following private Cape Town and London church ceremonies, his body was cremated and his ashes were scattered in his garden at 37 St John's Wood Road, London. Unmarried, he was survived by his sister, Sybil. 


@@@@@


doc= 51124


Mond family (per. 1867-1973), chemical manufacturers and industrialists, came to prominence with the life and career of Ludwig Mond, chemical technologist, manufacturer, and collector of works of art. He was the first of a notable dynasty of science-based businessmen, some of whom are better known under the name of Melchett (the family's title). The Monds played a leading role in the growth of large-scale industrial enterprise, but they also made themselves felt in other fields such as politics and the philosophy of management. They were patrons of the arts and respecters of scholarship. Judaism played a varying role in the family, insignificant for some, dominant for others. 



@@@@@


doc= 51125


Heath, Adrian Lewis Ross (1920-1992), artist and art teacher, was born on 23 June 1920 at Matmyo, north Burma, the only child of Percy Charles Petgrave Heath, the manager of a rubber plantation for the Bombay Burma Corporation, and his wife, Adria Frederica Ross-Porter. In 1925 Heath was sent from Burma to England to live with his maternal grandmother at Marchwood Park, near Southampton, and in 1929 he became a boarder at Port Regis preparatory school, near Broadstairs in Kent. After this he attended Bryanston School, where he distinguished himself as a sportsman (athletics and cricket) but was disruptive in the classroom. At Bryanston, Heath became more seriously interested in art, but his instruction and exposure to the realities of painting were haphazard, resulting on the one hand in work that was 'very conservative... timid', and on the other in a real enjoyment of the 'deft... brio and brushstroke' handling of paint by Edwardian artists, especially John Singer Sargent (National Life Story Collection). 
Heath left Bryanston in 1938 for Newlyn, Cornwall, to study the rudiments of painting with Alexander Stanhope Forbes, and in 1939 entered the Slade School of Fine Art, accompanying the school on its evacuation to Oxford in 1940. An attempt to enlist in the army was rebuffed, but in 1941 Heath was accepted by the RAF. Sidestepping the possibility and responsibilities of a commission, he eventually became a sergeant gunner, flying with 101 squadron. On a cross-channel sortie in January 1942 Heath's aircraft suffered engine failure: it made a forced landing near the Dutch coast, and Heath was captured. In Stalag 383 near Munich he met Terry Frost, whom he taught to draw and paint by passing on Forbes's basic methods of instruction. Heath became a persistent escaper, and was eventually banished to the isolation of a Silesian Stalag, where he remained until 1945, using his artistic skills as a forger of false papers for other escapers. 
After repatriation Heath returned to the Slade. He graduated in 1947, travelled to Paris, and spent a year disengaging from the influence of Cezanne and moving towards the pure abstraction of younger French artists like Serge Poliakoff; his first solo exhibition was held in Carcassonne in 1948. Heath visited Frost in St Ives in 1947, and again in 1951 (when he met Ben Nicholson) but neither event seems to have been crucial to his developing career. Arguably, and unusually, his part-time work as a lecturer in art history (1949-59) at the City Literary Institute, the Hammersmith School of Art, and the Regent Street Polytechnic was just as important. It paid the rent, and Heath freely acknowledged the resulting improvement in his own knowledge and understanding of art. In the same decade his twin careers as artist and teacher of artists gained momentum and began to overlap. Seeking to achieve complete abstraction in his painting, Heath initially inclined towards the 'systems' art (he called it 'dynamic symmetry') then being made by Victor Pasmore, Kenneth Martin, and Anthony Hill. However, in time their focus on mathematical precision became a constraint: Heath veered away from such austere practice, preferring to work intuitively and completely constructively, with what he called 'muck materials' like Polyfilla or cement. 
In 1953 Heath began a lifelong association with the Redfern Gallery in London as a regular solo exhibitor and published a rewarding and thought-provoking book, 'Abstract Art: its Origin and Meaning'. On 17 July 1952 Heath married Corinne Elizabeth Reid Lloyd ('b'. 1922/3), a designer, daughter of Charles Jesse Lloyd, banker. The newly-weds lived at Heath's house at 22 Fitzroy Street, London, before moving in 1957 to 28 Charlotte Street; they had a son and a daughter. In 1956 Heath was a participant in the important exhibition 'This is Tomorrow' at the Whitechapel Art Gallery, and in 1959 he began to exhibit outside London, at venues in Britain and northern Europe, in solo shows or in small, mixed, or group exhibitions of drawing or painting. In later years he travelled widely, drawing single-point motifs in Spain, Morocco, Norway, and Sweden, and 'the barren quality' of the landscape around his own Hebridean croft. These experiences fed an articulate process of painterly self-questioning, and a panoramic intellect developed from hungry and catholic reading. 
Heath never denied the many 'happy accidents' that can befall an abstract artist, an openness that helped to establish his charisma as a part-time tutor at the Bath Academy of Art, at Corsham Court (1955-76) alongside Peter Lanyon, Howard Hodgkin, Ayres, and others; and as senior fellow at Cardiff Polytechnic Institute of Higher Education (1977-88). His chairmanship of the Allied Artists' Association (1954-64) and his service with the Arts Council's art panel (1964-71) were marked by his disarming ability to facilitate, and not to dictate; but perhaps his greatest, unsung service to British art lay in his work during the 1970s and 1980s as standards moderator and troubleshooter for the Council for National Academic Awards. Through his determined promotion of the highest tutorial and academic standards in art education he helped to move British art education forward. Still painting, Heath died in France on 15 September 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51126


Hill, Alfred Hawthorne (1924-1992), comedian, was born in Southampton on 25 January 1924, the younger son and second of three children of Alfred Hill (died 1971), a former circus performer and the manager of a surgical appliance shop in Southampton, and his wife, Helen, 'nee' Cave. His father's occupation caused Hill some childhood embarrassment, being taunted by shouts of 'Hillie's dad sells french letters'. His mother was by all accounts a sweet, loving person -- a love reciprocated by the young Alfred. At the age of eleven he won a scholarship to the Richard Taunton School in Southampton, but he left in 1939, when he was fifteen. After a variety of menial jobs he became a milkman driving a horse-drawn cart round Southampton and fantasizing that he was Wyatt Earp, or some other Western legend. He later capitalized on this experience with the song 'Ernie -- the Fastest Milkman in the West', which was a number one hit in 1971. In the early 1940s Hill became an accomplished semi-professional entertainer, specializing in broad comedy and 'double entendres' that were largely lifted from Max Miller, the popular comedian of the day. 
In 1943, after a mix-up in Cardiff where he had been arrested as a deserter (his call-up papers had never reached him), Hill duly joined the army as a driver/mechanic in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers. He hated it, and after the war never drove again. In 1945 he applied to and was taken on by the army entertainment unit 'Stars in battledress'. There he was spotted by Colonel Richard Stone, who liked him so much that when he returned to civilian life and started a theatrical agency he recruited Hill as one of his first clients. Before that Private Hill had become Mr Hill, his service career behind him, and after auditioning unsuccessfully at the Windmill Theatre in 1947 he considered his future; Alf Hill did not have the right ring to it and, after considering alternatives, Hill settled on Benny -- the American comedian Jack Benny being one of his heroes. He then tried out his comedy material in pubs and working men's clubs -- a tough but useful training ground for a would-be funny man. 
Moving up-market in 1947 Hill appeared in a revue, 'Spotlight', at the Twentieth-Century Theatre in Notting Hill Gate, and after that came more appearances in pubs and clubs. It was now that Richard Stone took over and in 1948 he booked Hill into a seaside summer season in Cliftonville, Kent, in the show 'Gay Time', as 'feed' (that is, straight man) to principal comedian Reg Varney, who described Hill as 'brilliant'. Hill was indeed brilliant as a feed, but not yet as a solo comedian. However, television had erupted in the early 1950s and was to take Hill out of the also-rans and, in time, to make him an internationally known English comedian -- momentarily perhaps even more famous than Chaplin -- and a multi-millionaire. At a time when television was grateful for anything, Hill wrote and performed material that was well above the average for the day, and he also used the medium's technical flexibility, which enabled him to perform such tricks as impersonating the entire line-up of panel games, both male and female. 
Now established on television, Hill returned to radio in 1954 with the successful series starring ventriloquist Peter Brough, 'Educating Archie', in which he played the tutor of the dummy Archie. In that role he followed in the footsteps of Tony Hancock, Max Bygraves, and Beryl Reid, among others. Then came West End theatre in the shape of 'Paris by Night' (1955), which featured a number of scantily dressed showgirls. The revue, which co-starred the accident-prone comedy magician Tommy Cooper, ran for a year. Hill's next stage venture was in 1959. 'Fine Fettle', at the Palace Theatre, was a musical revue. The critic Milton Shulman, writing in the 'Evening Standard' in August 1959, commented that Hill brought 'a secret lip-smacking irreverence, which gives his humour a boisterous, even bawdy, quality'. This insight summed up the whole of Hill's work. Popular as he was when he was alive, after his death he disappeared from the public consciousness very quickly, and if remembered at all it was largely for his grossness and lack of subtlety. 
Hill's film career was not startling. In 1956 he starred in 'Who Done It?', written by T. E. B. Clarke and directed by Basil Dearden. According to Hill it was not a happy debut. His next film was 'Light up the Sky', in 1959, in which he and Tommy Steele co-starred as partners in a music-hall double act who were called up in the Second World War and stationed on a searchlight battery. In 1965 he had a cameo role in 'Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines', and in 1968 another cameo role in 'Chitty Chitty Bang Bang'. In 1969 came 'The Italian Job', which starred Noel Coward and Michael Caine, and in which Benny Hill played a sex-mad computer expert who lusted after large women and wound up in gaol. In 1970 he co-produced a short film, 'Eddie in August', in which he played a girl chaser (unlucky, of course). It was not a success, and Hill went back to the safer waters of television. 
Apart from television shows at the BBC and at Thames Television, Hill appeared in television commercials for a popular soft drink of the day. His one essay into the classical repertory was to play Bottom in an Associated Rediffusion Television production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' in 1964. His most popular television character was Fred Scuttle, a lisping, bespectacled buffoon, but, that said, his characters all had a certain similarity -- whatever the hat or the wig he had on, it was always the same Benny Hill underneath. In 1980, in the 'Los Angeles Times', Howard Rosenberg wrote of Hill's astonishing impact on American television: 'Hill's unlikely stylistic mix of Charlie Chaplin, Ernie Kovacs and Milton Berle -- the film speed-ups, blackouts, visual gags, drag queening, cheap double entendres and bawdy songs -- emerges as a sort of polished drivel, a triumph of trash so revolting that unbelievably you tend to like it.' Hill was eventually sacked from Thames Television in 1988, after a ten-minute interview. He was understandably upset, but his ratings were falling, and some of his jokes and characterizations had been recycled once too often. He died, unmarried, of heart failure in his flat in Twickenham Road, Teddington, London, on Saturday 18 April 1992. He was alone and his body was not discovered until the following Tuesday -- a sad end for a man who had made the world laugh. 


@@@@@


doc= 51130


Hobson, Sir Harold (1904-1992), theatre critic, was born on 4 August 1904 in Thorpe Hesley, near Rotherham, Yorkshire, the only son of Jacob Hobson, miner, and later insurance agent, and his wife, Minnie, 'nee' McKegg. Although left disabled by polio in his eighth year and largely educated at home by his working-class parents, who brought him large quantities of books from the public library, he recovered sufficiently to attend Sheffield grammar school, from where he gained a scholarship to Oriel College, Oxford; he graduated with a second-class degree in modern history in 1928. While at Oxford he met and developed a close friendship with Erwin Canham, later editor of the 'Christian Science Monitor'. Hobson began to write London theatre reviews for the paper in 1931, and in 1935 he was placed on its permanent staff. He remained its London drama critic until 1974. Regular employment enabled him to marry, on 13 July 1935, a radiantly cheerful schoolteacher, Gladys Bessie (Elizabeth) Johns (1900-1979), eldest daughter of James Johns. The marriage was the cornerstone of Hobson's private and professional life. They had one daughter, Margaret. 
As Hobson made clear in his autobiography, 'Indirect Journey' (1978), his critical attitudes were shaped by his experiences of life. His crusading moral zeal was a legacy of his parents' faith (which he inherited) in Christian Science and its belief in the unreality of disease. His catholicity of taste was formed by his omnivorous early reading, which embraced everything from the Authorized Version to the entire works of Sir Walter Scott. And his emphasis in acting on the import of a single gesture, or even a vocal inflection, was a consequence of his own severe physical restrictions. His subjective approach to theatre was complemented by formidable scholarship but he was, essentially, a romantic critic who believed in the passionate communication of a highly individual response. 
Hobson's romanticism was fuelled by his boyhood experiences of theatregoing in Sheffield: seeing Sir John Martin-Harvey in the Dickensian adaptation, 'The Only Way', he was haunted by the heart-rending desolation with which the actor expressed his failure to arouse affection or esteem. But Hobson's impressionable temperament was accompanied by a shrewd intellect: as an Oxford history student he was overwhelmed by Thucydides' account of the disastrous Athenian expedition against Syracuse which, with its famous reversal of fortune, affected his view both of drama and of the structure of theatrical criticism. 
It was through a mixture of enterprise and good fortune that Hobson became drama critic of the 'Sunday Times'. In 1939 he provided the newspaper with a front-page scoop about the evacuation of schools in the event of war. That led to regular book-reviewing throughout the war, his appointment as assistant literary editor in 1942, and from 1945 his acting as deputy to the paper's legendary drama critic, James Agate. The belated discovery by the 'Sunday Times''s proprietor, Lord Kemsley, of Agate's homosexuality led to Hobson, an approved family man, being appointed his successor in 1947. He remained as theatre critic of the paper until 1976. 
In his early years Hobson championed the work of T. S. Eliot, Christopher Fry, and John Whiting, who, like himself, were all committed Christians. But two significant events elevated him into a critic of enormous influence. One, paradoxically, was the appointment of Kenneth Tynan as his opposite number at 'The Observer' in 1954: Tynan's voluptuous stylishness was seen as the antithesis of Hobson's puritan zeal, but it gave Sunday theatre-reviewing the heady air of a keenly fought intellectual duel. Even more crucial was the emergence in the 1950s of a new style of drama to which Hobson responded with intuitive understanding. He carried on a weekly campaign on behalf of Samuel Beckett's 'Waiting for Godot' (1954), helping it to become a commercial success. He recognized, though less vehemently than Tynan, the romantic individualism of John Osborne's 'Look Back in Anger' (1956) and, alone of all critics, he saw the merits of Harold Pinter's 'The Birthday Party' (1958), describing its author as 'the most original, disturbing and arresting talent in theatrical London' (Elsom, 85) and encouraging him, after the play's box-office failure, to go on writing. 
Not all Hobson's enthusiasms were widely shared: few others believed as steadfastly as he in the dramatic genius of William Douglas-Home. However, his love of French theatre was enormously influential in breaching English isolationism. His adoration for Edwige Feuillere and Jean-Louis Barrault was well known, but it was his endorsement of dramatists such as Jean Genet, in whom he heard echoes of the Catholic mass, and Marguerite Duras, that led to their gradual acceptance in Britain. In recognition of his pioneering enthusiasm, which included such books as 'The French Theatre of Today' (1953) and 'French Theatre since 1830' (1978), he was created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur in 1960. He returned the decoration eight years later in protest at the French government's dismissal of Jean-Louis Barrault from his tenure at the Odeon. In 1971 he was created CBE for his services to theatre and he was knighted in 1977. The honour he most prized, since his adolescent ambition had been to become an Oxford academic, was being elected honorary fellow of Oriel College in 1974. 
Hobson was often regarded as a wayward, mercurial critic. His lasting achievement lay in his constant championship of avant-garde writers. His most distinctive quality was his ability to discover an epiphanic experience in a single moment, such as Olivier's rising inflection on the phrase 'troops of friends' in the course of Macbeth's downfall. Penelope Gilliatt once wrote that 'the characteristic sound of an English Sunday was that of Harold Hobson barking up the wrong tree' (Hobson, 'Indirect Journey', 107). Posterity has shown that, more often than not, he barked up the right tree. 
Hobson's life was an astonishing triumph over disability. His kindness to young critics was a constant inspiration. However, his greatest happiness came from his marriage to Elizabeth. Following her death in 1979 he wrote (in his 1981 'Who's Who' entry, under 'recreations') of 'her incomparable charm and wisdom, and the unquenchable radiance of her personality'. On 7 April 1981 he married their friend Nancy Penhale (1909-1992), who remained his companion during his final days in Westhampnett Nursing Home, Westhampnett, Chichester, Sussex. He died there on 12 March 1992. He was survived by his wife and the daughter of his first marriage. A memorial service was held at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 24 November 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51132


Hone, Sir (Herbert) Ralph (1896-1992), army officer and colonial official, was born on 3 May 1896 at 89 Sackville Road, Hove, Sussex, the son of Herbert Hone, schoolmaster, and his wife, Miriam Grace, 'nee' Dracott. He was educated at Varndean Grammar School, Brighton, where he was senior prefect. His mother died while he was still in his teens; his father, who was 'a man of character' ('The Independent'), went on to become mayor of Brighton in 1937. 
Hone passed the civil service examination in April 1915 before joining the Inns of Court regiment, from which he was commissioned and gazetted to the London Irish Rifles later that year. He was posted to the 1/18th battalion, a sporting unit which had kicked a rugby football ahead when it attacked in the murderous battle of Loos in autumn 1915. He served in the Notre Dame de Lorette sector and then at Vimy Ridge, where incessant rain made the trenches insanitary, but where everyone was expected to shave every day. Acute trench fever and impetigo put him in hospital, but after discharge he returned to the trenches, and to endless bombardment including by mustard gas shells. He was present when the Germans opened their offensive on 21 March 1918 with 6000 guns. Hone's company checked the first infantry assault near Couillet valley and took twenty-five German prisoners. In the ensuing fighting Hone anticipated and foiled several German attempts to infiltrate their lines, and led several counter-attacks. When the Germans sited a machine-gun where it could enfilade his company lines, he took a Lewis gun on to the parapet and promptly silenced it. In doing so he was badly wounded in the arm. Although losing blood fast, he was sent to walk several miles back to the casualty clearing station, where, with his bones fractured and the ulnar nerve severed, he was registered as 'slightly wounded'. However, he was sent back to England and his courage and conduct in the action was recognized by the award of an MC. He ended the war as a captain. On 12 November 1918 he married Elizabeth Daisy ('b'. 1894/5), daughter of James Herbert Matthews, master tailor of Brighton. They had a son and a daughter. 
After the war Hone served as a staff captain in the Ministry of Munitions from 1918 to 1920, when he resigned his commission to join the colonial service as assistant treasurer in Uganda. He used his spare time to qualify as a barrister, and was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in 1924. He also sat the London LLB externally. From 1924 to 1925 he practised on the south-eastern circuit, but in 1925 he returned to Africa as registrar to the high court (1925-8) and resident magistrate (1928-30) in Zanzibar. In 1930 he was appointed crown counsel in Tanganyika territory. From January to August 1933 he returned to Britain as assistant legal adviser to the colonial and dominions offices. He was then appointed attorney-general in Gibraltar, where he was commissioner for the revision of the laws of Gibraltar in 1934 and chairman of the Gibraltar government commission on slum clearance and rent restriction in 1936. He was also occasionally acting chief justice of Gibraltar. His next posting was as attorney-general of Uganda from 1937 to 1943. 
Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War, and while still attorney-general of Uganda, Hone was made commandant of the Uganda defence force. In 1941 he was transferred to general headquarters Middle East, first as legal adviser (advising notably on law in the conquered Italian territories) and then (from 1942) as chief political officer. In March 1943 he was promoted to major-general, 'to ease his command over the Brigadiers under him' ('The Independent'); he was also appointed CBE. Later that year he returned to London, where he served on the general staff at the War Office, dealing in particular with the war in Asia. He travelled frequently between London and SEAC headquarters, and struck up a close friendship with Louis Mountbatten, Lord Mountbatten of Burma. 
In August 1945 Hone was appointed chief civil affairs officer in Malaya, overseeing the transition to civilian rule. He was present at the Japanese surrender at Singapore on 12 September. On 25 October 1945 (he and his first wife having divorced earlier in the year) Hone married Sybil Mary, daughter of Auguste Alfred Collins, and widow of Wing Commander G. Simond. There was one son of this second marriage. Mountbatten pressed for Hone to be offered the post of governor-general of Malaya in 1946, and was extremely annoyed when the Colonial Office vetoed the appointment on the grounds that divorced people should not become colonial governors. Mountbatten took up the point with George VI, who then abolished the rule about divorce. In consequence Hone, who was appointed KBE in 1946, and served as secretary-general to the governor-general of Malaya from 1946 to 1948, and deputy commissioner-general in south-east Asia from 1948 to 1949, was appointed governor and commander-in-chief of North Borneo in 1949. Mountbatten wrote to him saying that he was sure he would make a great success of the post, 'for it will help to establish the principle that the Governorship should be open to all suitable people, irrespective of old-fashioned rules' ('Daily Telegraph'). However, the Colonial Office did not bow out gracefully, and in their letter of congratulation on his appointment the deputed official said, 'It may interest you to know that in this respect you are establishing a precedent and I have been asked to make it clear to you that your appointment will not automatically entitle you to receive an invitation to social entertainments, such as Garden Parties at Buckingham Palace, and this particular embargo is not, I am told, to be waived. ('Daily Telegraph')' As governor of North Borneo, Hone was, in the event, a great success, encouraging the country's recovery from the ravages of the Japanese occupation, expanding trade in rubber, timber, and copra, and travelling to remote villages which no governor had visited before. He was appointed KCMG in 1951. In 1954 he returned to Britain to become head of the legal division of the Commonwealth Relations Office. He remained there until 1961, advising and producing reports on a wide range of constitutional and legal issues. In 1961 he retired from the civil service, and resumed practice at the bar. Nevertheless, he also held many important advisory posts both at home and overseas, his ability at bringing new ideas to solve apparently intractable problems being very much appreciated. He was constitutional adviser to the Kenyan government from December 1961 to January 1962, to R. A. Butler (on central Africa) from July to October 1962, to the South Arabian government from October 1965 to January 1966, and to the Bermudan government from July to November 1966. 
The key to Hone's success was hard work, meticulous attention to detail, and good-humoured leadership. He relaxed with tennis, badminton, and philately. He was an active freemason, and was bailiff grand cross of the order of St John. He died at his home, 56 Kenilworth Court, Lower Richmond Road, Putney, London, on 28 November 1992, of pneumonia; he was survived by his second wife and by his three children. A memorial service was held on 8 February 1993 at the Grand Priory Church, St John's Square, Clerkenwell Road, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 51133


Robertson, Walford Graham (1866-1948), painter and theatre designer, was born on 8 July 1866 in London, the only child of Graham Moore Robertson (1813-1884), a wealthy shipbuilder, and his wife, Marion Greatorex (died 1907). Baptized Graham Walford, he reversed his names as a schoolboy, but was always known as Graham. He was educated at Slough ('c'.1875- 'c'.1879) and at Eton College (1880- 'c'.1881), but gained more valuable instruction in the studios of prominent artists. Walter Crane, Thomas Armstrong, and Edward Burne-Jones were among those who befriended the boy and occasionally used him as a model. After studying with the painter Albert Moore (in 1879-80 and in 1885-7), and at the National Art Training School, South Kensington (1881-4), Robertson exhibited his first paintings at the New Gallery in 1889. He became a member of the New English Art Club in 1891 and of the Royal Society of British Artists in 1896. He specialized in imaginative depictions of beautiful women (inspired by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, whom he idolized but never met), as well as landscapes and portraits betraying the influence of his friend James McNeill Whistler. His one-man exhibition at the Carfax Gallery in 1906 (followed by election to the Royal Institute of Oil Painters in 1910) helped secure his reputation as a rising talent, but he ultimately failed to achieve distinction as a painter. 
The large fortune Robertson inherited at the age of eighteen had minimal impact on his spartan way of life. Money did, however, free him to pursue myriad artistic interests (which ultimately proved quite lucrative) and to purchase works of art from his friends. He acquired important examples of contemporary painting such as Whistler's 'Arrangement in Brown and Black: Portrait of Miss Rosa Corder' (Frick Collection, New York) and Rossetti's 'Proserpine' (Tate collection). Many of these were sold at Christies on 22 July 1949. He also assembled an outstanding group of drawings, paintings, and prints by William Blake. A shrewd rather than extravagant collector, Robertson pursued Blake at a time when his art was undervalued, and he made pioneering contributions to Blake scholarship. His Carfax exhibition of 1906 included a series of colour prints undertaken as 'experiments in search of the lost method of William Blake'. In 1907 he edited a new illustrated edition of Alexander Gilchrist's biography of Blake (1863), and in 1952 his notes on his own Blake collection were published posthumously. By gift or bequest, Robertson transferred most of his Blake holdings to art institutions in Britain, including the Tate Gallery, the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, and the British Museum. 
Although Robertson never married, he relished the company of older, glamorous women, and was particularly devoted to his mother. His enthusiasm for the stage engendered friendships with celebrated actresses, most notably Ellen Terry, whom he met in 1887. In 1892 Ada Rehan introduced him to the New York theatre manager Augustin Daly, who hired him to design costumes for 'The Foresters' (1893), 'The School for Scandal' (1893), 'As You Like It' (1894), 'Twelfth Night' (1894), 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona' (1895), and 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1895). Robertson's detailed letters and drawings for these productions (Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, DC) attest to his concern with balancing historical accuracy with pictorial beauty. Daly's cavalier alteration of his designs irritated him, and he preferred collaborating with his friend the actor and theatre manager Sir George Alexander. In 1896 he made designs for Alexander's 'As You Like It' (Library of Congress, Washington, DC) and in 1898 he worked on 'Much Ado about Nothing' in partnership with the Scottish painter Arthur Melville, Robertson's mentor and studio-mate from 1896 to 1904. In 1898 Sarah Bernhardt recruited Robertson to design scenery and costumes for her production of their friend Oscar Wilde's 'Salome' (ultimately banned by the censor), for which Robertson envisioned the players in yellow against a deep violet sky. He went on to design costumes for Mrs Patrick Campbell in 'Undine' (1903) and 'Pelleas and Melisande' (1904). 
Having gravitated towards older companions in his youth, Robertson devoted his later years to the young. Inspired by the infant daughter of his deceased friend Melville, he wrote and illustrated 'A Masque of May Morning' (1904), 'A Year of Songs for a Baby in a Garden' (1906), and 'Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh' (1907). These were followed by other highly popular children's stories, books of verse, and plays. His Christmas play 'Pinkie and the Fairies' enjoyed phenomenal success when Herbert Tree produced it in 1908 with an all-star cast led by Ellen Terry. Robertson reinforced his growing reputation as an illustrator through his amusing embellishments to texts by Alfred Ollivant, G. K. Chesterton, Kenneth Grahame, and others. During the 1920s he composed and supervised local productions of his plays, pageants, and adaptations of eighteenth-century dramas. His plays manifest the fantastic turn of his mind. In 'The Slippers of Cinderella' (1919) the title character journeys in her glass coach to an economics lecture, and in the comic opera 'The Fountain of Youth' (produced by Nigel Playfair at the Lyric, Hammersmith, in 1931) a dog's miraculous rejuvenation as a puppy triggers a health craze. 
Robertson's enduring notoriety owes much to John Singer Sargent's masterful portrait of 1894 (Tate collection), which represents him in a long overcoat calculated to exaggerate his slender silhouette, with a jade-handled walking-stick and his poodle Mouton -- the first of several cherished canine companions, the rest English bobtail sheepdogs. Robertson's wry wit and whimsical ways provided the model for Jeffrey Panton in Alfred Sutro's comedy 'The Two Virtues' (1913). He became a cult figure among rising stage stars of the 1930s and 1940s. Laurence Olivier, Vivien Leigh, Noel Coward, and Lynn Fontanne were among those who made the pilgrimage to Sandhills, his house near Witley in Surrey, where no electricity, running water, or talk of war marred the nostalgic atmosphere. Robertson cheerfully acknowledged that he lived in the past, and his acclaimed autobiography, 'Time Was' (1931), is a treasure trove of anecdotes concerning the late Victorian celebrities whom he had counted as friends. Robertson died at Sandhills on 4 September 1948 of cerebral thrombosis and arteriosclerosis. By his request, his body was cremated and there was no funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 51134


Howerd, Frankie (1917-1992), comedian, was born in York on 6 March 1917, the elder son and eldest of three children of Francis Alfred William Howard, soldier and tutor in the army education corps, and his wife, Edith Florence, 'nee' Morrison. When Frankie was born his father was a private in the 1st (Royal) Dragoons. In 1920 he was posted to Woolwich barracks and he set up home in Eltham, London -- coincidentally the place where Bob Hope, another major comic talent, was born in 1903. After a spell in the army education corps Howard senior's health deteriorated and he was invalided out of the army when Frankie was in his teens. At the age of eleven Frankie won a scholarship to Shooters Hill grammar school, where his best subject was mathematics. At the age of thirteen he became a Sunday school teacher at the local church of St Barnabas. Later he joined the church dramatic society and he appeared in an amateur production of 'Tilly of Bloomsbury', his stage debut. This led him to apply for a place at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, but he failed the audition and took a series of undemanding clerical jobs, spending his evenings appearing with local concert parties, and in talent shows where his hesitant, stumbling manner was not appreciated. It was not the sort of stumbling that subsequently made him famous, but was born of nerves and shyness. 
In 1940 Frankie was called up and he served in the Royal Artillery. Stationed at Shoeburyness, Essex, he became, at last, a popular entertainer much appreciated by his fellow servicemen and women, and he honed the mixture of banter, insult, and denigration that later became his trademark. In 1943 he joined a civilian concert party called the Co-oddments, touring the Southend-on-Sea area. It was here that he met the two women -- Vere Roper and Blanche Moore, both pianists -- who became in turn his much maligned, allegedly deaf accompanist, and the butt of his humour. Next he was posted to Germany and, after some false starts (failed auditions with humourless officers), he attracted the attention of Major Richard Stone, who in the post-war years was to become a leading theatrical agent. He liked Frankie's routine and sent him off with a concert party to entertain the troops. It was at this time that he adapted his surname to Howerd 'to be different'. 
Demobbed in 1946 Howerd appeared at the Stage Door Canteen in Piccadilly Circus, a venue that in the later stages of the Second World War was a popular meeting-place for allied troops. Here, at a concert, he was a success and he was spotted by a theatrical agent, Stanley 'Scruffy' Dale. Dale's boss, Jack Payne, an astute impresario, duly put Howerd under contract. Dale arranged an audition for the BBC radio comedy and music show 'Variety Bandbox', and on 3 December 1946 the nation heard Frankie Howerd on the wireless for the first time; he became that rarest of creatures, a star overnight. By 1947 he was one of the most popular entertainers in the country, broadcasting regularly and touring the music-halls, often with Max Bygraves, a contemporary from a similar background. Jack Payne's ingenious manipulation of contracts made sure that Howerd received only a small percentage of his actual fee. In 1957, after a protracted court case, Howerd won both money and freedom from Payne. Stanley Dale had, by this time, left Payne, and he became Howerd's personal manager. Their fortunes soared. 
By 1951, joined by Eric Sykes, the writer chiefly responsible for Howerd's radio scripts, Howerd and Dale formed F. Howerd Scripts Ltd, which later blossomed as Associated London Scripts (the directors were Dale, Howerd, Sykes, and the writers Ray Galton and Alan Simpson, Johnny Speight, Tony Hancock, and Spike Milligan). Dale, with a technique similar to that of Payne, managed to pocket a large sum of money to which he was not entitled; he was ejected from Associated London Scripts and faded from the story. Howerd's success continued and he had many triumphs, including the radio show 'Frankie's Bandbox' (1961), and films, principally 'The Runaway Bus' (1954), 'The Lady Killers' (1955), 'The Great St Trinian's Train Robbery' (1966), 'Carry on Doctor' (1968), and 'Up Pompeii' (1970). His television successes included 'The Howerd Crowd' (1952, script by Eric Sykes), 'Nuts in May' (1953, script by Galton and Simpson), and, most importantly for Howerd, 'That Was The Week That Was' (1962, script by Galton, Simpson, and Speight). Most memorable was the long running 'Up Pompeii' (script by Talbot Rothwell). On stage he had success in the revue 'Pardon my French' (1953), the farce 'Charley's Aunt' (1955), as Bottom in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' at the Old Vic (1956), and in the musical 'A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum' (1964-5). On Howerd's way to the forum there were hiccups. Moliere's 'School for Wives' (1957) was not a success, and a musical, 'Mr Venus', folded after only seventeen performances in 1958. Worse was to come: a situation comedy, 'Frankly Howerd' (1959), was a flop; a television version of 'Twenty Questions' (1961) also failed; and by 1962 the top bosses of the BBC, both radio and television, felt that Howerd was finished. But in 1962 help was at hand. Peter Cook, seeing Howerd at the 'London Evening Standard' drama awards, where he was doing a spot, invited him to appear at his recently opened nightclub The Establishment. This led to Howerd's being given a spot on 'That Was The Week That Was', with such topical remarks as 'David Frost -- you know, the one who has his hair on backwards', and 'Robin Day -- hasn't he got cruel glasses'. This one television appearance had Howerd back at the top, and he was never to suffer the agonies of failing so badly again. 
Personally, Howerd could be charming or acerbic as the mood took him, kindness itself or bitingly sarcastic. He was not above inviting himself to friends' homes for lunch or dinner, but he entertained lavishly when on occasion he pushed the boat out. He was conspicuously untidy in appearance and wore a revolting toupee, to which he never referred. Howerd's speciality was the conversational innuendo -- a constant banter addressed to the camera or to individual members of the audience -- whose content was much less smutty than its tone. His partner for the last thirty-five years of his life was Dennis Heymer (1929-2009), a waiter at the time they met, but later Howerd's manager. Howerd died in hospital of heart failure on 19 April 1992, surrounded by friends and family. He was buried in the churchyard of St Gregory's Church, Weare, Somerset, on 29 April. He was one of the most outstanding comedians of his day and he brought originality and flair to many of his performances. 


@@@@@


doc= 51136


Smith, (Emily) Sheila Kaye- (1887-1956), novelist, was born on 4 February 1887 at Battle Lodge, 9 Dane Road, St Leonards, Sussex, the elder daughter of Edward Kaye-Smith (1840-1922), general medical practitioner, and his wife, Emily Janet Maclean (1843-1924), daughter of Robert de la Condamine and his wife, Janet. Sheila Kaye-Smith (she never used her first name) grew up in east Sussex, and childhood memories of summers spent with her younger sister, Selina (1889-1924), on local farms were to provide a fertile source of images for her novels set in the region. Photographic portraits of Sheila Kaye-Smith by E. O. Hoppe and Howard Coster reveal a serious yet unassuming woman, her dark hair cut in a short twenties bob. She attended St Leonards Ladies' College and in her teenage years wrote six short novels a year. When she was twenty-one her first full-length novel, 'The Tramping Methodist' (1908), was published. It displays themes which were to become characteristic of her work: love of place -- specifically the Kent and Sussex borders -- and a fascination with the Christian faith. During a career spanning some fifty years, she had thirty-one novels published with many more remaining in manuscript. Among her best-known works are 'Tamarisk Town' (1919), 'Joanna Godden' (1922), 'The End of the House of Alard' (1923) and 'The History of Susan Spray, the Female Preacher' (1931). In 1947 'Joanna Godden' was made into a film with Googie Withers in the title role. 
As a regional novelist, Sheila Kaye-Smith has much to offer: topographical accuracy, a keen ear for dialect, and a genuine affection for the locale and its people. She knew a great deal about farming life and the harsh conditions of farm workers in the nineteenth century and described their lot with imaginative sympathy. Indeed her evocation of rural life, as in 'Sussex Gorse' (1916), is realistic and vivid. However, although her characters are on the whole believable, there is a lack of psychological subtlety throughout. Though popular in their day, regrettably her novels have not found lasting acclaim, although 'Joanna Godden' and 'Susan Spray' were reprinted by Virago in 1983. Her most successful novel was 'The End of the House of Alard', which was a best-seller in both Britain and America. The theme of Anglo-Catholicism is central to this work as it was in the author's own life, and the declining fortunes of the novel's house of Alard come to symbolize the more general decline of the ruling classes in England following the First World War. Through the character of Gervase Alard, who eventually enters a monastery, Sheila Kaye-Smith expresses her own growing belief in Catholicism as the locus of immutable order and tradition. 
On 16 October 1924 Kaye-Smith married the Revd Theodore Penrose Fry (1892-1971), eldest son of Sir John Fry, baronet. They had met at the Anglo-Catholic Christ Church in St Leonards, where he was the curate. It was a church she had secretly visited as a child, attracted by the flickering candles and the smell of incense, visits disapproved of by her Anglican parents. Unable to remain at Christ Church once he was married, Penrose Fry accepted a curacy at St Stephen's, Gloucester Road, London, where a few years later T. S. Eliot became churchwarden. The couple lived first in North and then South Kensington. During this time she wrote a non-fictional study, 'Anglo-Catholicism' (1925). In 1929 they returned to Sussex, both deeply dissatisfied with Anglicanism, and were received into the Roman Catholic church. They bought Little Doucegrove, near Northiam in Sussex, a dilapidated oasthouse -- which had featured in her early novel 'Spell Land' (1910) -- together with 50 acres of farmland. This was to be their home for the rest of their lives. There were no children of the marriage. 
In addition to her novels, Sheila Kaye-Smith wrote some poetry, an autobiography entitled 'Three Ways Home' (1937), and a few works of non-fiction including two books on Jane Austen with G. B. Stern, 'Talking of Jane Austen' (1943) and 'More about Jane Austen' (1949). Her guide 'The Weald of Kent and Sussex' (1953) was part of the 'Regional Books' series and still provides a useful introduction to the region. Sheila Kaye-Smith died suddenly of a heart attack on 14 January 1956 at Little Doucegrove. She is buried beside her husband in the grounds of a small Catholic church which she had built at Little Doucegrove and which was dedicated to St Theresa of Lisieux, about whom she had written in 'Quartet in Heaven' (1952). 


