@@@@@


doc= 51141


Iona, abbots of (act. 563-927), played a major role in the history of Ireland and Britain from the foundation of Iona by Columba (Colum Cille) in 563 until the tenth century. The evidence is unusually good up to the mid-eighth century. The lost annals of Iona formed the basis to 'c'.740 for the chronicle of Ireland; the latter is no longer extant in its original form, but in derived texts, and especially in the annals of Ulster, much of the annals of Iona is preserved. Annalistic evidence for the sequence of abbots can be tested against a list preserved in the confraternity book of Salzburg, consisting, with the addition of Patrick, Ciaran, and Columbanus, of the abbots of Iona to Sleibine (died 767, the fifteenth abbot). A collection of genealogies of those abbots who belonged to Cenel Conaill (Columba's kindred) originally also extended as far as Sleibine. In addition, texts about Columba himself reveal much about attitudes both at and to Iona; two of them were composed by abbots. These texts extend from the 'Amra Choluim Chille' ('The wonderful [praise] of Colum Cille'), a difficult poem very probably composed shortly after the saint's death in 597, via two other poems of the mid-seventh century, to a fragment of a life by Cummene (died 669) and a complete life by Adomnan (died 704), the ninth abbot. A text no later than 'c'.700 gives an account of Columba's companions in his pilgrimage to Britain in 563 and of some of his relations by marriage. Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum' is revealing about Iona's relations with the English and, to a lesser extent, the Picts; for example, Bede says that Iona, an island off the west coast of Mull, was given to Columba by a Pictish king rather than by the ruler of Dal Riata (an Irish kingdom including the north-eastern part of modern co. Antrim and also what is now Argyll in Scotland). 
The first three abbots of Iona, Baithene, Laisren, and Virgno ['see below'], were all monks during Columba's lifetime. Baithene, indeed, was not only, like Laisren, a kinsman of Columba from the royal lineage of Cenel Conaill, but he had also been one of the twelve companions said to have accompanied the saint on his pilgrimage to Britain in 563. Baithene, Laisren, and another close kinsman and original companion of Columba, his uncle Ernan, appear in Adomnan's life as an inner core of trusted lieutenants and advisers. Baithene was prior of the daughter monastery of Mag Lunge on Tiree, Ernan of another Hebridean daughter house on the unidentified island of 'Hinba', and Laisren was prior of the monastery of Durrow in the midlands of Ireland, probably founded between 585 and Columba's death in 597. Virgno, on the other hand, was not a kinsman of Columba; indeed a Middle Irish note to the martyrology of Oengus calls him a Briton; this is confirmed by the life of Baithene, discussed below, and also supported by his absence from the eighth-century collection of genealogies of Ui Neill abbots of Iona (almost all from Cenel Conaill). Yet, he apparently had Irish connections: his sister's son, Comman, bore an Irish name. 


This story is, however, something of an exception to the way in which Adomnan normally presented Columba. If the texts about Columba are compared, in particular the 'Amra Choluim Chille' of 'c'.597 and Adomnan's life of about a hundred years later, there are two striking contrasts which must be important for the history of the community in the seventh century. In the 'Amra' the principal characteristic of Columba is his outstanding reputation as an exegete; Adomnan does not, of course, deny Columba's learning, but it is subordinated to his role as a prophet, a miracle worker, and one who enjoyed the companionship of angels. In this emphasis on scriptural knowledge, the 'Amra' is supported by the mid-seventh-century poems. Secondly, the 'Amra' presents Columba as the missionary of the Picts, and not so much the northern Picts as those around the Tay. Any notion that the Picts were not effectively converted by Columba and his immediate disciples is incompatible with the 'Amra', and indeed has required an implausibly late dating for the poem. 
The inheritance bequeathed by Columba to his chosen successor was, therefore, a demanding one. In Ireland there were dependent houses, perhaps mainly in the north-west, where Cenel Conaill was the ruling kindred, but also in the midlands; this confederation of monasteries was closely linked with the power of the Ui Neill, of whom Cenel Conaill was a branch. In Pictland, a full-scale mission was under way. And, for Iona itself, a reputation for outstanding learning had been established. It is worth noting that Baithene's short life concentrates on learning and says nothing of Pictland or of Ireland beyond a story implying both a respect for holy men who had remained in their native land and also Baithene's fitness to be included among the holiest as well as the most learned of their number. This is not surprising, since Baithene appears to have lived for only one year after Columba's death; he was said to have died on the very same day as his foster father, so that their feasts were celebrated together on 9 June. 




It was probably during Virgno's time that Oswald of Bernicia (died 642) and his brothers established contacts with Iona. Oswald was exiled together with his brothers, sons of the former king, AEthelfrith, when the latter's rival, Eadwin of Deira, came to power in 616. Both Oswald and Oswiu (died 670) are shown by Bede to have been able to speak Irish, whereas their elder brother, Eanfrith, appears to have had closer connections with the Picts. When, therefore, Oswald came to power in Northumbria in 634, he sent a message to Iona requesting that a bishop be sent to preach to his people. The annals of Ulster record the foundation of Lindisfarne, by the Monk Aedan, (died 651), in the very same year as Oswiu's victory over the British king Cadwallon. Whether Lindisfarne was really founded so quickly is doubtful, but what is striking is that it is given its British name (Medgoit) in the Irish annals, which may suggest some continued British presence close to Lindisfarne or British aid for Aedan's mission. 
The abbot at the time was 
Segene's successor, 
It was, however, in Cummene's time that Iona suffered the greatest blow to its power, the Synod of Whitby (664). Since the death of Aedan in 651, the Roman position on the dating of Easter and the tonsure had been advanced in Northumbria, first by an Irishman, Ronan, and subsequently by Wilfrid. Wilfrid had serious political backing from Oswiu's son and sub-king Alchfrith. Probably under pressure from Alchfrith, Oswiu summoned a council, over which he himself presided, at Whitby. Colman, then bishop of the Northumbrians, could not have made any serious concession without authority from Iona; he, like his predecessor Finan, was an Iona appointee. He appears from both accounts of the synod to have based his case principally on the holiness of Columba. 
The continued identification of Columba's monks with their 'patronus', as well as his reputation for scriptural scholarship, made it exceedingly difficult for his heirs to make any major change. Segene had refused to change in the early 630s when an Irish churchman, Cummian, sent him an elaborate letter justifying change to the paschal reckoning of Victorius of Aquitaine, and also in 640, when he and other northern Irish churchmen had received a letter from the pope-elect John urging them to accept the Alexandrian Easter. It is consistent with his conservative attitude on Easter that he was also notably active in collecting stories about Columba. Similarly, Cummene, whose death occurred on 24 February 669, was responsible for the first known life of Columba, in which he emphasizes the fearsome consequences for Dal Riata which flowed from their king having broken one of Columba's commands. 
The effect of the Synod of Whitby was to remove Northumbria and other English churches from any control by Iona. Colman had to leave and he was succeeded by an Englishman trained in southern Ireland. True, Wilfrid was to meet with opposition from those Northumbrians whom his disciples called Quartodecimans (that is, heretics on Easter), but there is no evidence that anyone sought to re-establish the authority of Iona. On the contrary, the terms of Pope Vitalian's letter to Oswiu and the eagerness of Wilfrid to extend his 'kingdom of churches' northwards 'pari passu' with Ecgfrith's military aggression threatened an English intervention unfavourable to the authority of Iona, whether among the Picts or even in Dal Riata. When Wilfrid was expelled from the bishopric of York and thus attended a synod held by Pope Agatho in Rome in 680, he 'confessed the true and catholic faith for all the northern part of Britain and Ireland, and for the islands' ('Life of Bishop Wilfrid by Eddius Stephanus', chap. 53). The ambition betrayed by this claim might well have been alarming to one such island, Iona: Wilfrid was hoping to make York the successor to Iona, not just in Northumbria but among the Picts and even in northern Ireland. He could entertain such ambitions only because Iona remained faithful to the Celtic Easter and tonsure. In Ireland, too, the shockwaves from Whitby were being felt. The arrival of St Theodore as archbishop of Canterbury (669) brought to England a man who believed that the community of Iona was heretical, and who almost certainly enjoyed a direct papal commission as archbishop of Britain (rather than as metropolitan bishop of a province embracing only southern Britain, as in Gregory the Great's scheme). Very probably in response to this event, the church of Kildare in Leinster (orthodox on paschal matters), and subsequently Armagh, developed claims to an archbishopric of Ireland. In the third quarter of the seventh century, the Ui Neill of Brega were at the height of their power (which explains why Brega was attacked by the Northumbrians in 684). They were more favourable to Armagh than to Iona. The ten years of the abbacy of 
His successor, Adomnan (d. 704), bequeathed a position to his successors that was much stronger in terms of the political environment, but weaker in so far as the community of Columba was now divided over the Easter question. The defeat and death of Ecgfrith of Northumbria at the battle of Nechtansmere, 685, to be succeeded by his half-brother Aldfrith, brought to the throne a personal friend of Adomnan. The death of Finsnechtae Fledach, king of Tara, ten years later, in 695, ended for the time being the domination of the kingship of Tara by the southern Ui Neill; Cenel Conaill would be the most powerful branch for the next generation. In the course of two visits to Northumbria to negotiate the release of captives held since the 684 attack on Brega, Adomnan had been persuaded to change to the Roman Easter. Armagh had probably abandoned the Celtic Easter 'c'.685 and Adomnan's conversion may have been due as much to changes in Ireland as to the learning and eloquence of his Northumbrian hosts. The effect of these changes was that the northern half of Ireland had probably entirely conformed to the Roman Easter before the end of the seventh century. 
The community of Iona itself, however, remained unwilling to change. The result was a split within the 'familia' of Columba which was to endure until Iona itself finally conformed in 716. The split was almost certainly the reason why in the early eighth century there were often two abbots of Iona. The 'Hibernian' abbot of Iona in succession to Adomnan appears to have been 
The background to the final decision to conform, taken in 716, can be inferred from Bede and from the annals. Of the abbots thought to have been Hibernian in sympathy, Conamail had died in 710, probably on 11 September, and Dorbene obtained the 'kathedra' of Iona in the summer of 713 only to die five months later on 28 October. Dorbene was the person who possessed the Schaffhausen manuscript of Adomnan's life of St Columba, where he might have read how, more than a century earlier, Columba had prophesied the conflict over Easter. Meanwhile Dunchad remained abbot. An English bishop of Iona, Coeddi, died on 24 October 712; and he may have been replaced by Ecgberht (died 729), who, according to Bede, came to Iona at about this time and was strongly Roman in his sympathies. The Northumbrians defeated the Picts near Stirling in 711; the letter of Ceolfrith, abbot of Wearmouth-Jarrow, to Nechtan, son of Derilei and king of the Picts, which must have been written between 705 and 716, is perhaps more plausibly dated a year or two after this battle rather than before. In that case, the arrival of Ecgberht on Iona is unlikely to have been later than the letter to Nechtan. The letter was designed to persuade the king to conform to the Roman Easter and tonsure; but it included, as one of its arguments, a passage on Adomnan's work in northern Ireland in favour of the Roman cause. In other words, since Ecgberht probably worked closely with Dunchad, the Roman abbot of Iona, the letter of Ceolfrith to Nechtan can best be seen as encouragement to Nechtan to bring the Picts into alliance with Dunchad and Ecgberht. Given the warm appreciation of Adomnan by Ceolfrith and Bede, and Bede's exceedingly favourable attitude to Ecgberht, it is unlikely that the letter was intended to break the connection between the Picts and Iona. 
In spite of this array of persuasive forces, the change was not accomplished easily. On Iona, Easter itself was changed in 716. This seems to have been followed by the resignation of Dunchad, who was to die on 25 May 717. His successor was 
Nechtan's expulsion of the community of Iona in 717 is not easy to explain. Assuming that Dunchad had been abbot for the Romani, his sphere would have included the Picts under Nechtan, if they had changed to the Roman Easter before 716 in response to Ceolfrith's letter. Nechtan may not have accepted the terms of the settlement, perhaps because he was not consulted, and perhaps because the influence he had over a Roman abbot of Iona would inevitably be greater than it was over an abbot accepted by all. Alternatively, it may have been that Nechtan expelled those who were making difficulties about accepting the Roman tonsure. It would, in any case, be very unsafe to infer from the annals that the link between the Picts and Iona was permanently broken in 717. Further difficulties are suggested by an entry in the chronicle of Ireland for 722, 'Feidilmid assumed the 'principatus' of Iona' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 722). Feidilmid is not included in the Salzburg confraternity book, which agrees with the picture of the succession given by another entry in the chronicle of Ireland s.a. 724: 'Faelchu son of Dorbene, abbot of Iona, slept; Cillene the Tall succeeded him in the 'principatus' of Iona' (ibid., s.a. 724). Although Faelchu was nearly eighty by 722, neither the phrasing of the entry for that year nor the one for 724 suggests that Faelchu had resigned. There were serious internal struggles among the Picts which might have had an effect on Iona, but these seem to have become serious only in 724. 
In 724 when 
In 726 Cillene the Tall (who died on either 14 or 19 April) was succeeded by his namesake, 
In 737 Aed Allan showed his appreciation of the significance of the 'cain' and his refusal to continue the alliance with Iona hitherto characteristic of the northern Ui Neill. He first held a meeting, situated close to the frontier, with Cathal mac Finguine, king of Munster, whereupon, in the words of the annals, 'the Law of Patrick was in force throughout Ireland' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 737). He had done precisely what Adomnan and his kinsman Loingsech mac Oenguso, king of Tara, had done in 697 when they established 'Cain Adomnain' at a great assembly at Birr on the borders between Munster and the lands of the Ui Neill; but this time it was the power of Patrick and Armagh which was displayed, not that of Adomnan or Columba. It may well have been Cillene Droichtech who brought about a realignment in Iona's alliances in order to meet the new situation. The traditional allies of Armagh were the Ui Neill of Brega; its new allies were Cenel nEogain; Cland Cholmain of Mide, however, had no strong and exclusive alliance among the great churches. The ruler of Mide in the middle years of the eighth century was Domnall mac Murchada (died 763), who may have been buried at Durrow. A number of things may have conspired to forge the alliance between Cland Cholmain and Iona, which was to rescue her influence in Ireland from the threat posed by the decline of Cenel Conaill: Domnall's friendship with Durrow, Cillene Droichtech's family connections in the midlands, and Domnall's policy of using the king of Cenel Conaill (weakened and therefore not a dangerous rival) as a deputy ruler in the north. 
The full effects of this realignment were visible in the time of Cillene Droichtech's successor, 
In 753 the law of Columba was proclaimed by Domnall mac Murchada, and in 754 Sleibine went to Ireland. He was presumably still there when, in 757, he also promulgated the law of Columba. However, when Domnall mac Murchada died in 763, his successor, Niall Frossach, was from Cenel nEogain; he, following the pattern established by his brother, Aed Allan, promulgated the law of Patrick in 767. Before Niall's death in 778 he had lost the kingship of Tara to Domnall's son Donnchad (died 797). He, together with Suibne's successor as abbot, 
Bresal's successor, 
The building of 'the new monastery of Columba' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 807) at Kells was an expression of the alliance between Cland Cholmain and Iona. It may also have been intended as a refuge from viking attacks for vulnerable and precious possessions, among them, perhaps, the 'Book of Kells'. The vikings began their attacks in 794. They burnt Iona in 802 and killed sixty-eight of the community in 806; this particular attack may have been behind the building of Kells. In 825 
In the long term the growing power of the vikings in the Western Isles was to make the position of Iona extremely insecure. The monastery inevitably found it difficult to maintain its role as the principal ecclesiastical link between Britain and Ireland. It attempted to do so by the same practice of making prolonged tours that had long been used to buttress the bonds of the 'familia' of Columba in Ireland. At some point in the eighth century, Columba's remains appear to have been elevated from their grave in the monastic cemetery and enshrined. In 818 


@@@@@


doc= 51145


James, Eric John Francis, Baron James of Rusholme (1909-1992), headmaster and university administrator, was born on 13 April 1909 near Derby, the younger son of Francis William (Frank) James (1865-1945), of Parkstone, Dorset, commercial traveller for wholesale chemists, and his wife, Lilian (Lily) Taylor (died 1961), daughter of Robert Taylor, of Whitehaven, who was a governess before her marriage. He was educated at Varndean School, Brighton, Taunton's School, Southampton, and Queen's College, Oxford, where he was an exhibitioner and honorary scholar (1927) and Goldsmith's exhibitioner (1929), played chess for the university, and graduated with first-class honours in natural sciences (chemistry) in 1931, and a DPhil in 1933. On 11 April 1939 he married Cordelia Mary Wintour (1912-2007), only daughter of Major-General FitzGerald Wintour, of Broadstone, Dorset. She was an active magistrate and a member of the Home Office advisory panel on the penal system; they had one son, Oliver Francis Wintour ('b'. 1943), who became professor and head of the department of medicine at Newcastle University. 
James had hoped to be a surgeon, but limited means led him instead into teaching; he took a temporary post in 1933 at Winchester College, teaching chemistry, and stayed for twelve years. In 1945 he was appointed high master of Manchester grammar school where he remained until 1962. He could have been headmaster of Winchester, but decided that, as an Anglican foundation, it was not suitable for an agnostic. In 1938 he published, with F. Goddard, 'Elements of Physical Chemistry', which became the standard school textbook for many years. Among his later publications were 'Science and Education' (in part) (1942), 'An Essay on the Content of Education' (1949), 'Education and Leadership' (1951), and 'Plato's Ideas on Art and Education' (1974). 
At Winchester, James exemplified his own belief that a 'scientist should be a man of wide interests in philosophy, literature and the arts' (personal knowledge) by becoming a 'div don' of high repute, that is, taking English, history and divinity; even though an unconcealed agnostic, he was always sympathetic to believers. 'Not to have experienced James on the minor prophets', one pupil said, 'is definitely to have missed something' ('The Independent'). 'He believed deeply in goodness and the power of reason' (Derbyshire, memorial address). He inspired intense personal admiration in pupils, many of whom later became Nobel prize-winners, professors, teachers, or captains of industry. Enlightened in his modest home by his father, who was devoted to literature, he believed passionately in the teacher as a cultural force, 'opening doors of fulfilment that otherwise pupils could never have attained' (personal knowledge). One boy spoke of James's 'winged words about Jane Austen' (A. H. Brodhurst, 'The Times', 5 June 1992), and another, caught reading a thriller in a chemistry lesson, was told: 'If it had been anything decent like Proust, I shouldn't have minded.' The next day, turning back from the blackboard, James found every boy had a volume of the 'Zodiac' Proust in his hands. As a bachelor he lived in the 'rough house' whose brilliant, and often merciless, mimicry of colleagues, led by James's abounding vitality of mind and personality, concealed real affection. In particular he passionately admired Spencer Leeson, the headmaster, and, despite the contrast in their beliefs, based much of his own headmastering on Leeson's example and precepts. 
At Manchester grammar school James's influence was much greater, because directed towards staff, parents, and governors as well as pupils. He followed Leeson's advice: providing 'spiritual leadership; intellectual distinction; and administrative ability -- very definitely in that order', seeing himself as ''primus inter pares' and doing a substantial amount of teaching' ('Spencer Leeson: a Memoir', 76). His tremendous drive, his belief in lofty academic standards, his devotion to, and excitement about, a school which made possible the best education in the world for clever boys irrespective of their backgrounds ('I've got every sort of boy from the sons of mill workers to the sons of company directors') (personal knowledge) -- all these created a great headmastership, one of the most notable of the twentieth century, comparable to that of Arnold of Rugby in the nineteenth century. He found time for everyone and everything until all the school's activities became imbued with his aspiration for excellence. To many of his staff the Chief 'was almost too good to be true. By merely being about the place he brought a vigour to the school which amounted in the course of time to a kind of revolution' ('Ulula', 83). Always available for discussion, he never pulled rank; wonderfully easy to get on with, he gave colleagues the impression they were a little bit more than his equal. At the same time he was a natural leader -- and an exemplar of his vision of masters' needing not only teaching ability but intellectual distinction. His skilful selection of staff on this assumption was vindicated by seventeen of their number achieving headships -- in which he was their most important source of wisdom and guidance as they in turn passed on the invaluable lessons learned under his aegis. For one protege the simplest and best was, wherever possible, to respond positively: 'Why not?' was a hallmark of his attitude to new ideas. 
About parents James was somewhat ambivalent: 'one of the most important things a headmaster has to do is to talk to parents about their children' contrasts bizarrely with 'given the choice I should prefer to have been the Head of an orphans' school' (personal knowledge). He spoke clearly about his aims and their responsibilities, expecting the school to achieve the former and parents to fulfil the latter: Manchester grammar school was a ladder giving their sons, from whatever level of society, access to the highest places in the land; and they must play their part, including 'selling their (diseducative) TV sets and buying Plato instead' (ibid.). 
As for pupils, some found James distant, even cold and remote, but on others he left an indelible mark, especially those whom he taught chemistry and, memorably, humanities: 'The supreme reward of being... at MGS was to be taught by Eric James... This Fabian agnostic took upon himself the Religious Instruction of the Sixth Form. What we got was an awesome trip through the history of Western Thought, after a thoroughgoing grounding in Platonism, the 'Chief' bemoaning the while his ignorance of Classical Greek. ('Ulula', 83)' One boy, asked by the Chief what he was doing alone near the library, said: 'Thinking, Sir'. The cold voice changed instantly: 'Good. Forgive the intrusion' (ibid.). The same pupil wrote: 'I do not miss him. What he was, in the effect he had on the boys of his High Mastership, and what they have passed on to the world, he still is and will be. He gave us our selves' (ibid.). 
James's objectives and achievements were clear and pursued relentlessly: scholarship should be an enduring source of satisfaction; equality of opportunity depends not on the ability to pay but on the ability to learn; since clever boys are not little swots but more, not less, likely to be good at other things, the school must give them every opening, including art, music, drama, games, and 'outward Bound-ery', in which Manchester grammar school excelled, with its treks and camps and outdoor centre at Disley. Where some immovable obstacle prevented swift action, as in the development of music, he had the patience to say: 'Where there's death there's hope' (personal knowledge). 
James was a member of the University Grants Committee (1949-59) (a very unusual honour for a headmaster at that time), of the BBC's The Brains Trust (in the 1950s), of the Central Advisory Council for Education (1957-61), and of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries (1958-61), and was chairman of the Headmasters' Conference from 1953 to 1955. His contribution to education was nationally recognized in 1956 when he was knighted, and again in 1959 when he was created a life peer, as Baron James of Rusholme. In the House of Lords as a cross-bencher he amply justified these honours by the vigorous part he played in debates relating to those fields where his knowledge and judgement would have full effect. 
In 1962 James left Manchester grammar school to become vice-chancellor of the newly founded University of York. He remained there until his retirement in 1973. York offered new challenges, and by meeting them James created one of the best post-war institutions of higher learning. While he may have run Manchester grammar school as if it were a university, he confessed he could not run York University as if it were a school. First it had to be built, and James played a major role in the architectural plan. Like J. H. Newman he felt its purpose was to help students to think clearly, to confront the perennial problems of human experience, to discuss and evaluate new and difficult ideas, which could often be better achieved by apparently remote than so-called relevant subjects. The buildings therefore had to express the university's total function as a small collegiate campus with a distinctive character: a community of scholars seeking excellence and maintaining tough academic standards; halls of residence as the centre of social and academic life, with a significant element of tutorial teaching and pastoral care; quality of teaching, rather than research, in a limited range rather than a multiplicity of disciplines. The architects regarded James as the perfect client: with the registrar, John West-Taylor, he and they in a rare creative collaboration hammered out the designs for a community in which the physical, social, and intellectual environments were one. James's particular satisfaction was the introduction of a lake, opening out and holding together the whole campus. 
Apart from the buildings, how did this man with a dream turn it into reality? By getting good men on the staff, by creating the kind of place where schools sent their best pupils, and by giving them all leadership and unstinted support -- 'miles of rope' ('The Times'). 'He worked best with and through others' (Derbyshire, memorial address). James made imaginative appointments such as Harry Ree, Alan Peacock, Patrick Nuttgens, Philip Brockbank, and Wilfred Mellers, for whom the early years at York were the 'best time of our professional lives' (ibid.). He wanted open access for applicants who could benefit from what York offered: 'Jude the Obscure need no longer look despairingly at the spires of an inaccessible university, provided he has three good A Levels... and is prepared, if necessary, to do without spires' (personal knowledge). 
Students could never claim he was out of touch; those who rejected his pipe-smoking paternalism, and even the International Socialists in 1968 and after, still admired him as always ready to talk, with glasses of Tio Pepe at the ready. His brilliant talents as a chairman, with relieving gifts of humour, held the university together, reconciling, or at least accommodating, conflicting opinions. Above all (and despite giving the impression that he did not care about ordinary people -- 'I do, only I can't go round saying 'I care'') 'he cared profoundly for us all' ('Ulula', 83). 
Beyond Manchester grammar school and York, James's influence was no less considerable. In the Headmasters' Conference he carried great weight: as chairman, conducting business with outstanding ability and dispatch; as a member, intervening with balanced judgement and common sense. He once flattened in one sentence those who pleaded for the retention of Latin for Oxbridge entrance: 'I cannot believe the whole future of Western civilisation depends upon O level Latin' (personal knowledge). He was a tireless champion of day and direct grant schools. He was an apostle of excellence and an unashamed elitist in an egalitarian age, and many responded gladly to his defence of Plato's ideal of an aristocracy of talent. He believed that in matters of the intellect and in judgements of value the idea of equality was irrelevant, and he led his grammar school colleagues in the battle for academic standards and selection against the proponents of comprehensive schooling. As a Fabian socialist he did believe in equality of opportunity, but felt that the Labour Party had betrayed its own ideals and experience by destroying the grammar schools while leaving the private schools untouched; many of its leaders had themselves benefited from the direct grant system, which offered opportunity without reference to financial background. Ultimately his campaign failed, and comprehensive schools mostly won the day; even his hopes of keeping a few highly selective schools open to the exceptionally gifted child regardless of financial circumstances were dashed. 
Among his fellow vice-chancellors James also found himself in a minority from time to time: while as a former member of the University Grants Committee he had no fears for university freedom from the government's auditing of university finances, his elitist aim to preserve the universities from narrow vocational studies failed. However his 1971 report 'The Education and Training of Teachers', which resulted from his chairmanship of the committee to inquire into the training of teachers (1970-71), won wide acclaim, introducing academic as well as vocational courses and regular in-service training for life: teaching became an all graduate profession, giving practising teachers more opportunity to take responsibility for young recruits. James served also as a member of the Press Council (1963-7) and of the Social Science Research Council (1965-8), and as chairman of the Personal Social Services Council (1973-6). He was a fellow of Winchester College (1963-9), an honorary fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects (1979), and was awarded honorary degrees by McGill (1957), York (Toronto) (1970), New Brunswick (1974), and York (1974). 
As a scientist and an aesthete James was deeply knowledgeable and passionate about alpine plants, and an enthusiastic patron of musicians and artists: the Jameses' gardens were each a miniature botanics; for many in Manchester, to visit the Jameses' house was to discover modern art for the first time; in York he and Lord Harewood introduced the idea of resident musicians (the Amadeus Quartet, paid for by Sidney Bernstein, Rostropovich, and others) and he brought Herbert Read and Henry Moore -- and some of the latter's works -- to the campus; through the Royal Fine Arts Commission (which he described as the most civilized body he had ever sat on) (S. Cantacuzino, 'The Times', 23 May 1992), of which he was a member from 1973 to 1976, and chairman from 1976 to 1979, he had a national influence. 
James was remarkable in combining a wonderfully unstuffy and relaxed style with speed of thought and work, ruthless clarity in decision making with insistence on balanced debate, a generous approachability with intolerance of the pretentious and self-important, a commanding intellect with encouragement and freedom for those who worked with him, unwillingness to suffer fools gladly with patience for the vulnerable, the weak and the sincerely simple, and a dominant personality with charming, self-deprecating humour, as much at ease with women as with men. He believed 'the supreme reward of teaching is to realise one is teaching a boy more intelligent than oneself' ('Ulula', 83), just as he found great pleasure in being forced, by intellectual ingenuity and persistence, to change his mind. Equally, an idea he did not believe in could be deftly sidestepped, as when a government inspector advised that a master should supervise the playground: 'An excellent idea,' he said. 'I'll pass it on to my successor' (personal knowledge). A swift stalker of corridors, he could still put an extraordinary variety of individuals at ease by giving them the impression of time and availability in the comfort of his study. Beneath words of wit there was a will of iron; and behind strong leadership there was willingness to trust and delegate without stint or caveat, so that failure to reciprocate caused him deep hurt. He was very human -- so that he delighted in the company of children, for whom he always had a sweet at the ready in his waistcoat pocket -- and working with him was great fun. He and his wife, Cordelia, were incomparable hosts, and the cleverer the visitors, the quicker his repartee, the more sparkling his mimicry, and the apter their quotations. 
Of medium height, with a small head (going bald on top), piercing blue eyes, a narrow face, sharp and mobile features, and a pipe usually in his mouth, often upside down and readily taken out to emphasize a point with expressive gestures, James was quick to speak and laugh, positive and enthusiastic in his quicksilver responses to others' talk, yet always with an air of meaning business behind his relaxation and ease. Even a sidelong glance from him carried great weight. His oft-imitated voice imbued everything he said with the sense of a rich, confident, and rounded personality. Latterly, loss of sight and lameness afflicted him. His death followed a head injury incurred after stumbling at his home, Penhill Cottage, West Witton, Leyburn, Yorkshire. Despite surgery he died three days after the accident, on 16 May 1992, in Darlington. He was cremated in Darlington on 23 May and his ashes buried in West Witton. He was survived by his wife and son. A celebration of his life was held at York University on 5 October 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51149


Daunt, William Joseph O'Neill (1807-1894), politician and author, was born at Tullamore, King's county, Ireland, on 28 April 1807, the oldest of five children of Joseph Daunt (1779-1826) of Kilcascan, co. Cork, landowner and militia captain, and his first wife, Jane Wilson (died 1816), daughter of the Revd Thomas Wilson, rector of Ardstraw, co. Tyrone. The Daunts, English protestants, had acquired land in co. Cork in the late 1500s; in 1828, breaking with family and class traditions, young Daunt became a Roman Catholic. He attributed his conversion to the influence of his tutor and his perusal of Catholic literature, although complicated psychological reasons involving his family may have played a more significant role. 
A protege of Daniel O'Connell, Daunt was MP for Mallow in 1832-3, until unseated on petition. A charter member of the Repeal Association from 1840, he was field director successively for Leinster, Ulster, and Scotland. In 1841-2, he was O'Connell's secretary while the latter was lord mayor of Dublin. In 1842 Daunt collaborated with Thomas Davis, John Blake Dillon, and Charles Gavan Duffy to found the Dublin 'Nation'. He contributed occasionally to 'The Nation', but later distanced himself from it and the associated Young Ireland movement. Daunt was close to O'Connell during the repeal leader's declining years in 1844-7, but after his death retired from politics. 
Daunt re-emerged in 1856 to help found the Irish church disestablishment movement, and remained active until the 'Disestablishment Act' became law in 1869. Although Catholic, Daunt worked closely on disestablishment with the intensely protestant English Liberation Society. In 1862, the liberationists invited him to join their executive council, but he declined. After Daunt and other Irish disestablishmentarians founded the National Association of Ireland in 1864, the liberationists supported it on the basis of 'uncompromising voluntarism' for religious bodies; this alliance would have been impossible if Daunt had not persuaded the Irish Catholic hierarchy to renounce the British government's grant to Maynooth College for training priests. 
Daunt deprecated papal and episcopal denunciations of secular republican organizations such as the Fenians, and generally urged complete separation of church and state. From his connection with the Liberation Society he became friendly with John Bright and other English Liberals, but was distrustful and critical of W. E. Gladstone. In 1870 Daunt joined Isaac Butt's Home Government Association. As one of the few important surviving O'Connellites he exerted considerable behind-the-scenes influence in what became the Home Rule League, until Butt's death in 1879. He supported Butt against the Parnellites, but unlike Butt he saw the value of parliamentary obstruction as a tactical weapon against English politicians. Although never a Parnellite, Daunt viewed home rule as the best attainable goal short of full repeal of the union. 
In July 1839 Daunt married Ellen Hickey (died 1897), daughter of Daniel Hickey. The couple had one son and one daughter. Daunt in his last years rarely left his estate at Kilcascan, co. Cork, but contributed prolifically to the press, especially concerning Irish finance, on which he was an acknowledged expert. 
Daunt wrote numerous books on political and economic issues and Irish history, and four novels, three of them under the pseudonym Denis Ignatius Moriarty. His 'Personal Recollections of Daniel O'Connell' (2 vols., 1848) is an important record of the Liberator's political conversations and non-political anecdotes. 'A Life Spent for Ireland' (1896) is a selection of extracts from Daunt's voluminous journals kept between 1842 and 1888, edited by his daughter, Alice Ismene Daunt. His writing style is dry, pithy, and readable, although frequently rambling. Daunt died at Kilcascan, Ballyneen, co. Cork, on 29 June 1894. 
Too introverted and reclusive, and possibly too scrupulous to be a successful politician, Daunt was nevertheless important as a link between the repeal and home-rule movements, and as an observer and chronicler of Irish nationalist politics for over sixty years. His unpublished journals and letters to scores of correspondents, as well as his many published works, are major historical sources, significant for their factual accuracy and broadmindedness. 


@@@@@


doc= 51152


Percy, Algernon George, sixth duke of Northumberland (1810-1899), landowner and politician, was born on 29 May 1810 at 37 Grosvenor Place, London, the eldest son of George Percy (1778-1867), second earl of Beverley and fifth duke of Northumberland, and his wife, Louisa Harcourt Stuart Wortley (1781-1848). From 1830 to 1865 he was known by the courtesy title Lord Lovaine, and briefly as Earl Percy, between his father's succession to the dukedom in 1865 and his own succession on his father's death on 21 August 1867. 
Educated at Eton College, Lovaine was an officer in the Grenadier Guards in his early years (1827-37), but followed his father as MP for the rotten borough of Beeralston, Devon, in 1831 only to find it disfranchised in the 'First Reform Act'. He contested, unsuccessfully, the Exeter seat in the election of 1841, and much more surprisingly failed to get elected for the North Northumberland county seat in 1847, his cousin Algernon Percy, fourth duke of Northumberland, a moderate Conservative allied by marriage to the whiggish Grosvenors, presumably declining to mobilize the overwhelming Percy influence over that constituency. 
Doubts about Lovaine's reliability may have been sown by his marriage on 26 May 1845 to Louisa Drummond (1813-1890). She was the daughter and coheir of the banker Henry Drummond, principal patron of the millenarian sect the Catholic Apostolic church, which had its origins in meetings of elitist church reformers at Albury Park, Drummond's Surrey seat, in 1826. The church blossomed under Edward Irving's inspiration into a bizarre religious manifestation of a group of eccentric tory aristocrats: extremely wealthy, exclusive, and deliberately self-terminating through insistence that, since the second coming was imminent, there was no need to provide any mechanism for discovering successors to its hierarchy of 'chosen' apostles. Followers, who included Lovaine for the rest of his life, adhered to the rule that the faithful should contribute a full 10 per cent of their annual income to the church -- for him a small sum until he succeeded to the huge Percy estates, after which his tithe cost him about $20,000 a year. With such riches at its disposal the church indulged in opulent display, creating for example the cathedral-like structure that eventually became the University of London's church in Gordon Square. Lovaine's 'very fantastic opinions', as Disraeli later described them (Disraeli to Queen Victoria, 30 April 1868, quoted in Blake, 492), were discreetly concealed by obituaries: 'in religious attitude he was a nonconformist' ('ILN', 7 Jan 1899, 7). As an act of piety he edited the two volumes of 'Speeches in Parliament by the late Henry Drummond' (1860), published within months of his father-in-law's death, after which he acquired, through his wife, the Albury Park estate. 
Lovaine entered parliament in 1852, when normal service was resumed in the North Northumberland constituency, and he continued to sit for the county until 1865. He was a solid, if uninspiring, supporter of the Conservatives and was rewarded with appointment as a lord of Admiralty in 1858 and as vice-president of the Board of Trade in 1859, performing unremarkably. As a back-bencher he spoke quite frequently, predictably, and briefly, mainly on military and naval matters, Irish education, and church rates. He ventured a joke when smoke abatement was being debated in 1857, saying that Scottish smoke was very like English smoke and that the same law ought to apply to the whole UK. His passion was only aroused when the sanctity of marriage was at stake: he strongly opposed the 'Divorce Bill' of 1857, aligning himself with Gladstone, and was even more vehement in resisting the frequent attempts to legalize marriage with a deceased wife's sister, which he was convinced would destroy marriages because husbands would take a fancy to their sisters-in-law (his sister-in-law was safely married to Sir Thomas Rokewood-Gage). 
In 1868 Northumberland, as he had now become, felt strongly that Disraeli was betraying the constitution, the party, and the social order in pressing ahead with the 'Second Reform Act', and he declined to give any active support to the Conservative Party in the election of 1868, remarking: 'If the present government obtain a majority, it will be only an incentive to the Whigs to plunge further into revolution, and between them Lord Derby and Disraeli they have let the mob in upon us, and will of course give way whenever they find themselves hard pressed.(Northumberland to Lord Hylton, 4 Nov 1868, quoted in Hanham, 26)' Disraeli refused, in 1868, to recommend Northumberland for the Garter, which the latter hankered after. 
Like Salisbury (Cranborne), who had also walked out of the cabinet in 1868 over Disraeli's 'Reform Bill' antics, and who became reconciled to Disraeli after he won power in 1874, so the politically unimportant Northumberland returned to the party fold. He was totally unexpectedly taken in to the cabinet as lord privy seal in February 1878, 'a strange choice surely' ('Diary of Gathorne Hardy', 354). At least he did no harm while in office, and at the opening of parliament in February 1880, as Disraeli related, 'he was consoled for his never having anything to do, by bearing the Crown -- rather a weighty and difficult office' ('Letters of Disraeli to Lady Bradford', 2.261). He was also consoled with the Garter, but was in fact kept occupied as chairman of the royal commission on the parochial charities of the City of London. Northumberland was one of the largest contributors to the Conservatives' election fund in 1880 -- his $2000 exceeded only by the duke of Portland's $6000 -- but this was not enough to prevent Beaconsfield's defeat, with which Northumberland's undistinguished political career came to an end. 
Northumberland's religious opinions were a handicap to political success; the major drawback, however, was his own personality coupled with his solidly traditional conservatism. Contemporary diarists found him 'rather deaf and slow'; Disraeli wrote to Lady Bradford that 'the cold, proud, Duke of Northumberland... was grim and acid' at a banquet given by Disraeli in 1875; and Gathorne Hardy noted that at a party meeting in the Carlton in 1885 Northumberland 'spoke in a whisper and dropped out words inconsecutively so that I doubt if the meeting knew what he was at' ('Letters of Disraeli', 1.206; 'Diary of Gathorne Hardy', 459, 565). More waspishly, 'Vanity Fair' remarked: 'In religion he is reputed to be an Irvingite, and to possess the gift of tongues. This gift he has never displayed in public' ('VF', 14 June 1884, 339). Disraeli summed him up in a -- not entirely fair -- pen portrait for Victoria: 'The Duke of Northumberland is very unpopular and has the reputation of being the proudest man in yr Majesty's dominions. He 'is' proud, but he is more shy; and suffering under a morbid feeling that he has never been appreciated.(30 April 1868, quoted in Blake, 492)' Northumberland may have been a political nonentity and a token cabinet minister, but he played the part of aristocratic grandee to perfection. In the home town of Grace Darling he was a natural for president of the Royal Lifeboat Institution (1866-99), and he was also president of the Royal Institution from 1873 to 1899. As the lord of Alnwick Castle and owner of a Northumberland estate of more than 186,000 acres he was as a matter of course lord lieutenant of Northumberland, from 1877 onwards; he was also a notably considerate landlord, offering his tenantry considerable financial help during the agriculturally difficult 1880s and early 1890s and giving a lead in the conversion of marginal arable land into pasture. He took seriously his responsibilities as by far the wealthiest landowner in the county, promoting the foundation of the Durham College of Science in Newcastle (forerunner of the University of Newcastle), of the Northumberland, Durham, and Newcastle Infirmary for Diseases of the Eye, and of the College of Medicine in Newcastle. Although an Irvingite he supported Anglican church-building and church schools, and gave $10,000 towards the formation of the see of Newcastle and the enthronement of the first bishop, in 1882. He catered for the social as well as moral improvement of the people on his estates by opening Hulne Park, Alnwick, to the public, donating a public park to Tynemouth, and helping with the building of the Tynemouth aquarium. 
Some of this munificence may have been financed simply by recycling some of the proceeds of the compulsory demolition of Northumberland House. This huge, rambling town house, with many alterations and additions to its Jacobean core, including a recently rebuilt ballroom, stood in the way of Bazalgette's plan for a direct link from Trafalgar Square to the Thames Embankment, and the Metropolitan Board of Works started compulsory purchase proceedings in 1873. Lord Elcho mounted a rather half-hearted preservation campaign, and the duke defiantly held a last enormous ball in July 1873, attended by the prince and princess of Wales, the Grand Duke and Duchess Cesarewitch, and 1000 other guests. Demolition, and the construction of Northumberland Avenue, none the less went ahead in 1874. The duke pocketed $497,000 in compensation. 
Northumberland died at Alnwick Castle on 2 January 1899, and was buried in Westminster Abbey a week later, alongside his ancestors. He was survived by his two sons, Henry George Percy, seventh duke of Northumberland (1846-1918), and Algernon Malcolm Arthur Percy (1851-1933). Proud, haughty, and difficult he may have been in London society, but in his own county and on his own estates he was said to be 'beloved and respected by all classes' ('Annual Register', 1899, pt 2, 127), a claim lent some credibility by the wreath sent to the abbey by the Albury working men's club. 


@@@@@


doc= 51153


Barry, Charles Robert (1823-1897), judge, was born on 3 January 1823, the eldest son of James Barry, a solicitor in Limerick, and his wife, Ellen Purcell. Educated at Dalton's School, Limerick, and Midleton College, co. Cork, he matriculated for Trinity College, Dublin, in 1840, graduated BA there in 1845, and proceeded MA in 1862. His career in Trinity, in one critic's view, did not show 'any very brilliant academical distinctions in his favour, a fact which seems to show that Barry was in his youth... indisposed to undergo any great exertion for anything' (Rhadamanthus, 43). Having entered King's Inns in 1841 and Lincoln's Inn two years later, Barry was called to the Irish bar in 1848, after which he joined the Munster circuit, where he was soon to serve as crown prosecutor. In 1855 he married Kate (died 1886), the daughter of David Fitzgerald of Dublin. They had two sons. Four years later he was made a QC at the early age of thirty-six, and from 1859 to 1865 he was crown prosecutor for Dublin. 
Barry sat as Liberal MP for Dungarvan, co. Waterford, 1865-8. Also in 1865 he became law adviser to Dublin Castle and was later to have carriage of the investigation that preceded the trial of Charles Kickham, James Stephens, and other Fenians. As a result, Barry incurred a degree of political odium. Barry's close ties with the Liberal Party assisted his further advancement: he became third serjeant in 1866, solicitor-general for Ireland in 1868, when Gladstone formed his administration, and attorney-general in 1870 -- this last elevation leading to his being sworn of the Irish privy council. Barry helped to frame the 'Irish Land Act' of 1870. 
Barry, a Roman Catholic, was appointed a puisne judge of the Irish court of queen's bench in January 1872. As an assize judge for the north-western circuit, Barry shortly thereafter presided at the first and second retrials of Sub-Inspector Montgomery of the Royal Irish Constabulary for murder. On 19 June 1871 Glass, the cashier at the Newtownstewart, co. Tyrone, branch of the Northern Bank was found murdered with a fractured skull and a slit in one of his ears. Montgomery, the senior policeman in the district, was called in to investigate, only eventually to emerge as the prime suspect himself: Montgomery had been in financial straits and had stolen $1605 from the bank, money which, together with a billhook identified as the principal murder weapon and a pruning knife, was found in a nearby wood. Montgomery's trial proved abortive as did the first retrial before Barry. The second, however, produced a conviction, following which Montgomery blurted out in court a belief in his own insanity and a strange tale of his having been drugged and poisoned. Barry was unimpressed and there was no reprieve: Barry, it was claimed, 'never hesitated to hang a man for whom hanging has appeared to be the correct remedy' (Rhadamanthus, 43). The case is featured in Denis Johnston's radio play 'Murder at Newtownstewart' (1937), also known as 'Murder hath no Tongue'. 
On the death of Lord Justice Deasy, Barry, in 1883, was promoted to fill the vacancy on the Irish court of appeal. It is hard to accept the view propounded by 'Rhadamanthus' that the translation brought no benefit to Barry's reputation. In 1892, in 'Delany' v. 'Dublin United Tramways', Barry dissented from his colleagues, but it was this dissent that won over a later court of appeal in a similar case in 1920. Delany, who was drunk, had attempted to board a moving tram. The conductor had sought to prevent this without instructing his driver to halt the tram. In the process Delany sustained serious injuries. The court of appeal majority considered that there was no case to answer and that the matter should have been withdrawn from the jury. Not so Barry: 'Take the case of a stowaway. Is the captain entitled to throw him overboard? Or to put him in the dinghy, and cut him adrift?'. In 'Agnew' v. 'Belfast Banking Co.' in 1896 Barry participated in the hearing of the appeal in the case of a woman who, while contemplating suicide, had sought to make a valid 'donatio mortis causa' (a gift made in contemplation of death). Barry's short concurring judgment, agreeing that no valid 'donatio' had occurred, focused on the interpretation of a critical clause in Justinian's 'Institutes': it reads like an advanced Latin seminar. 
In 1878 Barry was appointed to the commission chaired by Mr Justice Stephen to revise the criminal code. From 1880 he served as a senator of the Royal University of Ireland; and from September to December 1883 he was a joint commissioner of the Irish great seal. Barry died suddenly at his home, 3 Fitzwilliam Square, Dublin, on 15 May 1897, and was buried in Limerick three days later in the family plot in St Laurence's cemetery. 
Barry was 'a man of extraordinarily natural ability' who came to enjoy 'a popularity that has never been exceeded' (Ball, 2.305). He could 'tell you the winners of the Derby for many a year back, and probably make not a half-bad guess at the winner for the next' (Rhadamanthus, 44). 'He dresses, as a rule, with an attention to fashion that is unusual in an Irishman of his profession' (ibid., 43). Rhadamanthus added another pleasing and evocative cameo: Barry, he wrote, 'owns a fine red setter dog, which follows him to court, calls for him at four o'clock, takes him to the club, and generally behaves with such fascinating canine grace and good temper as to make himself the popular favourite everywhere that his master's dog should be. (ibid., 43-4)' 



@@@@@


doc= 51159


Savage, Michael Joseph (1872-1940), trade unionist and prime minister of New Zealand, was born on 23 March 1872 at Tatong, near Benalla, Victoria, the eighth and youngest child of Richard Savage (1830-1908), a small farmer, and his wife, Johanna, 'nee' Hayes (1838-1878). His parents were Irish Catholics who had emigrated to Victoria in 1856 and 1857 only to find a harsh and impoverished life, a constant struggle against poor soil and searing summer heat. Savage's mother died when he was five; his sister Rose (the eldest child and only surviving daughter) brought him up but she herself died in childbirth in 1891; his brother Joseph died later the same year. Savage added his brother's name to his own. Later, in New Zealand, his friends knew him as Joe, but to the public he was Micky Savage. The hardship and tragedies of boyhood did much to shape the concerns of the future Labour leader. 
After five years' schooling and two years' helping on the farm, Savage worked for seven years in a store in the small settlement of Benalla; he attended night classes at the high school and was active in the fire brigade and other community activities. There followed seven years as a station hand in New South Wales, during which he became a member of the General Labourers' Union, then in 1900 he joined his brother William at the North Prentice gold mine near Rutherglen in Victoria. There he became a member of both the local miners' union and the Political Labour Council of Victoria. The Rutherglen mines closed in 1907 and Savage, having read of the progress made by the workers in New Zealand under the Liberal government, and encouraged by his friend Paddy Webb who was already there, crossed the Tasman on the 'Manuka', arriving in Wellington on 9 October 1907 with 1 shilling in his pocket. He was thirty-five, a short, strong man, well read in the radical writers of the time, especially the Americans Henry George and Edward Bellamy, a courteous and matter-of-fact public speaker with a growing capacity to win his audience, and gifts as a political organizer. 
Savage spent six months cutting flax in the Manawatu swamp before moving to Auckland. There he boarded with Alf and Elizabeth French and their children. Savage, who never married, was to live with them until his death. He found a job as a cellarman at the Captain Cook brewery in Newmarket and was quickly caught up in union activities and as a member of the Auckland Socialist Party, making his mark as an organizer and as the party's most active soapbox orator. In 1911 he stood for parliament and, although unsuccessful, gained a broad base of support, significant at a time when the labour movement was deeply splintered. The defeat of militant unionism in the Waihi miners' strike of 1912 and the widespread waterfront disputes the following year convinced most labour leaders that industrial confrontation would not work and that they must try political action. The First World War brought further division but in July 1916 the New Zealand Labour Party was formed and Savage became a leading speaker at its conferences. 
In April 1919 Savage was elected to the Auckland city council, serving for four years, and to the Auckland Hospital and Charitable Aid Board. Although he retired from the latter in 1922, he was re-elected in 1929 for a further six years, an experience that gave him an acute grasp of the impact of the depression on the Auckland poor. At the end of 1919 he was elected MP for Auckland West; he held the seat for the rest of his life, and after the election of 1922 he became deputy leader of the parliamentary party. Labour increased its support over the next ten years but its leader, Harry Holland, an able but embittered socialist, had little appeal to the voter and support was largely confined to the cities. Following Holland's sudden death, on 8 October 1933, Savage succeeded him as leader. In place of socialism he offered -- in cloudy but reassuring phrases -- practical humanitarianism and the revival of the capitalist economy through state control of the monetary system. In the election of 1935 the government had clearly run its course, the right was divided, and Savage led Labour to a sweeping victory. 
Dominated by Savage, Peter Fraser, and Walter Nash (an Australian, a Scot, and an Englishman), and benefiting from an improving world economy, the new government moved rapidly to undo the cuts of the depression, to increase wages and pensions, and to introduce a large public works programme which included building state houses. The 1938 'Social Security Act', which extended benefits and introduced a virtually free national health service as an integrated and comprehensive system, shaped the country's welfare state for fifty years. The government increased its vote in the election of 1938 but internal division, the coming of the Second World War, and Savage's ill health overshadowed his remaining time as prime minister. 
By 1939 the cancer from which Savage had been suffering for some years was seriously affecting him and his mastery of caucus. John A. Lee, prominent among a group of Labour parliamentarians impatient with the pace of reform and swayed by Douglas Credit ideas, was ambitious to succeed Savage. Showing a staggering lack of judgement, in a party that prized loyalty, he chose to attack the failing prime minister. Savage hung on grimly, determined to see Lee defeated. At the party conference, held at Easter 1940, Lee was expelled from the party. Little more than a day later, on 27 March 1940, Savage died in Wellington. He was interred at Auckland's Bastion Point on 31 March. Peter Fraser, who succeeded him as Labour leader and prime minister, proved an outstanding wartime leader and a man of considerable political skills. But he never achieved Savage's remarkable popularity. For most New Zealanders Savage epitomized the idea of a decent society, shaped by the ideals of equality and material security for all. For thirty years or more his photograph hung in the homes of countless Labour voters. 


@@@@@


doc= 51165


Pinney, Sir Reginald John (1863-1943), army officer, was born at Camp House, Clifton, Bristol, on 2 August 1863, the eldest son of the Revd John Charles Pinney (1835-1911), vicar of Coleshill, Warwickshire; he was thus grandson of Charles Pinney, mayor of Bristol. He had five brothers and a sister. His mother, Harriet Margaretta Wingfield-Digby, died in 1877 during his time at Winchester College (1877-81). Pinney entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in 1882 and was gazetted in 1884 into the 7th foot (Royal Fusiliers); he entered the Staff College, Camberley, in 1889 and graduated in 1890. 
Pinney was deputy assistant adjutant-general at Quetta, India, from 1896 to 1901, and assistant adjutant-general to the Egyptian army in 1909-13. On 28 August 1900 he had married Hester ('b'. 1874/5), only daughter of Henry Head JP, of Shoreham, Sussex; they had three sons and three daughters. In the period between his two imperial postings, he fought in the South African War as a major in 1901-2, and commanded the 4th battalion of his regiment in 1903-7, being promoted brevet colonel in 1906. 
In 1913 Pinney was appointed brigadier-general in command of the Devon and Cornwall brigade, and in August 1914 he was appointed to command 23rd infantry brigade in 8th division: four regular battalions, just returned from overseas -- strangers to him and to one another. They reached France on 6 November. Two battalions were put straight into the line at Ypres. Pinney led his brigade, going well forward at moments of difficulty, in the capture of Neuve Chapelle (10-12 March) and on Aubers Ridge (9 May 1915). Shortly afterwards (8 June) he was promoted major-general, and he took 35th division to France in January 1916. This was nicknamed the bantam division; its infantry soldiers, all volunteers for Kitchener's army, ranged in height from 5 feet to 5 feet 3 inches (the army's pre-war minimum). Pinney took them in mid-July into the struggle for High Wood on the Somme, where they suffered many casualties for small gains. 
In September 1916 Pinney was transferred to command 33rd division, composed of regulars, Territorials, and Kitchener's army volunteers. Again there were many casualties for small gains on the Somme. In the following spring Pinney led them in the battle of Arras, where novel tactics secured some advance. He is supposed to have been the original on whom Siegfried Sassoon based his 'cheery old card' of a general whose staff were 'incompetent swine' (private information). 
While 33rd division was holding the extreme left of the allied line, on the coast at Nieuport, Pinney was injured; he thus missed most of the battle of Passchendaele, in which his division suffered heavily. It was called out of army reserve when, in mid-April 1918, Pinney fought a decisive minor action round Meteren. Ludendorff's second main attack, at the hinge of the French and British armies which was held by a Portuguese formation, broke clean through a gap 2 miles wide. Pinney, who had a sound eye for country, reconnoitred it with his divisional machine-gun officer, who had twelve guns with him. On 12 and 13 April 1918 this machine-gun company, aided by stragglers -- the best were Australian -- held the gap against six good German divisions; by 20 April Ludendorff had admitted defeat. 
33rd division took part in the subsequent advance to the German border that brought the war to an end; and in February 1919 Pinney retired. He had been made CB in 1917 and advanced to KCB in 1918: 'the true knight whose spurs were won in battle', as a friend put it ('The Times', 10 March 1943). He settled at Racedown Manor, Broadwindsor, in west Dorset, once home to William Wordsworth. He was high sheriff for the county in 1923, and a deputy lieutenant; colonel of the Royal Fusiliers (1924-33); and a benign influence on the neighbourhood. His eldest son, Bernard, was killed in November 1941, in heroic circumstances, commanding an anti-tank battery in Libya. Pinney died in Dorset County Hospital, Dorchester, on 18 February 1943, survived by his wife. He was buried at Broadwindsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 51167


Jones, Sir Glyn Smallwood (1908-1992), colonial governor, was born on 9 January 1908 at 24 Edna Street, Hoole, Chester, the first of two children of Gwilym Ioan Jones (1877-1943), grocer's assistant, and his wife, Agnes (1886-1960), 'nee' Roberts, milliner. His parents were both Welsh, but moved to Chester a few years before he was born. Though Welsh-speaking Calvinistic Methodists, they sent their son to the English-speaking Methodist church. His primary education was at the local council school. His secondary education was at the King's School, Chester, a day school close to his home. At King's School he became head boy, house captain, and captain of soccer, boats, and swimming. He also sang and played the piano and organ. His academic accomplishments were good, though not remarkable. In 1927 he was admitted to St Catherine's Society, Oxford (as St Catherine's College was then called), as a non-collegiate student, reading English and financed by a government grant for training teachers. He was a leading member of St Catherine's debating society and was a soccer blue. In 1930, with a third-class degree, and failing to secure a teaching appointment, he joined the tropical services course at Oxford, and a year later was appointed administrative cadet in Northern Rhodesia. 
From 1931 to 1951 Jones (or Jonas, as he was affectionately known) served as cadet, district officer, and district commissioner in the Zambezi valley, the north-west, the copperbelt (where he distinguished himself in a dangerous mine riot), the eastern province, and Barotseland. On 21 May 1938, on leave, he married Margaret Florence ('b'. 'c'.1912), daughter of Peter McWilliam, Tottenham Hotspur Football Club's manager and a former Scottish international. His wife did not return to Africa with him. On his return he was appointed secretary of the MacDonnell inquiry into a dispute between the Lozi (Barotze) paramount chief and the Luvale chiefs. On 7 November 1942, now divorced, he married a nurse, Nancy Madoc (1909-1998), daughter of John Henry Featherstone of Cape Province, South Africa. He was made an MBE in 1944. Their daughter, Elisabeth, was born in 1944 and their son, Timothy, in 1946. 
Jones became commissioner for native development in 1951. Appointed provincial commissioner in 1955, he served on the copperbelt -- where again he dealt with mine riots -- and as resident commissioner of Barotseland. He was appointed CMG in 1957. The governor, Sir Arthur Benson, made him secretary (later restyled minister) of native affairs in 1958, primarily because they shared a profound belief in the importance and continuing governmental role of the traditional chiefs. In 1958 the Colonial Office wished to appoint a new chief secretary in neighbouring Nyasaland. One of the two officers being considered was a Northern Rhodesia provincial commissioner junior to Jones on whose suitability his advice was sought late in 1959. Three months later Jones was himself offered the post and accepted it. He arrived in Nyasaland in February 1960. While the governor, Sir Robert Armitage, was on leave from August to November 1960 Jones was acting governor. Dr Hastings Banda, the Malawi Congress Party leader, who had been released in April after detention during a state of emergency, exerted pressure on Jones to release the remaining hard-core detainees, warning that he could not prevent major disturbances unless they were released. In exchange for an undertaking -- soon broken -- that Banda would control them, Jones released the detainees. Two weeks later he was advanced to KCMG. 
When Armitage left Nyasaland on retirement on 10 April 1961, Jones became governor. Devoted to the welfare of the Nyasaland people, he was convinced that Banda was the only person able to secure that welfare -- a view Banda shared. During the following three years his constant preoccupation was to support Banda, keep him in power and prevent him withdrawing co-operation with the British government. This task involved repeated capitulation to Banda's demands. To do otherwise would, in his judgement, have incurred widespread violence controllable only by external military forces, a prospect not to be contemplated. Given their joint belief in Banda's indispensable role, Jones and Banda developed a working relationship which took the country through self-government and secession from the Central African Federation in 1963 to July 1964 when, as Malawi, it became independent, with Banda as prime minister and Jones, now appointed GCMG, as governor-general. Shortly after independence a ministerial revolt resulted in the dismissal or resignation of all but one of Banda's ministers. Banda asked Jones if his staying on as prime minister was in Malawi's best interests and received an expected, promptly accepted, affirmative answer. Though agreeing with the ministers' objections to Banda's policies and autocratic methods, Jones tried to support him and desperately, but unsuccessfully, to effect a reconciliation. The former ministers fled the country, some with Jones's help -- and Banda's agreement -- and he long stayed in touch with them, trying to effect their return and a reconciliation. 
When Malawi became a republic in July 1966 Jones retired to England but did not sever his African ties. He was successively head of the Malawi Buying and Trade Agency in London, adviser to the Lesotho government, deputy chairman of the Pearce commission on Rhodesian opinion (appointed to assess African opinion on the proposed constitutional settlement drafted by Sir Alec Douglas-Home and Ian Smith), observer at the Rhodesia-Zimbabwe elections in 1980, and chairman of numerous African charities, including the Friends of Malawi Association and the Zimbabwe Trust. He died of liver failure at his home, Little Brandfold, Goudhurst, Kent, on 10 June 1992. He was cremated and his ashes were taken to Malawi and placed next to the remains of his son, who had died in 1961, in Zomba cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51168


Haigh, Mervyn George (1887-1962), bishop of Winchester, was born in Islington, London, on 14 September 1887, the only son and the second of the three children of William Edward Haigh ('b'. 1850), vicar of Holy Trinity, Islington, and his wife, Janet Middleton ('b'. 1861). He was educated at home before attending a day school at Highbury and then, from 1899, Clifton College. At New College, Oxford (1906-10), he gained second-class honours in moderations and Greats, after which he underwent theological training at the bishop's palace in Hereford, under the supervision of Dr Hastings Rashdall. He was ordained deacon at St Paul's Cathedral in 1911 and priested in 1912, then served curacies in East Finchley and Cranley Gardens, Chelsea, before volunteering as an army chaplain (1916). Haigh served in the former German colonial territories in east Africa until the end of the war, particularly in Dodoma, where, in addition to his normal chaplaincy duties, he distinguished himself as an effective counsel for the defence in three courts martial. He ministered, under appalling conditions, to soldiers suffering from a deadly 'Asian flu', before succumbing to malaria and returning to Britain (1919). 
Building on his experience as an army chaplain, Haigh taught Reformation and Renaissance history in the Ordination Test School at Knutsford, a training centre for ex-soldiers interested in the ministry, based in a disused prison. Knutsford, the brainchild of P. T. B. (Tubby) Clayton, was a precursor of modern pre-ordination training, and Haigh responded enthusiastically to its ethos: more egalitarian and less academic than traditional theological colleges, and yet still open to theological innovation under the leadership of its principal, F. R. Barry. He also became examining chaplain to the bishop of Llandaff, J. P. Hughes -- the beginning of a long and fruitful association with Wales. He was involved in the early 1920s in the committee, led by Percy Dearmer, which produced the innovative (and doctrinally relaxed) 'Songs of Praise', and he was a key contributor to the 'Grey Book', a set of proposals for the revision of the prayer book drawn up by some of the leading liberals in the Church of England. The latter gave him the opportunity to exhibit his considerable flair for liturgy, and the poetic power and ecological sensitivity of a litany preserved in his hand might well have received more thorough recognition: '
Spirit of God, Thou art also the Perfect Artist: 

Thy handiwork is the supreme miracle of beauty: 

Thou didst clothe the grass of the field: the gleam of the buttercups and bluebells is Thy artistry, and the wind that sways them into laughter is Thy breath. 
(Barry, 77-8)' In 1923 Haigh went to University College, Oxford, for a short-lived chaplain fellowship, and in 1924 Archbishop Davidson invited him to succeed George Bell as his chaplain. He found himself writing several of the archbishop's judicious pronouncements and overseeing the proposed revisions to the prayer book. He was instrumental in launching the 'Way of renewal', a scheme designed to make prayer and study the focal point of ruri-decanal chapters. Under Archbishop Cosmo Gordon Lang he was deeply involved in preparations for the 1930 Lambeth conference, and the encyclical letter which ensued, with its assertion that 'there is much in the scientific and philosophical thinking of our time which provides a climate more favourable to faith in God than has existed for generations' (Barry, 107-9), was written by Haigh. During this time Haigh established himself as a spokesman for a broad Anglican liberalism, which had little in common with the extreme modernism and rationalism of Bishop E. W. Barnes of Birmingham. 
Late in 1930 Haigh was appointed to the see of Coventry, where he immediately distinguished himself as an imaginative preacher, unafraid to criticize the past role of the church, for example, in trying 'to keep the arts, like the sciences, tied to the apron strings of its own elaborate but inadequate interpretation of life' (Barry, 123). In 1936 he underwent a severe physical breakdown, which almost induced his resignation, but he recovered enough to persevere. He led the diocese through the blitz in 1940, responding to the overnight destruction of the cathedral and four parish churches with an almost proverbial fortitude (it was also he who recognized the potential of the 'cross of nails' devised by A. P. Wales). On 11 December 1940 he spoke publicly on the blitz, arousing considerable controversy with his conviction that: 'If the British Government were to decide that this form of attack will be used against German cities if it continues to be used against ours, it might well be morally justified in coming to that conclusion... we could not desire to inflict on any German city such a general bombardment of women and children and beautiful old buildings as there was in Coventry... But there are still many people among us who seem to think that the methods of warfare to which they have grown accustomed are morally defensible, while refusing as morally impossible for us, in any circumstances or on any conditions, to adopt novel and more terrible forms of warfare when and so long as these are performed against ourselves. These people do not seem to have quite realized what total warfare may require, and if we are not prepared for that we might have done better not to have begun resisting the Nazi aggression by force. (Barry, 137-8)' Writing privately to Bishop Hensley Henson, Haigh explained that 'Experience & knowledge alike suggest that the Gov't may be minimizing the element of discrimination (as distinct from indiscriminate bombing)... and that it might be well for us... to concentrate more planes on larger targets' (Henson papers, 6 Jan 1941). Despite the widespread criticism of his remarks, they merely defended an attitude that was already covert government policy. The explosion of the two atomic bombs in 1945, which drove many who had criticized area bombing to a position of virtual pacifism, made Haigh's comments about 'total warfare' seem the more prophetic. 
In 1942 Haigh was translated to Winchester. At his enthronement he criticized the 'savage and inhuman theologies' of the Barthians (Barry, 123) and vigorously defended the church's right to campaign for social reform. As prelate of the Order of the Garter he was in constant contact with George VI. He was among those considered for the primacy after the death of Archbishop William Temple, but his own poor health, plagued by life-threatening low blood pressure, was already becoming a severe handicap. He resigned in 1952 at the age of sixty-five, but threw himself energetically into exploring the north Welsh countryside, taking rooms in the Golden Lion Hotel in Dolgellau. As county president of the Council for the Preservation of Rural Wales he campaigned to preserve the countryside, despite his increasing incapacity. He lived to see the rebuilding of Coventry Cathedral, and died on 20 May 1962 at Argoed, Dolgellau, shortly before its consecration. He was buried at Winchester Cathedral on 26 May. Bishop Haigh remained unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 51170


Kearton, (Christopher) Frank, Baron Kearton (1911-1992), scientist and industrialist, was born on 17 February 1911 at Congleton in Cheshire, the only child of Christopher John Kearton and his wife, Lilian, 'nee' Hancock. Shortly afterwards the family moved to Tunstall in the Potteries. His father, a bricklayer, was one of five brothers all of whom, at the insistence of their father, became skilled craftsmen. It is believed that the family came originally from Yorkshire where they farmed at the remote end of Swaledale; there is a village 15 miles west of Richmond named Kearton. Kearton attended Hanley high school, from where he went to St John's College, Oxford, as an open exhibitioner in 1929. He read chemistry and graduated with first-class honours in natural science (chemistry) in 1933. He was one of many who was fortunate in having H. W. (Tommy) Thompson as tutor. It is of interest that he did not in fact present himself for the conferment of his BA and MA until 1959 -- perhaps an early example of his impatience to move to the next task. On 16 April 1936 he married Agnes Kathleen 
(Kay; died 1997)
, the daughter of Samuel Pratt Brander, schoolmaster, who, after taking an honours degree in French at Bedford College, London, taught at Morecambe grammar school. They met while they were both at school through a common interest in tennis. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Kearton was tall and well built; he was energetic, extrovert, articulate, and forceful. His restless energy and ambition frequently led him into controversy, but he invariably acted in what he saw to be the national interest. He had a lively, if sometimes sarcastic, sense of humour. He did not smoke, and drank but little, but had a healthy appetite. His leisure was taken up with his family which, whatever the pressures, was an overriding priority -- he rejoiced in their successes and shared their problems and disappointments. He was devoted to his wife, and she, and his whole family and their doings, sustained and refreshed him -- he was not immune to disappointment and frustration. He was a voracious reader. His business life was austere but he delighted to entertain at his beautiful old home in Whitchurch, and to conduct his guests on an exhaustive and exhausting tour of his garden, in which he spent so much time. 
Upon graduation in 1933 Kearton joined the Billingham division of Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd (ICI). Thus began a career in which he played a major part in a wide range of industries -- chemicals, nuclear, man-made fibres, textiles, and oil -- and also, through the Industrial Reorganization Corporation (IRC), contributed to industrial development in Britain over an even wider front. He simultaneously took on a succession of diverse public appointments, concerned, 'inter alia', with the reorganization of the railways, the Atomic Energy Authority, the generation and supply of electricity, the development of scientific and technical policy, and the promotion of trade and investment between Britain and central and eastern Europe. 
Kearton was a scientist, but the nature of his contribution over much of his career was typified by the job he took on his second day with ICI; he started at 6 a.m. as a shift operative on chemical plants working a fifty-six hour week, soon becoming shift manager and later refinery manager. Perhaps the most significant event in these early years was his inclusion as one of seven members of a newly formed unit to carry out chemical engineering research. It was one of the first of its kind in Britain and Kearton acquired familiarity with the multidisciplinary skills which he was to apply with such success in many fields. 
Kearton's growing reputation in technical development work led to his being chosen to join a team formed by Wallace Akers who had himself been seconded from ICI in 1941 to lead, under Sir John Anderson, the British atomic bomb project, known by the codename Directorate of Tube Alloys. Although the phenomenon of nuclear fission had been confirmed in 1939, official scientific opinion throughout the world remained sceptical of its practical utility, and work to harness fission proceeded with little urgency. The theoretical work of R. E. Peierls and O. R. Frisch at Birmingham led to their memorandum of March 1940 in which they showed that it should be possible to make a bomb using as little as 5 kilogrammes of uranium 235, a naturally occurring isotope of uranium; they also outlined a possible means of separating this isotope and of constructing an explosive device. The impact of this memorandum was immediate and led to the rapid expansion of work in Britain and in the USA. Kearton worked on liaison with academics and on co-ordination of the work within ICI. Eventually he was responsible for the experimental station in north Wales which established the design features for an isotope separation plant. 
The August 1943 Quebec agreement re-established a degree of collaboration with the United States' atomic bomb programme -- the Manhattan project. The massive US effort had created a substantial lead over progress in Britain. The British government decided to transfer key scientists and engineers to the USA. Kearton went both to pass on unique British know-how, and to liaise between the scientists on both sides of the Atlantic. The work which he did is contained in 132 formal reports and in numerous letters. There is no doubt that in addition to his direct contribution he was able to make much use of his experience in the British post-war work on atomic energy. He also saw at first hand what could be achieved when a country harnessed its total resources to a clear objective; even today it is difficult to appreciate the huge physical and intellectual achievements of the Manhattan project in such a short time. This, and the construction of sophisticated manufacturing plants in a fraction of the time commonly accepted as normal in Britain, made a lasting impression. He also suffered two disappointments. He was one of many who did not think that the atomic bomb would be used and was dismayed when it was. His other, personal, regret came later. He worked with Klaus Fuchs in the USA; indeed they shared an office. Their friendship continued when both returned to Britain and Fuchs was a frequent visitor to Kearton's home. When suspicion of his espionage was aroused in 1949 it also fell on Kearton, who later described the period as 'the worst time in my life'. 
Kearton returned to ICI in 1945 but found the lack of challenge not to his taste. He joined Courtaulds, prompted by a speech made by A. H. Wilson, their newly appointed research director, describing a programme of reconstruction and investment. During the war Courtaulds had lost its American business (sold under pressure as a 'quid pro quo' for the passage of the Lend Lease legislation) which in the 1930s had contributed more than half the total trading profits of the group. This created an urgent need to modernize existing, ageing, factories, to expand capacity, and to increase spending on research and development, in order to regain its position in the man-made fibre industry and to rebuild earnings. This was the company which Kearton joined. 
Kearton spent twenty-nine years with Courtaulds, the first six years in research and development, with an ever widening remit, which led to his appointment to the board in 1952. The following ten years saw his influence grow throughout all the areas of the business, accompanied by both organic growth and acquisition, in which he was in the van; later, having led the opposition which defeated the bid made by ICI at the end of 1961, in 1962 he became chairman, retiring in 1975. The ICI bid brought him to public notice. While he was certainly not alone on the board in opposing the ICI proposal he led the opposition, and his quick thinking, confidence, and ability to articulate the arguments, often in colourful language, made him the man of the hour. 
In 1946 Kearton joined a medium-sized company which was technically innovative, poorly managed, short of management potential, and severely weakened by the war. When he retired Courtaulds was a major international company in its chosen fields of forest products, fibres, chemicals, plastics, packaging, textiles, and marine and industrial coatings; highly profitable and with a strong balance sheet. The management which achieved this was led by a new team, forged by Kearton. His vision, drive, energy, and leadership were an inspiration. Of course he made mistakes: anyone who set out to do what he did, in the industrial and social climate of the time, inevitably did so, but they were dwarfed by his achievements. 
Kearton's management methods and style were less admired. His authoritarian manner was fed by his undoubted success. His relationships with his board colleagues were often strained. His criticisms of what he saw as inadequate performance were delivered harshly and were often intensely personal. He believed that continued pressure could bring results, and that those who could not withstand such pressure were fundamentally unsuited to manage. This outlook damaged some careers irretrievably. He believed that softness at the top had a malign influence throughout the organization. He could be extremely kind on a personal basis to those who suffered private misfortune or family illness -- but he did not parade these kindnesses. 
Kearton has been described, deliberately, as an industrialist. He was less successful as a businessman. He had little feeling for the market place, and was often cavalier in his dealings with customers. His relations with the City were uneasy; he was often impulsive and was over-influenced by personalities, which sometimes led to errors of judgement. His relations with Whitehall and with the trade unions were ambivalent. On the one hand he took full advantage of tax and other government incentives for new investment, but he made no effort to cultivate relations with officials, whom he sometimes treated with contempt. With the unions he maintained a duality of approach. On the one hand he treated them as an obstacle to his drive for increased efficiency and profits, while on the other he strove to build personal relationships with the union leaders of the day. 
Kearton was appointed a member of the special advisory group of the British Transport Commission in 1960 by Ernest Marples, minister of transport. The total lack of any objectives or strategic aims for the management of the railways upon nationalization in 1948, and the absence of any guidance on the balance between the social needs of a public service and commercial viability, led to mounting losses and complete muddle in management. The group was charged with advising the minister on the resolution of this dilemma. Appointed in April, it reported in October. Its report was confidential but clearly formed the core of the white paper presented to parliament in December. The group, chaired by Sir Ivan Stedeford, comprised Henry Benson, Richard Beeching, Kearton, and two civil servants. Their achievement in six months was remarkable. They probed deeply into the facts and into management organization and practice and brought out into the open the dire situation. Their work led to the fundamental restructuring of the railways in which Beeching played such a central role and, in spite of much criticism, it saved the railways. 
Not surprisingly Kearton's wartime experiences made him in great demand in the British nuclear programme. Indeed, from 1946 onwards repeated attempts were made to recruit him into the Atomic Energy Authority (AEA) in various capacities. None was successful but he nevertheless played an important part-time role in special technical tasks, and as a member of the Fleck inquiry into the 1957 Windscale fire, the worst known nuclear accident at that time. He was a part-time member of the AEA from 1955 to 1981. He was also a member of the Electricity Supply Research Council, 1954-77 (chairman 1960-77), a member of the Central Electricity Generating Board, 1974-80, and a member of the committee of inquiry into the structure of the electricity supply industry, 1974-5. His contributions across the whole gamut of nuclear issues centred upon his belief that a unified national policy was necessary -- an issue still unresolved. 
Perhaps the most direct involvement by Kearton in national industrial policy was his appointment as chairman of the Industrial Reorganization Corporation (IRC). This body was formed by the 1964 Wilson government, which believed that to achieve the full impact of modern technology intervention was necessary. There was a widespread view, not only among politicians, that British management was inadequate to bring about the changes needed to achieve international competitiveness. The IRC was set up to be an instrument of industrial policy and not a political tool as some had hoped. The choice of Kearton, known for his personal drive and his intolerance of bureaucratic interference, as chairman, and a board largely composed of successful industrialists, ensured its independence. In its short existence (it was formed at the end of 1966 and did its final deal in 1971) it had a remarkable impact; and it did so with small resources. Its staff never exceeded thirty in total, with some ten executives at any one time, and a total of only twenty-two throughout its existence. The executives came mainly from the private sector, with no formal contracts and on the understanding that they would serve for about two years. 
The IRC had a crucial impact upon the motor industry, and upon the steps which led to the formation of the General Electric Company (GEC); and it was involved in some fifty mergers embracing, 'inter alia', textiles, instrumentation, paper, and engineering. The success of what it set out to do was not based upon coercion. On the contrary, the board determined that it should act only upon industrial and commercial logic, but with an eye to international strength. It did not have, or use, huge sums of money. In fact it used only about one-third of the $150 million made available. Its success rested upon three factors. What it sought to do went with the grain of prevailing industrial opinion; it was small and able to move quickly -- the responsible executive, the managing director, and the chairman, met daily; and the executives were outstanding -- young, ambitious, idealistic, and able. It was not by chance that many of them later became some of the most successful business leaders of their generation. 
All of these tasks, and others not described here, were part-time. None lessened Kearton's hands-on management and direction of Courtaulds; indeed, they seemed to act as a further stimulus to action. His usual practice was to devote a set part of the day, often up to mid-morning, solely to the current public task, and then to spend the rest of the day on Courtaulds' affairs. 
On 21 July 1975, the day before he was to retire from Courtaulds, Kearton met Tony Benn, the secretary of state for energy. They knew and respected each other. Within days Kearton had been appointed chairman designate of the British National Oil Corporation (BNOC). There were major differences of opinion between ministers as to the role of BNOC. Some were anxious to do nothing without the concurrence of the major oil companies. Others, including Benn, wanted BNOC to have a major commercial role. Kearton soon decided that the company must, in the national interest, have a direct involvement in the development of the North Sea. The arguments within government and between government and the oil companies dragged on, and Kearton became even more convinced of the role that BNOC should have, and increasingly frustrated by the lack of decision. It was one of the most active and turbulent periods of his career. Eventually BNOC was given participation rights and involvement in bidding for exploration licences, in spite of the continued protests of the oil companies. In 1979, its fourth year of operation, BNOC had a turnover of $3245 million and made a pre-tax profit of $75 million. In that same year it was involved in the drilling of nearly half the exploration wells on the continental shelf. By the end of the year it held agreements which gave it options on up to 51 per cent of the petroleum produced on the UK continental shelf. This, from a standing start, and against bitter opposition, was almost unbelievable. Kearton's successor as chairman, R. E. Utiger, wrote in 1980: 'I do not think that any other man could have created this Corporation in such a short time.' 
Kearton was made OBE in 1945 for his war work, knighted in 1966, and created a life peer, as Baron Kearton of Whitchurch, in 1970. Among many honours and appointments he was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1971, and received ten honorary degrees and four honorary fellowships. He particularly treasured his appointment as chancellor of the University of Bath, from 1980 to 1992, in which he was notably proactive; Professor J. R. Quayle, the vice-chancellor, wrote a generous and moving tribute to his chancellorship in the 'Bath Report' of 3 July 1992 on the day following his death. 
When Kearton was made a life peer in 1970 he was deeply involved in industrial and academic affairs and played little part in the house. Once he did begin to attend regularly 'there was no stopping him', as a friend and fellow peer recalled (Wooding, 238). He was much respected and had a wide circle of friends. He served on several select committees, covering a wide range of issues, especially those concerned with European affairs; energy and manufacturing; science, technology, and innovation; and overseas trade. His participation was characterized by his penetrating insight, his direct style of speech which, as another peer wrote, 'could verge on the picturesque' (ibid., 238), and his unfailing courtesy to witnesses. He continued to attend the house and to take a full part even when he was desperately ill. His death from cancer at Stoke Mandeville Hospital, Buckinghamshire, on 2 July 1992 was seen as a tremendous loss. He was buried at Whitchurch. 
Kearton had boundless energy, and was impatient and sometimes intolerant, unable to resist a challenge, whether concerned with national industrial affairs, 'The Times' crossword, a popular radio quiz, or the village vegetable competition. His capacity for sustained effort and digestion of papers was legendary, as was his practice of communication with anyone at any level in the organizations with which he worked -- frequently by hastily written cards, almost indecipherable, and usually containing cryptic messages which were stimulating or demoralizing, or both. His management style was not to everyone's taste. In dealing with people he sought to stiffen resolve and to test reaction to pressure; and thereby to convey the urgency and importance of the issue. He respected a robust response and could be both critical and inspiring. Some saw his many activities as driven by personal ambition. But this was only part of it. He had a deeply held belief in the future of his country. He believed in social justice, but had no time for the mere redistribution of wealth. Rather, he believed in the creation of wealth by the application of efficient management and modern technology. He believed in the importance of manufacturing industry and in individual enterprise; but he also believed that it was right to harness the country's total resources for the national good. He was a patriot. 


@@@@@


doc= 51171


Kedourie, Elie (1926-1992), historian and political scientist, was born in Baghdad on 25 January 1926, the son of Abdallah Eliahou Khedhouri (died 1964), an employee of the Iraq currency board, and his wife, Loulou Moshi, 'nee' Dangour (died 1980). Both parents were Jewish. He was educated at the College A-D Sasson and then the Shamash School before going in 1947 to the London School of Economics (LSE) to study for the BSc (Econ). His graduate work was at St Antony's College, Oxford, between 1951 and 1953. From 1953 he taught at the LSE, becoming professor of government in 1965 and retiring in 1990. On 3 August 1950, at the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue, London, he married Sylvia Gourgi Haim, a student of Semitic languages, and daughter of Gourgi Abraham Haim, a company director; they had two sons and one daughter. 
Kedourie's academic career began dramatically when in 1953 he withdrew his Oxford doctoral thesis, later published as 'England and the Middle East: the Destruction of the Ottoman Empire, 1914-1921' (1956). Kedourie's history offended the Oxford examiner Sir Hamilton Gibb, of whose standards of historical scholarship Kedourie was still contemptuous when, in a second edition of the book in 1978, he wrote an introduction recounting this now famous event. Kedourie's lifelong study of the Middle East challenged the idea that British and French imperial dominance of Arab countries had been a unique oppression generating an irresistible demand for national self-determination. He believed that a culturally misconceived imperial remorse had facilitated the emergence of unscrupulous despotisms in Arab countries. The spread of Western ideologies had led to a way of talking about politics in the Middle East which persuaded Western statesmen, quite wrongly, that they understood what was actually going on. 'In the Anglo-Arab Labyrinth' (1976) is regarded by some as Kedourie's masterpiece. This was a detailed examination of the history of Anglo-French relations with the Arabs during and immediately after the First World War which led Kedourie to conclude: 'Some sixty years or so after the exchanges between McMahon and the Sharif, then, there was in Britain a miasm of guilt and self-incrimination, of penitence and breast-beating which hung over relations with the Arab world. It has been chiefly generated by officials hopelessly lost in the labyrinth of their own files. ('In the Anglo-Arab Labyrinth', 318)' One of the most notable features of Kedourie's work was a lucid and witty style which could bring out the grand significance of political activity without sacrificing its contingent character. 
Kedourie and his wife, Sylvia (herself a notable scholar of Arab affairs), were convivial hosts, and Kedourie was meticulous in performing administrative duties such as being convenor of his department at the LSE. He and Sylvia founded the journal 'Middle Eastern Studies' in 1964. Four years previously Kedourie's 'Nationalism' appeared. It had a dramatic effect on historical scholarship. Kedourie destroyed the idea that nationalism was an immemorial political passion. Rather, it was a specific doctrine created around the turn of the nineteenth century. Resisting the strong contemporary impulse to blame Hegel for all dangerous ideas, Kedourie found one source of nationalist ideas in Kant's doctrine of self-determination. He later developed these ideas in the long introduction to an anthology, 'Nationalism in Asia and Africa' (1971). 
Kedourie took a close historian's interest in the detail of politics, and sometimes became involved in public policy. He had a number of conversations with Margaret Thatcher. He was especially alarmed by the degradation of British universities as they expanded during and after the 1960s, and wrote two brilliant pamphlets on the theme: 'Diamonds into Glass: the Government and the Universities' (1988) and 'Perestroika in the Universities' (1989). 
Kedourie's work was governed by two basic understandings. The first was a philosophical sophistication which treated history as the evidential study of events. This was in part developed from association with his friend Michael Oakeshott, who had been responsible both for appointing him to the LSE and for publishing his early work. The second was a realistic view of the mechanics of government as quite different from the moralistic justifications of policy advanced in public discourse. Kedourie immersed himself in the documents, and was alert to what could not be known. He eschewed the mechanical value-freedom on which, for example, students of Soviet politics often fatally prided themselves, but his judgements were always closely aligned to evidence. 
Kedourie's education in Baghdad had been French, but he had acquired a great admiration for England, an England which he believed had been corrupted by a false interpretation of recent history. He talked of 'scrupulosity' replacing 'scruple'. One specific target of his criticism was Arnold Toynbee, and one book of essays was entitled 'The Chatham House Version' (1970). He was also a mordant critic (in 'The Crossman Confessions and other Essays', 1984) of what Oakeshott called 'rationalism in politics', mocking, for example, the insouciant objectives (such as building half a million houses) conjured by the Wilson government of the 1960s out of nothing more substantial than abstract desirability. 
Kedourie was made a fellow of the British Academy in 1975 and a CBE in 1991. He died of heart failure at the Adventist Hospital, Tacoma Park, Montgomery county, Maryland, USA, on 29 June 1992, while on a visit to Washington, DC. He was buried on 2 July at Edgware Spanish and Portuguese cemetery, London. He was survived by his wife and three children. A memorial service was held at the Bevis Marks Synagogue, London, on 24 September 1992, and a memorial meeting was held at the London School of Economics on 20 January 1993. Kedourie generally had several projects going at the same time, so that at his death a book, 'Hegel and Marx' (1996) (typically developed from lectures), was virtually complete. It was published posthumously, edited by his wife. She also edited 'Elie Kedourie, CBE, FBA, 1926-1992: History, Philosophy, Politics' (1998), an indispensable source of knowledge about Kedourie. 


@@@@@


doc= 51173


Glancy, Sir Bertrand James (1882-1953), administrator in India, was born in Ireland on 31 December 1882. His father, Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Glancy, was an officer in the Royal Engineers who spent most of his life working abroad, and his mother, Helen, moved from hotel to hotel on the French riviera, with the result that Bertrand was brought up by a maiden aunt in Roscommon. He met his sister, Ethel, only at a tennis party when he was seventeen. His education began at a school for the sons of army officers at Westward Ho!. He soon moved on to Clifton College as a day boy, where he experienced the trauma of the death of one of his elder brothers. This may have contributed to a further removal to Monmouth, another minor public school more renowned for its rugby than classics, where Bertrand completed his studies before going up to Exeter College, Oxford, as a commoner at the age of nineteen. 
Bertrand followed in the footsteps of his elder brother, Sir Reginald Isidore Robert Glancy (1874-1939), when he entered the Indian Civil Service in 1905. Like Reginald, he was to spend many years in the political department working in the princely states of India, although he received his initial training in the prestigious Punjab cadre of the Indian Civil Service. This latter experience reinforced his natural disposition towards unending work, born of social unease and a desperate need to please the ambitions of his 'martinet of a mother'. In later years Glancy overcame his shyness by developing a reputation as a brilliant wit and raconteur. He remained anxious to please his mother, however, keeping up a regular weekly correspondence until her death at the age of ninety-one. 
In the year before his posting as first assistant to the agent to the governor-general in Rajputana in 1915 he married Grace Steele in Mount Abu, a hill station in Bombay presidency. Only one of their four children, Terence, was to survive; all the others died in infancy. From 1918 to 1921 Glancy was posted to the residency in Kashmir. After a brief spell at the political department in Delhi in 1921 his services were 'lent' to the state of Jammu and Kashmir for five years. 
On his return from home leave in 1926 Glancy returned to the political department in Delhi. In 1929 however he re-entered the world of the princely states. From then until 1932 he was president of the Jaipur council of state, before beginning his third and final spell of duty in Kashmir. After a home leave Glancy became resident and agent to the governor-general in the princely states of central India in 1933, and was stationed at Indore. 
Glancy's dealings with Tukoji Rao Puar III (1888-1937), the ruler of the tiny Maratha princely state of Dewas Senior, some 350 miles north-west of Bombay, were years later held up by the novelist E. M. Forster in his memoir, 'The Hill of Devi' (1953), as symptomatic of British insensitivity in relationships with Indians. Tukoji's dispute with the political department, which culminated in his flight to French Pondicherry, was occasioned by gross financial mismanagement. The workaholic Glancy certainly had little personal sympathy with the effete ruler and his court, but Tukoji's claim that he acted vindictively in revenge for an earlier humiliation of his brother Reginald is untenable. Forster's account is also tendentious: it was largely prompted by romantic memories of the Christmas house parties at Dewas between 1909 and 1914, which Tukoji put on for his former guardian, Sir Malcolm Darling (1880-1969), and his set of highbrow British friends. 
Glancy's pre-eminence as an administrator in princely India was recognized by his appointment in 1934 as political secretary and, from 1938, political adviser to the crown representative. This period was marked by the ultimately futile attempts to secure the princes' accession to a future all-India federation as envisaged by the 1935 'Government of India Act'. Many of the princes were unaware of the wider issues at stake; they were also disquieted by the increasing agitation for reform within their domains supported by the Indian National Congress, although it did not formally operate within the princely states. The failure of the federation scheme led ultimately to the collapse of the princely order on the British departure in 1947, and the transfer of power to the two democratic governments of India and Pakistan. Glancy, along with colleagues in the political department, greatly regretted this outcome and regarded it as a desertion of allies and dereliction of Britain's treaty obligations to the states, as the paramount power on the continent. 
Glancy was equally disillusioned by the British treatment of the ruling Unionist Party in the Punjab. It had traditionally adopted a loyalist stance and had actively encouraged recruitment to the Indian army. By the time that he became governor of the province in 1941 the first cracks were appearing in the cross-communal Unionist Party as a result of the dislocations brought by the war and the Muslim League's growing campaign for Pakistan in the province, which raised tension among the non-Muslim population. Glancy shared the Unionist leaders' opposition to the Pakistan demand because of its impact on the unity of the Punjab. He encouraged the Muslim Unionist leaders, Sir Sikander Hayat-Khan (premier in 1937-42) and Khizr Tiwana (premier in 1942-6), in their stand against Jinnah, the Muslim League leader who was demanding Pakistan. Indeed, he stretched his constitutional powers to the limit to secure the dismissal of the minister for public works, the pro-Muslim League Shaukat Hayat, on 26 April 1944 to prevent him embarrassing the Unionist government by resigning. 
Glancy's relations with Khizr were especially cordial and reproduced those he had earlier established with the princes. When Glancy left India in April 1946 Khizr declared: 'I can never adequately thank you for all your many kindnesses... I never deserved all I got.' Given this relationship, it is unsurprising that Khizr discounted the possibility that the British would desert their Unionist allies. The Muslim League triumph in the rural Punjab constituencies in the 1946 provincial elections surprised both Glancy and his prime minister. The outgoing governor became embroiled in controversy amid claims by the Punjab Muslim League president, the Nawab Iftikhar Husain Khan of Mamdot (1906-1969), that Glancy had denied his party the fruits of its victory by encouraging the formation of a Unionist-Akali-Congress coalition government. There is no evidence however that he paved the way for Khizr to resume office on 7 March 1946. 
Glancy retired to Kenya, which held far more appeal than attempting to live off an 'inflation-ravaged pension' in austerity Britain. He was kept informed by Khizr of developments within the Punjab. He was greatly saddened by the growing communal violence which culminated in the holocaust which accompanied the partition. He had warned his superiors of such an eventuality, but his voice had gone unheeded. He saw the rapid decision to divide and quit in 1947 as a 'betrayal of friends' in which 'all values were twisted out of shape'. He was appointed CSI in 1933, KCIE in 1935, and GCIE in 1946. 
Time hung heavily on Glancy's hands during retirement: he had been so immersed in his work that he had never taken up any hobbies. He took pride in his collection of Indian coins, which were placed on display in London and New Delhi. He also began writing his memoirs. Unfortunately these remained unpublished at the time of his sudden death in Nairobi on 17 March 1953. He was survived by his wife. 
Sir Bertrand Glancy was the ablest administrator of his generation in the political department of the government of India. His hallmarks were industry, wisdom, charm, and a 'wonderful way with words' which hid his lingering insecurity. Glancy retained, until the end of the raj, the paternalistic ethos of the Punjab school of administration, preferring rural allies to Indian politicians under the dominance of the Indian National Congress. 


@@@@@


doc= 51184


Lewis, Hywel David (1910-1992), theologian and philosopher, was born on 21 May 1910 at 5 Mostyn Crescent, Llandudno, the younger son of David John Lewis (1876-1947), a Calvinistic Methodist minister, first in Llandudno and then in Caernarfon, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Davies (1865-1953). His brother Alun Tudor Lewis (1905-1986) was a schoolmaster and an author of short stories in Welsh. Hywel was educated at Caernarfon grammar school and at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, where he developed his interest in philosophy. He graduated with a first-class degree in 1932. He returned to Bangor as a lecturer in philosophy after further studies at Jesus College, Oxford, from where he graduated with a BLitt in 1935. He became professor of philosophy at Bangor in 1947. Meanwhile, on 17 August 1943, he married a fellow university lecturer, Megan Jones (1909/10-1962), daughter of John Elias Jones, an inspector of schools. 
Lewis's early books, 'Morals and the New Theology' (1947) and 'Morals and Revelation' (1951), provided a forceful critique of the Barthian claim that mankind is utterly dependent on divine revelation for a knowledge of God and of correct moral value, and in their trenchant anti-determinism they revealed the influence of C. A. (Charles Arthur) Campbell. Lewis held the view that awareness of the divine is a basic intuition rooted in normal human experience and can be articulated by reflection upon our awareness of value, particularly moral value. He developed these ideas in what came to be perhaps his most influential book, 'Our Experience of God', published in 1959, by which time he had been appointed (in 1955) to the chair of the history and philosophy of religion at the University of London, a position which he held until he retired in 1977. 
Lewis's later, more developed work took two directions. He became increasingly interested in the subject of experience and the nature of the self (the influence of C. A. Campbell is also seen here), and the metaphysical and religious issues are energetically set out in 'The Self and Immortality' (1973) and 'Persons and Life after Death' (1978). The reverse side of this was an equally vigorous polemic against the 'linguistic turn' and the development of analytic philosophy, particularly A. J. Ayer's assault on the cognitive meaningfulness of theological language, but also on the reductionist and behaviourist account of the self which Lewis found in Gilbert Ryle's 'The Concept of Mind' (1949). The nature of the mind in this broader polemical setting was the subject of his Gifford lectures delivered at Edinburgh in 1966-8 and published as 'The Elusive Mind' (1969) and 'The Elusive Self' (1982). At this period he developed an increasing interest in comparative religion and was the founding editor of 'Religious Studies' in 1964, remaining editor until 1979. He published a number of titles in Welsh. A Festschrift, 'Religion, Reason and the Self', edited by S. R. Sutherland and T. A. Roberts, was published in 1990. He received honorary degrees from the universities of St Andrews and Emery, Atlanta, and from Geneva Theological College. He was president of the Mind Association (1948-9) and of the Aristotelian Society (1962-3), and chairman of the council of the Royal Institute of Philosophy (1965-88). 
Lewis's editorship of the 'Muirhead Library of Philosophy' (1947-78) provided him with another means of combating what he regarded as the narrowness of analytic philosophy. He edited 'Clarity is not Enough' in 1962. During his editorship the 'Muirhead Library' published titles by a wide range of philosophers, including those of a kindred spirit of Lewis's. Dom Illtud Trethowan's 'The Absolute and the Atonement' was published in the library in 1971. 
Lewis's first wife died in 1962, and he was married again on 17 July 1965, this time to (Kate Alice) Megan Pritchard ('b'. 1918/19), superintendent of a hospital X-ray department and daughter of Thomas Owen Pritchard, a businessman. Lewis, a small, fair-haired person, could be charming, but he was also an intense and doughty defender of whatever he believed was a matter of academic principle. Although residing near London for many years he retained a commitment to the principality of Wales, especially to its dissenting tradition, and to Welsh politics. He continued to be involved in academic work in retirement, though this period was marred by severe injuries sustained when he was hit by a car. He recovered and continued active for a further seven years. He died at his home, 1 Normandy Park, Normandy, Guildford, on 6 April 1992. He was buried in the St Tudno cemetery on the Great Orme. A memorial service was held in the chapel of King's College, London, on 3 June 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51185


Leyser, Karl Joseph (1920-1992), historian, was born on 24 October 1920 in Dusseldorf, Nordrhein-Westfalen, son of Otto Leyser (1885-1945) and his wife, Emmy, 'nee' Hayum (1891-1987). He was educated at the Hindenburg Gymnasium, Dusseldorf. Otto was the head of a family firm which manufactured belts and braces, a scrupulous and successful businessman, but he and his wife were Jewish and suffered constant harassment after the National Socialists came to power. Denounced by a discontented employee in 1937, Otto and Emmy moved to the Netherlands, but sent their two children, Karl and his sister, Dorothea, to England. There charitable organizations and family connections, including the distinguished medievalist Wilhelm Levison, enabled Karl to attend St Paul's School. At the school he studied history under Philip Whitting, who had a high regard for him, and made lasting friendships, including one with Christopher Lloyd, the younger son of Nathaniel Lloyd of Great Dixter, Sussex. In 1939 he matriculated as a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, but in 1940 was interned with other refugees and sent to the Isle of Man. 
Leyser's readiness to join the Pioneer Corps, the only branch of the armed forces open to internees, together with some pressure from his college, secured his release before the end of the year. He served until 1943, with the rank of corporal, when he was transferred to the Black Watch. Commissioned in 1944, he served with the 51st division in north-western Europe, and in 1945 had the great felicity of finding his parents alive, in hiding in Edam, Noord Holland. His father died in August that year, but Leyser brought his mother to England, where she lived until her death in 1987. Demobilized in 1945 with the rank of captain, and mentioned in dispatches, Leyser returned to Magdalen in 1946. He won the Gibbs scholarship in history that year and graduated BA with first-class honours in modern history in 1947. 
Leyser then began work on the Good Parliament of 1376, but his time for research was soon curtailed by his election to an official fellowship and tutorship at Magdalen, followed by a university lectureship in 1950. By that time he had begun to lecture on the Saxon and Hohenstaufen periods. He also expressed an interest in the early years of the Empress Matilda and in Anglo-German relations in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries. Those were long-laid plans. He later attributed his immensely productive concern with the empire, and particularly with the Ottonians, to an 'obiter dictum' of Bruce McFarlane's that he should take advantage of his command of German and German sources. McFarlane's influence on him, beginning with his kindly concern during the war, in the bleak days of Leyser's internment, and subsequently for the rest of his own life, is hardly measurable, though much can be deduced from Leyser's perceptive notice of him in the 'Proceedings of the British Academy' in 1976; but there was more to his momentous decision than that. One very powerful consequence of his commitment, however, came when Henrietta Bateman, an undergraduate at St Hilda's, came to hear him on the Ottonians; they were married in 1962 and family life with their four children provided an enriching stability in Leyser's life. 
The 1960s and 1970s were certainly a remarkably prolific time, despite Leyser's commitment to teaching in Magdalen, an obligation to which he might have been supposed, from his pupils' recollection, to have devoted his entire energies. His only monograph, 'Rule and Conflict in Early Medieval Society: Ottonian Saxony', appeared in 1979, but it was supported by a long line of papers, beginning with his essays on the Lechfeld and on Henry I and the foundation of the Saxon empire, and was followed by a strong company of others extending down to his Raleigh lecture of 1983, published in 1984, entitled 'The crisis of medieval Germany' -- that is, on the great Saxon revolt of 1073, which, together with the power of the reformed papacy, faced down the accomplishments of Ottonian kingship. Elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1983, he was also appointed to the Chichele chair of medieval history, and held the chair from 1984 to his retirement in 1988. After a severe stroke in spring 1992 he died in Oxford on 27 May 1992, and was buried in Islip churchyard. 
Karl Leyser's eminence was based upon a unique blend of German and English scholarship. His own experiences as a refugee, an alien who found solace in his new identity and most particularly in his marriage, gave a special and productive intensity to his work. He drew sparingly and with great skill on his military experience in illuminating the past, though he also valued it as a means further to relish Englishness. Naturalized in 1946, he served after the war in the Territorial Army as captain and major, and was awarded the Territorial decoration in 1963. He died at a time when he seemed about to enter an even more impressive phase of his professional life, but a serious road accident in 1977 had made him particularly aware of mortality, and neither he nor his friends would have felt that his time, most especially in those later years, had been ill spent. 


@@@@@


doc= 51187


Lloyd, Dennis, Baron Lloyd of Hampstead (1915-1992), jurist, was born on 22 October 1915 in London, the second son and second child of Isaac Lloyd ('b'. 1891), company director, and Betty Jaffa. He was educated at University College School, at University College, London (LLB, 1935), and at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge (BA, 1937; MA, 1941; LLD, 1956). He was called to the bar by Inner Temple in 1936. He was appointed reader in English law at University College, London, in 1947 and held the Quain professorship in the University of London from 1956 until his retirement, in 1981. He was head of the department of laws in University College, London, from 1969 to 1981. He married Ruth Emma Cecilia Przytulla ('b'. 1920/21) on 15 September 1940. They had two daughters, and celebrated fifty-two years of happy marriage. 
Dennis Lloyd was a man who played many parts. He was a distinguished jurist, a prominent barrister (made a QC in 1975), a minor but influential politician, a law reformer (it was for his political activity and law reform work that the Labour government in 1965 made him a life peer, as Baron Lloyd of Hampstead -- in fact he spent most of his time in the House of Lords on the cross-benches), a passionate supporter of the British film industry, and much else besides. In an age of increasing specialism he belonged to a dying breed of polymaths: a man of culture and erudition, at home in different disciplines (his jurisprudential writing is characterized by this), at ease with different worlds. 
Lloyd's academic interests and scholarly abilities were demonstrated early. His 'Unincorporated Associations', for which he had been awarded the Yorke prize at Cambridge, was published as a monograph in 1938. His work on rent control saw him produce a book that went through two editions and enabled him to become one of the architects of the 'Rent Act' of 1965. He helped to frame the concept of the 'fair rent', which guaranteed sensible levels of rent and gave security of tenure to long-term tenants. Both these books showed Lloyd the analytical lawyer. 'Public Policy: a Comparative Study in English and French Law', published in 1953, saw him at his more reflective. The book remains a model of how comparative law should be undertaken. 
The two sides of Lloyd's academic thinking were brought together in his scholarly but popular 'The Idea of Law', published as a Pelican book in 1964. Lloyd's 'idea' of law was functionalist and consensus-based. He had a vision of law as competent to solve any problem, whether it was concerned with the right to work (the subject of his inaugural lecture as Quain professor), homosexual behaviour, or the control of outer space. He believed that the idea of law that would prevail would be 'one which emphasises not so much the self-contained character of law, but rather its function as an instrument of social cohesion and social progress'. With most of his academic life spent (almost literally) in the shadow of Bentham it is difficult to ignore the great utilitarian philosopher's influence -- and Bentham would have applauded Lloyd's stand against the incorporation of the European convention on human rights into UK law -- but in 'The Idea of Law' and elsewhere it is the influence of twentieth-century American legal thought that is the more apparent. For Lloyd law was not so much 'logic' as 'experience'. He was no formalist, and he readily appreciated the social, economic, and political context of law. In 'The Idea of Law' the influences of Llewellyn's functionalism and Roscoe Pound's jural postulates, and his view of law as 'social engineering', are manifest. Lloyd insisted that 'the idea of law must not confine itself to grappling with the technical problem of giving effect to human values through legal machinery'. The idea of law that we find in Lloyd's jurisprudence is a vision consonant with Lloyd the man: a liberal in the best sense of that tradition, a believer in the importance of rights (though he was happy to rely on a common-law formulation of them), in the value of the rule of law, in the value of law as the 'essential guarantee for all those freedoms which are looked upon as vital to the good life in a social democracy'. He saw law as a building block of civilization. 
There is less of Lloyd the man in his magisterial 'Introduction to Jurisprudence', but it is this by which generations of law students will remember him. First published in 1959, when jurisprudence was not as central to law studies as it is now (Hart's 'Concept of Law' had not yet been published), it had gone through seven editions by 2001. Lloyd himself did not play a major part in the preparation of any edition after the second (in 1965) but he took a keen interest in the book, and was offering assistance and often valuable insights right up to his death. The significance of the publication of the 'Introduction' in 1959 cannot be underestimated. It introduced law students in much of the English-speaking world to the writings of Kelsen, Olivercrona, Savigny, and Geny, as well as to more obvious English classics. The recipe of insightful text and suitably chosen extract remains a model guide to the study of legal thought. To the text he brought his own philosophical training -- he was proud to have studied with Wittgenstein -- his culture, and his erudition. The 'Introduction' has its detractors but it remains the standard student text on the subject. 
Throughout his life Lloyd grappled with the problems of modernity and the conflicts of contemporary civilization. He was interested in the place of the individual within collectivist states, in the power of the press, in the role of the judiciary, in industrial relations. He wrote on all these subjects, and in law-reform bodies (he was a member of the Law Reform Committee for twenty-one years) and in the Lords he played an active part in engineering change (and, as in the case of human rights legislation, in resisting it where he strongly disapproved). 
Lloyd enjoyed films, and to a lesser extent music. He was a keen painter: his paintings graced the faculty of laws during his headship, and his home in Hampstead Garden Suburb. He chaired the committee that planned the National Film School, and was the chairman of the British Film Institute from 1973 to 1976. He spent the last years of his life in Hove, and remained active (indeed was studying modern Greek) right up to his death, in King's College Hospital, London, on 31 December 1992. Though of Jewish descent Lloyd was not a religious or practising Jew. He was cremated at Golders Green crematorium in January 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51190


Loutit, John Freeman (1910-1992), radiobiologist and haematologist, was born on 19 February 1910 at 16 Almondbury Road, Mount Lawley, Perth, Western Australia, the only child of John Freeman Loutit (1868-1950), a mechanical and locomotive engineer, and his wife, Margaret Gould, 'nee' Broadfoot (1878-1971), whose family were also engineers. His antecedents had emigrated from the Orkneys to Australia in the 1850s. He was educated at the local Church of England grammar school and the universities of Western Australia and Melbourne (Trinity College). In Hilary term 1931 he took up a Rhodes scholarship at St John's College, Oxford, where he read physiology and graduated with a second-class degree in natural sciences in 1933. He later completed his medical training at the London Hospital medical college, winning prizes there. On 14 June 1941 he married Thelma Salusbury (1913-1992); they had a son and two daughters. Also in 1941 Loutit was appointed to take charge of the south-west London blood supply depot, where his research career began. He made contributions to knowledge of the preservation of blood for transfusion, and also of types of haemolytic anaemia. At the end of the Second World War he took part in work on the treatment of starvation in Holland and was made an officer of the order of Orange Nassau. 
After the end of the Second World War the government felt the need for a research unit to investigate the biological hazards of radiation, in view of the use of atomic weapons and also of nuclear power. Loutit was invited to be the director of the Medical Research Council (MRC) radiobiology unit located initially at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell, but independent of it. He set out to collect a nucleus of talented physicists and biologists to investigate various fundamental aspects of the hazards of ionizing radiation. The unit's programme encompassed the effects of radiation on cellular function, induction of chromosome aberrations, the pathogenesis of injury in various organs, the absorption and retention of radioisotopes by the body, and the genetic effects of radiation. 
Loutit was a hands-on scientist (personally ingesting small quantities of radioactive material in order to assess their biological effects) and made many contributions to knowledge of the uptake and retention of radioactive isotopes from the air and the food chain, particularly isotopes of strontium and iodine. However, his most important contribution was the demonstration of the immunosuppressive effect of radiation. Using a strain of mouse with a chromosome translocation resulting in a recognizable cell marker, Loutit and his colleagues showed that mice treated with high doses of X-rays would accept bone marrow grafts from genetically incompatible donors, and could thus be rescued from the lethal effects of irradiation. This discovery led to major advances in knowledge of the effects of radiation, and also to advances in the treatment of leukaemia and other malignancies, and was relevant to organ transplantation. For it, Loutit, jointly with his colleagues David Barnes, Charles Ford, and John Hamerton, was awarded the Robert Roesler de Villiers award of the Leukemia Society of the USA. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1963 and was awarded honorary degrees by the universities of St Andrews and Stockholm. He served on many national and international committees concerned with radiation, often as chairman. He was appointed CBE in 1957 for his services to radiation protection. 
Throughout the roughly twenty years that Loutit was director the MRC radiobiology unit grew and came to be of major international status, being particularly strong in genetics and cell biology, Loutit having appreciated early on the importance of the genetic effects of radiation. However, in 1969 the MRC recommended that the unit should be reduced to half its size. Loutit was unhappy with this decision and resigned. He returned to work full time at the bench for another nineteen years. During this time he worked on haematopoietic stem cells and their function. He argued that there was a variety of stem cells in the bone marrow giving rise to all the different types of blood cells, and also bone forming cells, osteoblasts, and bone destroying cells, osteoclasts. He also studied the induction of myeloid leukaemia and of bone tumours by bone seeking radioactive isotopes. In his last field of work he continued his lifetime interest in using gene mutations to answer biological problems, and studied various mouse mutants of haematological importance. During his career he published two books and more than 200 scientific papers. 
Loutit was a kind-hearted, reserved, somewhat taciturn man, who never spoke ill of others, and was always modest. He was devoted to his family, with whom he lived in the village of Steventon, Oxfordshire, from the 1940s until the end of his life. He was a convinced Christian and attended Steventon church regularly. He brought to his hobbies the same enthusiasm and attention to detail that he brought to his work, and was a keen gardener and cricketer. His skill in cooking was legendary, and he regularly cooked for dinner parties at his home. He died of pneumonia and dementia at the Grange Nursing Home, Stanford in the Vale, Oxfordshire, on 11 June 1992. He was buried on 21 June 1992 in the graveyard of St Michael's Church, Steventon, Oxfordshire. He was survived by his wife and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51192


MacBeth, George Mann (1932-1992), writer and radio broadcaster, was born at Hill Road, Shotts, Lanarkshire, Scotland, on 19 January 1932, the only child of George MacBeth (died 1941), a coalminer, and Amelia Morton Mary Mann (died 1951). His parents moved to Billingham, Cleveland, before settling in Sheffield where his father was killed in an air raid in October 1941 while serving in the Home Guard. His mother died of cancer ten years later. Educated at King Edward VII School, Sheffield, MacBeth was a clever child and received a scholarship to New College, Oxford, where he read classics and philosophy, gaining a first-class degree in 1955. At Oxford he ran the poetry society, founded and co-edited 'Trio', and published 'A Form of Words', his first collection of poetry, in 1954 with the Fantasy Press. On 3 August 1955 he married a fellow student, Elizabeth Browell Robson, later the distinguished geneticist. 
On leaving Oxford he joined the BBC as a producer in the Overseas Talks department and for the next twenty-two years worked as a BBC radio producer on programmes such as 'Poets' Voice', 'New Comment', and 'Poetry Now'. As the producer and editor of these programmes, MacBeth exercised a very considerable literary influence. A zealot in the cause of modern literature, and poetry in particular, he was in touch with a wide congregation of poets from staid traditionalists to avant-garde concrete poets and visualists. His exceedingly eclectic tastes and superb editorial judgement resulted in his programmes not only broadcasting the best and latest work of the established poets but also a considerable body of poetry from unknown, up-and-coming writers. Furthermore, all programme contributors read their own work, a new departure for the BBC which had previously relied predominantly upon actors. Through his radio programmes MacBeth was instrumental in developing -- even in some instances kick-starting -- the careers of many poets who went on to become major writers, such as Adrian Henri, Peter Porter, and Alan Brownjohn. In the recording studio, he was sensitive and professional to every poet whom he produced, treating everyone as equal: he was never above gently instructing even the most famous in order to get their best performance. Indeed, it was due to MacBeth's tutelage that the standard of spoken poetry rose so sharply. He also introduced British poetry audiences to foreign writers, of whom they would otherwise have been ignorant: this led to his bringing fresh influences to British verse. MacBeth was utterly unpartisan. He abhorred literary cliques and prophesied, accurately, that they would eventually stem the nation's poetic tide that was running hard during the 1960s and 1970s. 
From the 1950s MacBeth was a central figure of The Group, a loose company of poets including Edward Lucie-Smith, Philip Hobsbaum, Alan Brownjohn, and Ted Hughes, whose aim was to modernize verse, to bring it away from the tight confines of the past. This group metamorphosed into the Poets' Workshop, of which MacBeth was a leading figure, religiously attending meetings to offer incisive and always impartial criticism on the work of the other seventy or so members. In his own right MacBeth was a remarkably adroit and skilful poet. With his second and third collections, 'The Broken Places' (1963) and 'The Doomsday Book' (1965), his reputation was assured and he published twenty-one verse collections. His talent, once described by an antagonistic critic as being 'magnificently wasted', ranged from sound poetry ('The Lax Cheer') to tightly structured traditional forms ('My Father's Patents'). He was a master with any poetic form, any genre. His personal verse ('The Land-Mine', 'The Drawer') was remarkable for its intensity of emotion while his comic poems, such as 'The Flame of Love, by Laura Stargleam (a Mills & Boon Poem)' and 'Pavan for an Unborn Infanta', a poem lamenting the inability of two London Zoo pandas successfully to mate, were not only hilarious but often trenchant. As a performer of his own poetry MacBeth was a consummate literary entertainer. He could judge an audience the minute he walked into a room and his poetry readings drew large followings. MacBeth's popularity as a poetry performer, however, rankled with some who did not share his generous non-partisan stance and were jealous of his position. Consequently his work was frequently attacked by establishment critics who not only took against him but found his work hard to pigeonhole. Despite occasional critical opprobrium, his poetry earned him the prestigious Geoffrey Faber memorial award in 1964 for 'The Broken Places', and the Cholmondeley award in 1977. MacBeth also wrote for children and was an outstanding anthologist. His three anthologies for Penguin, the 'Penguin Book of Sick Verse' (1963), 'Animal Verse' (1965), and 'Victorian Verse' (1969), were remarkable for their range while his 'Poetry 1900-1975' (1979), an enlightened educational anthology, was widely used in schools. His anthology 'The Book of Cats' (1976) -- MacBeth was an enthusiast for cats -- remained in print for over twenty-five years. He also taught creative writing to American undergraduates (both in London and the USA) and travelled internationally on reading tours. 
In 1975 MacBeth's marriage was dissolved. In that same year, a watershed in MacBeth's life, he quit the BBC to make his living by his pen and published his first novel, 'The Transformation'. His prose was never as popular as his poetry. Each novel -- he wrote nine in all -- was utterly unlike the last: several were erotic to the point of the pornographic, and all seemed somehow self-indulgent. Only one, 'Anna's Book' (1983), received critical acclaim. On 4 March 1982 MacBeth married the writer Lisa St Aubin de Teran ('b'. 1953), with whom he was overjoyed to have a son. Later that decade she left him and the marriage was dissolved in 1989. This was devastating, as he was to show in his poetry, collected in a powerfully emotive volume entitled 'Anatomy of a Divorce' (1988) and in a novel, 'Another Love Story' (1991). On 28 September 1989 he married Penelope Ronchetti-Church and settled in Ireland. He was again made happy by the birth of a daughter. By this time, however, MacBeth had contracted motor neurone disease, from which he died at Moyne Park, Tuam, co. Galway, Ireland, on 16 February 1992. His last collection, published posthumously, was 'The Patient' (1992), in which he dealt touchingly and courageously -- even humorously -- with his condition. The book cemented his position as one of Britain's most important post-war poets. 
MacBeth was tall and always extremely thin, moustachioed, bespectacled and eccentric, especially in his dress; he once shocked the then staid BBC hierarchy by coming to work wearing a cream leather suit. Unconceited, generous, and always good-humoured, he never played the part of the poet. He was too busy living a life that included owning a run-down Ferrari (to which he wrote a funeral ode), collecting samurai swords, and buying Edwardian furniture for the vast, semi-derelict houses he revelled in owning. He was once asked, if he had not been a poet, what would he have liked to have been? He replied, without hesitation, 'A general'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51201


Bannerman, Helen Brodie Cowan (1862-1946), children's writer, was born on 25 February 1862 at 35 Royal Terrace, Edinburgh. She was the eldest daughter and fourth child of seven children of Robert Boog Watson (1823-1910), minister of the Free Church of Scotland, and his wife Janet (1831-1912), daughter of Alexander Cowan of Moray House, Edinburgh, and Helen Brodie. Both Helen Watson's parents were Scottish, as was her husband William Burney Bannerman (1858-1924), a physician, the son of James Bannerman (1807-1868) and (David) Anne Douglas (1819-1879). She lived in Madeira, where her father was minister at the Scottish church, from the age of two to the age of twelve. When the family returned to Edinburgh she was educated at Miss Oliphant's school. At a time when women were not admitted to Scottish universities she sat external examinations and was made an LLA (lady literate in arts) by St Andrews University in 1887. 
After her marriage on 26 June 1889, Helen Bannerman went with her husband to India and lived there as the wife of an officer in the Indian Medical Service (IMS) until he retired as a major-general in 1918. They had four children in India: Janet Cowan Watson (1893-1976), Davie Anne Douglas 
(Day; 1896-1976)
, James Patrick 
(Pat; 1900-1955)
, and Robert Boog Watson (1902-1988). 
The book for which Helen Bannerman is best known, 'The Story of Little Black Sambo', was written for her two daughters, to amuse them during a journey from the hill station of Kodaikanal to Madras. This involved being carried on a chair down the steep hillside, then travelling in a bullock cart, and finally going by train, with stops at rest houses and for meals along the way. It took two days and two nights -- time to refine the story of the adventures of a little black boy who outwits several tigers until it became a classic of economy and drama. She illustrated the book herself in watercolour and bound it into a small volume, with a picture facing every page. A friend took it to London and sold it to a publisher -- despite Helen's admonitions not to sell the copyright -- for $5. 

'Little Black Sambo' was published by Grant Richards in London in 1899 and became a runaway best-seller. It was published in the USA in 1900. American publishers rushed out copies of the book with, in later years, illustrations by a variety of artists, many of whom set their pictures in the deep south of the USA, associating the book with the American experience of slavery, and sowing the seeds for hatred of the book by black Americans in the years ahead. 
Having effectively lost the copyright -- though she had never agreed to its sale -- Helen Bannerman made nothing more than the original $5 from her best-seller. She did, however, publish subsequent books, though none was such a success as her first. They were 'The Story of Little Black Mingo' (1902), 'The Story of Little Black Quibba' (1903), 'The Story of Little Degchiehead' (1904), 'Pat and the Spider' (1905), 'The Story of the Teasing Monkey' (1906), 'The Story of Little Black Quasha' (1908), 'The Story of Little Black Bobtail' (1909), and 'The Story of Sambo and the Twins' (1937). After her death her daughter Day gathered together some unfinished text and pictures, and completed them, and published 'The Story of Little White Squibba' in 1966 under her mother's name. 
Helen Bannerman was a small, neat figure, with her fair hair in a bun, and blue eyes. She had a quick intelligence and enjoyed puns and verbal wit. She was no housekeeper but very much the intellectual. She was deeply Christian in her attitudes. She knew, at the end of her life, of the criticisms of her book 'Little Black Sambo' as racist and found them hard to understand; the child is the hero of the story and in her pictures he and his parents are lovingly drawn. In her picture of the closing scene (used in subsequent British reprints), where Sambo and his parents celebrate his escape from the tigers by eating pancakes, she shows the family sitting at a table with a clean white cloth, using plates and forks. In the American Stoll and Edwards edition a debased Sambo, sitting by himself, shovels the food into his mouth off the bare wooden table. As her son Robert put it in a letter to 'The Times' on 1 May 1972 when the book was under attack: 'My mother would not have published the book had she dreamt for a moment that even one small boy would have been made unhappy thereby'. 
Helen and William Bannerman retired to Edinburgh in 1918; he died there in 1924. She suffered a stroke in 1939, after which she was bedridden. She lived with her daughter Day in her home at 11 Strathearn Place, Edinburgh, and died there of a fractured femur and cerebral thrombosis on 13 October 1946; she was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 51204


Younger, Sir William McEwan, of Fountainbridge, baronet (1905-1992), brewer and political activist, was born at Ravenswood, Melrose, Roxburghshire, on 6 September 1905, the second son in a family of two sons and one daughter of William Younger (1857-1925), brewer, of Ravenswood, Melrose, and his wife, Katharine Theodora (died 1961), daughter of Commander Adam Alexander Duncan Dundas, 27th chief of Dundas, naval officer. His father was the brother of George Younger, first Viscount Younger, and of Robert Younger, Baron Blanesburgh; his paternal grandmother, Janet, 'nee' McEwan, was the eldest sister of William McEwan, Gladstonian Liberal MP for Edinburgh and the founder of McEwan's Brewery. He was thus brought up with a background of brewing and politics, and heavily influenced by an atmosphere of free trade and competition. He was educated at Winchester College, but blossomed during his time at Balliol College, Oxford, from 1924 to 1928. While at Oxford he was introduced to mountaineering and he became an accomplished rock-climber in the Alps, the Lake District, and the Cuillins, and was on the shortlist, though not selected, for the Everest expedition of 1928. For a not overconfident young man, the acquisition of skill and daring learned in rock climbing, together with the general ethos of the pursuit of excellence inherent in a Balliol education, produced a spirit ready to challenge existing attitudes in both commerce and politics. He graduated with a second-class degree in modern history in 1928. 
On leaving Oxford, Younger (known as Bill) joined the firm of Wm McEwan & Co., brewers, of which his father had been the managing director. He learned his trade from the bottom, with spells as maltman, shift brewer, and salesman. Part of his training took place in London, where he stayed in the house of the celebrated Dame Margaret Greville, Edwardian hostess and heir and presumed daughter of William McEwan. Dame Margaret was so impressed by the young man that when she died she left him all her ordinary shares, though they were at that time unquoted. 
In 1931 the Edinburgh brewing firms of Wm Younger (not a relative) and Wm McEwan amalgamated with a joint equity as Scottish Brewers Ltd but in trade continued to compete fiercely with each other. However, the older William Younger was still very much the senior partner and Younger found his radical business ideas had to be suppressed. On 24 June 1936 he married Nora Elizabeth ('b'. 1916), eldest daughter of Brigadier Edward William Sturgis Balfour and Lady Ruth Balfour of Balbirnie; there was one daughter, Caroline Ruth, born in 1946. In 1937 Younger joined the Royal Artillery, in the Territorial Army. When war came in 1939 he quickly rose to be a major in the 40th light anti-aircraft (LAA) battery and in November 1940 he was sent to the Middle East. While in command of the LAA battery he took part in the first siege of Tobruk, where his valiant and original air defence of the fortress earned him the DSO. He was subsequently promoted lieutenant-colonel commanding the 14th LAA regiment, took part in the remainder of the north African campaign, and, after landing at Salerno, followed the war in Italy until the armistice. Known by his men as Colonel Screwtop, the main supplier of beer to the army being McEwan Youngers, he returned from the war with greatly increased self-confidence and a determination to put his radical ideas to the test. 
Younger stood twice as the tory candidate for West Lothian, a seat almost certainly unattainable for a conservative, but after defeat in the 1950 election he confined his political ambitions to work for the party and concentrated his main efforts on brewing. 
In the immediate post-war years the brewing industry was dominated by family-owned companies. The relaxation of rationing allowed much increased production from existing equipment, and consumption rose rapidly. The main place of sale was the public house; lager was a minor brand and cans had only just begun. As the families of the many smaller, family-owned brewers sought to realize the value of their investments, these breweries fell into the hands of larger companies seeking to enlarge the number of their tied outlets. The process was accelerated in the late 1950s when the Canadian brewer Ed Taylor started to buy up individual companies and amalgamate them to make larger groups. The whole industry was thrown into turmoil, and many firms sought protection by running for cover to larger groups. 
In Scotland the situation was somewhat different. The tenanted public house was a rarity and customers were tied to a brewery by loans, often at lower than commercial rates. A large proportion of the trade was completely free and depended on the marketing of individual brands. Younger, by now managing director of Scottish Brewers Ltd, saw this as an opportunity, concentrated on the free trade, and developed brand marketing to an extent not previously seen in the industry. He encouraged the development of the can, which was particularly suited to the growing trade in off-licences and eventually supermarkets. Under his leadership Scottish Brewers Ltd became the dominant force in Scotland and the north of England. 
Although many smaller brewers came to him for protection, Younger refused to buy except for cash, taking the view that the issue of shares would cause a dilution of shareholder equity. He believed strongly in competition, and when the main rival to Scottish Brewers Ltd in Scotland was offered to him he refused the offer on the basis that the resultant combine would so dominate the Scottish brewing scene as to extinguish competition and blunt the competitive edge of his company. His business philosophy was at variance with that of the rest of the brewing industry and he took no part in the councils of the various trade associations. In 1961 Newcastle Breweries joined the group. The name was changed to Scottish and Newcastle, and Younger became the chairman and managing director. 
In spite of his education and background, Younger was anything but a conventional establishment figure. His business philosophy often consisted in seeing what the opposition was up to and then doing something completely different. Within the parameters of his policy directives, he allowed his subordinates to get on with their work without interference. Under his leadership the Scottish and Newcastle group developed rapidly during the 1960s, and the shareholding left him by Dame Margaret Greville made him a rich man. By 1970 he felt he needed a change, and he retired in order to devote himself to politics and his other business interests, and to dispose of a large part of his fortune. His marriage had started to fail in the 1960s and he was divorced in 1967. 
Younger was the honorary secretary of the Scottish Unionist Association from 1955 to 1964, when he was made a baronet. In 1968 he and two colleagues were asked to go to Belfast to see whether Stormont could be a pattern for a Scottish assembly. The report was accepted by a large majority of Scottish tories and Edward Heath announced in 1970 in the declaration of Perth that there would be a Scottish assembly. Younger was chairman of the Conservative Party in Scotland from 1971 to 1974 and worked closely with Heath. He was a left-centre tory and when Margaret Thatcher disavowed the declaration of Perth he withdrew. 
Younger was a director of many Scottish businesses including the Scottish Widows Fund, the British Linen Bank, and Scottish Television, and was for several years chairman of the Scottish Investment Trust. He was the moving spirit behind the successful annual international forum of the Scottish Council (Development and Industry). He was a founder, trustee, and generous supporter of the Institute of Economic Affairs. In the 1950s he had given away his house at Balerno to the Save the Children Fund. He now created the Craignish Trust, one of the chief beneficiaries being Balliol College, as a result of which he was made an honorary fellow, a distinction of which he was immensely proud. 
In 1983 Younger married June Peck ('b'. 1933), but by now his health was starting to fail and he retired to Little Hill Cottage, Harpsden, Henley-on-Thames, where he died on 14 April 1992. He was cremated at Reading on 23 April, and was survived by his wife and the daughter of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 51206


McFadzean, Francis Scott, Baron McFadzean of Kelvinside (1915-1992), businessman and economist, was born on 26 November 1915 at 8 Fullarton Terrace, Troon, Ayrshire, the son of Francis Findlay McFadzean, law clerk, and his wife, Annie Scott, 'nee' Smith. Frank, as he was always known, developed early on a broad accent, and qualities of forthrightness and decisiveness which he never lost. He left school at the age of fourteen to go to sea and pursue the romance of travel and hazard, but after four years of washing down decks and painting hulls he reviewed his progress and made his first career change. Three months of intensive study in the Mitchell Library, Glasgow, saw him pass the entry examination for Glasgow University, where he took a first in economics and developed an appetite and talent for intellectual debate. Later a postgraduate degree in business administration at the London School of Economics (LSE) completed his academic armoury. After a short spell as a civil servant, from 1938 to 1940, in which his intellectual strength guided him through the Board of Trade into the Treasury, his career was interrupted by the Second World War. After joining the Duke of Cornwall's light infantry as a private he made his way through the ranks and through Africa, Italy, and north-west Europe finally to Malaya, where he was demobilized as a colonel. 
McFadzean began his post-war career working with the Malayan government (1945-9) and then with the Colonial Development Corporation (1949-52). His strong opinions soon led him into direct conflict with Lord Reith, chairman of the latter, and their letters announcing a parting of the ways crossed in the post. McFadzean then joined the Royal Dutch-Shell group of companies, rising to become managing director of the group, a post he held from 1964 to 1976, and chairman of the committee of managing directors, from 1972 to 1976. He also chaired Shell Oil in the United States and Shell Canada. The years of his chairmanship were turbulent, with the first oil crisis in 1974 rewriting the rules for the oil industry. His resilience and decisiveness were called on heavily during these years, as they had been during the Nigerian crisis five years earlier, when he flew into the rebels' camp in Enugu to obtain the safe passage of his expatriates. On his return from Nigeria his preference for a low profile was exemplified by his whimsical willingness to speak only to the 'Sunday Post'. He was knighted in 1975. 
In 1976, shortly before his retirement from Shell, McFadzean was appointed chairman of British Airways by Harold Wilson. With typical clinical appreciation of his new situation he completed the integration of British European Airways and the British Overseas Airways Corporation, making considerable cost savings, but, even more importantly, winning the battle to build the airline around Boeing aircraft, a base which underpinned the airline's competitive position and secured its future. These years with British Airways took their toll on his health and led to his leaving the corporation in 1979. Nevertheless, in December 1979 he was persuaded by Margaret Thatcher, who much admired his acumen, to accept the chairmanship of Rolls-Royce (which he had previously served as a non-executive director). Rolls-Royce was in major financial difficulties when he arrived. The recession in the airline industry had deepened drastically in the early 1980s, following the second oil crisis, and orders had fallen by almost 75 per cent. McFadzean tackled effectively the cost implications of this without damaging the momentum of technological development. As a result Rolls-Royce kept its place in the front rank of engine suppliers and within three years was profitable again and ready for privatization. Like British Airways, Rolls-Royce, thanks to McFadzean (by now Baron McFadzean of Kelvinside), had got its fundamentals right. 
McFadzean's determination to set his own course and break the shackles of a traditional and comfortable Scottish life emerged early, with his departure from home into the rough and tumble of life at sea. During these formative four years he gained confidence in the strength of his intellect, and realized that he needed to pursue education to develop and hone his mind. His studies and his mental jousting with Alec Cairncross and others did just that. This period of education in Glasgow and later at the LSE convinced him that he had something to offer in the academic field of economics. Perhaps he saw himself in the line of Adam Smith and the other thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment. He certainly had the practical experience to contribute. Nevertheless, it was a pity that his contribution should have taken the form of debunking another's ideas rather than of a broader statement of his own: two of his three books were attacks on the liberal economist John Kenneth Galbraith. 
McFadzean's internationalism was not an academic conversion but born of personal experience throughout the war years and his career with the Colonial Development Corporation and Shell. His respect for his associates in foreign countries was based on friendship and understanding, not on the anticipation of material gain for his company. The calculations may have been based on money, but the decisions were made on the importance of maintaining the relationship. This brought security and stability to difficult situations, and made solutions easier to find. 
The origins of McFadzean's decisiveness are more elusive. His primary objective in Shell was to ensure that momentum was never stalled by indecision. He seemed to have a fear, perhaps emanating from his period of employment with the government, as a civil servant and then with a public sector corporation, that there were many ways in which a decision could be avoided and action frustrated. He contributed greatly to Shell's effectiveness in decision making, so important in the crisis years. The same was true of his time at British Airways, when he refused to be frustrated over Boeing, thus laying the proper foundation for a great airline. However, the same clarity fitted ill with the industrial relations of the 1970s. In this period agreements between employers and trade unions were labyrinthine, and there was little receptivity for broad-brush strategic moves. Agreements moved forward by inches. This fitted ill with McFadzean's background and humour, and it left a mark on his attitude and his health. 
Throughout his working life McFadzean was a natural 'free trader', almost more at home in the dynamism and bustle of the Far East than in Britain itself. The excitement and the turbulence of the oil industry suited him well. Risk taking was second nature to him, and his fearlessness, born in the mountainous seas of the Atlantic Ocean, never left him. With no sense of hierarchy, he treated everyone as a colleague worth listening to and arguing with, although he knew where the buck stopped. For him a decision deferred was an opportunity lost. To those who knew him well he was straightforward and helpful. He held strong views but would welcome disagreement. His friendship was always worth having, not just for natural enjoyment but for the support it always conveyed. Nevertheless, for those who were more acquaintances than friends he could appear detached and reserved, and his gruff reactions could disturb rather than endear. 
McFadzean was twice married: first in 1938 to Isabel McKenzie Beattie, who died in 1987, and second in 1988 to Sonja Lian Hoa Nio Khung. He died at his home, Woodside, Quarry Woods, Bisham, Berkshire, on 23 May 1992, of kidney and heart failure. He was survived by his second wife, and by the daughter of his first marriage, Felicity Carmen Francesca ('b'. 1946), who in 1979 married Sir Richard (later Baron) Marsh, the former Labour cabinet minister. 


@@@@@


doc= 51213


MacMillan, Sir Kenneth (1929-1992), choreographer, was born on 11 December 1929 at Dunfermline, Fife, the youngest of five children (one of whom died in infancy) of William MacMillan (1891-1946), labourer and cook, and his wife, Edith (1888-1942), daughter of George Shreeve, of Ormesby (near Great Yarmouth) and his wife, Mary Anne (known as Raya). 
Kenneth MacMillan's parents met in Norfolk during the First World War, when his father's Scottish regiment was posted at Ormesby. William MacMillan took his growing family back to Scotland but moved to Great Yarmouth in 1935, in search of work. Kenneth went to Northgate infants' school, which was evacuated in 1940 to Upper Broughton in Nottinghamshire; homesick, he insisted on returning to Yarmouth, which was severely bombed during the battle of Britain. He won a scholarship at the age of eleven to Great Yarmouth grammar school, which had been evacuated to Retford, Nottinghamshire, but which allowed its pupils to return home in the holidays in spite of the continued bombing. 
It was in Retford that MacMillan discovered ballet, thanks to a local dance teacher, Jean Thomas. He had learned Scottish dancing as a small child in Dunfermline and tap as a boy in Yarmouth, where he performed in end-of-the-pier talent shows and amateur concert parties to entertain the troops. Miss Thomas taught him ballet as well as tap and encouraged him to read about ballet in the local library. 'I was transported into a world which seemed so exotic to me, living at a time when death and destruction was an everyday occurrence' ('Shropshire Star'). 
Later, when he became a choreographer, he was determined that the ballets he created should reflect the whole of human experience -- death, distress, political oppression, extreme psychological states, as well as the symbolic truths contained in fairy-tale ballets. His boyhood wartime memories inform certain of his works, such as 'The Burrow' (1958), 'Valley of Shadows' (1983), and 'Gloria' (1980), which is dedicated to his father, gassed during the First World War. His mother's death in 1942, when he was twelve, also affected him deeply. 
During term time in Retford, MacMillan performed in Jean Thomas's dance concerts as well as taking part in school plays. He kept his dancing activities as secret as he could from his schoolmates, although by the age of fourteen he was already determined to become a ballet dancer. When his grammar school returned to Great Yarmouth in 1944, he sought out a ballet teacher there, Phyllis Adams, who helped ensure that he was accepted by the Sadler's Wells Ballet School (later the Royal Ballet School) in 1945, when he was fifteen. On his return visits to Yarmouth he would try his hand at choreographing dances for Miss Adams's pupils. He saw his first ballets, danced by Ninette De Valois's Sadler's Wells company, at the New Theatre in London. When the company moved into the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, in 1946, he appeared, while still a student, in 'The Sleeping Beauty', which reopened the opera house. 
His father died just as MacMillan became a founder member of De Valois's new junior company, first known as the Sadler's Wells Opera Ballet, then Theatre Ballet. It was originally intended as a nursery for young dancers and choreographers, who would then move to the senior company at Covent Garden -- as MacMillan did in 1948. He went on its first American tour, dancing the role of Florestan in the last act 'pas de trois' in 'The Sleeping Beauty' on the company's triumphant opening night in New York in 1949. 
Although his career as a dancer was advancing well, MacMillan suffered increasingly from stage fright. De Valois granted him leave of absence early in 1952 and suggested he perform more informally with a small group headed by the young South African choreographer John Cranko. Their performances in Henley-on-Thames helped save the neglected Kenton Theatre, which had been restored by the artist John Piper. During the successful summer season Cranko encouraged MacMillan's interest in choreography -- an ambition deferred in favour of dancing. 
Cured of his stage fright, MacMillan rejoined the touring company, the Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet, in September 1952. Opportunities to choreograph soon arose when the company set up a Sunday workshop under the direction of David Poole. MacMillan's first ballet, 'Somnambulism', was made at short notice in 1953, when a colleague dropped out of the first workshop performance. 'It even surprised me what it was like', MacMillan said in an interview (Gruen). 'I thought when I started doing choreography it was going to be like things that everyone else had done. In point of fact, it came out unlike anything anybody had ever done' (ibid.). 
Although dancers of this period, such as Maryon Lane and Pirmin Trecu, confirm that the spiky choreography was new-minted, MacMillan was influenced in his early work by modern ballets of the forties and fifties -- in particular, those by Roland Petit and Janine Charrat, danced by visiting French companies, and by Jerome Robbins and Antony Tudor, performed by Ballet Theatre (soon to become American Ballet Theatre). MacMillan also acknowledged the influence of Frederick Ashton, the Royal Ballet's founder-choreographer. 'I certainly learned craftsmanship from him since, when I was a dancer, I was in a lot of his ballets and I saw how a ballet was made' (MacMillan, 9). 
MacMillan soon consolidated his initial success by creating 'Laiderette' (1954) for the Choreographic Group. Although De Valois found its harpischord music by Frank Martin unsuitable for inclusion in the touring company's repertory, Marie Rambert snapped up 'Laiderette' for her Ballet Rambert, which continued to perform it, to recorded music, until 1967. De Valois promptly commissioned MacMillan's first work for Sadler's Wells Theatre Ballet, 'Danses concertantes' (1955), to Igor Stravinsky's music of the same name. Designs by Nicholas Georgiadis, then a young theatre designer at the Slade School of Art, marked the start of a long collaboration between the two men. 

'His professional debut with 'Danses concertantes' showed a talent seething with ideas, bursting to find new ways of using the classical vocabulary... the intoxicating feeling of dance that bubbled wittily and imaginatively, and in such profusion. (Crisp, 'Kenneth MacMillan', 6)' Confident that MacMillan had found his vocation, De Valois agreed that he should give up dancing and become a resident choreographer for the touring company. It presented a programme entirely of his work, including 'House of Birds' and 'Solitaire', in June 1956. 'The evening left one in no doubt of MacMillan's arrival among the few creative choreographers', in the opinion of a reviewer ('Ballet Annual'). He was commissioned to create 'Noctambules', his first work for the senior Covent Garden company, in 1956, before taking leave of absence to work with American Ballet Theatre, choreographing 'Winter's Eve' and 'Journey' for that company's dramatic ballerina, Nora Kaye. 
On his return after five months in New York, MacMillan set about creating 'The Burrow' (1958), the first of his signature flesh-and-blood ballets. It was also the first time he used Lynn Seymour, the Canadian dancer who was to become his muse. 'The Burrow', which deals with a group of oppressed people living in terror of 'the knock on the door', has similarities with the story of Anne Frank. It was also a response to the new realism of films and plays of the time. 'Little of what I was seeing then [in ballet] had any contact with a real world of feeling and human behaviour. I wanted to make ballets in which an audience would become caught up with the fate of the characters I showed them. (Crisp, 'The man who makes')' Audiences and critics responded enthusiastically: 'Controversial and stimulating', wrote Clive Barnes, 'this piece ['The Burrow'] seems a landmark destined to do for ballet what 'Look Back in Anger' did for the theatre' ('Daily Express'). 
Although MacMillan went on to choreograph 'The Invitation' (1960), with its graphic depiction of the rape of a young girl (Lynn Seymour), he had also made 'Le baiser de la fee' in the same year with Seymour -- a response to Stravinsky's score, whose fairy-tale scenario deals with the isolation of the artist from human relationships. However emotionally searing MacMillan's work became in the years that followed, he never totally abandoned the conventions of classical ballet. The two seemingly divergent strands of gritty expressionism and other-worldly fantasy coincided towards the end of his life, when he choreographed 'Prince of the Pagodas' (1989), with another elusive fairy-tale scenario, and 'The Judas Tree' (1992), which includes a gang rape and a lynching. 
MacMillan developed yet a third strand, the plotless ballet, almost as non-representational as its music. After the early 'Danses concertantes' he went on to choreograph the pure-dance 'Diversions' and 'Symphony' in the sixties, as well as two big, ambitious ballets, 'The Rite of Spring' and 'Song of the Earth'. The Royal Opera House board of governors objected to the use of Mahler's music for a ballet, so MacMillan created 'Song of the Earth' for the Stuttgart Ballet in 1965, before it was brought into the Royal Ballet's repertory a year later. The same objections were later raised against his use of Faure's music for 'Requiem' (1976), his memorial to John Cranko, late artistic director of the Stuttgart Ballet (MacMillan created six works in all for the Stuttgart company). 'Requiem' was eventually danced by the Royal Ballet in 1983. 
In an interview in 1963 MacMillan recognized a prevailing theme in his ballets: 'The more I look at my work, the more it seems that, unwittingly, I choose the lonely, outcast, rejected figure... it seems to happen unconsciously, as a sort of leitmotif' (MacMillan, 6). His first three-act ballet, however, commissioned by the Royal Ballet for February 1965, was based on the familiar story of 'Romeo and Juliet', to Prokofiev's score. MacMillan already knew Cranko's version for Stuttgart and the Russian production by Leonid Lavrovsky, which had been one of the hits of the Bolshoi's first London season in 1956. But he was determined to bring his own vision of Shakespeare's tragedy to the Royal Opera House stage, with Lynn Seymour and Christopher Gable as the young lovers. 'Their' 'Romeo and Juliet' was to be as emotionally immediate as 'West Side Story', while retaining the formal grandeur of a classical ballet. Georgiadis was once again MacMillan's choice of designer. 
Seymour and Gable worked closely with the choreographer: their ideas, as well as their physiques and personalities, formed the way the ballet evolved. However, Rudolf Nureyev and Margot Fonteyn were the first-night Romeo and Juliet. Such starry casting in an unproven full-length ballet was a condition for the company's forthcoming American tour, as well as for Paul Czinner's film of the production, made a few months after the premiere. 
Although 'Romeo and Juliet' was a huge success with Fonteyn and Nureyev (and the casts that followed), MacMillan felt betrayed by the Royal Ballet management, as did Seymour. Gable, equally disillusioned, gave up dancing for an acting career. MacMillan accepted an offer from the Deutsche Oper in West Berlin to run its ballet company -- a decision endorsed by Sir Frederick Ashton, then director of the Royal Ballet. 'I might not have gone if Fred had said I was too valuable to lose', MacMillan told a friend, Gilbert Vernon, 'but he didn't even try to stop me' (private information). 
MacMillan left for Berlin in 1966, taking several colleagues with him, including Seymour as his new company's ballerina. It was not a happy experience, though MacMillan created works for the company, including 'Concerto' and 'Anastasia' (the one-act version) that have been performed by many companies, as well as mounting his own productions of 'Swan Lake' and 'The Sleeping Beauty'. He found the bureaucracy of a German opera house hard to handle, especially since ballet did not seem a priority. He did not speak German, so he felt cut off from films, theatre, and the outside world: Berlin was a divided city, the western part an allied-controlled enclave. MacMillan became increasingly isolated as his imported entourage moved away to live independent lives. 
He had been consulting a psychiatrist before he left for Berlin, suffering from the depression and anxiety attacks that were to dog him all his life. Berlin exacerbated his problems, as did his dependence on alcohol and cigarettes. He had a minor stroke in 1969 from which he soon recovered, shortly after the end of his Berlin appointment. He had already been designated the next artistic director of the Royal Ballet in 1970, after Sir Frederick Ashton's reluctant retirement. 
Relations with the Royal Ballet's staff and dancers during the difficult period of transition had been made even more awkward for MacMillan by the opera house management's decision to reorganize its two ballet companies. The touring company was reduced to a small group of soloists: jobs were lost; the re-formed administrative structure of the merged companies was ambiguous, leading to rows and resignations. 
MacMillan succeeded, however, in broadening the Royal Ballet's repertory still further by introducing works by other choreographers. Many of his own creations, including a three-act version of 'Anastasia', were not initially well received. As they were revived, they were viewed more favourably. None the less, it would take seventeen years before his 'Manon' (1974) was regarded as a modern classic, danced by companies all over the world. Critics of the time were sharply divided over his achievements: his ballets and his artistic policy were attacked by sections of the press in Britain and the United States. During this testing period, he met Deborah Williams, an Australian artist; they married in 1973 following the birth of their daughter, Charlotte. 
After seven years as director of the Royal Ballet, MacMillan resigned in 1977 in order to concentrate on choreography. His fourth full-length ballet, 'Mayerling' (1978), investigated the tormented psyche of Crown Prince Rudolf and his suicide pact with his young mistress, Mary Vetsera. Scenarios for MacMillan's new one-act ballets were also dark: a disturbed family in 'My Brother my Sisters', a lunatic asylum in 'Playground; Valley of Shadows' (based on the novel and film of Giorgio Bassani's 'The Garden of the Finzi-Continis') included scenes in a Nazi concentration camp. 'Different Drummer' told the story of George Buchner's 'Woyzeck', another example of man's inhumanity to man. 
MacMillan's dance-drama 'Isadora' (1981), recreating Isadora Duncan's extravagant life in dance and dialogue, was regarded as an experiment that failed. Although his ballets during this period elicited fine performances, they were not to the taste of an increasingly conservative audience at the Royal Opera House. Televised versions of his work were more successful, including a documentary about 'Mayerling' (London Weekend Television, 1978), and another, 'A Lot of Happiness' (Granada, 1981), about the process of creating choreography. MacMillan also directed professional theatre productions of August Strindberg's 'The Dance of Death' and Tennessee Williams's 'Kingdom of Earth', with mixed results. 
MacMillan was knighted in 1983 but felt increasingly that his work, challenging the boundaries of ballet, was ill-appreciated in Britain. He accepted an invitation in 1984 to become artistic associate of American Ballet Theatre, where Mikhail Baryshnikov was then artistic director. MacMillan travelled to the United States to supervise American Ballet Theatre's stagings of his ballets, including 'Romeo and Juliet' and a production of 'The Sleeping Beauty', as well as two new works for the company, 'Wild Boy' and 'Requiem' (to Andrew Lloyd Webber's music). He retained his links with the Royal Ballet, remaining its principal choreographer, while forging new ones with the Australian Ballet and Houston Ballet. During this period of frequent travel, his health deteriorated and he suffered a heart attack in Australia in 1988. 
Aware that he was living on borrowed time, MacMillan returned to enter a new creative phase with the Royal Ballet. He started work on a long-deferred three-act ballet, 'Prince of the Pagodas', to Benjamin Britten's score. It was to star nineteen-year-old Darcey Bussell in her first major role in 1989. He acquired yet another muse in the former Bolshoi principal dancer, Irek Mukhamedov, who joined the Royal Ballet in 1991. MacMillan choreographed a gala 'pas de deux' for Bussell and Mukhamedov, which became the core of his 'Winter Dreams' ballet. His last creation, apart from the dances for the National Theatre's 1992 production of the musical 'Carousel', was 'The Judas Tree', with Mukhamedov as the brutal anti-hero. Controversial to the end, MacMillan invented a tortured, symbolic scenario, built around guilt, betrayal, and murder on a construction site by Canary Wharf, then under development in the East End of London. 
By the time of his death MacMillan's reputation as a choreographer had spread worldwide. His ballets, particularly the dramatic, narrative works, have been danced by an increasing number of companies. Roles such as Juliet, Manon, Rudolf, and Mary Vetsera have proved open to interpretation by many dancers from different backgrounds. The Royal Ballet has continued to claim him as its great creative force, along with Frederick Ashton; their ballets have forged its distinctive identity. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Edinburgh University in 1976 and by the Royal College of Art in 1992. 
MacMillan died of a heart attack, backstage, during the first night of the Royal Ballet's revival of 'Mayerling' in the Royal Opera House on 29 October 1992. The announcement of his death was made on stage at the end of the ballet -- an extraordinarily dramatic, public conclusion to a life in the theatre. He was cremated in London on 6 November 1992; a memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 17 February 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51214


McWilliam, Frederick Edward (1909-1992), sculptor, was born on 30 April 1909 in Newry Street, Banbridge, co. Down, the son of William Nicholson McWilliam, medical practitioner, and his wife, Elizabeth Esther, 'nee' Rounds. An exile for most of his life, McWilliam cherished memories of his childhood in a small country town where craftsmen still pursued their traditional skills -- his own work was splendidly imbued with craftsman-like qualities -- but he also carried darker memories of Ireland in the 1920s, as it moved towards partition in an atmosphere of bigotry and intolerance. He was educated at Campbell College, Belfast, and at Belfast College of Art (1926-8). He continued his studies, at first intending to become a painter, at the Slade School of Fine Art, London (1928-31). Influenced by a member of the teaching staff, A. H. Gerrard (later Slade professor of sculpture), and by Henry Moore, whom he met for the first time in his second year -- both of these men became his lasting friends -- McWilliam emerged from the Slade committed to sculpture. After being awarded the Robert Ross leaving scholarship, he went straight to Paris to work: 'It was the mecca... holy ground, full of the memory of Cezanne, and the presence of Picasso', he said later (Flanagan and Marle, 22). His visit coincided with the slump, his money soon dwindled, and he returned to London. 
On 31 March 1932 at St John's Presbyterian Church, Kensington, McWilliam married the painter Elizabeth Marion (Beth) Crowther (1909/10-1988), whom he had met at the Slade. She was the daughter of Ramsden Crowther, a mill owner from Golcar, near Huddersfield. They had two daughters. Their first home -- at Chartridge, Buckinghamshire -- was a rented cottage which they shared with Henry Moore. There McWilliam began in earnest to carve, using cherrywood from the orchards which surrounded the house. His early pieces were semi-abstract, but a visit to the International Surrealist Exhibition at the New Burlington Galleries, London, in 1936 induced a change of direction. In the following year he joined the British surrealist group, and exhibited with them. He had his first one-man exhibition, of sculpture and drawings, at the London Gallery, Cork Street, London, in March 1939. 
The outbreak of the Second World War interrupted this steady progress. For six years, while serving in the RAF (in England and then, from 1944 to 1946, in India), McWilliam produced very little. As soon as conditions allowed, he returned to his work in wood, stone, clay, bronze, and concrete. In addition, he was invited in 1947 by A. H. Gerrard to teach sculpture at the Slade, a post which he occupied until 1968. 
McWilliam tended to work in series, exploring a theme in a succession of variations, rather as a composer might do. Characteristic of his sculpture produced just before and soon after the war was his exploration of 'the complete fragment', the part standing for the whole, in works which are aptly described by their titles: 'Mandible' (1938), 'Eye, Nose and Cheek' (1939; Tate collection), 'Profile' (1939-40), and the extraordinary 'Head in Extended Order' (1948), in which the components of a face -- lips, eyeballs, nose, and ear -- are laid in a row like excavated fragments of classical antiquity. His later 'Legs' series (1977-81) was a more playful excursion into the same territory. Another surreal device much favoured by McWilliam might be called 'the missing torso'. In 'Man and Wife' (1948), 'Father and Daughter' (1949), and 'The Matriarch' (1952), to name but a few pieces, limbs tenderly and convincingly, in defiance of common sense, surround an empty space. Henry Moore's riven sculptures of the same period became more famous but McWilliam's work had a lightness and grace which were all his own. 
In 1949 McWilliam was elected to the London group (he resigned in 1963); and in the following year he and his wife, Beth, made what proved to be their final move, to a house and studio in Holland Park, London. The house had a large, tree-lined garden, lovingly tended by Beth, where they entertained their many friends and where, according to the artist and collector Roland Penrose, 'his sculptures, placed appropriately on mounds among trees, seem to join the conversation' ('Women of Belfast', introductory note). 
In 1951 McWilliam was commissioned to create a large figurative work, 'The Four Seasons', for the country pavilion at the Festival of Britain; many public commissions followed throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Probably the most important was his monumental 'Princess Macha' (1957) for the Altnagelvin Hospital in Derry, a tall elegant figure which marked the beginning of his re-engagement with his Irish past. He also undertook a number of 'straightforward' portrait commissions, including a fine bronze of his friend and fellow Ulsterman the painter William Scott (1956). 
The Irish present -- or one brutal aspect of it -- announced itself with the commencement of the troubles in 1969. On 4 March 1972 a bomb exploded without warning among the diners at the Abercorn Tea-rooms in Belfast. Two women were killed, two more lost both legs, and a total of 130 people were injured. McWilliam, who never before had used his sculpture for direct comment, was moved by this dire event to create a series of small bronzes, known collectively as 'Women of Belfast' (1972-3; Arts Council of Northern Ireland Collection, no. 5). These suffering figures, whirled about, tumbled, and harried by the bomb blast, their faces contorted, their clothing agitated, have undeniable power. Though connected to the Northern Ireland conflict, they had a wider significance: they were emblems of innocence violated in a violent century. 
McWilliam received an honorary DLitt from Queen's University, Belfast, in 1964. He was appointed CBE in 1966, and in 1971 he won a gold medal for sculpture at the Oireachtas Exhibition in Dublin. He was briefly an associate of the Royal Academy: he was elected in 1959, but resigned in 1963 in protest at the hanging committee's rejection of a painting by William Gear. A comprehensive photographic survey of his work, by Roland Penrose, was published in 1964. A large retrospective in 1981 -- held first at the Ulster Museum, Belfast, before travelling to Dublin and Cork -- showed how various and inventive his contribution had been. He continued to carve with verve until almost the end of his life; and a second retrospective, at the Tate in 1989, included examples from his latest series, the fantastic 'Mulberry Figures', carved from a gnarled mulberry tree growing in his garden, which the great storm of 1987 had uprooted. He died of cancer at 12 Pembroke Square, Kensington, London, on 13 May 1992. He was survived by his two daughters, his wife having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51215


Lucas, John, first Baron Lucas of Shenfield (1606-1671), royalist landowner, was born on 23 October 1606, the eldest legitimate heir of Thomas Lucas ('c'.1573-1625), of St John's, near Colchester in Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1647), daughter of John Leighton, gentleman, of London. Lucas was a prominent supporter in Essex of Charles I, which helps to explain the episode in 1642 in which crowds, numbered in their thousands, attacked and plundered his house. This has featured prominently in accounts of popular politics in the English revolution since its inclusion in Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion'. Lucas succeeded to a prosperous landed estate in Essex in 1625. His earlier education is unknown, and although he appears not to have attended either Oxford or Cambridge his sister Margaret, later Margaret Cavendish, duchess of Newcastle upon Tyne (1623?-1673), described him as 'a great scholar'. As he was in France at his father's death he may have been sent abroad for part of his education. On 17 December 1628 he married Anne Nevill (died 1660), daughter of Sir Christopher Nevill. 
While the Lucas family traced their descent to the younger son of a fifteenth-century Suffolk gentry family, their fortune had been made by John's great-grandfather who as town clerk of Colchester married into the town's elite and later purchased the estates of the dissolved abbey of St John's. This purchase simultaneously removed the family to the 'country' seat of St John's -- in reality little more than a stone's throw from the walls of Colchester -- and bequeathed to them a series of conflicts between the abbey and Colchester that ran back to the peasants' revolt of 1381. Margaret Lucas's detailed, if eulogistic, account of the family's upbringing -- emphasizing the care their mother took to instil in her children the values of a culture of honour appropriate to their gentle status -- provides a key to Lucas's later history: the family conflicts gained an added edge from his readiness to detect a slight to his and his family's honour, and his religion provided another source of conflict with a town noted for the strength of its puritanism. The anti-Calvinist Samuel Harsnett, then bishop of Norwich, a Colcestrian and friend of the family (who had been his early patrons), had acted as his informal guardian. That Lucas was later suspected, wrongly, of popery probably reflected his patronage of ceremonialist ministers; among them was his chaplain Thomas Newcomen, who may have been Lucas's agent in ensnaring Dr John Bastwick, one of the famous puritan martyrs of the 1630s. 
Lucas was a member of a protoroyalist group within Essex and probably played a key role in the group's attempt to win the county for the king in preparation for civil war. Although he never served as a JP, he became sheriff in 1636 and succeeded, where his predecessor had failed, in collecting the unpopular ship money tax. Success won him the public thanks of the king and doubtless helped to win him a knighthood in 1638, but it also gained him enemies in a county dominated by the parliamentarian and puritan earl of Warwick and his allies. Lucas's attempt in August 1642 to steal away from Colchester with horse and supporters to join Charles I led to the attack on his house. Although this has been represented, then and later, as an example of class hostility, the reality was more complex: Lucas had angered both the godly rulers of Colchester and the parliamentarian elite within the county, and there is reason to suspect the involvement of the former, and at least the acceptance of the latter, in the attack. 
After his imprisonment by the House of Commons, Lucas fled to Oxford and served as colonel of horse in the royalist army. In 1645 he secured the title of Baron Lucas of Shenfield as compensation for his sufferings, though Clarendon implied that a gift from Lucas was also involved. Despite his support for the royalist cause he was not involved in the 1648 siege of Colchester, in the aftermath of which his brother Sir Charles Lucas (1612/13-1648) was executed; indeed, when the royalist army came into the county he fled to London to avoid any suspicion of involvement. Nevertheless, he was again imprisoned briefly in 1655. The Restoration brought him revenge over his enemies at Colchester, who were forced to participate in the reburial of his martyred brother in the family church of St Giles. Lucas was made a fellow of the Royal Society on 20 May 1663 but was inactive and was expelled in 1666. In 1671 the printed copy of a speech he had made in the Lords against the subsidy was ordered to be burnt by the public hangman. Lucas, it was reported, died of chagrin at this public disgrace -- a strange end for a man whose life had been marked by loyalty to the royal cause. He died on 2 July and was buried at St Giles, Colchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 51219


Markus, Erika (1910-1992), bridge player and writer, was born on 27 June 1910 in Gura Humora, then in the Austro-Hungarian empire (but now in Romania), the youngest daughter of Michael and Louise Scharfstein, a prosperous Jewish couple with interests in forests and vineyards. After the First World War the family moved to Vienna, where Rixi (as she became known) was educated in music, literature, and the theatre. She learned from one aunt to play poker, and from an uncle in the Netherlands to play whist at ten and bridge ('plafond') at thirteen; she had natural card-playing sense. Her parents did not approve, but after attending finishing-school in Dresden (Frau Wallenstein's 'Pensionat' for Jewish daughters of good families) she took up bridge in Vienna and was regarded as a prodigy. 
Through bridge Rixi met Salomon Markus. Twice her age, and in the shoe business, 'Salo' first admired her ability but soon resented her success, objecting to her playing in coffee houses, surrounded by men. Rixi married him in 1928, partly to remain in Vienna after her parents moved to Berlin, but equally to continue playing. Marriage proved a complete disaster (the only mistake to which Rixi would admit). Pregnant at nineteen (her only daughter was born in 1929), she fell seriously ill. This ruined any chance of an active career and led her to become a professional bridge player in 1934. 
Rixi caught the attention of Dr Paul Stern, who invited her to join the Austrian women's team, in defiance of her husband's will. Partnered by Ethel Ernst, she won the first European women's championship (Brussels, 1935) and the second (Stockholm, 1936), then the world women's championship (Budapest, 1937), her team remaining unbeaten in international play. The Anschluss ruined her plans for Oslo in 1938. She left for England, where her parents had moved in 1936, as Hitler entered Vienna. Her husband followed, but the marriage was dissolved in 1942. An elder sister, living in Poland, died in a concentration camp. Salomon Markus later became a millionaire property developer in Austria, and her daughter Margo led a glamorous life in America but died in 1976 from cancer, aged forty-six. Rixi had many affairs, including a thirteen-year alliance with (Norman) Harold Lever, Baron Lever (1914-1995), millionaire lawyer, Labour cabinet minister, and a bridge player of international class; but she never remarried. 
Bridge offered Rixi an entry into society, through Lady Rhodes, Manning Foster, and other influential figures. During the Second World War she was a fire-watcher and translator for the Red Cross. Naturalized in 1950, she played for Britain, partnering Doris Rhodes in the ladies' team which won the European championship in 1951 (Venice) and 1952 (Ireland), and toured the USA in 1953. Her partnership with Fritzi Gordon ['see below'] began in 1951 when Sidney Lee, trailing Denmark in the final, successfully reshuffled his pairings. Universally known as Frisky and Bitchy for their free-wheeling style and willingness to confide to all that the other was 'a selfish bitch' ('Daily Telegraph', 6 April 1992), the pair were a formidable partnership which often disintegrated, but both recognized the special chemistry that made them the top women's pairing of all time. Rixi's highlights included winning the European women's championship (1951, 1952, 1959, 1961, 1963, 1966, mostly with Fritzi); the gold cup (1961); the world women's pairs (1962, 1974); the world mixed teams of four (1962, with Nico Gardener); the women's team Olympiad (1964); and the inaugural European bridge cup (1974-5). Rixi had numerous victories in the spring foursomes and masters pairs, and the Whitelaw, Lady Milne, Queen's, and Hubert Phillips cups. With over 100 international and national titles, she was the outstanding woman player of her day; but Fritzi was close behind. 


Despite their similar backgrounds, the two were not friends, sharing only their bridge skills, a tigerish appetite for success, and a knack for disconcerting opponents. Rixi was regarded as friendly away from the table, but intolerably aggressive at play, preferring to be respected and feared rather than liked. She disliked artificial bidding, advocating a simple system with a strong NT and CAB responses to 2C and relying on flair and technique. Her slogan was 'Bid boldly, play safe', which became the title of her first and best book (1966). Her 'Rixi bids', as Terence Reese christened them, were notorious: intuitive leaps to 'lucky' contracts ('Soaring fancy, wild illogicality and comical resource'), which were, she insisted, the outcome of inexorable logic plus aggression, with the thrill of danger. She had a photographic memory, and an uncanny sixth sense. As a woman respected in a man's world she often scorned the abilities of other women. 
Rixi contributed regular columns to 'The Guardian' (1955-92) and the 'Evening Standard' (1975-80), many syndicated widely. She was a contributing editor to 'The Bridge Player's Encyclopedia' (1967). She regularly organized the 'Guardian' Easter tournament, the 'Evening Standard' charity congress (August), and the 'Harpers & Queen' festival (December); and she initiated the annual Lords v. Commons challenge match. The author of a dozen books (the early ones written with the assistance of Derek Senior), she at first offered excellent analysis, then tended to recycle her 'Guardian' gossip or simply present hands. Some she translated into German. 'Aces and Places' (1972) and 'Bridge around the World' (1977) reflect the international circuit, from St Moritz in January to Marrakesh in December, offering insights into the foibles of the rich and famous but too often name-dropping and excessively promoting her own interests. In her memoirs, 'A Vulnerable Game' (1988), a minor classic without a single bridge hand, she discusses her life and interests in ballroom dancing, gourmet cooking, music, theatre, and sport. 
Rixi Markus received many honours. She won five world titles and four Olympic gold medals, ten European championships, and a gold medal from the European Bridge League as best ladies' player (1959); she was recognized by the World Bridge Federation as best woman player (1972) and first woman grandmaster (1974), and was named 'bridge personality of the year' by the International Press Association (1974) and Charles Goren player of the year (1976); and she was awarded the Common Market medal of honour and, prized above all, the MBE for services to bridge (1975). The Rixi Markus cup (women's individual) was named after her, and she participated in Channel 4's 'Master Bridge' series (1983). She died on 4 April 1992, two months after Fritzi Gordon, at 42 Nottingham Place, Westminster, from pneumonia, having written her 'Guardian' columns almost to the end. 


@@@@@


doc= 51222


Beane, Sawney (fl. 15th-16th cent.), legendary murderer and cannibal, is first mentioned in print in broadsheets about 1700. Various versions of his life appeared: in some he is said to have been active during the reign of James I of Scotland (1424-36), while other accounts date his crimes to the reign of James VI, who ruled Scotland from 1567 before succeeding to the English throne as James I in 1603. The story of Sawney Beane was collected in 'A Compleat History of the Lives and Robberies' (5th edn, 1719) and in 'A General and True History of the Lives and Actions' (1734) before the legend became enshrined in the 'Newgate Calendars'. 
According to legend Beane was the son of a hedger and ditcher. He had an unnamed wife with whom he had eight sons and six daughters, who incestuously produced a further thirty-two children. The Beane family lived in a cave by the sea in Galloway. They lived by robbing passing travellers, murdering them, and then consuming the bodies (uncooked but apparently smoked or pickled). This went on for at least twenty-five years, during which many of the local innkeepers were executed for murder as the last people to see the travellers alive, with the result that 'not a few innkeepers... left off their business, for fear of being made examples of' ('History', 2). This in turn discouraged visitors to the area. Over a thousand people disappeared before a man and his wife returning from a local fair were attacked. The man defended himself while the female Beanes slashed his wife's throat and drank her blood before disembowelling her. A party of thirty people arrived while this was happening and the Beanes made their escape. The crime was reported to the provost in Glasgow, who sent for the king. The king brought 400 soldiers and a pack of bloodhounds which led them into a deep cave whose entrance was covered at high tide. There they found the limbs of men, women, and children 'hung up in rows, like dried beef' and 'lying in pickle' while heaps of loot lay on the floor ('Life', 3). The soldiers buried the human remains and took the Beanes and the loot off to Edinburgh (Leith in some versions). The whole clan was executed, the men being dismembered and left to bleed to death while the women and children, having watched this, were burnt alive. 
There is no contemporary record of any of this and all versions of the story contain internal discrepancies. The dates suggested for Beane's activities, as well as the appearance of printed accounts in eighteenth-century pamphlets, strongly suggest that the story had most appeal at times when anxieties about the union with Scotland and the barbarous image of the highlander were particularly contentious. Accusations of cannibalism are almost invariably levelled at those whose difference from the accuser is felt to be threatening. This, the constant emphasis in the early texts on the sufferings of 'the King's subjects' and the dismay of 'the whole Kingdom' ('Life', 3, 4), and the heavily stressed intervention of the king himself, all indicate that this is a fable about the final omnipotence of the head of state over the furthest and most rebellious reaches of the country. 


@@@@@


doc= 51223


Speight, Sadie (1906-1992), architect and designer, was born on 26 May 1906 at 65 Church Street, Standish, Lancashire, one of two daughters of Alfred Speight, a doctor, and his wife, Mary Annie, 'nee' Urmston. Both she and her sister, Kathleen, studied at Manchester University. Speight graduated from the school of architecture with first-class honours in 1929. She was a prix de Rome finalist and spent time studying abroad, as holder of the Zimmern travelling scholarship in 1929. In 1930 Speight received the Royal Institute of British Architects' (RIBA) silver medal for drawing and was elected an associate; in 1932 she held the Faulkner fellowship at Manchester University and gained her master's degree in 1933. Between 1930 and 1934 she was also working as an architectural assistant to Halliday and Associates in Manchester. As recipient of the RIBA Neale bursary in 1934 she conducted research into Isabelline architecture in Spain. 
On 3 January 1935 Speight married John Leslie Martin (1908-2000), who had been a fellow student at Manchester University, and they collaborated on the design of a number of private houses, including one for the textile designer and painter Alastair Morton, and a kindergarten at Northwich, Cheshire (1937-8). Speight, who continued to work under her maiden name, and Martin were part of the group of modernist architects and artists, including Ben Nicholson and Naum Gabo, who produced 'Circle: an International Survey of Constructive Art' in 1937. The couple's interest in contemporary design was further developed through the Good Form range of modular furniture which they produced for W. Rowntree & Sons of Scarborough 'c'.1938 and the publication, in 1939, of 'The Flat Book' (commissioned by Herbert Read) which offered advice on all aspects of the creation of the modern home. Many of the designers whose work they recommended, including Barbara Hepworth, Serge Chermayeff, and Milner Gray, were leading exponents of modernism in Britain; some of the products they illustrated, such as chairs by Finnish designer Alvar Aalto, they had purchased for their own home. Speight was an invaluable chronicler of the modern movement in architecture and design in Britain, as well as one of its practitioners. Her achievements in product design and shop layout reveal a particular flair for the use of colour and the grouping of objects, which surely owed much to her early contact with the champions of abstract art in Britain. 
After the Second World War Speight was a founder member of the Design Research Unit, set up to enable the skills of designers to be utilized to the full in the post-war recovery. Her designs for household appliances included an electric kettle and iron for Beethoven Electric Equipment. For the Festival of Britain in 1951, in collaboration with Leonard Manasseh, she designed the Rosie Lee cafeteria at the 'Live Architecture' exhibition in Lansbury, London. From the 1950s onwards she continued to work on architectural, interior, and exhibition design commissions while bringing up two children, Christopher and Susan, both of whom were to train as architects themselves. These projects included interiors for Swansea University in the 1950s and various Cambridge colleges in the 1960s. In this latter part of her career she also documented her husband's work as a leading architect and emeritus professor at Cambridge; he was knighted in 1957. She designed the layout of his book 'Buildings and Ideas' (1983) in which he acknowledged her contribution to his career, and was involved in the planning of 'Leslie Martin and Associates', an exhibition organized by the Gulbenkian Foundation in 1990. Almost until the end of her life, Speight continued to work on house conversion projects in Norfolk for family use. In her final months she suffered from motor neurone disease; she died on 23 October 1992 at her home, The Barns, Church Street, Great Shelford, Cambridgeshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 51225


Buchler, Adolph (1867-1939), college head, was born into a poor family of rabbinic stock on 18 October 1867 in the Slovakian village of Priekopa, then in Hungary. His father died in Adolph's infancy. He and his sister were brought up by their mother, whose brother was Adolph Neubauer (1831-1907), bibliographer and professor in biblical Hebrew at Oxford. Between 1887 and 1892 Buchler studied at the Budapest Jewish Seminary (where in 1892 he was ordained rabbi), Budapest University (philosophy), Leipzig University (where in 1890 he gained his doctorate on his -- later published -- dissertation on the Hebrew accents), and at the Breslau Jewish Seminary. 
After some months in 1892 as assistant rabbi in Budapest, Buchler spent a year in Oxford as assistant to his uncle in identifying the Hebrew manuscripts at the Bodleian. In 1893 he was appointed to teach at the Vienna Jewish Seminary in Jewish studies. Buchler married Hermione Lowenthal (died 1956) in 1895. They had six children. In 1906 his fame as pedagogue and original scholar led to his appointment as chief assistant to the ailing principal of Jews' College, London, Michael Friedlander, whose retirement was followed by Buchler's succession on 1 August 1907. The college was the Orthodox seminary intended principally for the training of rabbis and ministers for the congregations of the United Synagogue in London and the many synagogues beyond which followed its pattern. 
The new principal was a classicist, modern linguist, grammarian, and master of the substance and methods of the latest Jewish scholarship. According to his pupil and successor, Isidore Epstein, there was hardly a highway or byway of Jewish learning that did not attract Buchler's attention. His special field was Jewish life in Palestine in the generations both before and after 70 AD. His pioneering use of Talmudic sources, in addition to classical, was esteemed by Christian and Jewish scholars alike. Among the best-known of his numerous works were 'The Political and Social Leaders (of the Jews) in Sepphoris in the Second and Third Centuries' (1909) and 'Studies in Sin and Atonement in the Rabbinic Literature of the First Century' (1928). 
Buchler was slightly built, with an angular face and quizzical expression. He was firmly Orthodox, with a deep sense of duty in all things. He readily shared his vast knowledge and remarkable memory with fellow scholars. His famously meticulous preparation of his lectures was matched by his interest in the welfare and progress of his students, who revered him as instructor and friend. When the chief rabbi, J. H. Hertz, described him in 1927 as 'a scholar's scholar', it was intended as a compliment. But the quality was not unreservedly welcomed by the doubters of the practical utility of higher levels of rabbinic study in the training of the Jewish 'clergy'. They declared their preference for 'a wide secular education and considerable general culture', and also for the transfer of Jews' College to Oxford or Cambridge. Buchler led the opposition, and the plan was not proceeded with. 
Buchler's modest bearing belied his readiness to fight for his point of view. The contrasting opinions and consequent tensions remained throughout his tenure. On 24 March 1931 he used the celebration of the college's seventy-fifth anniversary (1930) to deliver a tirade against his community's lay leaders, many of whom were present, for their limited concern for -- and neglect of -- Jewish higher studies generally. While his immense contribution to Jewish scholarship was acknowledged, his ambitions for the college were unfulfilled. He saw the inadequate provision of resources as a reflection of communal priorities which were not his. 
Buchler died suddenly on 19 February 1939 at his home, 261 Goldhurst Terrace, Hampstead, and was buried on 21 February at the Willesden Jewish cemetery in London. Among the mourners was the chief rabbi of Palestine, Isaac Herzog. 


@@@@@


doc= 51226


Maskell, Daniel (1908-1992), tennis player and broadcaster, was born on 11 April 1908 at 15 Everington Street, Fulham, London, the fourth and youngest son and seventh of eight children of Henry George Maskell ('b'. 1873), engineer, and his wife, Emma Pearce (1875-1922). He had an entirely happy childhood, though his upbringing was firm. His father, Harry, insisted that all the younger members of the family address him as 'sir'. The younger Dan won a place at Upper Latymer School, a grammar school in nearby Hammersmith, but the family could not afford the fees. He went instead to Everington Street School, close to the family home. There his talent for sport soon emerged. He was captain of the school soccer team, and during school holidays he became a part-time ballboy at Queen's Club, near his home. He said it was 'a better way of earning pocket-money than queueing for meat or delivering bread' (Maskell, 28). As well as tennis and other racket sports, Queen's was also the venue at that time for a range of sports, including the Oxford and Cambridge football, rugby, and athletics matches. Maskell never forgot witnessing performances from the future Olympic champions Harold Abrahams and Lord Burghley, nor acting as a ballboy for the future duke of York (later George VI), who competed at Wimbledon in 1926. 
Lawn tennis became Maskell's main interest. He was a natural timer of the ball, and the game came easily to him. He seized the opportunity to impress in matches against the younger Queen's members and professionals. In 1923, aged fifteen, he became a full-time ballboy. When the maharaja of Baroda, a Queen's member, presented a trophy for the annual competition between the ballboys, Maskell won his first tennis prize. Just a year later he was appointed a junior teaching professional, and in 1926 was given a five-year contract by Queen's to teach lawn tennis, real tennis, rackets, and squash. Tournament tennis at the time was mostly for amateur players. Professionals could not compete. But in October 1927 Maskell helped create the first world professional championship, played at Queen's Club, and defeated Charles Read in three straight sets for a first prize of $50. A year later he beat the same player to become British professional champion -- a title he won sixteen times between then and 1951. 
In 1929 Maskell left Queen's to become the first teaching professional at the All England Club, Wimbledon, where his duties also included coaching juniors with Davis cup and Wightman cup potential. He had already been a spectator at Wimbledon many times, starting in 1924 when he saw Britain's Kitty McKane defeat Helen Wills (Moody) in the ladies' final -- the only match the American woman lost at Wimbledon in a career that took her to eight Wimbledon singles titles. Maskell joined the club in pre-practice week prior to the championships fortnight in June, and his first task was to practise with legendary champions such as Helen Wills, Jean Borotra, and Dorothy Round. He also became coach to the British Davis cup team. Led by the inspirational Fred Perry, the British team regained the cup in 1933, defeating France in Paris, and retained it for the next three years on the centre court at Wimbledon, beating the United States and Australia. Perry was Wimbledon champion three years running from 1934 to 1936, and with Dorothy Round winning the ladies' singles in 1934 and 1937, Maskell was part of the golden age of British tennis. On 26 August 1936 he married Constance Eileen (Con) Cox (1916-1979), secretary. They had one daughter, Robin, and one son, Jay. 
During the Second World War, Maskell served in the Royal Air Force and, from 1940, was its first rehabilitation officer, based at the Palace Hotel in Torquay, and then Loughborough. Maskell's task was to devise exercises and activity for wounded aircrew. He was devastated when bombing destroyed part of the Palace Hotel and killed over twenty patients and medical staff while he was on a weekend away. He rose to the rank of squadron leader, and was appointed OBE in 1945. After the war he resumed his career at the All England Club, became chairman of the Professional Tennis Coaches Association, and continued to play professional tournaments. He also gave private tennis coaching to members of the royal family. 
Maskell's broadcasting career began in 1949 when he joined the BBC radio commentary team for Wimbledon as an expert summarizer. In 1951 he moved to television, and soon became the leading commentator -- a role he continued for the next forty years until he retired in 1991, by which time he had not missed a day's play at Wimbledon since 1929. Such was his impact that the 1992 Wimbledon championships began with a presentation to him in the royal box of a silver salver engraved with the landmarks of his career. The All England Club had already honoured him nearly forty years earlier, in 1953, by making him the first professional member of the club. As a television commentator, he believed in meticulous preparation and economy of words. 'The picture tells the greatest part of the story', he said (Maskell, 218). One of his golden rules was never to talk during a rally. Nevertheless his rich, even plummy, voice became almost the traditional sound of an English summer. His reaction to winning shots, with such phrases as 'Oh, I say!' and 'a dream of a backhand!', became legendary. He was never controversial nor outspoken, but was always looking to emphasize the positive aspects of players and the game. Following his retirement from the All England Club in 1955, he worked for the Lawn Tennis Association until 1973, devoting himself to coaching and development work. In 1982 he was appointed CBE for his services to tennis. In 1988, when tennis was restored to the Olympic games after an absence of sixty-four years, he fulfilled a life's ambition by attending the games in Seoul, Korea, as a member of the BBC team. Colleagues were astonished when the eighty-year-old Maskell, after the long and tiring flight from London, insisted on going straight to the Olympic Stadium to see the opening ceremony. 
Maskell's personal life was struck by two tragedies. In 1970 his only son, Jay, a licensed pilot, was killed in an air crash in the Bahamas, and in 1979 his first wife, Connie, was drowned in the West Indies. He married second, on 20 August 1980, Kathleen (Kay) Latto (died 1993), a voluntary worker. Away from tennis he had an intense passion for skiing, which he took up in the 1930s. Asked on a radio programme what he would do if given only one further day of sport, he opted for skiing. He was also a keen golfer, and for twenty-two years served on the committee of Wimbledon Common Golf Club, where he first swung a club as a seventeen-year-old. In his last years he suffered from cancer of the prostate. He died of heart failure in his sleep, on 10 December 1992, at East Surrey Hospital, Redhill, and was cremated on 17 December at Randalls Park, Leatherhead, Surrey. He was survived by his second wife and by the daughter of his first marriage. A memorial service was held on 15 March 1993 at All Souls, Langham Place. 


@@@@@


doc= 51229


Mathias, William James (1934-1992), composer, was born on 1 November 1934 at Cilhawl, North Road, Whitland, Carmarthenshire, the only child of James Hughes Mathias (1893-1969) and his wife, Marian, 'nee' Evans (1896-1980). His father, who had a keen interest in music, was a history teacher at Whitland grammar school and his mother was a respected amateur organist and piano accompanist. Mathias showed an early interest in the piano and at the age of six he began formal lessons. Composing seemed to be a natural extension of his piano studies, and he wrote a large number of works, without any official tuition, while at school. A school song, written when he was twelve, is still in use today. 
In 1952 Mathias went to University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, to read English, French, and philosophy, but soon transferred to music. He was tutored by Professor Ian Parrott and graduated with first-class honours in 1956. He then gained an open scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music in London to study composition with Lennox Berkeley and piano with Peter Katin. While there he met his future wife, (Margaret) Yvonne Collins, another scholarship student, also from south Wales, who was studying voice. They married in 1959 and had one daughter, Rhiannon ('b'. 1968). Among their peers at the academy were Cornelius Cardew and Harrison Birtwistle, yet out of this furnace of avant-garde ideas Mathias emerged with his own lyrical, compositional style. His music soon came to the attention of Alan Frank, the entrepreneurial music editor at Oxford University Press, who wooed the young composer into the ranks of the press's house composers -- who at that time included Ralph Vaughan Williams and William Walton. 
In 1959 Mathias took up a lectureship at the University College of North Wales, Bangor. This, coupled with his marriage the same year, gave him the professional, emotional, and financial security to build on his increasing reputation as a composer. In 1968 he took the position of senior lecturer at the University of Edinburgh. However, Wales remained his natural home, and in 1970 he was appointed professor of music back in Bangor, and the family moved into Y Graigwen, a beautiful house on the island of Anglesey overlooking the Menai Strait. He took early retirement to devote more time to composition in 1988. 
Mathias wrote with great fluency in a style that was largely consolidated by the time he left the academy. His stylistic hallmarks were a modal tonality, frequent harmonizations at the interval of a 4th or 7th, ostinati motifs, a penchant for syncopated rhythms, and the construction of forms through contrasting and often quite discrete musical episodes. His character was present in his music's energy and jauntiness and in a seam of Celtic romance. His prolific output -- nearly 250 catalogued works -- covered most genres, and the quality was variable. He made a significant contribution to the canon of twentieth-century organ music both with the organ concerto, op. 81 (1984), and with shorter works such as the dazzling 'Carillon' (1990). He also wrote well for choir, moving easily between sacred and secular texts. He regarded 'Lux aeterna', op. 88 (1982), dedicated to the memory of his mother, as his 'choral best'; it was a glorious work in the great tradition of other British works written for the Three Choirs festival. During the 1980s Mathias made frequent visits to the United States and Canada, where there was a constant demand for new anthems. This popularity was in part precipitated by the enormous interest in 'Let the people praise thee, o God', op. 87 (1981), commissioned for the wedding of the prince and princess of Wales and consequently heard at its premiere by over 750 million people worldwide. 
Mathias's chamber and orchestral music conveyed a sort of nationalism born not out of the politics of confrontation but out of a deep empathy with the history, spirit, and natural beauty of Wales. The concertos for flute and oboe were distinctly pastoral in places, and the harp concerto, op. 50 (1970), showed a marvellous understanding of the possibilities of the Celtic emblem. He wrote three symphonies, a single opera ('The Servants', to a libretto by Iris Murdoch), a number of successful works for youth orchestras, ten concertos, three string quartets, a piano trio, and other works for assorted forces. His final three large-scale works, the third symphony (1991), the violin concerto, and 'In Arcadia' (1992), were all affirmatory and pointed to a man who was determined to live life to the full. In the last few months of his life Mathias revised a number of early works but continued to compose afresh, even commencing a fourth symphony. 
Mathias received many honours, including being made a fellow of the Royal Academy of Music (1965) and a doctor of music of the University of Wales (1966); he was awarded the Bax Society prize (1968) and the Guild for the Promotion of Welsh Music's John Edwards memorial award (1981), and was appointed CBE (1985). He was diligent in his public roles as president of the Incorporated Society of Musicians (1979-80), member of the music advisory committee of the British Council (1974-83), member of the Welsh Arts Council (1974-81), and vice-president of the Royal College of Organists (1985-6). He also founded the St Asaph festival in 1972 and remained its artistic director until his death. He died, from cancer, at his home in Anglesey on 29 July 1992, survived by his wife and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 51230


Hill, Sir (James William) Francis (1899-1980), lawyer and historian, was born at 34 Tentercroft Street, Lincoln, on 15 September 1899, the elder of the two sons of James Hill, an immigrant to Lincolnshire from his native Scotland, and his English wife, Millicent Blinkhorn. James Hill worked in Lincolnshire as a travelling tailor. 
Hill was educated at the Lincoln Technical School. In 1918 he was commissioned into the King's Royal Rifles (60th Rifles) and served in France until 1919. After demobilization he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated in 1921. He was then articled to a Lincoln solicitor, Russell Race, and was admitted to the roll of solicitors in January 1926. He was immediately taken into partnership, and remained a partner in the firm until his death. The minutiae of provincial legal practice, however, did not satisfy him and he soon became involved in the public life of the city. 
Hill was elected a city councillor in 1932, and served as councillor and later alderman until 1974, leading the independent group which controlled the council for a period after the Second World War. He was mayor in 1945-6 and was elected a freeman of the city in 1961. For many years he chaired the Lincoln education committee, and a primary school in the city is named after him. He was twice an unsuccessful parliamentary candidate: first as a Liberal, at Peterborough in 1929, and then as a Conservative and Liberal National, at Lincoln. 
Over time Hill fought many local battles in Lincoln. In 1928, a threat to the twelfth-century Jews' House from a local slum clearance scheme was successfully resisted. Years later, when Lincoln corporation, backed by the Central Electricity Generating Board, planned to erect at the Lincoln power station a group of cooling towers 220 feet high which would have cut off the historic view of Lincoln from the south-west, he managed, if not to prevent their being built at all, to get their height reduced to 60 feet. His campaign in 1955 to prevent the diversion of the Roman Ermine Street north of the city to make room for a runway extension at Royal Air Force, Scampton, was finally unsuccessful, but his vigorous resistance did ensure that the decision was taken right up to cabinet level. 
Frank Hill (as he was generally called) became a leading figure in local government. He was chairman of the association of municipal corporations from 1957 to 1966, and a member of the royal commission on local government (the Maud commission) from 1966 to 1969. He was chairman of the Standing Advisory Committee on Grants to Students from 1958 to 1966 and a governor of the Administrative Staff College, Henley, from 1960 to 1969. His chairmanship of the association of municipal corporations led in due course to his election as president of the European conference of local authorities, whose headquarters were at Strasbourg, a post he occupied from 1966 to 1968. He was subsequently president for three years of the International Union of Local Authorities at The Hague, an appointment that involved frequent extensive travel. From 1972 to 1978 he was chairman of Municipal Mutual Insurance plc and was regarded with affection by both senior and junior staff. In his honour the company in 1972 endowed the Francis Hill chair of local government at Nottingham University. He was made a CBE in 1954 and in 1958 received a knighthood for services to local government. He was appointed a deputy lieutenant of Lincolnshire in 1974. 
Hill's service in local government and his professional work as a solicitor informed his distinguished work as a local historian of Lincoln. His four volumes of civic history, published by Cambridge University Press, 'Medieval Lincoln' (1948, repr. 1965), 'Tudor and Stuart Lincoln' (1956), 'Georgian Lincoln' (1966), and 'Victorian Lincoln' (1974) were highly regarded. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and an honorary vice-president of the Royal Historical Society. 
Hill's work for education included serving as chairman of the governors of Lincoln School and Lincoln Girls' High School from 1935 to 1966. In 1938 he became a member of Nottingham University College council and then served as its president from 1948 and pro-chancellor in 1959. For twenty eventful years during the building of the university's splendid campus and its wide academic organization he gave the creative leadership the period required and, in recognition of this, was elected chancellor in 1972, remaining so until he retired in 1978. He received honorary degrees from the universities of Cambridge (1950), Nottingham (1961), Birmingham (1961), and Leicester (1974). 
Hill leased from the dean and chapter of Lincoln a house in Minster Yard known as The Priory; he restored it substantially and in his will devised it back to the chapter. He died there, after suffering a heart attack, on 6 January 1980, and was buried at Newport cemetery, Lincoln. He was unmarried. By his will the pictures which he collected at The Priory were given to the city of Lincoln and his considerable library was bequeathed to Nottingham University. His collection of some 1400 Anglo-Saxon and Norman coins, of which nearly a thousand were minted in Lincoln or Stamford, was presented by him to the city in 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 51231


Meaney, Sir Patrick Michael (1925-1992), businessman, was born on 6 May 1925 at 66 Bodmin Street, Wandsworth, London, the youngest in the family of two sons and two daughters of Joseph Francis Meaney, a tram driver, and his wife, Ethel Clara Martin. He was at first named Patrick Henry. Brought up in London, he was educated at Wimbledon College and the Northern Polytechnic. He served in the armed forces during the Second World War, remaining from 1941 until 1947; he was with the 6th airborne division at Arnhem. Meaney was married twice. His first marriage having ended in divorce, his second marriage, on 9 July 1968, was to Mary June Connell ('b'. 1927/8), the daughter of Albert William Kearney, a company director. He had a son, Adam, and a stepson and stepdaughter from his second marriage. 
In 1951 Meaney joined the haulage group Thomas Tilling Ltd. He rose in the company to become a director in 1961 and managing director and chief executive in 1973; under his management the group developed a strong building-product division and took over a number of companies in order to expand and diversify its activities. Following the recession of 1980-81, and the slump in profits, Meaney was unable to prevent the hostile takeover of Thomas Tilling by BTR in 1983: as a result of this, he was ousted from his job. 
Meaney had been a director of the Rank Organization since 1979, and at the end of 1983 he replaced Sir John Davis as chairman. The Rank Organization, founded in 1933 by the Methodist J. Arthur Rank as the Religious Film Society to make films for Sunday schools and Methodist halls, had developed into a large film-making company; it diversified in the 1950s, when Rank took over the family flour business in 1952 and set up Rank Xerox Ltd in 1956 to manufacture photocopying equipment. By the late 1960s, when the Rank Organization stopped making films, Rank Xerox was contributing over 90 per cent of the group's overall profit, and Meaney saw his main task as developing the group's other activities in order to lessen its dependence on Rank Xerox. He appointed Michael Gifford, from Cadbury Schweppes, as his chief executive, and together they built up the cinema chain and film-distribution side of the group and modernized the Top Rank bingo clubs. By 1992 the Rank Organization had a stock market value of $1.8 billion and a workforce of 45,000. 
Meaney was also on the boards of several other companies, including Cable and Wireless from 1978 to 1984, ICI from 1981, and Tarmac from 1989, and he was chairman of the Mecca Leisure Group from 1990. Keenly interested in horse-racing, from 1985 he was a director of Racecourse Technical Services Ltd and Metropolitan and Country Racecourse Management Holdings Ltd and deputy chairman of the Horserace Betting Levy Board. A director of Midland Bank from 1980, he was appointed deputy chairman in 1984 and served as chairman of the remuneration committee. He played a crucial part in the merger negotiations with the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HBSC) at the beginning of 1992, when his negotiating skills ensured that a likely takeover bid from Lloyds Bank was deflected. 
Meaney was much in demand for membership of trade and industry committees, and served on the councils of the Confederation of British Industry and the London chamber of commerce and industry, and on the stock exchange listed companies advisory committee. He was president of the Chartered Institute of Marketing from 1981 to 1991: during his presidency the membership grew to 50,000, and the institute developed a relationship with the Department of Trade and Industry that led to the successful marketing initiative, while he helped to make contact with influential people interested in business development and built up a panel of vice-presidents from the leaders of British industry. He was asked by the government to chair the review committee on the shipbuilding company Harland and Woolf in 1980. He also chaired the commerce and industry committee of the Great Ormond Street Hospital's wishing well appeal. 
A jovial and friendly man, Meaney was widely respected in the City for his energy and his ability to grasp the essentials of every situation and problem. A keen rugby player, he belonged to Harlequins Rugby Club. He was also a great opera lover and a Francophile. He was knighted in 1981. He died of heart failure at 27 Circus Road, Westminster, on 16 July 1992, survived by his wife, Mary, his son, Adam, and his stepson and stepdaughter. There was a memorial service on 7 October 1992 at the church of the Immaculate Conception, Farm Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 51232


Milchsack, Lisalotte (1905-1992), promoter of Anglo-German relations, was born in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, the daughter of Dr Paul Duden (1868-1954), an industrial chemist, and his wife, Johanna Bertha, 'nee' Nebe (1875-1947). Her grandfather was the lexicographer Konrad Duden (1829-1911), author of the Duden dictionary. She studied history at the universities of Frankfurt, Geneva, and Amsterdam before marrying Hans Milchsack (died 1984), a Dusseldorf businessman and the owner of an inland shipping navigation company; they had two daughters. 
The Milchsacks were early opponents of the Nazi regime: in January 1932 Hans walked out in protest during a meeting at the Industrieclub in Dusseldorf where Hitler was speaking, and as early as 1935 Lilo was telling her English friends that Hitler's policies were leading to war. During the war her husband was able to help some of the Dutch workers in his factory in the Netherlands, and in 1945, because of his anti-Nazi record, he was appointed burgomaster of Dusseldorf-Wittlaer by the Americans. 
In 1947 Lilo Milchsack was introduced to Robert Birley, educational adviser to the military governor of the British zone from 1947 to 1949, and when she began holding meetings in 1948 with the idea of forming some kind of association, Birley, who by now had moved from Berlin to Dusseldorf, was a great support. The Deutsch-Englische Gesellschaft (Anglo-German Association) was founded in her house in Wittlaer in March 1949 out of a desire for reconciliation between Germany and England, and with the aim that Germany should rebuild a democratic society through studying British institutions, with the help of close personal contacts with Britain. As Birley put it in 1947: 'we can offer the strength of our own traditions to Germany... Germans now... hunger for contacts with the outside world, from which they have cut themselves off for so long' (Uhlig, 167). The association was intended as an informal and independent political forum, where leading German and English politicians, journalists, academics, and others prominent in public life could meet and hold joint discussions. As a means of encouraging frank discussion, she established the rule that names would not be mentioned in press reports. 
Lilo Milchsack was director of the Deutsch-Englische Gesellschaft from 1949 to 1977 and chairperson from 1977 to 1982. She organized in 1950 the first of what became annual four-day conferences at Konigswinter, on the Rhine, south of Bonn: the theme of the first conference was social work and that of the second press responsibility. Although Birley had returned to England in 1949 to take up his appointment as headmaster of Eton College, he tried to attend every Konigswinter conference, and he chaired many of them. Over the years the conferences covered more general topics such as East-West relations and the Atlantic alliance. Lilo Milchsack also started 'Young Konigswinter' conferences, to bring together young people in their twenties from the two countries in order to develop mutual understanding. The Konigswinter conferences were described by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt in 1980 as 'a kind of college of higher education in politics'. He also said that 'at Konigswinter you have always been able to balance intellectual potential and warmth of heart, in short, to create a human atmosphere' (Uhlig, 200). This was largely because of the strength of Lilo Milchsack's personality and vision and the combination of her organizational ability and her gift for friendship. 
Lilo Milchsack retired as chairperson in 1982 but remained as honorary chair for the rest of her life, and she continued to participate in the conferences. She was awarded the Grosses Bundesverdienstkreuz in 1959 by the German government, and, after being appointed honorary CBE in 1958 and honorary CMG in 1968, she was created an honorary DCMG in 1972, the first German so appointed. As Sir Alec Douglas-Home said in 1971, 'Germany and Britain started this century in discord. We enter its last quarter in total trust' (Uhlig, 158). The Konigswinter conferences played a large part in the development of this trust. Lilo Milchsack died on 7 August 1992 in Dusseldorf. 


@@@@@


doc= 51236


Mitchell, Peter Dennis (1920-1992), biochemist, was born on 29 September 1920 at 19 Rustic Avenue, Mitcham, Surrey, the younger son of Christopher Gibbs Mitchell (1889-1951), civil servant, and his wife, Kate Beatrice Dorothy, 'nee' Taplin (1892-1974), daughter of William George Taplin of Peckham and his wife, Rosetta. His father was the elder son of Christopher Mitchell, a stonemason and quarry owner who had moved to London towards the end of the nineteenth century, going into partnership in a business importing stone to London. His father's brother, Sir Godfrey Way Mitchell, went into his father's business, but after the First World War he acquired and built up the firm of George Wimpey and was chairman from 1930 to 1973. Wimpey shares were passed to the family and Mitchell became one of the beneficiaries, particularly through his mother and his elder brother. His father was a successful civil servant and was made OBE. His mother, who probably had the greater influence on him, was a shy, gentle person, of very independent thought and action, with a strong artistic perceptiveness. Being a rationalist and an atheist, she taught him that he had to accept responsibility for his own destiny and especially for his failings in life. 
Mitchell went initially to Streatham grammar school and transferred to Barrow Hedges School after the family moved to Carshalton, Surrey, in 1927. In 1931 he entered Queen's College, Taunton, a school with a Methodist foundation, though from the age of about fifteen he adopted an atheistic philosophy. He failed the Cambridge scholarship exam in 1939, but went to Jesus College on the recommendation of his headmaster at Taunton, C. L. Wiseman, an able mathematician who influenced Mitchell significantly. At Cambridge, Mitchell followed courses for the natural sciences tripos, studying physics, chemistry, physiology, mathematics, and biochemistry in part one (in which he obtained a second class), and specializing in biochemistry for part two (in which he obtained an upper second). After graduating in 1942, he continued in Cambridge, undertaking research with Jim Danielli as his supervisor while also working on aspects of British anti-Lewisite as part of the war effort. Danielli introduced him to David Keilin, the scientist whom he came to love and respect more than any other. It was during this time that he met Jennifer Moyle, also working in the biochemistry department at Cambridge. Moyle worked with Mitchell from about 1948 until her retirement in 1983. Mitchell's thesis for the PhD degree was referred because it was too speculative, Mitchell having incorporated many philosophical elements. The final thesis, on the action of penicillin, was accepted in December 1950. Meanwhile, on 11 December 1944, Mitchell married Eileen Margaret Forbes Rollo ('b'. 1917/18), a nurse, and daughter of William Forbes Rollo, a civil servant; they had twins, Jeremy and Julia. However, the marriage was not successful and they parted some years later. 
During the 1950s Mitchell worked on aspects of the properties of bacterial membranes, especially the transport of phosphate. In 1955 he was persuaded by Michael Swann, then professor of zoology at Edinburgh, to leave Cambridge in order to set up a new chemical biology unit in the zoology department at Edinburgh, where he would be a lecturer (later senior lecturer and ultimately reader) and director of the new unit. Moyle also transferred to Edinburgh and their collaboration continued. Mitchell bought the Old Manse at Carrington, south of Edinburgh, and renovated it for use as his home. His most significant intellectual development during this period was the formulation of ideas about vectorial metabolism. In essence this considered the directional aspect of the chemical processes taking place in cells. With membrane-bound enzymes, it implied that a reaction could be catalysed where the reactants came from one side of the membrane but the products were released on the other, thus bringing about both the reaction and the transfer of a substance across the membrane. Initially Mitchell applied his ideas to reactions such as those in which a phosphate group is added to or removed from a sugar. Mitchell himself considered this theoretical aspect of his work as his most fundamental and important contribution to biology, though he is remembered more for its specific application in the chemiosmotic theory where he considered the addition of a phosphate to the adenine nucleotide ADP, to form ATP as a vectorial process. 
The means by which energy is drawn from oxidation of substances in cells and converted to the energy currency, ATP, is known as oxidative phosphorylation. Mitchell proposed his chemiosmotic theory in 1961 and revised it five years later to its final form. He suggested that the respiratory chain, the enzyme system which reduces oxygen to water in all aerobic cells, pumps protons across the membrane, creating both a gradient of protons from one side to the other and an electrical potential. The protons return across the membrane, encouraged by the potential via any route available. The major route is through the ATPase or ATP synthase enzyme driving the addition of a phosphate to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to form adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Thus energy from oxidation is initially stored as a proton gradient and membrane potential, which is then used for ATP synthesis. These proposals were not easily accepted by the scientific community. Workers in the field of oxidative phosphorylation were almost all trained chemists and believed that energy from oxidation must initially be stored in a chemical substance, the search for which had occupied many workers for a long period without success. Moreover, Mitchell's proposals appeared with arguments sufficient enough to make them plausible but without any experimental evidence in their support. It was therefore some years before the theory was accepted. 
On 1 November 1958 Mitchell married (Patricia) Helen Mary ('b'. 1924), formerly Robertson. An artist whom he had originally met in Cambridge, she was the daughter of Colonel Raymont Patrick Thomas ffrench, formerly of the Indian army. They brought up two more boys, Jason and Gideon, and enjoyed more than thirty years of a close and happy marriage. 
During the early 1960s Mitchell's health deteriorated and he suffered from stomach ulcers. On medical advice he resigned his readership in 1963 and moved to a cottage outside Bodmin in Cornwall. He had earlier been attracted by a dilapidated, Regency-fronted mansion at Glynn, to the south-east of Bodmin, which he bought and with the co-operation of Moyle restored to form a research institute together with a home for his family and flats. The new Glynn Research Institute, which opened for research work in 1965, possessed laboratories, preparation rooms, a library, and ancillary facilities. It was initially staffed by Mitchell, Moyle, and as technician Roy Mitchell (no relation to Peter), together with the company secretary. Research was directed at testing the validity of the chemiosmotic theory. The isolation of Glynn gave Mitchell an ideal environment for his work, and it was compensated by his ability to discuss ideas prodigiously by letter. 
In 1966 Mitchell published the first 'Grey Book' from Glynn, a revised and much fuller version of the theory proposed in the 1961 paper in 'Nature'. It was the 'Grey Book' rather than other publications such as a major review in 'Biological Reviews' (also in 1966) which enabled scientists around the world to begin to understand Mitchell's chemiosmotic theory. The theory itself, however, was still not acceptable to large numbers of workers in the field, a situation which persisted until the mid-1970s. Although the first clear support for the theory came from an American group led by Andre Jagendorf, working on chloroplast photosynthesis, research at Glynn revealed evidence for the theory, the first demonstration that protons were pumped by the respiratory chain being published in 1965. The Glynn group also provided evidence for the involvement of protons in ATP synthesis in the same year. 
The question of 'how' the respiratory chain pumped protons across the membrane occupied Mitchell from the outset. The 1966 'Grey Book' and its sequel, the second 'Grey Book' (published in 1968), considered possible mechanisms for linking the process of oxidation-reduction to proton pumping based on the idea of the redox loop. In 1975 Mitchell put forward the 'Q-cycle', a version of his redox loop principle, as a mechanism for the transport of protons by the second of the three energy-conserving complexes of the respiratory chain. This provided not only a much needed, plausible mechanism for proton pumping but also explained hitherto puzzling experimental results obtained with the middle (second) complex of the respiratory chain; it also demonstrated how a single electron passing through the complex might pump two protons across the membrane. Initially the cycle was received with some scepticism, but progressively over the next ten to fifteen years sound evidence was accumulated in its support. 
As the 1970s progressed, despite its unorthodox character the correctness of the basic postulates of the chemiosmotic theory was increasingly recognized. In 1974 Mitchell was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1981 he was awarded the society's Copley medal. In 1978 the Nobel committee decided to award Mitchell the prize for chemistry for his work in the field of bioenergetics and particularly the chemiosmotic theory. The ultimate acceptance of his initial proposals convinced Mitchell of the validity of his approach to oxidative phosphorylation. From the outset he had ascribed to the final complex of the respiratory chain, the cytochrome 'c' oxidase, only an electron-transporting function, since this complex possessed nothing which Mitchell could identify as a proton carrier. This situation led to a major conflict with a Finnish biochemist, M. Wikstrom (and an increasing number of other biochemists worldwide), between 1977 and 1985, which concluded with Mitchell's acceptance of the argument that the oxidase pumped protons. This argument was one of several in which Mitchell engaged, including those on the total number of protons pumped by the respiratory chain, and the mechanism by which protons would drive the synthesis of ATP by the ATPase. Although in many (though not all) of these disputes on detailed aspects of the chemiosmotic theory he ultimately accepted the opposing viewpoint, he maintained his position and the respect of the opposition by virtue of the skill which he used to suggest valid alternative interpretations of the experimental results, thus undermining his opponents' positions. In his later years Mitchell was forced to give increasing amounts of time to fund-raising for the Glynn Research Institute, whose original endowment could no longer support all of its needs. In order to give more time to these activities and to provide a base for the future research of the institute, a new research director, Peter Rich, was appointed. 
Mitchell remained an active scientist until his death. In the course of his career he published some 200 scientific papers and essays. His major contribution to biological science was to provide a new framework for bioenergetics, in which the process of energy conservation in oxidation was firmly linked to the transport of molecules across cell membranes. While physiologists developed an understanding of transport processes and while biochemists established the chemical reactions in metabolism, the failure of the two groups to interact inhibited the solution of major biological problems. Mitchell's achievement was to bring transport and metabolism together, providing a single unified conceptual framework, thus benefiting both fields. 
Mitchell had considerable charm, which enabled him to communicate his ideas to others and which was also a necessary compensation for an aggressive tendency in argument. He was distinguished in appearance, with dark, wavy, receding hair worn down to his shoulders over much of his life. He also sported a gold earring in his left ear, imitating one of his sons. He had other serious interests. Philosophy, on which he published some essays, had fascinated him since his undergraduate years or earlier, though it was not a subject on which he received tuition at Cambridge. The philosophical system which he developed as the basis for the first rejected thesis was fully consistent with his theoretical approach to biology, and it no doubt influenced the development of most of his theoretical ideas. If Keilin had been the scientist he most admired, then Karl Popper was his other hero. Popper's philosophy greatly interested him. 
Partly out of his concerns over inflation (which always threatened the financial security of the institute) Mitchell also became keenly interested in economics. For many years he was a member of a private think-tank, the Economic Research Council. Arising from the many controversies in which he had been engaged, Mitchell was concerned about the process of human communication, and occasionally wrote on this subject. At various times he considered redirecting the work of the Glynn Institute either towards economics or towards the study of human communication. However, friends persuaded him that his greatest contribution would be in the biological sciences, the area which retains his imprint. He died of cancer at Glynn House on 10 April 1992. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51237


Mander, Raymond Josiah Gale (1911-1983), actor and theatre historian, was born at 6B Cato Road, Clapham, London, on 15 July 1911, the only son of Albert Edwin Mander, architect and surveyor, and his wife, Edith Christina, 'nee' Gale. Albert Mander was related to the film director Miles Mander, but there seems to have been no family connection to inspire Ray Mander's passion for labelling items around the family home, thought at one stage to destine him for a career as a museum curator. Instead, after being educated at Battersea grammar school and perhaps inspired by the bundle of Irving theatre programmes given to him on his seventh birthday, he became an actor when he left school, touring in weekly repertory. 

(Francis) Joseph Blackett Mitchenson (1911-1992), actor and theatre historian, was born at 53 Selborne Road, Southgate, London, on 4 October 1911, the only son of Francis William Mitchenson, general merchant and drama critic, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Roddam. Mitchenson's father's ancestors had strong theatre connections and his mother (who had Yorkshire family connections) was theatre crazy and an amateur actress. The parents' marriage was not a success and Francis Mitchenson soon disappeared from the scene. Joe Mitchenson was educated privately, and from the age of eight, with financial support from a relative, took dancing classes at the Fay Compton School of Dance. Five years later he decided that his interest was in acting, no doubt influenced by contact with theatricals encountered at a fashionable vegetarian restaurant to which he was frequently taken by his mother after dancing classes. His first experience of the West End came in 1934 when he walked on in 'Libel' at the Playhouse (with Alec Guinness similarly engaged). 
14 February 1939 saw the first meeting between Mander and Mitchenson, and later in the year they appeared together in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Mitchenson playing Fenton and Mander playing Page. They toured the provinces for the rest of the year, with Mander playing Guildenstern among other roles in the Harold V. Neilson company at the Opera House, Manchester, until the Benson tradition ended just before the outbreak of the Second World War. Mander and Mitchenson then followed separate paths during the war. Mander found employment as a pioneer disc jockey for the BBC with thirty-five programmes to his credit, despite the inclusion on one occasion of banned Strauss music. Mitchenson meanwhile joined the Royal Horse Artillery and then transferred to the infantry before being invalided out with a leg injury, which continued to trouble him in later life. 
At the end of the war the two friends decided to turn their common interest into something more, and gradually the Mander and Mitchenson Theatre Collection was born, housed in Mitchenson's mother's house in Sydenham, London. Over the years this tall Victorian terraced house at 5 Venner Road overflowed with an amazing treasure trove of playbills and books from seventeenth-century folios onwards, programmes, periodicals, gramophone records, playwrights' prompt scripts, drawings, designs, and china figurines of great actors and actresses in their most famous roles, including a Bloor Derby Garrick. Anything which narrated theatre history was avidly acquired, magpie fashion. 
Soon the passion for collecting took over from acting, although Mitchenson continued to make the occasional 'professional' appearance in later life -- probably the last was with Coral Browne on television in 'Caviar for the General'. Working together, Mander and Mitchenson established themselves as the source for any authoritative theatrical information, willingly dispensing this to actors with whom they had personal connections (Judi Dench was a particular friend and later a patron of the collection's charity) and managements alike. They provided material for journals, television programmes -- 'This is your Life' was a consistent customer -- and innumerable exhibitions -- among which was one to Soviet Russia in 1978 of theatre design for the British Council. 
It was a natural step for Mander and Mitchenson to use their acquired knowledge as the source for publications, and between 1952 and 1977 seventeen books were written or compiled by them, besides contributions to more than 400 other publications. Their own publications ranged from pictorial histories of British theatre (1957), of opera (1959), of Gilbert and Sullivan (1962), of musical comedy (1969), of revue (1971), and of pantomime (1973), to more narrative accounts -- including 'Hamlet through the Ages' (1952), 'The Gay Twenties' (1958), 'The Turbulent Thirties' (1960), and the theatrical companions to Maugham (1955), Coward (1957), and Wagner (1977) -- and the authoritative records of London's theatres themselves, 'Theatres of London' (1961) and 'Lost Theatres of London' (1968). 
In the 1960s and 1970s 'Ray and Joe' became a theatrical institution and, dressed in style, invariably held court at first nights, reflecting on previous productions and associated gossip. At Venner Road they dispensed knowledge to those fortunate enough to be invited there -- it was a private collection -- or to those who could brave a telephone conversation which was always a double act. Noel Coward aptly named them Gog and Magog, quipping 'sort out between yourselves which is which' (private information). Indeed many of their friends secretly found it difficult to distinguish Mander (with the air of a former pugilist and speedy verbal delivery) and Mitchenson (taller, with long silver hair). 
Mander and Mitchenson knew from their personal experience of rescuing theatrical records from oblivion (as when they purchased the watercolour poster by Dudley Hardy for Kitty Grey from its use as temporary shop window repair following bomb damage) or when they failed (as with drawings in the Saville Theatre's bar), how easily theatre history might be lost. They first suggested as early as 1944 that their collection might be bequeathed to the nation. Sybil Thorndike aptly summed up their importance with her description of those the profession affectionately knew as 'The Boys' as 'our passport to posterity' (private information). 
Initially Mander and Mitchenson hoped that their collection would find a home in the National Theatre on the South Bank, but reasons of space forced rethinking. For a time it seemed that the collection would find a permanent home in the eighteenth-century Beckenham Place Park, with support from Lewisham council (which at one stage had sought to acquire the Venner Road property for road widening). The collection moved there in 1983, but despite support from the Greater London council in its final days the cost of renovating the Beckenham property proved too much for the charitable trust to which Mander and Mitchenson had made over the collection in 1977 (although both retained a hands-on approach to its work, sometimes to the concern of its curators). In 2001, after a brief period in temporary accommodation, it moved to a new home as part of the Jerwood Library of the Performing Arts in the Hawksmoor building at the Trinity College of Music, Old Royal Naval College, in Greenwich. There, while still retaining its independent status and within an academic environment which might have surprised its founders, it was located in a worthy surrounding and atmosphere appropriate for Mander and Mitchenson's life work. 
Mander died at Hither Green Hospital, Lewisham, London, on 20 December 1983, of bronchopneumonia and emphysema, when the move to Beckenham Place had only just begun. Mitchenson moved with the collection to Beckenham and lived there until shortly before he died in Orpington Hospital, Bromley, London, on 7 October 1992, of renal failure and prostatic hypertrophy. 


@@@@@


doc= 51239


Shorter, Dora Mary (1866-1918), poet and journalist, was born at 17 Richmond Hill, Dublin, the elder daughter of George Sigerson (1836-1925), Dublin physician and scholar, and his wife, Hester, 'nee' Varian (1828-1898), poet and novelist. Her sister Hester (later Piatt) also became a writer. Dora and her brother George were educated at a dame-school until the family moved to the more central location of 3 Clare Street, where the children were taught by their mother and aunt until Dora was seventeen; she then had a governess for a few years and thereafter she attended the Dublin School of Art. 
Although her parents' marriage was unhappy, the family home became a Dublin salon where Dora met the leaders of Irish literary and political life. This period coincided with the beginning of the Irish literary revival, and she threw herself into the cultural life of Dublin, becoming a member of the Pan Celtic Society in 1888 and of the National Literary Society in 1892; she also contributed poems, reviews, and articles to Irish periodicals, and her first book, 'Verses' (1893), was financed by Father Matthew Russell, editor of the 'Irish Monthly', in which most of the poems had first appeared. Soon after this the rising English journalist and journal editor Clement King Shorter (1857-1926) met and fell in love with the beautiful Dora Sigerson; after a persistent courtship on his part they were engaged in September 1895, and married on 9 July 1896. In London she and Shorter held Wednesday dinner parties for writers, politicians, and journalists at their home in Marlborough Place, St John's Wood. She contributed poems, articles, and reviews to numerous British and Irish journals, and continued to publish volumes of verse and prose sketches at regular intervals, and a 'Collected Poems' was issued in 1907. Her verse was generally well received, although some critics complained about the irregularity of her metrics. She took pleasure in frequent trips to the continent with her husband, and in 1904 they bought a country cottage in Great Missenden, Buckinghamshire. 
Although Dora Sigerson Shorter played a vigorous role in the intellectual and cultural life of London (she counted George Meredith and Thomas Hardy among her friends and was a founding member of the Lyceum Club), her Irish sympathies strengthened; she joined the Irish Literary Society and later the Irish National Club, and according to the Fenian Mark Ryan wrote a pamphlet to dissuade Irishmen from enlisting in the British army during the South African War. She was deeply affected by the Easter rising in 1916, and with her husband organized an unsuccessful campaign to save Roger Casement from hanging. She designed and sculpted a memorial to the events of 1916 now in Glasnevin cemetery. The poems in her 'Love of Ireland' (1916) and 'The Sad Years' (1918) indicate a growing despair at British conduct in Ireland, and friends, such as Katherine Tynan, believed that her anguish over the political situation there was the major factor in her physical decline and premature death. Chronically ill during the previous year, she died on 6 January 1918 at 16 Marlborough Place, and she was buried in Glasnevin graveyard, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 51246


Guinness, Bryan Walter, second Baron Moyne (1905-1992), poet and novelist, was born on 27 October 1905 at 11 Grosvenor Place, London, the eldest of three children of Walter Edward Guinness (1880-1944), MP, later first Baron Moyne of Bury St Edmunds, and his wife, Lady Evelyn Hilda Stuart, 'nee' Erskine (1883-1939), daughter of the fourteenth earl of Buchan. 
A sensitive boy, Guinness loathed his preparatory school. Perhaps the most effective scene in his novels is the passage in 'Landscape with Figures' (1934) which describes the torments of his dormitory. At Eton, one morning at chapel, he suddenly found he was unable to get off his knees; this was the start of an attack of polio which set him back academically and made participation in games impossible. The late diagnosis of the disease -- the fault of his Eton dame who thought he was malingering -- meant that he never grew to his full height. His father, who was tiny, good-looking, and perfectly proportioned, was known as 'the pocket Adonis'. Bryan Guinness inherited his father's piercing blue eyes and handsome features but not his proportions: his feet and hands were too big and he should have been a few inches taller. He was nevertheless a graceful dancer, and when he waltzed with his mother the whole ballroom would stop to watch. Oxford he enjoyed; he belonged to the 'Brideshead generation' with Evelyn Waugh, Brian Howard, and Harold Acton. However, he worried his mother because he underspent his allowance, a worry uncommon for most parents of an undergraduate. It was an early sign of his shrinking dread of ostentation. 
After leaving Christ Church with a degree in French and German, Guinness read for the bar. He also went to dances, at one of which, in 1928, he met the eighteen-year-old Diana Freeman-Mitford ['see 'Mosley, Diana (1910-2003)], daughter of David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford, second Baron Redesdale (1878-1958). They married on 30 January 1929 and had two sons. Diana, freed from the countrified parents that her sister Nancy was to immortalize in her novels, longed for society. Guinness, it became clear, wanted to settle down to enjoy just such a quiet rural life as she had escaped. His poem 'The Cocktail Party' starts: '
Here friendship founders in a sea of 'friends', 

And harsh-lipp'd 'bubbly' cannot make amends. 

' In 1931, discouraged by a colleague who told him that he was unlikely to be given briefs because of his wealth, he left the bar and bought Biddesden House in Wiltshire. In 1932 Diana fell in love with Sir Oswald Mosley, soon to become leader of the British Union of Fascists. She divorced Guinness in 1934. On 21 September 1936, Guinness married Elisabeth Nelson (1912-1999) from Argyll. Her tastes, unlike Diana's, corresponded with his and together they built up the farm and Arabian horse stud at Biddesden. Their happy marriage produced four sons and five daughters. 
Guinness had already published his first novel, 'Singing out of Tune' (1933), and followed it with 'A Week by the Sea' (1936). 'Lady Crushwell's Companion' (1938) reflected his increasing interest in farming. The style was graceful and the reviewers were polite, but the novels did not really catch on. Where he did receive some recognition was as a poet, particularly for his collection 'Under the Eyelid' (1935). He produced a further six volumes of poetry. 
The first of several children's books, 'The Story of Johnny and Jemima', appeared in 1936. Some regard this as Guinness's best work, in which good triumphs over evil with just enough violence to please a child. Illustrated by Roland Pym, it was the start of a fruitful collaboration. Guinness's play, 'The Fragrant Concubine', was performed in the West End in 1938. During the war Guinness was part of the Spears mission and served as liaison officer with the French in Syria. He was in the region when his father, as minister resident in the Middle East, was assassinated by Jewish terrorists. He inherited Knockmaroon, a house overlooking the Liffey near Dublin, and from then on divided his time between Ireland and England, with many journeys abroad. He became vice-chairman of Arthur Guinness, Son & Co. in 1949. 
After the war Guinness also produced six more children's books, including 'The Children in the Desert' (1946), five novels, and five plays. 'A Riverside Charade' was performed at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin, in 1954. His novella, 'A Fugue of Cinderellas' (1956), records the gently competing sensibilities of a group of well-meaning people. His 'Collected Poems, 1927-1955' was published in 1956. There were also two collections of short stories and three volumes of autobiography, 'Dairy not Kept' (1975), 'Potpourri from the Thirties' (1982), and 'Personal Patchwork' (1986). 
One of Guinness's salient characteristics was a real reverence for the arts. He was a governor of the National Gallery of Ireland from 1955 and a member of the Irish Academy of Letters. As Lord Moyne, he was quite assiduous in the House of Lords, although making speeches did not come easily to him. He would be better known as a writer, perhaps, had he managed to suppress his natural kindliness and delicacy and admitted more of the ruthlessness of life into his writing. 
Bryan Guinness died at Biddesden House on 6 July 1992; his ashes were buried in Ludgershall churchyard, Wiltshire, on 30 July. 'On a Ledge', his final collection of poems, was published posthumously in 1992. 


@@@@@


doc= 51247


Maclay, John Scott, Viscount Muirshiel (1905-1992), businessman and politician, was born on 26 October 1905 at 13 Park Terrace, Glasgow, the youngest child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Joseph Paton Maclay, first Baron Maclay (1857-1951), shipowner and public servant, and his wife, Martha (died 1929), daughter of William Strang, muslin manufacturer, of Glasgow. His father was chairman of Maclay and McIntyre, shipowners, a friend of Andrew Bonar Law, and a very successful controller of shipping under Lloyd George during the First World War. Of his four brothers, the two eldest, Ebenezer (1891-1918) and William (1895-1915), were killed in action during the First World War; the third, Joseph (1899-1969), was Liberal MP for Paisley from 1931 to 1945, and succeeded his father as second Baron Maclay and chairman of Maclay and McIntyre; the fourth, Walter (1901-1964), was an eminent psychiatrist and sometime honorary physician to the queen. 
John Maclay was educated at Winchester College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was in the crew that beat Oxford in the 1927 boat race, before joining the family shipping firm. On 16 October 1930 he married Betty L'Estrange Astley (1902-1974), younger daughter of Major Delaval Graham L'Estrange Astley, of Wroxham, Norfolk. There were no children of the marriage. On the outbreak of the Second World War he served briefly as a captain in the 57th Searchlight regiment of the Royal Artillery, before being seconded to the Ministry of War Transport and sent to Washington as deputy to Sir (James) Arthur Salter, head of the British merchant shipping mission there. He succeeded Salter as its head in 1944, and was gazetted CMG in the same year. 
Maclay had been elected unopposed as Liberal National MP for Montrose Burghs in July 1940, and on his return from Washington he was briefly parliamentary secretary to the Ministry of Production in Churchill's 'caretaker' ministry of May-July 1945. Following the Labour victory in the general election of that year he kept largely to commercial life, serving as chairman of the British committee of the international chamber of commerce from 1947 to 1951, but he also took part very effectively in Commons debates on shipping and trade. After the abolition of the Montrose Burghs constituency he stood successfully as National Liberal and Conservative candidate for West Renfrewshire, which he represented for the next fourteen years. Between 1957 and 1967 he was president of the National Liberal council (the National Liberals had six Scottish MPs), a not utterly fictive role in view of his preference for consensual policies. In October 1951 Churchill made him minister of transport and civil aviation, without a seat in cabinet, but his health was poor and a crisis over increased fares for London transport in May 1952 brought about his resignation. He served briefly as president of the assembly of the Western European Union in 1955-6 (and later expressed regret that Britain had not played a more constructive role in the early stages of European integration) before returning to office under Sir Anthony Eden as minister of state for the colonies in October 1956. While there, he was (albeit briefly) closely involved in formulating the British response to developments in Cyprus and Ghana. 
In January 1957, on replacing Eden as premier, Harold Macmillan appointed Maclay secretary of state for Scotland in place of James Stuart. A shy personality and somewhat quavering delivery made him an unobtrusive presence as secretary of state, yet he presided tactfully over a considerable expansion in the capabilities of the post. He later recollected of his time in office that 'Secretaries of State were now being judged by the performance of the Scottish economy', with traditional British departments such as the Board of Trade being regarded as marginal. Stuart, a friend and confidant of Churchill, had not regarded industry as a priority, though he developed the social and infrastructural responsibilities of the Scottish Office in response to the nationalist pressure of John MacCormick's covenant movement and the Balfour commission of 1953-5. But, as an inquiry by Alexander Cairncross had disclosed in 1953, the country's economy was still archaically dependent on the traditional capital goods and textile industries. Already suffering from under-investment, these industries were thrown into crisis both by the post-Suez depression and by the technical changes enforced by the canal's closure: giant tankers and containerization. Macmillan himself took a direct interest in the country which had produced his publishing forebears, and made common cause with leaders of Scottish business, notably Lord Polwarth of the Scottish Council (Development and Industry) and George Middleton, general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress. National policy on developmental assistance was still, however, determined by unemployment levels, not by entrepreneurial potential, and in real terms less was being spent on industrial policy than twenty years earlier. Urgency was underlined by the general election of October 1959, in which -- against the British trend -- the right-wing vote in Scotland fell from 51.1 per cent to 47.2 per cent and seats from 36 out of 71 to 31. 
This disaffection was tackled by Macmillan, now with Cairncross as his chief economic adviser and his former assistant and ghost writer Allan Young as Board of Trade controller in Scotland, by sweeping moves of industrial direction in the steel and automotive industries. In 1959 came the decision -- against the advice of the industry's leaders -- to site a new integrated steelworks and strip mill at Ravenscraig, near Motherwell, and in 1960 Macmillan followed this with his 'Local Employment Act'. As a result, Maclay joined with the Scottish council to create a committee on future strategies for Scottish industry, under J. N. Toothill, managing director of Ferranti's Scottish operation. As well as the co-ordination of regional development bodies and a shift towards the encouragement of diversified industries based on 'growth points' in the new towns, the Toothill report (substantially drafted by the committee's secretary, Dr Tom Burns, later professor of sociology at Edinburgh) recommended 'a new department which should bring together the present industrial and planning functions of the Scottish departments'. Accordingly in 1962 the Scottish Office changed from having, besides agriculture and fisheries, a home department, and a health department, to a new structure of an 'economic' development department plus a 'social' home and health department. This was to cope with the opening of the Ravenscraig strip mill and two motor plants -- Rootes Cars at Linwood, near Paisley, and British Motor Corporation Vans at Bathgate -- which were seen as inaugurating a new era of Scottish consumer-goods manufacturing. Counsels were fatally divided, however, between the advocates of diversification and the remaining heavy industrial magnates, who favoured a huge littoral steel-and-ships development on the Clyde estuary. Nobody then realized how useful the latter course would have been in coping with the challenge of North Sea oil. 
Despite considerable achievements, including the initiation of construction of the Forth and Tay road bridges, the inauguration of Scotland's first nuclear power station, and of the Glasgow redevelopment plan, important measures of rating reform, improvements to hospitals, the licensing laws, and the fishing fleet -- and the fateful decision in the 'Housing (Scotland) Act' of 1957 to encourage high-rise building with a special subsidy of $40 per flat, which revolutionized, if it did not exactly improve, the Scottish urban landscape -- Maclay came under increasing criticism. In 1961 the inquiry of Dr Beeching into the railway network was under way, with its recommendations likely to involve extensive line closures in rural Scotland. The railway modernization programme of 1955 had singularly failed to save Scotland's greatest railway manufacturer, the North British Locomotive Company, chaired by Viscount Reith; it went under in 1961. In 1962 Maclay was in confrontation with the miners and the Labour Party over the National Coal Board's plans to close twenty pits over a four-year period (he secured a favourable price-hike for otherwise uneconomic Scottish coal, but this did him little good) and with the teaching profession (once a pillar of the Scots bourgeoisie but now going swiftly left) over pay. Wishing to spend more time with his wife, who was now confined to a wheelchair, he offered his resignation early in 1962, but was persuaded to stay on. Then on 13 July 1962, along with a third of the cabinet, he was axed. Macmillan replaced him with Michael Noble, MP for Argyll, to little avail. Despite the remarkable popularity of Macmillan's successor, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, the number of Scottish tory MPs fell to twenty-four in 1964 and twenty in 1966. 
In 1962 Maclay was made a Companion of Honour, like Walter Elliot and Tom Johnston before him. He went to the Lords in 1964 as Viscount Muirshiel of Kilmacolm, and became a knight of the Thistle in 1973. Between 1967 and 1980 he was lord lieutenant of Renfrewshire. He occupied his retirement from politics as a director of the National Provincial Bank, the Peninsular and Oriental Steamship Company, and the Clydesdale Bank, and also as a trustee of the National Galleries of Scotland (1966-76) and founder chairman of the Scottish Civic Trust (1967-89). He received honorary degrees from the universities of Edinburgh (1963), Strathclyde (1966), and Glasgow (1970). He died of heart failure at his house, Knapps Wood, Kilmacolm, Renfrewshire, on 17 August 1992. His wife predeceased him. A memorial service was held at Kilmacolm Old Kirk on 16 September 1992. Of his well-meant projects, the Linwood and Bathgate motor works were closed in 1981, and Ravenscraig steelworks were closed in 1992. 
Maclay's career was enigmatic. From occupying only minor office -- and without enjoying any great success in it -- he became, during his five-year tenure of the Scottish secretaryship, the essential creator of the institution as it was to preside over Scottish affairs between then and the creation of a Scottish parliament forty years later. A modest and unpretentious man, he was motivated by a strong sense of public duty, and was described by a former parliamentary private secretary as 'the most saintly character I knew in politics' ('The Times', 29 Aug 1992). 


@@@@@


doc= 51249


Joly de Lotbiniere, Seymour (1905-1984), broadcasting executive, was born on 21 October 1905 at Elibank, Taplow, Buckinghamshire, the younger of the two sons of Brigadier-General Henri Gustave Joly de Lotbiniere (1868-1960) of the Royal Engineers and his wife, Mildred Louisa (died 1953), daughter of Charles Seymour Grenfell, a stockbroker, of Elibank. His grandfather was Sir Henri-Gustave Joly de Lotbiniere (1829-1908), lieutenant-governor of British Columbia. As his parents were in India, de Lotbiniere and his brother spent their school holidays with their aristocratic English relatives. He was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was awarded a first class (division two) in part one of the economics tripos in 1926 and a second class (division two) in part two of the law tripos in 1927. He was called to the bar by Lincoln's Inn, but after practising at the Chancery bar for three years he left in 1932 to join the talks department of the BBC. 
In 1935 de Lotbiniere was appointed director of outside broadcasts. The outside broadcasts unit was responsible for any broadcast not transmitted from a BBC studio, and included the Christmas day royal broadcasts, the maiden voyage of the 'Queen Mary' in 1936, the coronation of George VI in 1937, and major sporting events such as the Grand National, the boat race, and the cup final. In the early days of outside broadcasts the commentators tended to be experts, but de Lotbiniere realized that it was better to use an eloquent speaker, an expert with the microphone, to describe the event, helped by a second commentator, an expert on the event being broadcast, who could be invited to add his comments as required. De Lotbiniere was responsible for developing the art of the live running commentary, during which it was important to keep up the suspense, describing the action as it happened. He also believed in 'actuality', picking up the actual sounds of the event, to help the listener to picture the scene: the sounds of horses' feet at the trooping of the colour, or the roar of flames of the Crystal Palace fire. In 'The technique of the running commentary' he wrote that the commentator must 'allow the sounds to speak for themselves... In this way, listeners who never could hope to attend coronations and cup finals will get a feeling that broadcasting has enabled them to have a share in these events' (De Lotbiniere, 'Technique', 37-40). He listened to all outside broadcasts, usually at home, and held weekly post-mortems. 
After eighteen months in Bristol as director of the BBC west region from 1940 to 1941, de Lotbiniere became director of empire programmes in October 1941, and he was among those responsible for setting up the front line reporting unit (later called the war reporting unit) in 1943. He was in charge of selecting and training two teams of reporters to cover operation Spartan, a big second front exercise in March 1943, which persuaded the War Office that the BBC would need a team of war correspondents to cover the invasion of Europe. As a result, the BBC reporters were given special training attachments with army units preparing for the second front. He was appointed head of the war reporting unit in May 1943. 
De Lotbiniere was sent to Canada in October 1943 as the BBC representative in Toronto, chosen partly because his family was well known in Canada. Responsible to the director-general for all BBC policy and practice in Canada, he organized the re-broadcasting by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation of BBC programmes, and the exchange of programmes between the two countries. In 1944, in Quebec Cathedral, he married Mona (died 1993), daughter of Professor T. Lewis of Brecon: she had been his secretary at the BBC. They had one son. 
At the end of the war de Lotbiniere returned to his former job as director of outside broadcasts, and built up a strong team of commentators, including Raymond Baxter, Wynford Vaughan Thomas, Brian Johnston, and John Snagge. From 1948 to 1952 he was head of outside broadcasts, in charge of both sound and television, covering events such as the wedding of Princess Elizabeth in 1947, the Olympic games in 1948, and the Festival of Britain in 1951, and in 1952 he himself did the television commentary on the funeral procession of George VI at Windsor, his first television assignment. In 1950 the outside broadcasts unit presented the first televised election broadcast, with a programme of results from the 'Daily Mail' results board in Trafalgar Square. He was in charge of all BBC negotiations on sports broadcasting, and persuaded the BBC to spend more on sport, thus securing better contracts. 
Sound and television outside broadcasts were split in 1952, with de Lotbiniere choosing to take television, and he was in charge of the television coverage of the coronation of Elizabeth II on 2 June 1953, the biggest broadcasting operation in the history of the BBC. He was helped by his military and upper-class background in his discussions with the palace, which at first refused to allow cameras or commentators inside Westminster Abbey. De Lotbiniere, who was appointed OBE in 1953 for the coronation broadcast, told Richard Dimbleby, who headed the team of commentators inside the abbey, 'we seem to have achieved something beyond most people's dreams' (J. Dimbleby, 'Richard Dimbleby', 1975, 247-8). He was appointed CVO by the queen in 1956 in recognition of the help he had given George VI with his Christmas broadcasts. 
De Lotbiniere left outside broadcasting in 1955 to become assistant controller of programmes, television, and in 1956 became controller of programme services, television, but he found administration less and less interesting. He was appointed controller of the west region in 1963, and retired in 1967 to Suffolk, where he bought his father's former house. 
In the 1930s de Lotbiniere had lived for several years at Toynbee Hall, taking a group from the East End hop picking and camping in Kent every summer. This concern for people characterized his whole life, and was one reason why he left his lucrative but personally unfulfilling career as a chancery barrister. Highly regarded and much loved by his colleagues, de Lotbiniere was nicknamed Lobby. At 6 feet 81/2 inches, he was the tallest man in the BBC, a source of amazement to George V, who claimed to have met the tallest man in Britain. Living in the flint-knapping country of the Suffolk-Norfolk border, de Lotbiniere became a world expert on gun flints, and was called in during the excavations of the 'Mary Rose' to date gun flints discovered in the wreck. He died on 6 November 1984 at his home, Brandon Hall, Brandon, Suffolk, and was cremated on 12 November following a funeral service in St Peter's Church, Brandon. 


@@@@@


doc= 51254


John Wainwright (bap. 1723, d. 1767/8) was baptized at St Mary the Virgin, Stockport, Cheshire, on 14 April 1723, the son of John Wainwright (died 1766), and his wife, Mary Heginbothom (died 1767). The family probably lived at 58 Churchgate, Stockport, and John senior, a joiner, was occasionally employed at St Mary's. The younger John's education is unrecorded. He is described as organist of St Mary's on a memorial plaque erected in 1903 but no evidence of this appointment exists. On 30 December 1746 he married Anne Clarkson ('bap'. 1725, died in or after 1781) at St Peter's, Blackley, north of Manchester, although she too came from Stockport. They had moved to Pool Court, Manchester, by 1748, when their first child, Robert, was baptized at Manchester collegiate church, now the cathedral. John Wainwright's occupation is given as 'Musick Master' in the church register. On 19 October 1749, according to the records of the court leet, a John Wainwright (there may have been another in Manchester at this time) was appointed scavenger for 'St Anns Square and the Streets Adjacent' ('The Court Leet Records of Manchester', 7, 1888, 180). Newspaper references to 'Mr Wainwright' suggest that he also performed locally as an organist, conductor, and perhaps violinist. John Wainwright is famous as the composer of the Christmas hymn 'Christians awake', to words by John Byrom. Apparently on Christmas eve 1750, Byrom recorded in shorthand in his pocket book, 'The singing boys with Mr Wainwright came here and sang 'Christians Awake'' (W. Shaw, 186). The tune was published by Caleb Ashworth (1761) as 'Mortram, old 50th Psalm Tune' and by Wainwright in 'A Collection of Psalm Tunes, Anthems, Hymns and Chants' (1766) under the title 'A Hymn for Christmas Day': today it is usually called 'Yorkshire' or 'Stockport'. Although Wainwright is described as organist of the collegiate church at Manchester on the title-page of his 'Collection', he was not officially appointed organist and instructor of the choristers until 12 May 1767. He died in Manchester and was buried at St Mary the Virgin, Stockport, on 28 January 1768. In 1908 part of his gravestone was discovered supporting a greenhouse in a local garden: it seems that it was destroyed when the church steeple was blown up with gunpowder in 1810. 



@@@@@


doc= 51255


Greenstreet, Sydney Hughes (1879-1954), actor, was born on 27 December 1879 at The Butts, Sandwich, Kent, the son of John Jack Greenstreet, tanner, and his wife, Ann Baker. Educated at Dane Hill preparatory school, Margate, from 1887 to 1897, he worked as a tea planter in Ceylon between 1899 and 1901, memorizing Shakespeare to ameliorate the tedium. He was serving as agency manager for the Watney, Combe, Reid brewery in Harrow (1901-2) when he joined the Ben Greet School of Acting and made his stage debut as killer Jim Creigen in 'Sherlock Holmes' by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and William Gillette (1902) at the Marine Theatre, Ramsgate. Two years later he toured the United States with Greet's ensemble, making his Broadway bow in the morality play 'Everyman' (1904). Settling in America (he became a citizen in 1925), he appeared in everything from 'Twelfth Night' (1905) to popular farces such as 'Excuse me' (1912), and he honed his craft with the Harry Davis Stock Company (1909-10) and the Henry W. Savage Company (1910-12). Although Greenstreet claimed to have spent much of this period 'sailing like a small blimp through bedroom farces' (Sennett, 9), he was also an accomplished Shakespearian clown, prompting Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree, after his 1916 performance in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', to describe him as 'the greatest unstarred star of the English stage' (ibid.). However, it was his Duke in 'As You Like It' at Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, that stood out; as the stage collapsed beneath him, he emerged from the rubble to deliver the line, 'True it is, we have seen better days' (Miller, 85). 
In 1918 Greenstreet married Dorothy Marie Ogden, with whom he had a son, John Ogden Greenstreet. Meanwhile, his reputation for diverse characterization was continuing to burgeon in such plays as 'The Rainbow Girl' (1918); 'The Humble' (1925), a reworking of 'Crime and Punishment'; 'Much Ado about Nothing' (1928); Karel Capek's 'R. U. R.' (1930); and 'Roberta' by Jerome Kern and Otto Harbach (1933), in which he sang opposite Bob Hope. He also unearthed a talent for dastardy as Dr Grundt in 'Berlin' (1931), with the 'New York Times' declaring him 'a rip-snorting and delightfully malign villain' (Sennett, 11). However, his greatest stage successes came with the Broadway productions of the Theatre Guild (1935-41), alongside Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne. In addition to headlining Ben Jonson's 'Volpone' (1930), he was acclaimed as Baptista in 'The Taming of the Shrew' (1935), as Dr Waldersee in Robert E. Sherwood's 'Idiot's Delight' (1936), and as Sorin in Anton Chekhov's 'The Seagull' (1938). Yet it was Robert E. Sherwood's 'There Shall be No Night' (1940) that transformed his career, for film director John Huston consequently cast him as Kasper Gutman in Warner Brothers' 'The Maltese Falcon' (1941). Having rejected countless other Hollywood overtures, the 61-year-old debutant made an immediate impression in this prototype 'film noir', landing a best supporting Oscar nomination. He also began a ten-film partnership with Peter Lorre -- their combination of jovial infamy and weaselly grasping earning them the nickname 'the Laurel and Hardy of crime' (Sennett, 2). In the majority of these pictures Greenstreet essayed sophisticated, corrupt villains, who chucklingly delighted in their malevolent ingenuity. He was invariably filmed from below, so that his imposing bulk could dominate the screen (his weight was usually about 285 lbs, but he could balloon to 325 lbs); he also had a genius for injecting black comedy into the most menacing dialogue. Having played Japanese collaborator Dr Lorenz in 'Across the Pacific' (1942), he excelled as Senor Ferrari in 'Casablanca' (1942). But, in reteaming with Lorre and Humphrey Bogart in one of the glories of the studio era, he had the misfortune to get stuck in an on-set telephone box, which had to be dismantled to release him. 
A consummate professional who tolerated any amount of improvisation, providing he was fed his scripted cues, Greenstreet enlivened several mediocre movies with his inveterate scene-stealing. Warners demanded devilry and Greenstreet delivered: he was Nazi spy Colonel Robinson in 'Background to Danger' (1943), the vengeful Mr Peters in 'The Mask of Dimitrios' (1944), duplicitous solicitor Jerome K. Arbutny in 'Three Strangers' (1946), disgraced police inspector George Grodman in 'The Verdict' (1946), Count Fosco in 'The Woman in White' (1948) and, perhaps his most malicious performance, Sheriff Titus Semple in 'Flamingo Road' (1949). Greenstreet was considerably less effective in benign roles, such as the celestial interrogator in 'Between Two Worlds' (1944) and the amateur sleuth in 'Conflict' (1945), but he hankered after comedies, complaining that 'you'd hardly expect a musician to stick to one string on his violin' (Sennett, 197). Conveniently ignoring his unremarkable work in 'Pillow to Post' and 'Christmas in Connecticut' (both 1945), he retired in 1952, lamenting 'I was a character comedian on the stage for forty-one years, but not one single comedy role has come my way in Hollywood. So I'll keep turning down the sinister parts and take it easy until something worthwhile comes along, but it will have to be good. (ibid., 148)' Having devoted himself to painting, sculpting, and collecting antiques, Greenstreet died in Los Angeles, California, from a combination of diabetes and Bright's disease, on 18 January 1954. He was buried in Forest Lawn memorial parks, Glendale, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 51256


Grogan, Ewart Scott (1874-1967), settler in Kenya, was born on 12 December 1874 at 61 Eaton Square, Belgravia, son of William Grogan (1824-1891), a fashionable house and estate agent, and his second wife, Jane Sams, 'nee' Scott (1846-1895), a widow. He was the eldest of eight children of this marriage, but William Grogan's sixth son and fourteenth child. His father had professional dealings (1854-90) with Gladstone, from whom the boy got his forename. After schooling at Boxgrove School, Guildford (1881-7), and Winchester College (1888-91) he read law at Jesus College, Cambridge (1893), but was sent down for rowdyism (1895). He studied briefly at the Slade School of Art before volunteering in the second Matabele (Ndebele) campaign (1896). In fulfilment of a boyhood dream he was the first white man to traverse Africa (1898-1900). His journey on foot from the Cape to Cairo required valour and fortitude. He mapped districts, and earned the scorn of topographers by naming four peaks east of Kivu mounts Dorothy, Margaret, Hilda, and Sybil, after his sisters and his fiancee's cousin (later Viscountess Monsell). His record of this adventure, 'From Cape to Cairo' (1900), dedicated to Rhodes, is written with vivid power but often strident or vulgar: he used the term 'nigger' to denote black Africans throughout. 
After obtaining a forestry concession of 132,000 acres in British East Africa (1904) Grogan became with Hugh Cholmondeley, third Baron Delamere, the most successful leader of the East Africa Protectorate pioneers. Richard Meinertzhagen wrote on 23 May 1904, 'he has great charm, a brain as clear as crystal and a strong character. He not only means what he says but says what he thinks' (Meinertzhagen, 165). Lord Cranworth found him 'good-looking, with a fine physique and an impelling eye; he had a presence in full keeping with his reputation' (Cranworth, 25). Though Grogan appeared impulsive, his stunts were calculated. He proved an astute speculator, buying large land tracts in and around Nairobi. From 1905 until the 1930s he published many influential letters in 'The Times'. Elected first president of the Colonists' Association (1907), he repeatedly clashed with colonial officialdom. He talked fierily about settlers' rights, and among other provocations went out at midnight to peg a claim encircling Nairobi which was found to be legal. In the gravest incident he was convicted of flogging in front of Nairobi court house three Kikuyu servants who had jolted his sister and other white women in a rickshaw (1907). Grogan considered 'the nigger the most hideous of God's creations' and despised 'any disciple of the poor-dear-black-man, down-with-the-Maxim, Africa-for-the-African Creed' ('From Cape to Cairo', 78, 168-9). The flogging was condemned by the colonial secretary Elgin and by Winston Churchill, who called Grogan a 'ruffian' (Hyam, 412). Sentenced to one month's imprisonment he became a bogeyman to officials and was not nominated to the legislative council until 1922. Instead he was elected first chairman of the Convention of Associations, known as the Settlers' Parliament (1911). In the legislative council he represented a succession of constituencies (with an interval in 1931-6) until 1956. His firebrand speeches were sometimes insolent. His racial antagonism to Indian immigration was strenuously articulated in speeches and writings (Grogan, 'Kenya: the logic of facts'). 
In the British general election of 1910 Grogan unsuccessfully contested Newcastle under Lyme as a Liberal Unionist. As a campaign preliminary he published his protectionist tract 'The Economic Calculus' (1909). Grogan joined the protectorate's war council (1914) and his oratory was crucial to rousing settlers to war mobilization (1915). He undertook intelligence work with the east African force and was a liaison officer in the Belgian Congo. Blackwater fever contracted in wartime, financial worries, and domestic unhappiness changed him at this time; he became cruel and sarcastic at home, though to friends he remained charming. Having attended the Paris peace conference as adviser to Lord Milner on African frontiers, he took a lead in currency and economic issues affecting Kenya (as the colony was named) during the 1920s. In 1922 he opened Mombasa's first deep-water pier with railway wharves. He next bought 100,000 acres (1928-30) for the cultivation of sisal and citrus fruits, and eventually amassed 500,000 acres. Torr's Hotel in Nairobi was built by him (1928). He was the first passenger to fly across Africa from Cairo to Cape (1932). 
Grogan married on 11 October 1900 Gertrude Edith (1876-1943), daughter of James Watt, New Zealand sheep rancher. To his enduring disappointment they had four daughters. After the First World War he conducted a succession of discreet affairs. In 1919 he fathered a daughter with Doris Tate-Smith (1890-1993), a nurse who was an architect's widow. He fathered another daughter in 1929 with Doreen Wright ('b'. 1900), the wife of a political colleague. Latterly he was increasingly isolated by a possessive Irish consort-housekeeper, Camilla Towers. After selling his business interests (1957-62) he endured a miserable decline into deafness and blindness before dying on 16 August 1967 at Rondebosch, Cape Province, South Africa. He was buried the following day in Maitland cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 51259


Naughton, William John Francis (1910-1992), writer, was born on 12 June 1910 in Devlis, Ballyhaunis, co. Mayo, Ireland, the fourth of six children of Thomas Naughton (1873-1957), a shopkeeper and railway worker, and then coalminer in England, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Fleming (1875-1949). The family emigrated to Bolton, Lancashire, in 1914, when Bill was four years old. He was educated at St Peter and St Paul School in Bolton, which is vividly recreated in fictionalized form in his novel 'One Small Boy' (1957). 
Leaving school at fourteen, Naughton first worked in a weaving shed, then in various labouring jobs between periods of unemployment. In 1930 he married Anne Wilcock (1905-1985), a cotton mill worker, with whom he had three children, Marie, Larry, and Sean (who died in infancy). At this time he was working as a coal-bagger and driver for the Co-operative Society in Bolton. In 1938 Naughton, who was always keen on recording events, had the chance to develop his literary skills with the Mass-Observation study of Bolton (Worktown, as it was called), under the poet and sociologist Charles Madge. However, when Naughton became a conscientious objector in the war, the Co-op felt compelled to lay him off, and his marriage broke up soon afterwards (though the couple were not divorced until 1950). After a brief spell in Manchester he finally settled in London in 1941, where he became a civil defence corps driver. He also took to writing, publishing his first stories in 1943, in the 'London Evening News'. Subsequent stories were published in 'Lilliput' and broadcast on BBC radio, leading Madge to commission a book from him, the result being the very successful 'A Roof Over your Head' (1945), Naughton's first volume of autobiography. This led to other commissions, including an article called 'The spiv', which brought the then obscure word into popular usage. 
Though he published two novels in the 1940s, 'Pony Boy' (1946) and 'Rafe Granite' (1947), it was in the 1950s, as a playwright, that Naughton became well known, on both radio and television. He always claimed that 'Coronation Street' drew on his radio play about a Lancashire street, 'June Evening' (1958), which had been adapted for television just nine months before the soap opera began (1960). Many of his most celebrated works began on radio, going through television and theatre adaptations (with Bernard Miles, at the Mermaid Theatre), thence to film. Thus the radio play 'My Flesh, my Blood' (1957) subsequently became 'Spring and Port Wine' (filmed in 1970); 'All in Good Time' (1961) became the film 'The Family Way' (1966); and, most famously, 'Alfie Elkins and his Little Life' (1962) was to become the internationally successful film (and novel) 'Alfie' (1966), making a star of Michael Caine in the process. This won a Screenwriters Guild award (as did 'The Family Way'), and was nominated for an Academy award of merit. His more experimental radio play 'The Mystery' won the Prix Italia in 1974. 
Among Naughton's last works are three highly evocative volumes of autobiography, 'On the Pig's Back' (1987), 'Saintly Billy' (1988), and 'Neither Use nor Ornament' (1995), taking us back to life in Bolton during and after the First World War. These episodic memoirs also reveal the origins of some of his short stories, of which he wrote more than 200. The best-known are collected in 'Late Night on Watling Street' (1959), although arguably his best, the much anthologized 'Spit Nolan', is to be found in his collection for children, 'The Goalkeeper's Revenge' (1961), which won the Other award in 1978. 
Naughton, a man of medium build, described himself as having a 'big head, blue eyes, and a round face' (Naughton, 'On the Pig's Back', 69), and in later life he had a distinctive moustache. He was a private man, refusing an entry in 'Who's Who', and also something of an outsider: first as an Irish Catholic living in Bolton, then as a northerner living in London, and finally as a self-educated, working-class writer among the literati of the time. But in 1968, after living in London from the 1940s to the 1960s at 64 St George's Square, Pimlico, he moved to Ballasalla on the Isle of Man with his second wife, the Austrian Ernestine (Erna) Pirolt ('b'. 1929), a nurse, whom he had married on 9 September 1952. He was heavily influenced by mystical writers, especially Thomas a Kempis -- after whom he named his house in Ballasalla, Kempis. Naughton was certainly driven to be honest in his observations of life, dismissing his own 'hack' work as 'a sin against the Holy Spirit -- from which source all literature springs' (ibid., 33). He strove to capture actual speech patterns and rhythms, giving his writing a vibrancy and poignancy that only occasionally falls into sentimentality. (Five trunkfuls of his diaries, stretching from the 1930s to the 1990s, and running to several million words, are deposited at Bolton Library but will have to wait until 2015 before being opened to the public.) His overall contribution to the cultural ferment of the 1950s and 1960s has still to be properly assessed. Undoubtedly he was one of the first post-war writers to recreate, for the world, the authenticity of working-class life in the north of England. But his range was wider, as his London work, his contributions to popular television series (such as 'Nathaniel Titlark', 'Starr and Company', 'Yorky'), his children's stories, and his more experimental, Pinteresque drama 'The Mystery' show. 
Towards the end of his life Naughton was consolidating his long-term interest in dreams, in an as-yet-unpublished volume, 'The Dream Mind', which he considered one of his most important works. He died at his home on the Isle of Man on 9 January 1992, shortly after a stroke, and was cremated on 14 January, to be interred at Rushen cemetery on the Isle of Man. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51261


Horn, Alexander (1762-1820), Benedictine monk and political agent, was born in north-east Scotland on 28 June 1762, the son of Alexander Horn and Jeanette, his wife (died 1807). His father was descended from the Horns, lairds of Westhall (Oyne, Aberdeenshire). He entered Regensburg seminary in December 1772, took the Benedictine habit and religious name Maurus in 1778, and was professed on 29 September 1779. He was ordained priest, probably about 1785. 
Clearly possessing academic ability, about 1789 Horn was apparently considering work on Marianus Brockie's 'Monasticon Scoticum'. At this time the Scots' monastic library was being praised in print by visiting bibliophiles. Horn was librarian in 1790 and had bought incunables, and later was to receive great praise for his work as librarian. His interests, however, widened. From about 1790 he acted as agent in Regensburg, seat of the imperial diet, for the British ambassador in Munich, and in 1791 published anonymously a tract condemning France's activities against the empire: 'Kurze and unparteiische Darstellung aller Tractaten und Vertrage, auf welche Frankreich seine dermaligen Angriffe auf das deutsche Reich grunden sucht'. Another such paper was delivered by his fellow Scottish monk Ildephonse Kennedy to the Bavarian Academy of Sciences in Munich. Horn now cultivated influential people, had close ties with the princely family of Thurn and Taxis -- his brother, also a monk, was later 'Hofrat' (court official) and confessor to them -- and led a social life, being described by an English visitor in late 1794 as 'such a wild young fellow, that it is a real shame that he should have the monkish habit' (Fremantle, 2.9). John Robison's sensational work published in 1797 on the alleged international conspiracy of freemasons, illuminati, and Jacobins contained important material supplied by Horn. 
In 1799 Horn travelled with the British ambassador in Munich to England, where he had dealings with members of William Pitt's cabinet, particularly Earl Spencer, then returned to Regensburg as official British agent. This was the time of secularization of religious houses in south Germany. Horn used his bibliographical expertise to deal in rare books and manuscripts, including some from these houses, and helped to build up Spencer's magnificent collection. When in 1802 secularization in Regensburg itself became imminent, he appealed to the British government on behalf of the Scots monastery and (with more success) to the cardinal protector of Scotland in Rome, as the Scots abbey enjoyed exemption from all church authority except the Holy See. He and his abbot, Benedict Arbuthnot, also sought the aid of Napoleon's Scottish Catholic generals, Macdonald and Lauriston. In the event the monastery continued in being, though with restrictions. 
In 1804 Napoleon succeeded in having the British ambassador expelled from Munich. Horn was then British charge d'affaires in Regensburg (1804-6), dealing most successfully with the diet and heading a network of informants. When Rome in 1805 intervened at Napoleon's request, he chose to give up his monastic commitments and continue his political work. Having for a time acted clandestinely in Regensburg, he went to Austria as a British diplomat and agent. His reports from Linz, Vienna, and Prague show him to have been an acute observer in close touch with important political and military persons. In 1808-10 he was the sole British diplomat in central Europe. When Austria fell in 1810, he went to London and received a generous government pension. 
Horn's later years are obscure. After returning to Regensburg in December 1813 he was expelled by order of Montgelas. He then lived with a pension at Frankfurt am Main. At some point he married a Baroness von Gumppenberg. In April 1820, with permission from Munich, he planned to return to Regensburg with the princess of Thurn and Taxis, but died, either shortly before or after, on 16 April. He is included in the monastic necrology, indicating that he was reconciled with the church authorities or perhaps, in such traumatic times for monasticism, was not considered an apostate from religion. 


@@@@@


doc= 51265


Norton, (Kathleen) Mary (1903-1992), children's author, was born at 48 Mildmay Park, Highbury, London, on 10 December 1903, the only daughter of Reginald Spencer Pearson, a surgeon, and Minnie Savile, 'nee' Hughes. She had four brothers. When she was still young, the family moved to Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, to live at The Cedars, a rambling Georgian house that became the setting for Mary's most famous work, 'The Borrowers'. She was educated at St Margaret's Convent, East Grinstead, and attended art school for a short course, before joining the Old Vic Shakespeare Company in the season for 1925-6. There she understudied for Edith Evans, and later described this period as the most memorable of her life. At this time Mary was 'as thin as a wasp and very pale and quiet and gentle' ('The Times'). 
On 4 September 1926, at St Mary's, Lambeth, London, Mary Pearson married Robert Charles Norton ('b'. 1892/3), an engineer who came from a wealthy shipowning and trading family from Portugal. They moved to Portugal on their marriage, to a country estate several miles from Lisbon. At the outbreak of the Second World War Robert joined the navy, and Mary and their children, two boys and two girls, moved first to England, and then to New York, where Mary worked for the British Purchasing Commission. She rented a house in Connecticut, where she began to write essays, translations, and children's stories. Her first children's book, 'The Magic Bed-Knob, or, How to Become a Witch in Ten Easy Lessons', was first published in America in 1943. In that same year Mary and her family returned to England, where she briefly resumed her stage career -- including a part in a two-year run of 'The Guinea-Pig' at the Criterion Theatre, London. 'The Magic Bed-Knob' was published in England in 1945, and two years later was followed by a sequel, 'Bonfires and Broomsticks'. John Betjeman described the work as 'quite the best modern fairy story I have read' (Stott, 199). The two books were combined into one volume, 'Bed-Knob and Broomstick', in 1957. A successful Disney film, 'Bed Knobs and Broomsticks', a mixture of live action and animation, was released in 1971. 
Once back in England, Norton had begun work on 'The Borrowers'. Published in 1952, the work was immediately hailed as a classic of children's fiction, and won the Carnegie medal for that year. The story concerned the life and adventures of a race of tiny people tucked away under floorboards and in the crevices of houses, and living parasitically off the 'human beans'. Part of the thrill of the book is the ingenuity with which the borrowers recycle their 'borrowings' into their own domestic sphere. A knight from a chess piece, sawn in half, becomes the pedestal for the dining-room table and a statue for the hall. But the wider story was equally gripping: the Clock family -- Pod, Homily, and their daughter Arietty -- so called because their front door is under the grandfather clock -- are the last of the borrowers to survive in the old house. As the adolescent Arietty rebels against the narrow boundaries imposed on her, and makes contact with a human boy, their whole way of life is threatened. They are discovered by the adults, and at the end of the book have to flee from the house into the open fields beyond. 
Norton later wrote of the origin of these characters. Short-sighted from childhood, she remembered peering close up into banks and tree roots, wondering what life would be like so close to the ground, when ordinary things became obstacles and dangers. The first book was followed by several sequels: 'The Borrowers Afield' (1955), 'The Borrowers Afloat' (1959), 'The Borrowers Aloft' (1961), and 'Poor Stainless' (a short story about a borrower published in 1971). These sequels follow the Clocks as they try to find some stability in a series of hostile environments, with increasingly predatory humans on the scene. 
Norton's first marriage was dissolved, and on 24 April 1970, at the Chelsea register office, London, she married the writer (Arthur) Lionel Bonsey (1911/12-1989). In 1972, encouraged by the Irish government's offer of tax concessions for writers and artists, they moved from their old Essex farmhouse to co. Cork, where they bought and restored a Queen Anne rectory in Kilcoe, Aughadown, Ballydehob. There Norton wrote 'Are All the Giants Dead?' (1975), a dream adventure which explores what happens to the characters of fairy tales after the ends of the tales. She also wrote the last of the borrowers books, 'The Borrowers Avenged' (1982), in which the Clock family is finally rewarded with the possibility of a stable future. 'The Borrowers Omnibus' was published in 1990. There have been a number of television series based on 'The Borrowers', both American and British, and films in 1973 and 1997. 
For her publisher Vanessa Hamilton, there were few authors 'quite so charming and distinguished as Mary, so vital, and with such a marvellous sense of humour' ('The Independent'). Norton died of a heart attack on 29 August 1992, at 102 West Street, Hartland, Bideford, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 51267


Oliver, Stephen Michael Harding (1950-1992), composer, was born on 10 March 1950 at Chester Nursing Home, the last of the three children of Osborne George Oliver ('b'. 1903), an electricity board official, and his wife, (Charlotte) Hester, 'nee' Girdlestone ('b'. 1911), an adviser in religious education. Although Oliver became an agnostic the Christian ethic informed everything he did, and he was to write much sacred music. While a chorister at St Paul's choir school he discovered, in 'The Mikado', his empathy with secular music drama. He wrote his first opera at the age of twelve and never stopped. Works, including his earliest oratorio, followed at Ardingly College. But it was his opera 'The Duchess of Malfi' (1972), performed while he was at Worcester College, Oxford (from which he graduated BA in 1971 and BMus in 1972), that told the outside world of the arrival of a new theatre composer to be reckoned with. His successful output was such that, after two years spent teaching composition and music history at Huddersfield Polytechnic, he was able to move to London, proud to be a full-time professional. 
Oliver regarded himself as a craftsman -- someone in the line of eighteenth-century composers who would undertake any commissioned work. He wrote fast, with a facility for inventing the widest ranges of sounds, from pastiche of any century's characteristics to his personal contemporary 'squeaky-gate' music, with anything from Messiaen-scale orchestration to miniatures for lute and viola da gamba, or simply a tray of wine glasses. He composed for every facet of entertainment: film ('Lady Jane Grey'), dance ('La bella Rosina'), radio (incidental music for 'The Lord of the Rings'), television (much of the BBC Shakespeare series), and straight theatre (some ninety plays, many for the Royal Shakespeare Company, including scores for 'Nicholas Nickleby' and 'Peter Pan'). 'Blondel', the musical he wrote with Tim Rice, was not quite a success, though it ran in London for a year, and one song, 'Running Back for More', reached the pop charts. The Thatcherite certainties of Rice's lyrics did not blend happily with Oliver's angst. 
It was in opera that Oliver found his most rewarding outlet. Although occasionally he devised his own storyline ('Il giardino', 1977, 'Exposition of a Picture', 1986, and his version of Mozart's 'L'oca del Cairo', 1991), usually the texts Oliver wrote, and set to music, were drawn from his dauntingly deep knowledge of literature: Webster, Dickens ('Perseverance', 1974), Beckett ('Past Tense', 1974), Fielding ('Tom Jones', 1976), Yeats ('The Dreaming of the Bones', 1979), Schnitzler ('A Man of Feeling', 1980), Ostrovsky ('Sasha', 1984), de Beaumont ('La bella e la bestia', 1984), Mann ('Mario ed il mago', 1988), and Shakespeare ('Timon of Athens', 1991). The theatrical effectiveness of these operas was perfectly judged. They enjoyed naturalistic word-setting, melody in tonal but contemporary idiom, and audacious orchestration, frequently making use of the marimba and a battery of other percussion instruments. The smaller scale works were particularly successful, the clarity and delicacy of chamber music bringing out the best in Oliver. Many of them used an uneasy, tentative 3/4 time to suggest the malaise of the principal characters. Although he was at ease with his homosexuality and did not see himself as an outsider, the composer's own (quite unjustified) feelings of inadequacy were put to good use in some of the best roles he created: the Beast, Cipolla, and Timon. The need for friendship was a theme that ran through his work, and he was the first to see that the hero's relationship with Smike should be at the core of 'Nicholas Nickleby'. 
Oliver was the acknowledged star of the 'South Bank Show' on the making of 'Nicholas Nickleby', that great Royal Shakespeare Company success; the television public met for the first time the brilliant conversationalist and (occasionally) caustic wit. This was followed by 'Understanding Opera', a slightly didactic series he wrote and presented for BBC2 television. He had dexterity with words both written and spoken. His translations of other men's operas included 'Euridice', 'Orlando', 'Le coq d'or', and 'The King Goes Forth'. He would review a concert for the BBC in rhyming couplets, and frequently had his listeners in stitches on Radio 4's 'Stop the Week'. He was also an excellent actor. But the dazzling exterior hid a serious, public-spirited man who served on many committees, among them the boards of English National Opera (where he brought commission fees up to date) and the Performing Right Society (where he led the campaign to give lyricists parity with composers). Privately he led an almost (but not quite) monk-like existence, preferring to live undisturbed and alone, spending little on himself and, instead, redirecting his earnings to small, struggling opera companies and a variety of charities. He had, in the fullest measure, the gift of unassailable friendship, and was always ready with advice, help, and, often, hard cash where it was needed. A typical act of sacrifice, despite his need of privacy for composing, was to give a final home to a close friend dying of AIDS. 
In the last year of his life, before he was stricken by the same virus, Oliver achieved an astounding compositional 'tour de force' which included an oratorio ('The Vessel'), new recitatives for the Glyndebourne production of 'La clemenza di Tito', and two operas ('Timon of Athens' for the English National Opera and 'L'oca del Cairo' for the Batignano festival), all in 1991. He bore his last illness with exemplary courage and optimism, and died at his home, Flat B, 44 Queensgate, London, on 29 April 1992. His ashes were scattered at his request in the olive grove of the ex-monastery of Santa Croce, Batignano, Italy, where four of his works were first staged. He left the bulk of his estate in trust to further new opera. 


@@@@@


doc= 51268


Ormrod, Sir Roger Fray Greenwood (1911-1992), judge, was born in Whitehaven, Cumberland, on 20 October 1911, the son of Oliver Fray Ormrod, a solicitor, and his wife, Edith Muriel, 'nee' Pim. He was educated at Shrewsbury School (1924-9), and the Queen's College, Oxford (1930-33), where he read medicine and jurisprudence, obtaining his degree in the latter. He was called to the bar in 1936, when he joined the busy chambers of Edward (later Lord) Pearce in the Temple. On 9 April 1938 he married (Doris) Anne Lush ('b'. 1905/6), a magistrate and marriage guidance counsellor. 
On the outbreak of war in 1939 Ormrod completed his medical training at the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, where he became house physician in 1941. In 1942 he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps and served in Normandy and north-west Europe. He returned to the bar in 1945, became a QC in 1958, and was appointed a judge of the High Court (Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division) in 1961, in which year he also received a knighthood. His medical background influenced his career in the law, and he retained links with medicine through his active membership of several medical institutions. He was elected FRCP in 1969 and an honorary FRCPsych in 1975. 
For his first ten years on the bench Ormrod administered the unreformed divorce laws, which required proof of a 'matrimonial offence' before a divorce could be granted. In 1969 he tried the nullity case of 'Corbett v. Corbett' ([1971] P83), in which he held that marriage in England involved the union of persons of the opposite sex, and consequently where one party had undergone a sex change the marriage was a nullity, since the wife was 'not a woman for the purposes of marriage but a biological male and had been since birth'. 
Ormrod welcomed the reform of the divorce laws in 1971, which replaced the matrimonial offence as the sole ground of divorce with the breakdown of the marriage, and when the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division became the Family Division. Unlike some of his judicial brethren Ormrod took the view that this was a radical change in the law, and for the next eleven years, both at first instance and as a lord justice of the Court of Appeal, to which he was appointed in 1974, he was responsible, practically single-handedly, for the development of family law following the 1971 legislation. An early example of his approach was the case of 'Wachtel v. Wachtel' ([1973] Fam 72), when he said: 'Shares in responsibility for breakdown cannot be properly assessed without a meticulous examination and understanding of the spouses concerned, the more thorough the investigation the more the shares will in most cases approach equality.' He concluded that, in financial proceedings, conduct usually proved to be a marginal issue 'unless it is both obvious and gross'. 
Nowhere was Ormrod's influence more decisive than in cases relating to children. Although since 1925 judges had paid lip-service to the statutory requirement that the welfare of the child was the 'first and paramount consideration', attempts were made to modify the consequences of this rule by considerations of the conduct of the parents, weight being given to the wishes of an 'unimpeachable spouse'. In 'S v. S' ([1977] 1AER 656), Ormrod said: 'The phrase unimpeachable cannot mean a parent who is beyond criticism because there is no such thing.' 
Some, who had not had Ormrod's experience of trying long, defended divorce cases directed to the respective blameworthiness of the spouses, thought that the pendulum had swung too far in disregarding matrimonial conduct, causing injustice to the 'innocent' spouse, especially husbands and fathers. Ormrod defended his approach in his presidential address to the Holdsworth Club in 1980, when he said: 'In the great majority of cases, the closer the investigation the clearer it becomes that the practicalities point to the mother as the parent who should have the care of the children; and consequently the person who will need the house.' And he went on to refer to one of his favourite dicta: 'It takes three to commit adultery. I always ask what has the 'innocent' party done or failed to do?' 
Ormrod was, in his own field of family law, one of the great reforming judges of the twentieth century whose influence on that branch of the law was profound and extended over more than thirty years. He was not concerned with the past history of a marriage, but always looked ahead to the future and the consequence of a divorce, above all to the welfare of the children and the financial support of the mother. His approach was essentially pragmatic and practical. He refused to allow the Family Division to become a court of morals. Ormrod had perhaps the most original mind of any of his contemporaries in the Court of Appeal except Lord Denning. His mind worked with astonishing rapidity, and he was a fluent and rapid speaker. On the bench, when dealing with matrimonial cases, he often appeared impatient and intolerant of what he regarded as irrelevancies, but this was on account of his profound knowledge of his subject, the speed and clarity with which he saw the nub of the problem, and, above all, his anxiety that he might not be able to do justice within the constraints of the law. 
After his retirement in 1982 Ormrod threw himself into his many extramural activities, including the Notting Hill Housing Trust, of which he was chairman for twenty years, and was able to spend more time on Exmoor, where he had a house. He died at his home, 4 Aubrey Road, Kensington, on 6 January 1992, and was cremated. He left his widow, an adopted daughter, and several young people who had benefited from the kindness and generosity of him and his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51271


Sir John Starr Paget, third baronet (1914-1992), aeronautical engineer and company director, was born on 24 November 1914 in Somerset, and in the absence of his eccentric parents was brought up largely by his nanny, Nurse Evans. As a boy he contracted jaundice, so his schooling at Oundle was curtailed and he was sent to Chateau d'Oex in the Swiss Alps. He read engineering at Trinity College, Cambridge, and gained firsts in all parts of the tripos (BA 1936, MA 1939). In 1936 he began a graduate apprenticeship with the English Electric Co. Ltd at Stafford, later working for them at Preston and contributing innovative ideas to aircraft manufacture. In 1943 he moved to D. Napier & Son, Liverpool, where he worked on the Sabre aero-engine (used in the Hawker Typhoon and the Tempest fighter). On 11 November 1944 he married Nancy Mary, elder daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Woodbine Parish, army officer, and a great-granddaughter of W. E. Gladstone; they had two sons and five daughters. Paget then moved to Napier's London works, first as manager (1946) and later as director and general manager. From 1949 he was connected with Acton Technical College (later Brunel University), where he promoted the sandwich course. After retiring from Napier in 1962 he moved to Taunton, Somerset, and became a successful bespoke cabinet-maker and cider-apple grower. He founded Somerset Fruit Machinery, which manufactured fruit-picking machines that he had designed (these were also used in Japan to pick up golf balls). Paget died on 7 February 1992 at his home, Haygrass House, Taunton, survived by his wife and seven children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51275


David Macdonald Paton (1913-1992), Church of England clergyman, was born on 9 September 1913 in Hampstead, London. He was educated as a scholar at Repton School when Geoffrey Fisher, later archbishop of Canterbury, was headmaster, and at Brasenose College, Oxford, where he obtained a second in classical moderations in 1934 and a third in 'literae humaniores' in 1936. From 1936 to 1939 he was midlands secretary of the SCM. He was ordained deacon in 1939 and priest in 1941. In 1940 he went to Hong Kong as curate of St Stephen's Church, and in 1941 he moved to China as a missionary, working mainly in the east Szechwan region. After leaving China (1944) he was chaplain and librarian of Westcott House, Cambridge (1945-6). In 1946 he married China-born Alison Georgina Stewart, with whom he had three sons. From 1947 to 1950 he was back in China as chaplain to the bishop of Fukien. He was then vicar of Yardley Wood, Birmingham (1952-6). His first book, 'Christian Missions and the Judgement of God' (1953), criticized the colonial mentality of many missionaries and denounced 'rice Christianity'. From 1956 to 1959 Paton was a disappointing secretary of the SCM Press. He was more successful as secretary from 1959 to 1963 of the Council for Ecumenical Co-operation of the Church Assembly, and from 1964 to 1969 of its missionary and ecumenical council. He then served as rector of St Mary de Crypt and St John the Baptist, Gloucester, from 1970 to 1981, and as vicar of Christ Church, Gloucester, from 1979 to 1981. He attended the 1975 World Council of Churches assembly at Nairobi and edited its official report, 'Breaking Barriers' (1976). He was honorary canon of Canterbury Cathedral from 1966 to 1980, then canon emeritus and a chaplain to the queen from 1972 to 1983. His numerous publications included 'Anglicans and Unity' (1962) and 'RO: the Life and Times of Bishop Ronald Hall of Hong Kong' (1985), and many book reviews. Although he was regarded by some as 'arguably the most farsighted English Anglican this century' ('The Guardian'), senior office eluded him. He died at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, on 18 July 1992 after a long illness, and was survived by his wife and three sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 51416


(Mary) Gertrude Forbes-Robertson, Lady Forbes-Robertson (1874-1950), actress, was born in Rocklands, Maine on 14 December 1874. After her marriage in 1900, she was for years the leading lady of her husband, but also led an occasionally separate professional life. Her first stage appearance was in Saratoga, New York, as Lady Stutfield in 'A Woman of No Importance' (1894). She first travelled to England in 1899, when she was seen with her sister Maxine Elliott in 'The Cowboy and the Lady'. She appeared in all Forbes-Robertson's major productions, including 'Caesar and Cleopatra', in which she played Cleopatra. After touring in the USA she rejoined Forbes-Robertson's company for his farewell season (1913) and repeated all her major roles. She later appeared in London under her own management, and undertook extensive tours of South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. Her final appearances on the English stage were in 1927, when she played Desdemona, Maria ('Twelfth Night'), and Lady William Bacton in 'This Year -- Next Year'. She was seen on Broadway in 1936, playing Gertrude to Leslie Howard's Hamlet. Her acting, while not quite on the level of that of her sister and her husband, was praised for 'her girlish spirit, playful humour, eloquent speech and dusky beauty' (T. L. Miller, in 'The Cambridge Guide to the Theatre' (1993-6)). She died at her home, Attcliffe, St Margarets-at-Cliffe, Kent, on 24 December 1950. 


@@@@@


doc= 51435


Bell, (George) Douglas Hutton (1905-1993), plant scientist, was born at 37 Glanmor Crescent, Swansea, on 18 October 1905, the elder son of George Henry Bell, civil engineer, and his wife, Lilian Mary Matilda, 'nee' Hutton. His father worked principally for municipal authorities in the Swansea area. His mother was related by marriage to the Massachusetts philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson, whose well known aphorism, 'If a man write a better book, preach a better sermon, or make a better mousetrap than his neighbour, though he build his house in the woods, the world will make a beaten path to his door', could well have been applied to Bell in his middle age, at the height of his creativity in plant breeding. Bell was educated at schools in the Swansea area, first at the Brymill primary school from 1913 to 1918 and then at Bishop Gore's Grammar School from 1918 to 1924. The arts side at school appealed to Bell more than the sciences. He particularly liked English usage, which was taught by D. T. Thomas (the father of Dylan). This teaching stayed with Bell throughout his life as those who subsequently were his students and junior colleagues learned when they split infinitives or commenced lists with 'Firstly'. 
After school Bell went up to the University College of North Wales, Bangor, where he graduated with a first in botany and agricultural botany in 1928. He had chosen these subjects because he had experienced the food shortages of the First World War and he had become concerned about famines in other parts of the world. Sir Rowland Biffen, professor of agricultural botany at Cambridge, had been the external examiner of Bell's BSc and had seized his attention, so when Bell was awarded a research studentship by the Ministry of Agriculture he naturally sought to take it up at Cambridge. For his PhD in the Cambridge school of agriculture, Bell chose to study the distinctions between barley varieties, and in this work he was supervised by Sir Frank Engledow. He was greatly assisted by being allowed to spend a year in the USA at the University of Idaho, where he could compare the barley varieties that he had studied on the university farm in Cambridge in the very different environment of Idaho. In Idaho he had the good fortune to work alongside Dr H. V. Harlan, the foremost barley scientist of his day. When he submitted his PhD thesis in 1931 it had not been read by Engledow until it was bound and ready for submission. 
Having succeeded in taking the PhD degree Bell stayed in Cambridge as an assistant research officer in the Plant Breeding Institute of the school of agriculture, where he helped Biffen and Engledow with their breeding programmes in wheat and barley. In 1933 he was appointed university demonstrator and his commitment to wheat and barley breeding continued with, in addition, some attention paid to pea breeding. With the security of a demonstrator's salary, he was able to marry, on 3 September 1934, Eileen Gertrude Wright (1905/6-1993), daughter of Alfred Wright, retired jeweller; they had first met on a transatlantic liner when returning from the USA. Their happy union lasted until their deaths within a few days of each other fifty-nine years later. There were two daughters. 
Bell was appointed university lecturer in 1944. During the war his attention was concentrated on very practical affairs, including bolting and seed production in sugar beet -- sugar being in very short supply in the wartime period. He also researched the use of tuber fragments as seed in potato production. But his continued attention to barley resulted in real progress towards the development of winter varieties. 
Often someone's life story can be written in the history of an institution. This is very much the case with Bell and the Plant Breeding Institute, Cambridge. He was its acting director from 1946, and in January 1948 became director with the appointment backdated to October 1947. This appointment was in accord with an agreement among the university, the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Agricultural Research Council that the institute should be separated from the university and become jointly the responsibility of the ministry and the council. This arrangement was to continue until 1955 when responsibility for the institute would fall to the council alone. Bell was given the responsibility of building an independent institute which, by research, was to improve the agricultural industry of the drier and primarily arable sector of eastern Britain. The mission statement for the institute spoke of the need for pure and applied scientific research on plant breeding for the betterment of agriculture, the production of new varieties, the development of new techniques and the support of appropriate research. From 1947 until 1971 (the time that he directed the institute) and indeed afterwards Bell was the doyen of plant breeding in Britain. From scratch he built a research establishment in which the very practical research needed to serve the industry was carried out alongside underpinning research in plant physiology and pathology, in genetics, cytogenetics, and molecular biology, in entomology, statistics, and chemistry. Starting with a staff of three in 1947 he had recruited a total staff of 231 by 1971, when he retired. Since there was no pre-existing model for such an institution, unusual creativity was needed by Bell in its generation. 
The Ministry of Agriculture had bought Anstey Hall Farm, Trumpington, just to the south of Cambridge, at Bell's instigation in March 1950. Here the institute's premises were constructed and eventually all of the farm's 153 hectares were brought into experimental use. It had a friable, free draining, sandy clay loam soil overlying chalk marl, in great contrast to the land on which Bell had worked at the Cambridge University farm, which was unforgiving gault clay, inaccessible after rain. Bell often debated the balance of the institute's programme between pure and applied research, but eventually concluded that there could be no separation because breeding improved varieties must involve the use of the most up-to-date knowledge and methods from pure science. As a result, the programme of the Plant Breeding Institute extended from very practical work aimed at producing varieties to strategic work in relevant scientific disciplines. This structure was aimed at changing plant breeding from being a complex craft which made occasional references to science but relied principally on the eye and the intuition of the breeder into a science-based technology. Despite the reluctance of some of the old hands this objective was successfully achieved. 
At its fullest stretch the objectives of the institute were to produce new varieties of barley, wheat, oats, triticale, potato, marrow-stemmed kale, field beans, red clover, maize, oil-seed rape, lucerne, and various species of forage grass. Bell's leadership was based upon the remarkable achievements of his personal large-scale breeding programmes in barley. The pinnacle of his success with barley came with the release of the spring barley variety Proctor in 1953. Because of its high yield, lodging resistant short straw, malting quality, and resistance to 'Rhyncosporium', Proctor was widely accepted by farmers. It transformed British agriculture. When it was introduced in 1953 there were 0.9 million hectares of barley in Britain, but by 1963 there were 2.4 million hectares. In 1956 the area in barley exceeded that in oats for the first time since 1879, while by 1966 barley occupied more than half of the national area under tillage and 70 per cent of this area was sown to Proctor. This variety satisfied the needs of the newly intensified, mechanized agriculture, where barley was replacing oats as the principal feed for livestock. 
By the time of his retirement Bell could look back on a life in which he had succeeded in attaining all the practical objectives he had set himself in agriculture and for agricultural research. As would be expected in the light of his contributions to the transformation of British agriculture he received many honours. He was a fellow of Selwyn College over the period 1944-54 and became an honorary fellow in 1965. He was elected to the Royal Society in 1965 and appointed CBE in the same year. Among many other honours he was awarded the Mullard medal of the Royal Society in 1967 and the Massey-Ferguson national award of the Royal Agricultural Society of England in 1973. He died of bronchopneumonia at the Humanitas Foundation, Bottisham, Cambridgeshire, on 27 June 1993; he was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 51438


Benson, Ivy (1913-1993), bandleader, was born at the Malt Shovel, 26 Lowerhead Row, Holbeck, Leeds, a public house owned by her grandparents, on 11 November 1913. She was the only daughter and third child of Douglas Rolland Benson (1890-1977), a musician, and his wife, Mary Jane Mead; their first son, Thomas, born in 1911, died of diphtheria in 1914, and Douglas, born in 1912, died of a heart attack following rheumatic fever in 1929. 
Ivy, a pupil at St Luke's School, Beeston Hill, Leeds, took piano lessons from the age of five, and at nine she made her first broadcast on the BBC's 'Children's Hour' on 2LO. A year later she won a talent contest at the Leeds Empire singing 'Yes, we have No Bananas' and was presented with a doll's house by the music-hall star Florrie Forde. Her father, known as Digger, a trombonist in the pit orchestra at the Leeds Empire, played several instruments and taught his daughter to play the clarinet. In spite of teaming her up on the piano with a banjo-playing colleague and billing her as Baby Benson, he hoped she would choose a classical career, but on hearing a Benny Goodman record Ivy knew she wanted to play jazz. 
On leaving school at fourteen Ivy won a scholarship to Leeds College of Art, but was unable to attend because there was insufficient money to keep her there. After taking a job at the clothing store Montague Burton's for 15's'. a week, she saved enough to buy her first alto saxophone. At fifteen she joined Edna Crowdson's Rhythm Girls, and a summer season in Bridlington resulted in a chance meeting with the songwriter and music publisher Reg Connelly, who was to have a big influence on her career, starting with an engagement at a London club where she was heard by Teddy Joyce, the leader of the group Teddy Joyce and the Girlfriends. 
In 1937, as a featured soloist with the Girlfriends, Ivy toured in a show entitled 'Radio Rodeo', and when Teddy Joyce died shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War she formed her own band, auditioning successfully for the revue 'Meet the Girls' (starring Hylda Baker). With the male musicians disappearing into the armed forces, the impresario Jack Hylton booked the Ivy Benson band into Covent Garden, which was converted in 1940 into a ballroom. In 1943, with Hylton's help, the band was given the job of a BBC house band based in Bristol where the girls were visited by Queen Mary and broadcast at all hours of the day and night to the troops overseas. In October of that year Ivy plus the strings and rhythm sections of her twenty-strong line-up made their first records for EMI at their Abbey Road studios, the brass and saxophones being rejected because of poor intonation. Nevertheless, that same year the band was on peak form in a feature film for British National, 'The Dummy Talks' starring Jack Warner and Claude Hulbert, with Ivy playing herself in a speaking role. 
In 1944 the Ivy Benson band topped the bill at the London Palladium for six months, and following VE-day in 1945 it was the first group of entertainers to be invited by Field Marshal Montgomery to join the victory celebrations in Berlin. A further accolade was a live broadcast from Hamburg immediately following George VI's speech on Christmas day 1945. The band then embarked on a punishing schedule of tours for the Entertainments National Service Association and was soon top of its ratings. In between overseas tours, it headlined at variety theatres and was resident for summer seasons at Butlin's holiday camps. 
It was at Butlin's in Filey that Ivy met Caryll Stafford Clark ('b'. 1916/17), a theatrical producer and the son of Caryll and Mundy, a double act from the 'Crazy Gang Show'. She and Clark were married at Caxton Hall on 19 October 1949, but the marriage lasted just two years. Ivy married for the second time on 6 September 1957, while the band was resident for one of sixteen summer seasons spent at the Villa Marina on the Isle of Man. When her husband, (Berthold) Brantley (Brant) Callaway ('b'. 1914), of the US air force, returned to the United States in 1963, Ivy, refusing to leave her elderly parents or her band, was divorced for desertion. 
Ivy continued to front her band for another couple of decades, eventually reducing to a ten-piece as big bands lost out in popularity to the guitar-based groups. In 1977 she was the subject of the television programme 'This is your Life'; following this burglars broke into her house in Chiswick, mugging her father, Digger, who as a result of the attack died a few months later. Ivy finally called it a day in 1982, although in 1983 she celebrated her seventieth birthday by re-forming her band for an appearance on the Russell Harty television show. During her retirement in Clacton-on-Sea she entertained the holidaymakers at local hotels by playing the electronic organ. 
In 1984 a play based on Ivy Benson's life, 'The Silver Lady', by Liane Aukin, was staged at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre, and in 1988 she was the subject of a BBC television documentary named after her signature tune, 'Lady be Good'. Also in 1988, she was awarded an honorary fellowship by Leeds Polytechnic, formerly the Leeds College of Art, the only honour to be bestowed on one of the most popular stars of the 1940s. She died in the Clacton and District Hospital, Clacton-on-Sea, on 6 May 1993, and was cremated in Clacton-on-Sea on 13 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 51439


Bernstein, Sidney Lewis, Baron Bernstein (1899-1993), businessman, was born on 30 January 1899 at 14 Westbury Road, Ilford, Essex, the fourth of nine children of Alexander Bernstein ('c'.1860-1922), businessman, and his wife, Jane Lazarus. His father had moved with his brother Julius from Riga, Latvia, in the early 1890s. The brothers married two sisters, whose family had come from Riga rather earlier. Alexander Bernstein was a shoemaker by trade and in due course, as Sir Denis Forman relates, 'set up a boot factory when he made a lucrative contract to supply boots to the Boers in South Africa... When the Boer War broke out the boot contract collapsed and he was declared a bankrupt' (Forman, 160). With the aid of his family his next venture was the manufacture of carborundum wheels. He also bought land in Edmonton. This piece of land was ideal for shops, but he thought it needed something to entice shoppers. He thought a film theatre with live entertainment seemed most likely to do so. In 1908 he built the first of the Bernstein theatres, the Edmonton Empire, and ran it like a music hall. In this way the Bernsteins became involved in the entertainment industry. 
When his father died in 1922, Bernstein's family owned a small but significant group of about twenty film theatres. Bernstein (who was educated at the Highlands board school, Ilford, and the Cooper's Company School, Bow, London) became head of this family business. He let the property and related interests go and concentrated on the film theatre business. He also loved the live theatre, and went into partnership with Arnold Bennett to put on a successful series of plays at the Court Theatre in Sloane Square. Some years later he collaborated with Bovis the builders to put up the Phoenix Theatre in Charing Cross Road, in the design of which he played the determining role. The theatre opened in 1930 with Noel Coward's 'Private Lives'. That went well, but the following productions were not a financial success. In the absence of plays which he considered suitable, Bernstein used the theatre to show films -- Rene Clair's second talking film, 'Le million', was first shown there. 
By 1932 Bernstein realized that the financial returns from 'legitimate' theatre were inadequate. He therefore continued to develop his main interest, the chain of film theatres. His Granada theatres were grandiose in style. He took a close interest in their architecture, in partnership with the Russian designer Theodore Komisarjevsky. The latter had been educated at the Imperial Institute of Architecture in St Petersburg, and had gone to England in 1919. The most important of Bernstein's theatres was the Granada in Tooting. It combined Moorish, Renaissance, and classical styles. It is now a listed building and represents a lasting monument to the co-operation between Bernstein and Komisarjevsky. Bernstein's interest in film led him to join a group of film buffs in founding the Film Society in 1925, whose purpose was to show to London audiences the best films from around the world, and particularly those from Russia. This brought him into contact with some of the intellectuals who were also interested in films, including George Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, John Maynard Keynes, Julian Huxley, Augustus John, James Agate, Jacob Epstein, T. S. Eliot, Wyndham Lewis, and Ivor Montagu. Although he did not operate at their intellectual level, Bernstein was accepted by them, since he was charming, rich, and generous. His membership of the Film Society helped to establish his position in London's artistic community. 
Later Bernstein also helped to promote the National Theatre. The idea of such a theatre had had its proponents since the days of David Garrick two hundred years before. Bernstein's work for the theatre brought him in touch with another congenial group of people, including Sir Bronson Albery, Sir Lewis Casson, Dame Sybil Thorndyke, and Geoffrey Whitworth. His interest in theatre design caused him after the war to be co-opted to the committee considering the logistics of the new theatre. But he came to grief over his insistence that a projection room for films and facilities for television should be provided in its design. He fell out with the then architect, Brian O'Rourke, and resigned in 1956. 
On 26 November 1936 Bernstein married Zoe Patricia Farmar (1911/12-1972), journalist, daughter of Egbert Farmar, scholastics coach. There were no children of the marriage. 
Bernstein's contribution to the war effort began in May 1940 when Winston Churchill appointed Alfred Duff Cooper as minister of information. The minister recognized the potential importance of film and appointed Bernstein as film adviser. The appointment was made against the advice of MI5, who regarded Bernstein as a security risk. Although Bernstein had a number of communist friends, there is no evidence that he himself ever was a member of the Communist Party. His only active participation in politics had been to stand as a Labour candidate for the Middlesex county council in Willesden at the end of the 1920s. He was elected and served from 1929 to 1936. Bernstein was by nature a doer rather than an adviser. His keenness to get results made him enemies as well as friends. But by the autumn of 1940 the films division was producing some of its best work, such as 'London Can Take It', intended to explain the British war effort to the American public. American broadcasters such as Quentin Reynolds and Ed Murrow recognized the importance of these films. Bernstein also acted as godfather for a number of patriotic films for home distribution, such as 'In Which We Serve' (1942). In 1944 he became head of the film section of the psychological warfare division attached to Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force, and soon his work was extended to the liberated parts of Europe. 
During the war Bernstein's brother Cecil looked after the family's theatres very competently. When the war ended there were still no building permits for more film theatres. But Bernstein needed an outlet for his energies. Hence he and his friend Alfred Hitchcock decided to form a partnership for independent film production in Hollywood. This met Bernstein's need for an entrepreneurial role with a creative side. It also suited Hitchcock's quest for creative autonomy without unreasonable commercial interference. The two of them founded the Transatlantic Picture Corporation as their joint enterprise. Their first film was 'Rope' (1948), based on a play by Patrick Hamilton. This was moderately successful. 'Under Capricorn' (1949) was a flop. 'I Confess' (1953) was an artistic but not a commercial success. In 1951 Hitchcock and Bernstein decided to dissolve the partnership. Hitchcock continued in Hollywood; Bernstein returned to London. 
His first marriage having ended in divorce, Bernstein married, second, on 11 December 1954, Sandra Malone (1923-1991), daughter of Charles Malone, of Toronto. There were two daughters and a son of this marriage. 
'We wish to become exclusive programme contractors for the Manchester-Liverpool station for seven days a week' (Moorehead, 216). So wrote Bernstein to the Independent Television Authority (ITA) on 20 September 1954. The authority had invited applications for the first group of programme contractors in August of that year. But Granada had in effect been applying to enter television for years. Ever since their first inquiry in 1948 the Bernsteins had been keeping up a regular, if one-sided, correspondence with the postmaster-general's office. After the Labour defeat in 1951, Bernstein had written to Herbert Morrison: 'I think you should know that my company have applied to the Postmaster-General for a licence to operate a commercial television station or sponsored television. I still think the country would be better off without it. However, if there is to be commercial television in this country, we think we should be in. (ibid., 215)' When the time came in the mid-1950s for Bernstein's application to be considered, his long-standing links with the Labour Party in fact caused the authority some hesitation. Some of the members feared that he might not be wholehearted in his loyalty to the system as laid down by parliament. In the event the authority decided that Granada would be run by competent people who could be relied upon to bring an enterprising television company into existence. The fact that Granada Television was a wholly owned subsidiary of Granada Theatres Ltd was not regarded as a drawback. On the contrary, the good reputation of that company gave the authority an assurance that it could rely on a well-run enterprise. 
The way some of the independent television contractors went about the building up of the commercial channel confirmed the worst fears of critics of the introduction of the new service. By contrast Granada claimed that it would be showing items of unusual or topical interest and special programmes of intellectual or cultural value. Bernstein assured the press that there would be nothing boring. At the end of its first year Granada produced a volume of essays entitled 'Year One' (1958), with an introduction by Sir Kenneth Clark, then chairman of the ITA. Clark wrote a foreword in which he admitted that he had not foreseen how much Granada would develop a character 'which distinguishes it most markedly from the other programme companies and the BBC' ('Year One', 3). 
In the meantime Bernstein had begun to establish himself and his company in Manchester. A site in Quay Street was bought in May 1955 and a self-contained centre was built. Bernstein's interest in architecture came into its own again. In the view of some of those who knew him best, Bernstein's architectural talent consisted in his attention to detail rather than an interest in a grand design. The Granada headquarters building was functional, but hardly added an architectural landmark to the Manchester street scene. Bernstein attracted an able group of younger producers and directors and put his stamp particularly on the news and current affairs output and on Granada's drama and social documentaries. He found himself in conflict with the Independent Television Authority, as much on matters of substance as on his attitude to the contractual relationship between Granada and the ITA. Most of the other programme contractors recognized that they were dependent on a public authority, and conducted their relations with the authority accordingly. Bernstein barely acknowledged the nature of the relationship. This view of the autonomy of Granada was also reflected in his attitude to its northern location. He would spend two or three days in Manchester, flying from Biggin Hill on a Tuesday. He did not think it necessary to appoint any directors who lived locally, although in later years he complied with the ITA's insistence that he should. Through the Granada Foundation and in other ways he extended carefully targeted patronage to institutions and causes in the north-west. It is a measure of the lack of confidence of the local authorities in the north-west in the 1950s and 1960s that they were very pleased with the contribution that Granada was willing to make to the regional scene. 
It was in the field of current affairs that Bernstein's interests first clashed with the prevailing orthodoxies of broadcasting, established during the BBC monopoly. As Asa Briggs, the historian of the corporation, recounted: 'More intrepid than other broadcasting organisations, Granada deliberately broke new ground when, after consulting its lawyers, it broadcast programmes while the campaign at Rochdale [the by-election of February 1958] was in progress... two Granada producers had been dispatched to the town to talk over with local party agents provisional plans for by-election broadcasts, proposals which were leaked to the 'News Chronicle' before reaching the head offices of the parties in London... The 'New Statesman' claimed that it was 'to the credit of Granada Television that at Rochdale, it finally forced the machine men to grow up into the television age'. (Briggs, 238-9)' The other area into which Bernstein steered his television company was drama. During the 1960s Granada's output was consistently better than that contributed from elsewhere on independent television. He kept a close personal eye on the company's drama output. Like Bernard Shaw, who had been the great playwright of his youth, what Bernstein looked for in a play was a social statement. But plays had also to be well constructed. Having himself little or no experience of production, he engaged producers and directors. Philip Mackie was the first. When Bernstein invited him to join Granada, Mackie wrote: 'I see you are offering me the post of Head of Drama'. Bernstein replied, 'No, I'm asking you to be in charge of plays' (Moorehead, 266). 
This correspondence illustrates Bernstein's approach to the management of Granada. His theory that you must never give people titles of any kind, or they get above themselves, contrasted markedly with the carefully structured BBC hierarchy where everyone had his or her title (and the commensurate brass plate). Bernstein regarded himself as the producer of everything the company put out; all the other staff were his assistants. This did not make for easy relations with the more independent members of the company. It originated in the personal way in which Bernstein had run his cinemas, essentially as the proprietor of a private company. He brought from Granada Theatres three assistants to Granada Television: his brother Cecil, his man of business Victor Peers, and his accountant Joe Wharton, who acted as company secretary. They were his intimates; all the rest were disposable. Even Sir Denis Forman, who soon became indispensable to Bernstein, took a long time to be accepted by this tightly knit management group. 
The essentially personal way which Bernstein brought over from Granada Theatres also accounted for the manner in which he dealt with the financial crisis which arose in 1956. The initial losses of the company led Bernstein to make a working arrangement with Associated Rediffusion for the exchange of programmes and networking. The purpose was to protect Granada Television against heavy losses, pending the establishment of satisfactory advertising revenue. The ITA did not take cognizance of this agreement until 1959, by which time the financial crisis had been overcome. Sir Kenneth Clark and Sir Robert Fraser did not insist, as perhaps they should have done, on an independent scrutiny of the compliance of the agreement with section 5 (2) of the 'Television Act' (1954). But then, as Bernard Sendall argued in his history of independent television in Britain, 'neither Wills (the chairman of Rediffusion) nor Bernstein were men who would with deliberation have acted in breach of the Act or of the contracts which were based on it' (Sendall, 199). 
By the 1960s the prosperity of what had by then become the Granada Group (of which Granada Television was a subsidiary) enabled Bernstein to branch out into other fields. Cinemas were turned into bingo halls; a successful television rental enterprise was built up by Alex Bernstein, Cecil's son; motorway service stations were introduced; and an effort was made to establish the company in publishing. Granada acquired McGibbon and Kee, Rupert Hart-Davis, and one half of Jonathan Cape, as well as the Panther and Paladin paperback imprints. The music publisher Novello was another exercise in diversification. At the end of Bernstein's chairmanship television provided only 16 per cent of the group's income. Nevertheless Bernstein's heart remained in television. Although under the ITA's rules he had to retire as chairman of the Granada Television board in his early seventies, he remained chairman of the Granada Group until his eightieth birthday in 1979. 
Bernstein was raised to the peerage, as Baron Bernstein of Leigh (a life peer), by Harold Wilson in 1969. Although he attended the House of Lords from time to time he spoke rarely. He liked to run his own show and it may be that he found the rules of the upper house too constricting. He died of cerebral arteriosclerosis on 5 February 1993, at his London home, Flat 4, 26 St James's Place, Westminster. He was survived by the three children of his second marriage, his wife, Sandra, having predeceased him in 1991. 
Bernstein was essentially a product of the second television age, when in 1955 the BBC monopoly was replaced by the duopoly of the BBC and commercial television companies operating under the control of the Independent Television Authority. Bernstein contributed significantly to the building of independent television in the public interest, which characterized British television between 1955 and 1990. This period may well come to be seen in retrospect as television's golden age. The expansion of the technological options and the pressure for their exploitation during the Thatcher years brought this golden age to an end sooner than Bernstein would have liked. 


@@@@@


doc= 51446


Bishop, Dame (Margaret) Joyce (1896-1993), headmistress, was born on 28 July 1896 at The Glen, Oxford Road, Moseley, King's Norton, Worcestershire, the second of three children of Charles Benjamin Bishop, lacquer manufacturer and owner of a silver plating business, and his wife, Amy Stewart, 'nee' Tindall. From a solid middle-class churchgoing background, the family believed in the importance of educating girls and the development of a sense of personal commitment to society. Her early education was interrupted by serious illness, and she was taught at home until she was nine. From an early age her interest in literature was encouraged and after Edgbaston high school she went in 1915 to read English at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Oxford in wartime was a difficult place, although Bishop contributed regularly to college dramatic productions along with her academic studies, enjoying her time there. Because she was taken ill during her final examinations her degree results were not distinguished (she was awarded a third-class degree in 1918). However, personal recommendations from her tutors enabled her to obtain her first teaching post at Hertfordshire and Essex high school. Her next appointment, in 1924, took her as headmistress to Holly Lodge high school, Smethwick (where she succeeded her elder sister, Phyllis Mabel, born in 1891) in one of the poorest and most heavily industrial areas near Birmingham, where she remained for eleven years. When she first arrived the school was only two years old and still incomplete. Here she developed her ideas on the importance of an academic education available regardless of parental income as the way to develop the full potential of girls. This conviction remained central to her work throughout her career. 
In 1935 Bishop became headmistress of the Godolphin and Latymer School, Hammersmith, west London, remaining there for twenty-eight years. This was a well established, endowed girls' school with about 40 per cent of scholarship places. Here she found that, freed from having to battle for what she wanted as she had done at Holly Lodge, she was able to turn her formidable energies into other channels and develop strategic plans for the school. In addition she became an active member of the Association of Headmistresses. The threat of war led her to decide on evacuation for the whole school in September 1939, eventually to Newbury, Berkshire. However, after two years it was finally decided that school life would be more satisfactory in London, and by July 1943 all the students and staff had returned. The next challenge facing Bishop and the governors, that of the Butler 'Education Act' of 1944, was met with the decision that Godolphin should take aided status. As a result fees were abolished for all, while the school remained selective and academic, continuing, in Bishop's words, 'to foster scholarship and sound learning'. Throughout her career as headmistress she inspired deep loyalties among both staff and pupils, and many remained immensely grateful for the opportunities she opened to them. At the same time she continued to expand her interests outside the school and became involved in a number of working parties and committees at a national level. One of the most far reaching concerned the recruitment of women into teaching. She joined a government working party which reported in 1949 to the Ministry of Education with wide ranging recommendations designed to attract more women entrants. A pioneer herself in her recruitment of both married and part-time women teachers at Godolphin, she was involved in follow-up research to reverse the shortages created by the shrinking number of unmarried graduate teachers, particularly in girls' grammar schools. This report was presented to the Association of Headmistresses and the Association of Assistant Mistresses in 1961. Both these reports contributed to the growing debate changing the climate of opinion about professional women working outside the home. Bishop's words on the subject of the 'vanishing spinster' in 1962 were widely reported. 
Bishop's contribution to the Association of Headmistresses was recognized when she became chairman in 1951-2. Her keynote speeches to the annual conferences in these years reflected her educational principles, which were essentially practical rather than original. School 'must be a place where [the pupil] develops her intellectual gifts for the fulfilment of herself, and for the service of God and one where she learns to know that in that service lies perfect freedom' (report of 1951 Headmistresses' Conference, 11: U. Warwick Mod. RC, MSS 18, Association of Headmistress, TBN 27). From this period too, the invitations to sit on committees and governing bodies increased. Her formidable energy enabled her to combine the direction of her school with her outside interests. Among other bodies she served on the Secondary Schools Examination Council and the National Advisory Council for the Training and Supply of Teachers. On her retirement from Godolphin in 1963 she was made a DBE in recognition of her services to education (having already been made CBE in 1953). 
Bishop continued to develop her interests in education long into retirement. She was supervising tutor of postgraduate teaching students at King's College, London, for ten years. A passionate opponent of comprehensive education and combative supporter of grammar schools, she made a major contribution to the effort to raise substantial bursary funds when Godolphin became independent in 1977 in reaction to local reorganization. Between 1958 and 1984 she served as a governor of the Royal Ballet School, taking particular interest in the academic education of the young dancers. For many years she was closely associated with the Froebel College, Roehampton, which trained teachers for primary schools, and its associated school, Ibstock Place, becoming chairman of the governors of the Froebel College in 1964. Minutes of governors' meetings indicate an incisive mind at work, able to present clear summaries for consideration: her style was direct and unpompous. Her main interests were in management and the welfare of the student body. In the 1970s, with the reduction in teacher training numbers, the college faced major reorganization and amalgamation, which Bishop strongly opposed. She favoured continuing independence for the college. However, the weight of government policy led to the plans being accepted in 1977. Bishop made her final appearance at the governing body in 1979. 
Bishop's energy and good health continued well into her retirement. Her interest in people and her capacity for making friends and networking were facilitated by her companion and housekeeper, Elizabeth Ellett, whose loyalty over fifty years liberated Bishop from domestic chores, enabling her to develop a multi-faceted career while at the same time enjoying a well organized home life. Her dinner parties became legendary: carefully constructed occasions for introducing like minds or sparking controversy. She died of bronchopneumonia at Queen Mary's University Hospital, Roehampton, on 7 June 1993, and was buried at Putney Vale cemetery. A memorial service was held in St Margaret's Church, Westminster, on 4 October 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51448


Blanchflower, Robert Dennis (1926-1993), footballer and journalist, was born on 10 February 1926 at 7 Elmdale Street in the Bloomfield district of east Belfast, the eldest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of John Blanchflower, an iron turner in the Belfast shipyards, and his wife, Selina, 'nee' Ellison. His working-class, Presbyterian family had little interest in sport, though his mother had played football in her youth, for the Roebucks factory team during that brief moment between 1915 and 1923 when women's football threatened to become almost as much an obsession as the male version. 
Danny Blanchflower was educated at Ravenscroft public elementary school and did well enough to be awarded a scholarship to Belfast College of Technology. He joined the air training corps there but left early to become an apprentice electrician at the Gallachers' cigarette factory. He also joined the air-raid precautions (ARP) and in 1943 lied about his age in order to join the RAF. As a trainee navigator he was sent on a course to St Andrews University (where he acquired a lifelong love of golf) and in the spring of 1945 was posted to Canada for further training. By April 1946 he was back in Belfast, back at Gallachers, and building a reputation as an outstanding footballer. 
Like many working-class boys of his generation, Blanchflower learned to play football at school and on the streets and waste ground of his home town. He was good enough to be chosen for the Belfast Wolf Cub team against their Dublin counterparts in 1937. When the time of year allowed, he could play three times on a Saturday: for the school in the morning, the Boys' Brigade in the afternoon, and a local league team in the evening. During the early part of the war he characteristically formed his own club, Bloomfield United. He was establishing a reputation for himself within the local football subculture and in 1942, shortly before his sixteenth birthday, he was signed as an amateur by the local professional team Glentoran. He returned from military service fitter and stronger and soon won a place in the Glentoran first team, who played in the Irish league. He had thought of returning to St Andrews University, but the offer of a $50 signing-on fee and $3 for playing a game he loved and was good at proved too tempting. 
In February 1947 Blanchflower played for the Irish league against the English league. As the opposition included Stanley Matthews, Tommy Lawton, Tom Finney, and Billy Wright and the Irish only lost 4-2 it is hardly surprising that it stimulated his ambition to go east. By now he was playing on the right-hand side of midfield, where his ability to make the telling pass and to see how the game was going far outweighed his shortage of pace. He fell out with Glentoran about money, and in 1948-9 their directors agreed that if an English club wanted him he could have one-third of the transfer fee. Only second-division Barnsley made an offer, because other English clubs thought him neither strong enough nor quick enough to succeed in the faster English game. The fee was $6000, of which Blanchflower collected $700, which did nothing to appease his low opinion of football's ruling elite. 
At Barnsley, Blanchflower replaced a local hero, Sidney (Skinner) Normanton, for whom the phrase 'Get stuck in' could have been invented. Blanchflower could tackle too, but his anticipation, interceptions, and perceptive passes soon won over the hard-nosed Oakwell crowd. Certainly the local paper had never seen such a skilful player. As its football correspondent put it, 'the girth of his skill is immense' (Bowler, 53). On 1 October 1949 he won the first of fifty-six caps for Northern Ireland. While playing for Barnsley he lived in Darfield in a bungalow owned by the club and travelled to home matches on public transport with his boots in a brown paper bag. But he wasn't happy. What disappointed him was the lack of thought, of serious preparation, of any plan or method on the field. He was desperate to practise with the ball but the trainer would not even allow him to return in the afternoon for ball practice because if he did, he said, all the other players would want to do the same. He was impatient for a move to the first division, where more sophisticated attitudes would be found. In March 1951 he was transferred to Aston Villa for $15,000. But he was intensely frustrated to find that things were little different there. The older players did much as they liked and were far from impressed by this incessantly talkative young man who thought he knew much more than they did. 
In 1954 Blanchflower seemed on the verge of signing for Arsenal for a then record fee but at the last moment the deal fell through. Instead he went to Tottenham Hotspur for $30,000. It was the best move of his life. Not that it seemed so at first. For one thing Arthur Rowe, who had built the stylish Tottenham team of the early 1950s, had to retire from the manager's job owing to illness. Jimmy Anderson was a much more old-fashioned manager and soon fell out with Blanchflower, from whom he removed the captaincy. A championship team was nevertheless being built up -- at least, once Bill Nicholson replaced Anderson as manager in October 1958. It was Nicholson who made the inspired signings of Les Allen, Bill Brown, Dave Mackay, and John White. He disciplined the argumentative Blanchflower by dropping him, but in 1959 reinstated him as captain. Although very different in character, they were both keen on new ways of playing based on what they had seen of the control, passing, movement, and possession of the Brazilians and the Hungarians. 
Blanchflower had captained Northern Ireland to the last eight of the world cup in 1958 and in the same year was voted footballer of the year by the football writers. In his early thirties he was at the height of his powers and an intelligent creator of time and space. Tottenham finished third in the first division in 1959-60, having finished eighteenth in 1958-9. On the eve of the 1960-61 season the 'Evening Standard''s Bernard Joy reported a conversation with Blanchflower in which the latter had told him that football was not really about winning, goals, saves, or supporters: 'It's about doing things in style, doing them with a flourish. It's about going out to beat the other lot, not waiting for them to die of boredom. It's about dreaming of the glory of the double' (Bowler, 13). By the end of the season both cup and league had been won (the first time in the twentieth century that any team had won the double), the league with an average of almost three goals a game. But it was the style in which it was done that made Spurs the second-favourite team of most football enthusiasts. An almost certain record of 21/2 million people watched their matches. And for Blanchflower it was a personal triumph recognized by a second award as footballer of the year. The FA cup was won again the next year and the European cup winners' cup the year after that, but the glory of 1960-61 could never be recaptured. 
Blanchflower was that rare bird, someone who could think and talk about the game as effectively as he played it. He had been writing columns in various papers since his Villa days for the 'Birmingham Evening Mail' and then, after his move south, for the 'London Evening News'. He had even published in 'The Observer' and the 'New Statesman'. By the time of retirement in 1964 he had ten years' experience, and he worked for the 'Sunday Express' as a columnist from 1964 until 1988. 
Like many complicated personalities, Blanchflower had his contradictions. He was a private man, and refused to take part in the television programme 'This is your Life' in 1961; but he wanted people to know who he was, and he was the first professional footballer to appear on 'Desert Island Discs' (in 1960). He could be charming but also determined to have his own way, opinionated and witty but sometimes intolerant of the views of others. He could be unwilling to change his ideas or compromise. Even in football he was both progressive and romantic: he was a pioneer of more imaginative systems of play, but could be very critical of modern coaches, whom he accused of using tactics to stifle invention. He was articulate but not always easy for young footballers to understand, and this may have partly accounted for his failure to succeed as a manager when he eventually tried, first with Northern Ireland from January 1976 to the summer of 1978, and then when he failed to save Chelsea from relegation in 1978-9. He probably would have liked to manage Tottenham -- he had been assistant manager there while still a player -- but when Nicholson resigned in 1974 the board shied away from appointing someone so brilliant but unpredictable and outspoken. 
Blanchflower was married three times. He and his first wife, Denise (whom he had married in Belfast), divorced in 1953. His second marriage was to Betty Lawson, with whom he had a son and two daughters. That marriage ended in divorce in 1963, the year in which he married Avrille Margaret Dean Hunter. There were two further daughters by this marriage, which ended in divorce in 1976. 
Money was a frequent worry for Blanchflower, and he was grateful for a testimonial which brought him $40,000. Towards the end of his life he suffered from Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. He died at Woodlands Nursing Home, Rookery Road, Staines, Middlesex, on 9 December 1993, of bronchopneumonia after suffering a fall which broke his hip. As his biographer shrewdly noted, he was remembered with more affection than was sometimes bestowed on him in his life. A memorial service was held in St Anne's Cathedral, Belfast, on 14 February 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 51450


Anderson, Mary (1859-1940), actress, was born in Sacramento, California, USA, on 28 July 1859, the daughter of Charles Henry Anderson (died 1863) and his wife, Antonia Leugers, and named Mary Antoinette. Her mother, a Philadelphian of German, staunchly Catholic descent, had been disowned by her family after eloping to California with Anderson, a highly cultured but worldly New Yorker of English stock, fresh from a university education at Oxford. In 1860 the young couple moved to Louisville, Kentucky, where Mary's father later joined the Confederate army, only to be killed in action at Mobile while still in his twenties; Mary was then three and her brother, Charles Joseph, just a few months old. Mary was educated at the Ursuline convent and subsequently the Academy of the Presentation Nuns in Louisville, but proved an idle, somewhat rebellious pupil, her sole enthusiasm being to learn by heart long passages from Shakespeare and recite them aloud. This histrionic flair was encouraged by her stepfather, Dr Hamilton Griffin, a former surgeon in the Southern army and aficionado of the bard's work, whom her mother had married in 1867, and at the age of fourteen Mary was taken to see Edwin Booth play Hamlet, whereupon she announced her intention of becoming an actress. Some tuition in elocution was arranged locally, and she was sent to New York to study under the veteran performer George Vandenhoff, who gave her ten lessons, virtually her only professional training. 
On her return the publicity-conscious manager of the Louisville theatre, Barney Macauley, asked Mary to play Juliet in a benefit performance on Saturday 27 November 1875, and was sufficiently impressed to engage her for a whole week early in the new year to appear with his stock company not only as Juliet but also as Julia in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Hunchback', Bianca in H. H. Milman's tragedy 'Fazio', and in the title role of 'Evadne' by R. L. Sheil. Further engagements quickly followed, at St Louis and New Orleans and at John McCullough's theatre in San Francisco, allowing her to add other major characters to her repertory, namely Pauline in Bulwer-Lytton's 'The Lady of Lyons', Parthenia, the heroine of Mrs Lovell's beauty-and-beast romance 'Ingomar the Barbarian', and, with considerable audacity for a girl of sixteen, the Gypsy Meg Merrilies in an adaptation of Sir Walter Scott's 'Guy Mannering', a role still identified with the recently deceased 'grande dame' of American theatre, Charlotte Cushman. Soon she was offered a contract by John T. Ford to star at his Washington theatre, where, in January 1877, she played Lady Macbeth and embarked on an extensive tour of the Middle West and South, leading at the year's end to a six-week engagement in New York at the Fifth Avenue Theatre, which was the scene of her metropolitan debut on 12 November in 'The Lady of Lyons'. Press reviews of this performance were mixed, though there was praise for a 'tall, willowy' actress of 'much dramatic potentiality', if as yet unfinished. The public, however, here as elsewhere, instantly took her to their hearts and signalled their devotion by dubbing her Our Mary. 
Thus began a twelve-year starring career of unbroken success and mounting acclaim, marked by repeated engagements in New York and lengthy tours at the head of her own company, which filled the coffers of theatre managers wherever Anderson went. She also broadened her range of parts to include Berthe in a translation of 'La fille de Roland' by Henri de Bornier, the Countess in a revival of Sheridan Knowles's comedy 'Love', the Duchess de Torrenueva in James Robinson Planche's 'Faint Heart Ne'er Won Fair Lady', Ion in Sir Thomas Noon Talfourd's tragedy of that name, Galatea in W. S. Gilbert's 'Pygmalion and Galatea', and Desdemona in 'Othello'. This triumphal progress was briefly interrupted in the summer of 1879 for a voyage to Europe, where she visited Stratford upon Avon, London, and Paris, and met the two reigning doyennes of the international stage, Sarah Bernhardt and Adelaide Ristori. Returning to London in September 1883 for a season at the Lyceum during Henry Irving's absence in New York, she found herself engulfed by an even greater tide of popularity than at home, and her engagement stretched into a two-year residence while Irving remained busy in America. She chose the virginal Parthenia for her London opening, and proceeded to regale audiences at measured intervals with most of the roles which had assured her transatlantic reputation, but in January 1884 was able to add a new one in Clarice, the actress wife in 'Comedy and Tragedy', which Gilbert wrote expressly for her. Towards the end of her stay she was invited to the Memorial Theatre at Stratford to play Rosalind in 'As You Like It', a creation which, with Clarice, she took back to the United States and toured from coast to coast. Featuring most of her London company and Johnston Forbes-Robertson as her leading man, the tour met with universal acclaim, intensified no doubt by knowledge of her success abroad. In London again in September 1887, she appeared as Perdita as well as Hermione in 'The Winter's Tale', becoming the first actress to play both parts and publishing an edited version of the text which accommodated the doubling. After an unprecedented run of over 160 performances this production, too, was taken back to the United States the following autumn, but was destined to bring her extraordinary career to an abrupt halt. During a performance at Albaugh's Theatre in Washington on 7 March 1889 she collapsed on stage and was unable to continue. Suffering from severe nervous exhaustion, compounded perhaps by a growing distaste for some aspects of her profession, she disbanded her company and announced her retirement. 
Ordered to take a prolonged rest, Anderson sailed east. In London, on 17 June the following year, she married Antonio Fernando de Navarro (died 1932), a fellow American practising as a barrister in England. They had two children, a son, Jose, and a daughter, Elena, and settled at Court Farm in Broadway, Worcestershire. There Mary became a noted hostess, welcoming guests from a distinguished circle of musical and literary friends and ecclesiastical acquaintances of her husband, who was a papal chamberlain and knight commander of Saint Gregory. Subsequently she resisted every inducement to return to the stage, emerging from retirement only to take part in a number of benefit performances in aid of war charities during the First World War. She published two books of memoirs, 'A Few Memories' (1896) and 'A Few More Memories' (1936), and collaborated with Robert Hichens on a stage adaptation of his novel 'The Garden of Allah', produced at the Century Theatre, New York, in 1911. Predeceased by her husband by eight years, she died at home at Court Farm on 29 May 1940. 
Mary Anderson possessed two distinct advantages as a performer, great physical beauty and a clear, expressive voice. George Odell, the annalist of the New York theatre, pronounced her 'the most beautiful woman I ever saw on the stage, or, for that matter, off the stage', and remembered her voice as 'a rich contralto' (Odell, 10.372-3). Such was her allure that artists vied to paint her portrait or design her costumes, while photographs of her appeared in countless magazines and were used to advertise soap or a make of corset. Opinion was divided, however, among critics and fellow professionals alike, about the quality of her acting. For some there was an innate nobility in her every action, her modulation of delivery could bring tears to the eyes, and, in William Winter's words, 'she filled the scene with her presence, and she filled the hearts of her audience with a... conviction of the possible loveliness and majesty of the human soul' (Winter, 'Other Days', 276). Others considered her too statuesque by half, wanting in subtlety and restraint, her beauty and declamatory power serving only to draw attention to themselves to the detriment of the ensemble. Significantly, her stage experience was confined to eighteen leading roles: advised by Charlotte Cushman to 'start at the top' if she wished to be a star, she later prided herself on never having played a secondary role, and this relative lack of apprenticeship may account for allegations by her detractors that her acting relied on a limited range of devices employed indiscriminately regardless of context, and never displayed a truly imaginative grasp of character. But her popular appeal was undeniable, and for most members of the audience outweighed all other considerations. Certainly, few performers have been able to inspire such affection. 


@@@@@


doc= 51451


Barnes, John Henry (1850-1925), actor, was born at Watlington, Oxfordshire, on 26 February 1850, the son of John Barnes, a miller and farmer, and his wife, Mildred ('nee' Smith). His interest in acting was awakened by the sermons of J. C. M. Bellew, whom he considered to be 'the very best reader and elocutionist that I have ever heard' (Barnes, 5). Barnes's father would not hear of him going into the theatre, but after his father's death in 1868 Barnes made his first public appearance as a reader at the Westbourne Hall, Bayswater, on 22 October 1870. His stage debut took place on the auspicious first night of Henry Irving's production of 'The Bells' at the Lyceum Theatre, on 25 November 1871, when he appeared as Irving's double. Although he began his career with the rising star of the London theatre, Barnes later gained wide experience in the provinces, where he worked with several notable managers: Edward Saker in Liverpool, Mrs Wyndham in Edinburgh, and Charles Calvert in Manchester. While at the Theatre Royal in Manchester he played alongside the veteran Samuel Phelps -- thus began 'my worship of Samuel Phelps' (Barnes, 67). 
Generally known as Handsome Jack Barnes, throughout his career Barnes partnered a succession of celebrated leading ladies, who were glad to avail themselves of his attractive stage presence but were reassured that their own performances would not be eclipsed. He accompanied Adelaide Neilson to America in 1874; supported Genevieve Ward at the Lyceum in 1879; and partnered Madame Ristori at Drury Lane in 1882 (including Macbeth to her Lady Macbeth) and Mary Anderson at the Lyceum in 1883 and thereafter on the ill-fated American tour which ended with her retirement from the stage. His association with Ellen Terry stretched from Bassanio to her Portia in Irving's revival of 'The Merchant of Venice' (Lyceum, 1 November 1879) to Sir Howard Hallam to her Lady Cicely Waynflete in Shaw's 'Captain Brassbound's Conversion' for the Vedrenne-Barker management (Court Theatre, 20 March 1906). 
Barnes belonged to a generation of actors whose careers bridged the Atlantic Ocean. As early as 1875 he took his own company to Canada, and scarcely had he disembarked in England on 3 June 1891 than he set sail again for New York on 16 September and remained in America for several years. In 1905 he worked there for Charles Frohman. 
During Barnes's lengthy career his chosen profession changed beyond recognition. Like Johnston Forbes-Robertson, also an admirer of Phelps, Barnes provided continuity with the past. He appeared as Polonius to Forbes-Robertson's Hamlet at the Lyceum Theatre (11 September 1897), when his performance was not admired by Shaw. Barnes and Forbes-Robertson were reunited in their 'Hamlet' roles for the latter's farewell season at Drury Lane (22 March 1913), shortly after which the two veterans shared the 'curious experience of being filmed for moving pictures in 'Hamlet'', produced by Cecil Hepworth, at Walton-on-Thames (Barnes, 307). Appropriately, Barnes's last West End performance, at the Shaftesbury Theatre (17 April 1923), was as Lester Montague in 'Merton of the Movies' by George S. Kaufman and Marc Connelly. 
Though never a star in his own right, Barnes was a highly respected member of his profession: he was a founder member of the Green Room Club; worshipful master of the Drury Lane freemasons' lodge (1901); an advocate of and later instructor at the (Royal) Academy of Dramatic Art; and the recipient of a complimentary benefit matinee at the Palace Theatre (17 March 1922). Apart from his memoirs, 'Forty Years on the Stage' (originally published serially in 'The Stage' from October 1913), he wrote what he termed 'serious verse' and articles in the 'Nineteenth Century'. He died at his home, Wyndham House, Shoot-up Hill, Cricklewood, on 10 November 1925, leaving a widow, Mary L. Barnes. 


@@@@@


doc= 51452


Louis Calvert (1859-1923), actor, the third son of Charles and Adelaide Calvert, was born in Manchester on 25 November 1859. He was educated at Dr Ernest Adams's academy in Manchester, where he showed an early inclination towards acting, and in Germany. Although Charles Calvert discouraged his children from taking up the theatre as a career, Louis, like his brothers Leonard, William, Alexander, and Cecil, followed in his parents' footsteps on to the stage. Louis made his debut in Natal in 1878 and proceeded to Australia before returning to England in 1880. During the following decade he gained varied experience with Sarah Thorne at Margate, with Henry Irving at the Lyceum, and with Lillie Langtry in America. 


@@@@@


doc= 51453


Coghlan, Rose (1851-1932), actress, was born in Peterborough, Lincolnshire, on 18 March 1851, the daughter of Francis Coghlan, the author and publisher of 'Coghlan's Continental Guides', and his wife, Anna Marie, 'nee' Kirby. Her elder brother 
Coghlan went to the United States in 1872 to work with Lydia Thompson's burlesque company, and it was there that she built a solid reputation as a leading actress, performing major roles until the early 1920s. She acquired American citizenship in 1902. In the 1880s she became a leading lady with Lester Wallack's stock company, and in such roles as Rosalind in 'As You Like It' (1880), Stephanie in 'Forget-me-Not' (1880), and Lady Teazle in 'The School for Scandal' (1882) she was a considerable critical and popular success. J. Rankin Towse termed her Lady Teazle 'one of the best witnessed by this generation' (Towse, 409). Frederic Edward McKay wrote of her as Rosalind: 'Miss Coghlan has conceived the character as it existed in the mind of the master, and represents it with a fidelity to truth almost marvelous in its near approach to perfection' ('New York Star', 1 Oct 1880). 
Many critics commented on the quality of Coghlan's voice. McKay praised her 'mellifluous vocalism': 'it seemed to me the Aeolian harp had been revivified' (McKay and Wingate, 250); another added, 'what a resonant, silvery, mellow voice it is'. Rose, a buxom, golden-haired woman of medium height, with large blue eyes, was a natural for comic roles, and critics praised once and again her 'romping spirits' and 'sportive gaiety' in such parts as Rosalind and Lady Gay Spanker (in 'London Assurance'). During her years with Wallack's company she married the lawyer Clinton J. Edgerly (in April 1885), but the marriage soon failed and Edgerly sued her for divorce on grounds of desertion in September 1890. In the 1880s she also adopted a daughter, Rosalind Agnes Coghlan ('b'. 1881). 
Charles Coghlan, meanwhile, was building his reputation in England, where he became known as a perfect type of the modern gentleman. With his dark-haired good looks, he perfected an urbane and easy manner, what critics termed his 'reserve force', and established his theatrical reputation during the Bancrofts' management of the Prince of Wales's Theatre in the 1870-76 seasons. He was a natural for the toned-down realism of Tom Robertson's plays. The critic Clement Scott was a naysayer, however, writing in Coghlan's obituary that his ''reserve force' was merely loss of memory and the inability to make the brain act as quickly as it should'. His style was described as 'so easy, so natural' -- a quality that worked well in such plays as Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money' (1872) but proved disastrous in the production of 'The Merchant of Venice' (1875), in which Coghlan played Shylock: 'In light comedy he had often held his forces in reserve with great effect. Here he did it to such bad purpose that his performance nearly ruined the Bancrofts.' His subdued characterization, dubbed the 'Drawing-Room Shylock', went counter to the tradition of fierce and emotional acting of the part. Clement Scott termed his Shylock 'an absolute inanimate being, without force, without movement, without love, without hate, without expression' ('The Drama of Yesterday and Today', 1899, 1.585). 
Soon afterwards Coghlan went to the USA and played at Daly's and Palmer's Union Square Theatre in New York, where he assumed such roles as Lovelace in 'Clarissa Harlowe' and Jean Renaud in 'A Celebrated Case' (1878). He continued to work in England as well, playing Antony to Lillie Langtry's Cleopatra in 1890, at the Princess's Theatre. Some critics still could not bear his style in a Shakespearian context; G. B. Shaw summed up his Mercutio at the Lyceum in 1895, noting that 'he lounges' ('Dramatic Opinions and Essays', 1901, 1.188); Shaw did approve, however, of his performance as the seducer in 'A Woman's Reason' (Shaftsbury, 1895): 'Mr. Coghlan created the part, like a true actor, by the simple but very unusual method of playing it from his own point of view' ('Our Theatres in the Nineties', 1932, 2.5). Coghlan also continued to try his hand as a playwright. His first play, 'Good as Gold', had been produced at the Lyceum in 1868; 'Enemies' was produced at the Princess's in 1886. 
In 1885 Rose Coghlan had set up her own company in New York, a short-lived venture; she continued to work with Wallack until his retirement in 1888. In 1893 she staged the first American production of Oscar Wilde's 'A Woman of No Importance', and with Charles she revived 'Diplomacy' in 1892-3. Her reputation for high-spiritedness remained, and extended into her personal life. She had a second, rather tempestuous marriage to the actor John Taylor Sullivan, beginning on 7 June 1893 (the couple divorced on 11 June 1904); the newspapers followed the ups and downs of her private life, even reporting with horror in 1893 that she rode astride, 'like a dragoon', in Central Park. Her brother caused a scandal of his own in October 1893 when he married the heiress Kuhne Beveridge; it was generally assumed that he was already married to Blanche Wilson, whom he had presented as his wife for many years and with whom he had a daughter, Gertrude ('b'. 1878). The marriage to Beveridge incited much press coverage and led to a rift with his sister; it was annulled in September 1894, and Charles was reconciled with his first wife. In the late 1890s he toured the USA in a repertory that included his own play 'Lady Barter'; it was during this tour that he became ill with acute gastritis, and he died in Galveston, Texas, on 27 November 1899. His coffin, along with many others, was washed away in the Galveston flood of 1900 (it was recovered four years later), an incident that led to persistent reports in later years that he had died during the flood itself. 
After the turn of the century Rose Coghlan met increasing difficulty finding work. Since the mid-1890s she had been plagued by financial problems, and in 1898 she began to work on the vaudeville circuit, where she was employed over the next twenty years. Opportunities to appear in plays became less frequent, though, when she did find roles, she excelled. As Penelope in the ill-fated 1903 New York production of Stephen Phillips's 'Ulysses', she 'almost single-handedly' saved the show 'from instant and ignominious collapse' ('New York Evening Post', 15 April 1922). 
Other notable appearances from Rose's later years included a tour in Shaw's 'Mrs Warren's Profession' in 1907 and roles in 'The Winter's Tale' and 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' at Winthrop Ames's New Theatre in 1910. She acquired some work in films, notably in 'The Sporting Duchess' (1915) and 'Beyond the Rainbow' (1922). Her last stage success came at the age of seventy, when she played Madame Rabouin in Harley Granville Barker's adaptation of Sacha Guitry's 'Deburau' (Belasco, 1920). The 'New York Post', in a largely dismissive review, called her small performance 'one of the chief artistic features of the evening'; 'she vivified the whole picture -- even the dialogue, poor stuff that it was, assumed significance as uttered in her clear, crisp, and deeply suggestive delivery' (24 Dec 1920). 
Two years later Coghlan was destitute. A benefit was held for her in New York at the Apollo Theatre (set up by the Producing Managers' Association), which raised $10,000. She then retired to St Vincent's Retreat, Harrison, New York, a sanatorium run by Catholic nuns. According to some reports she was under the care of the Actors' Fund of America and the National Vaudeville Artists' Association. In November 1924 she offered at auction her collection of autographed photographs. She died of a cerebral haemorrhage on 2 April 1932 at St Vincent's Retreat, and was cremated on the 4th at Fresh Pond crematorium, Middle Village, Queens, New York. 


@@@@@


doc= 51454


Charles Francis Coghlan (c.1842-1899), who was born in Paris, and to whom she was very close, studied law and later decided on a career in the theatre; Rose followed him on to the stage. Rose Coghlan made her first appearance at the Theatre Royal in Greenock, Renfrewshire, in 1865, playing one of the witches in 'Macbeth', and made her London debut as Pippo in 'Linda of Chamouni' (Old Gaiety, September 1869). In the early 1870s she met the actor-manager Charles Calvert, who cast her as Nerissa in a production of 'The Merchant of Venice'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51455


Harker, Joseph Cunningham (1855-1927), scene painter and theatrical designer, was born on 17 October 1855 in Levenshulme, Lancashire, the third of the three children of William Harker and his wife, Maria O'Connor. When Harker was three years old, his father, a well-known character actor in Manchester, died, and his mother, an actress, toured the provinces to support her children. Although Harker spent these early years performing occasionally in child roles, he showed more interest in scene design, and by the age of twelve he began building and painting his own toy-theatre models. In 1870 he moved to London, where his uncle, John O'Connor, a principal scene painter at the Haymarket Theatre, arranged for him to be apprenticed as a scene painter's assistant at the Globe for Thomas W. Hall, whose daughter, Sarah Elizabeth, Harker married on 10 May 1877. During this period, Harker gained further experience through his occasional work for his uncle at the Haymarket, Albert Callcott at the Alhambra, and Ada Cavendish at the Olympic. In 1874 he ended his apprenticeship, and for the next eight years his freelance work at various London theatres included supervising scenes for 'The Ring' at Her Majesty's Theatre, painting in its entirety the scenery for 'Parsifal' at Covent Garden, and painting scenery for George Sanger's pantomimes at Astley's and Augustus Harris's spectacular pantomimes and melodramas at Drury Lane. Harker's many years of freelancing at various studios under the supervision of prominent London scene designers afforded him a breadth of training that greatly enhanced his proficiency in both designing and painting according to different styles and for different genres, ranging from Shakespeare to musical comedy. 
After spending six years in Scotland, Dublin, and the United States -- where he was employed to paint the backgrounds for large panoramas (open-air pictures) which were very much in vogue -- Harker returned to London in 1888 and secured his first significant commission, which paved the way for the development of his professional career. In the autumn of 1888 he was hired to paint several scenes for Henry Irving's Lyceum production of 'Macbeth'. Shortly afterwards, Irving, who had befriended Harker's father while the two had performed together in Edinburgh, furnished Harker the money to open his own painting studio and offered him work in subsequent Lyceum productions. From 1888 until Irving relinquished management of the Lyceum in 1899, Harker designed and painted dozens of sets for the Lyceum, including scenery for 'King Lear', 'Cymbeline', and 'Henry VIII'. 
Harker's prestigious position as a principal scenic artist for Irving garnered him other commissions during the 1890s from some of London's prominent theatre managers, including George Alexander at the St James's Theatre, Richard D'Oyly Carte at the Savoy, and Herbert Beerbohm Tree at the Haymarket. By 1900 he had secured a reputation as one of the leading scene painters and designers for the British stage. Because he preferred to work as an independent scene artist and not as a stock artist for any one particular house, he received commissions to design scenery from almost every London theatre manager. In addition to providing scenery for more than half of Beerbohm Tree's sixty-odd productions at Her Majesty's Theatre between 1898 and 1917, Harker also designed scenery for Otho Stuart at the Adelphi and the Court, John Vedrenne at the Comedy and the Savoy, George Grossmith at the Shaftesbury and Winter Garden, and George Edwardes at the Gaiety and Daly's. His prolific output as an independent scenic artist was aided by his collaboration with his four sons, who joined the scene studio some time after 1910, and their partnership earned special recognition for their expert designs of oriental settings, including those for 'Kismet' (1914), 'Cleopatra' (1925), and 'Chu-Chin-Chow' (1916), the latter regarded by Harker's contemporaries as his finest work. By the time of his death in 1927, his studio (which was later named Harker, Homan, and Bravery Studios Ltd, and continued in business until the 1950s) had provided scenery for most of London's major theatres and managers. 
As a master scenic artist of the Victorian and Edwardian eras, Harker, like the other prominent contemporary scene designers with whom he was ranked (Hawes Craven, Walter Hann, and William Telbin), worked according to a scenographic tradition of pictorial realism, which equated the proscenium arch to a frame in which the painted setting represented 'real' environments and locales. Applying the principles of realistic scene painting required that Harker depend on visual source material based on direct observations of natural and geographical environments or on research in historical and archaeological facts, but his designs were not merely photographic realism 'per se', for they were governed by his careful selection and manipulation of compositional details that created stage pictures that served myriad illustrative ends, from showing character psychology to vivifying dramatic atmosphere. Harker, believing in the primacy of the scene painter in creating visual effects, preferred to design and paint sets without three-dimensional pieces, advocating instead the use of drops painted to simulate three-dimensional detail. He excelled particularly in painting realistic exterior settings with vibrant colours and sunlight effects; J. Comyns Carr, recalling Harker's designs, remarked that 'the foliage of the trees seems actually to move in the breeze' (Harker, 198). 
Towards the end of Harker's career, the pictorial aesthetic that had long governed his profession and dominated the Victorian and Edwardian theatres was being challenged by the new stagecraft of Poel, Appia, and Craig, who advocated non-illusionistic, non-representational settings. Harker remained a strong proponent of traditional stagecraft, and in 1924, when the new scenography was gaining increasing supporters, he wrote his memoirs, 'Studio and Stage', devoting over half of it to criticism of the new stagecraft and a defence of scenic realism and scene painting. 
Harker died on 15 April 1927 at his home at 4 Lyndhurst Road, Hampstead, and his ashes were interred on 19 April at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 51456


Maude, Cyril Francis (1862-1951), actor and theatre manager, was born on 24 April 1862 at 19 St George's Square, Westminster, London, the eldest of the seven children of Charles Henry Maude (1830-1908), a captain in the 14th Madras infantry and the grandson of the first Viscount Hawarden, and his wife, Georgiana Henrietta Emma Hanbury-Tracy ('c'.1833-1921), the daughter of the second Baron Sudeley. He was educated at preparatory schools in London, Surrey, and Hampshire and, from 1876 to 1879, at Charterhouse School, where, already intent on a theatrical career (at a time when the stage was gaining in respectability), he took part in plays. He then studied with private tutors and took lessons in dancing, elocution, and fencing. Ill health threatened his ambitions and led to his being sent with his brother Ernest to Canada in 1882 to learn farming. 
With renewed health, Maude obtained an engagement in New York with Daniel Bandmann's company in 1884, and his first professional appearance was at Denver, Colorado, that April as the Servant in John Oxenford's 'East Lynne'. After returning to London he was first seen in the modest part of Mr Pilkie in 'The Great Divorce Case', by John Roe and Richard Doe, at the Criterion Theatre on 18 February 1886. Greater distinction came, following work in the provinces, as the Duke of Courtland in G. H. Macdermott's 'Racing', which opened at the Grand Theatre, Islington, on 5 September 1887. Maude's career was now assured, and he became best known for his characterizations of a long line of older -- often very old -- men in both classic and contemporary comedies. The next decade saw engagements at the Gaiety, the Vaudeville, the Criterion, the Avenue, the Strand, the Haymarket, the Comedy, the Lyceum, and the St James's theatres; at the last he created the part of Cayley Drummle in Pinero's 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' (27 May 1893). In 1888 he twice married the actress Winifred Emery (1861-1924) (on 28 April, and again on 2 June), with whom he co-starred in many productions and with whom he had a son and two daughters. The second wedding (reasons for which remain obscure) took place in the Savoy Chapel, and was said to mark the 'vast alteration which has taken place in the last few years in the estimation of the stage as a profession by the British aristocracy' ('The Era', 9 June 1888). 
On 17 October 1896 Maude began a highly successful partnership with Frederick Harrison (1854-1926) at the Haymarket Theatre, when he opened in the part of Captain Larolle in Edward Rose's 'Under the Red Robe'. The following nine years saw him direct and star in many important productions, including J. M. Barrie's 'The Little Minister' (as Reverend Gavin Dishart), 'Cousin Kate' by H. H. Davies (Heath Desmond), and Robert Marshall's 'The Second in Command' (Major Christopher Bingham), as well as in such classics as 'The Rivals', 'The School for Scandal', and 'She Stoops to Conquer'. 
In 1905 Maude leased and rebuilt the Avenue Theatre, Northumberland Avenue, which had opened in 1882. As the work neared completion the theatre, now named the Playhouse, was largely destroyed and eight people killed when, on 5 December 1905, the roof of the adjoining Charing Cross Station collapsed. In the year before it could be restored and opened (it cost the London and South-Eastern Railway Company $20,000 to make it good) Maude took over the Waldorf Theatre for some months. He played Lord Meadows in 'Toddles', by Clyde Fitch, at the Duke of York's, at Wyndham's, and, from its opening on 28 January 1907, at his Playhouse, where the next six years saw a further string of successes. At the same time he appeared at a number of gala and royal command performances. 
Maude averred that his greatest enjoyment lay in 'powder plays', and he took great pains in studying old men, even following likely models in the street; Sir Peter Teazle in 'The School for Scandal' was his favourite role. His meticulous make-up included 'blueing the veins of his hands and chalking the knuckles' ('The Sketch', 25 Oct 1893, 658-9). His greatest success, in box-office terms, was as Andrew Bullivant in 'Grumpy', by Horace Hodges and T. W. Percyval, first performed at Glasgow on 19 September 1913, given more than 1300 performances in Britain and abroad, and filmed in 1930. 
Maude relinquished his lease of the Playhouse in 1915. He spent much of the period between 1913 and 1925 on tours in the United States and in 1917-18 was in Australia. Winifred Emery died on 15 July 1924. After marrying Beatrice Mary Trew, the daughter of the Revd John Ellis and the widow of P. H. Trew, on 12 October 1927, Maude lived chiefly in retirement. His last performance was as Sir Peter Teazle, opposite Vivien Leigh, at a benefit on behalf of the RAF Benevolent Fund and the Actors' Orphanage at the Haymarket Theatre on 24 April 1942. 
Maude was a 'sprightly, neat little man' ('Torquay Times', 23 Feb 1951, 2) of 'bright spirits and high principles' (Brereton, 42) whose acting was distinguished by 'gentle pathos' (ibid., 41). He wrote two reminiscences, 'The Haymarket Theatre' (1903) and 'Behind the Scenes with Cyril Maude' (1927), and co-wrote a novel, 'The Actor in Room 931' (1925), and a play, 'Strange Cousins' (1934). He appeared in nine films, the first in 1913. He was one of the founders of the (later Royal) Academy of Dramatic Art in 1905 and was elected its president in 1936. In his last years Maude lived in Torquay, where he took up painting and became president of the Devon Art Society, as well as president of the South Devon Literary and Debating Society. He died of influenza at his home, Dundrum, Lower Woodfield Road, on 20 February 1951, and was buried at St John's Church on 23 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 51457


Moss, Sir Horace Edward (1852-1912), theatre and music-hall manager, was born on 12 April 1852 in Ashton under Lyne, the son of James Moss, a theatre manager. He received some education in Manchester and Glasgow, musical tuition from Andrew Banks, and learned the music-hall business at his father's premises in Greenock. At the age of seventeen he became manager of a travelling company, then proprietor of a diorama of the Franco-Prussian War. In 1877 he leased the Gaiety Music Hall on Chambers Street, Edinburgh, and in 1880 purchased premises in Leith; artistes were booked to appear in both halls, thus establishing the first link in what eventually became a circuit of thirty-nine variety theatres operated by Moss throughout the British Isles. In 1884 Moss added Newcastle upon Tyne to the circuit, and, shortly after, Glasgow. His collaboration in 1890 with Richard Thornton to build the Empire Theatre in Newgate Street, Newcastle, initiated a long and prosperous partnership. 'Empires' became his hallmark, with new premises in Edinburgh (1892, now the Festival Theatre), Sheffield (1895), Glasgow (1897), Leeds (1898), and Nottingham (1898) also bearing the name. The last-named marked the first amalgamation of Moss's interests with Oswald Stoll, whose own circuit was initially launched in Cardiff. 
Although the music-hall industry emerged from similar types of enterprises in the major population centres of London, Glasgow, and Manchester in the 1830s and 1840s, with large halls a feature of each city by the 1850s, the lower cash input necessary in the provinces may have enabled Moss and his partners to form wider networks from which to expand than their London-based competitors. They booked the best-known artistes in the business at a time when music-hall was at its most profitable, helping to sanitize music-hall's reputation into the more benignly connotative 'variety', appealing to the middle classes, and being fully acceptable to audiences of both sexes. In December 1899 the multiple public limited liability companies under which Moss, Thornton, and Stoll operated merged into a single corporation, initially capitalized at $1.4 million. Moss Empires Ltd was distinguished by an unusually large percentage of ordinary share capital (about 80 per cent) rather than relying on mortgage debentures and loans. Each new Moss venture floated on the Edinburgh and London stock exchanges in the 1890s, such as the amalgamated syndicate in 1899, was eagerly and fully taken up by a wide range of private investors, signifying great faith in the directors and the future of the industry. While artistes could not become true stars without garnering the praise of Londoners, as entrepreneurs Moss, his partners, and his co-investors profited from touring the London stars in growth economies all over the nation, further streamlining the booking system and reducing the friction of competition in this unified venture. 
The Hippodrome (1900) at Charing Cross Road and Cranbourn Street, bordering on Leicester Square, was Moss's first central London property, and he managed it personally for the first five years. It offered large-scale circus, water spectacles, variety, and in the winter months extravagant pantomimes. In 1909 the circus arena was replaced by stalls and the property's distinctiveness was largely forfeited; thereafter it presented variety, opera, and ballet (including the first English performance of 'Swan Lake'). While Moss took particular pride in the Hippodrome, the more typical focuses of Moss Empires Ltd immediately after the turn of the century were the expansions into the genteel residential suburbs of London, Manchester, and Birmingham (in contrast to the working-class halls of competitors such as Thomas Barrasford or Frank MacNaghten and the seaside circuit of Walter De Freece) and building replacements for the company's older or incommodious halls in city centres. The syndicate broke up in 1910, partly owing to shareholders' uneasiness with competition and conflicts of interest arising from Stoll's own independent circuit, including the London Coliseum Ltd (1904) in London, which was built up separately from Moss Empires Ltd. 
By this time, however, Moss was increasingly withdrawn from business activities, and opted for the life of a country gentleman in Midlothian, where he was both a justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant. He married twice; first, on 19 January 1877, Ellen Alice (died 1892), the daughter of Leonard Bramwell of Guernsey, and second, in 1902, Florence Nellie, the daughter of J. R. Craig of Peterborough. He had a daughter from his first marriage. He preferred to be a behind-the-scenes organizer, and seems to have been a consummate administrator. Unlike his music-hall contemporaries -- such as the gregarious George Edwardes, the personable Stoll, and the politically ambitious De Freece -- he did not generate publicity about himself, avoided the limelight, and, despite membership in Greenock and Edinburgh masonic lodges, showed little inclination for professional and fraternal conviviality. Even his choice of clubs was low-key: the Junior Constitutional, Royal Automobile, and Conservative Club (Edinburgh). His name was a virtual endorsement of business integrity, yet he took little part in the more flamboyant aspects of the theatrical and music-hall industries. Nevertheless, he was knighted in 1905, in recognition of his business success and probably also in acknowledgement for arranging several of Edward VII's dinners for the poor. He received the French government's distinction of officer of public instruction in 1912. Days before, on 23 April 1912, he underwent surgery at his home in Regent's Park, and despite an improvement in his health during the summer never resumed public life. He died at his home, Middleton Hall, Gorebridge, Midlothian, on 25 November 1912, and was buried in Portobello cemetery, Edinburgh, on 28 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 51458


Rignold, George Richard (1839-1912), actor and theatre manager, was born in Leicester, the second son of the actors William Ross Rignold (1813-1883) and his wife, Patricia Blaxland (1800-1888). Music was George Rignold's first love and he became an accomplished violinist, but his father encouraged him to take to the stage, which offered better financial prospects. After early experience at the Theatre Royal, Birmingham, Rignold joined J. H. Chute's company in Bath and Bristol. In the production of 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' with which the new Theatre Royal, Bath, opened on 4 March 1863 Rignold played Theseus in a notable cast, which included his elder brother William (1836-1904) as Lysander, Charles Coghlan as Demetrius, Henrietta Hodson as Oberon, Ellen Terry as Titania, and the father and daughter William and Madge Robertson (later Dame Madge Kendal) as Egeus and Second Singing Fairy respectively. 
In March 1869, following further engagements with Chute and others in Plymouth, Swansea, and Manchester, Rignold progressed to the metropolis, to the Queen's Theatre, Long Acre, where E. J. Young's company included Henrietta Hodson, Mrs Stirling, and Charles Wyndham. Rignold made his mark in a range of parts: Sir John Bridges in Tom Taylor's ''Twixt Axe and Crown' and Father Isambard in the same author's 'Joan of Arc'; William in Douglas Jerrold's 'Black-Eyed Susan', which he also played at the Holborn Theatre; and Shakespeare's Caliban (28 October 1871), Posthumus (30 March 1872), and Romeo, to Adelaide Neilson's Juliet (14 September 1872). Roles in contemporary plays followed: Westland Marston's 'Put to the Test' at the Olympic Theatre in February 1873, Herman Merivale's 'The White Pilgrim' at the Court Theatre in February 1874, and the first provincial tour of Taylor's 'Clancarty' in the same year, but it was his casting as Henry V in New York in 1875 that proved to be the turning point in Rignold's career. 
Charles Calvert's revival of 'Henry V' had been such an outstanding success at the Prince's Theatre, Manchester, in 1872 and subsequently on tour that it had been bought by the New York managers Jarrett and Palmer. Calvert supervised the staging at Booth's Theatre in February 1875, but, because of his poor health, stepped down from the title role and cast Rignold in his stead. Calvert's elaborate stagecraft and detailed realization of medieval pageantry and warfare were a revelation to New Yorkers. Rignold's Henry V, though it lacked the subtlety of Calvert's own interpretation, impressed American audiences, for whom Henry James can stand as a spokesman: 'He plays the part in a most natural fashion, looks it and wears it to perfection, and declaims its swelling harangues with admirable vigour and taste. He is worth looking at and listening to' ('The Nation', 11 March 1875). Now dubbed Rignold Rex and Handsome George, Rignold was feted by lady admirers -- his wooing of Princess Katherine was considered to be his finest scene -- and his photographs by Sarony sold in huge quantities. 
Rignold took 'Henry V' across America, from the east coast to Salt Lake City and on to San Francisco, and thence to Australia and New Zealand. Acclaim was universal: 'His interpretation in every sense of the word is perfection' ('Wellington Evening Chronicle', 27 Dec 1878). It was not just the influence of England's theatre that Rignold was spreading across the globe, but also, especially with such a patriotic play as 'Henry V', her history and culture. The success of 'Henry V' had encouraged Rignold to add Macbeth to his repertory at Booth's Theatre in May 1875, but this served only to reveal his limitations as an actor. Even with Henry V the more exacting London critics expressed reservations when Rignold appeared at Drury Lane in November 1879: 'He does but small justice to the noble words put into his mouth. His elocution is imperfect, often incorrect in emphasis, too hurried, and deficient in kingly dignity. He seems too anxious to get over the speeches and come to the fighting' ('The Times', 6 Nov 1879). 
The strictures of the London critics, compared with the plaudits of their American and Australian counterparts, no doubt influenced Rignold's decision to pursue his career in Australia. On 25 March 1882 he appeared in Melbourne as Frank Darlington in Augustus Harris's Drury Lane success 'Youth', and, following a brief business trip to England to buy plays and other requisites, Rignold went into partnership with James Allison at Her Majesty's Opera House, Melbourne. Later the two men took Her Majesty's Theatre in Sydney, of which, following Allison's death in 1895, Rignold assumed sole charge. During the nine years from 1888 Rignold mounted plays from the English repertory: melodramas such as Watts Phillips's 'The Dead Heart' and Charles Reade's 'The Lyons Mail', Gilbert Parker's version of Goethe's 'Faust', and Shakespeare. He performed in most of the productions himself and attracted several notable English actors to his theatre, playing Mark Antony to J. F. Cathcart's Brutus, Master Ford to his brother William's Falstaff, and Macbeth to Janet Achurch's Lady Macbeth. Rignold proclaimed: 'I made Shakespeare pay. I never lost a farthing over any of my revivals, and I did the pieces as well as it was possible with all the best attainable effects electric and otherwise' ('The Era', 8 Nov 1902). In an age in which international copyright was more honoured in the breach than the observance Rignold was scrupulous in remunerating living authors. 
Rignold returned to London in 1902 to appear in a benefit performance for his, by then blind, brother William. Rignold's first wife, whom he married on 28 September 1865, the actress Marie Braybrook Henderson, had supported him in his various enterprises, and died in Australia on 26 February 1902. His second marriage, on 3 October 1907, was to Georgina Harriet Dora Coppin (1864-1911), the daughter of the Australian politician and theatre manager George Selth Coppin. He had no children from either marriage. Rignold lived quietly at his property on the beautiful shore of Sydney's Middle Harbour, though he made a return to the Melbourne stage in 1907 as Jason in Hall Caine's 'The Bondsman'. He died in a Sydney nursing home, Charlemont Private Hospital, Darlinghurst, on 16 December 1912. His death was extensively reported in his home country, but had he remained there he would not have achieved as great an eminence as he did in Australia: 'He trained as far as possible an Australian company of players, and throughout his career set up a high artistic standard which did much to place the Australian stage in its present position' ('The Times', 17 Dec 1912). 


@@@@@


doc= 51459


Thomas, (Walter) Brandon (1848-1914), actor and playwright, was born on 24 December 1848 at 101 Mount Pleasant, Liverpool, the eldest of the three children of Walter Thomas (died 1878), a bootseller, and his wife, Hannah Morris. He was educated at private schools to the age of twelve: first at the Mechanical Institute, Liverpool, and then at Plumb's House boarding-school, near Prescot. In September 1861 he became a shipwright and was then indentured as a joiner. Having learned bookkeeping, he took a clerkship with timber merchants in Liverpool and Bootle from 1865 until 1875, and then found a similar post in Hull, where his family had moved five years previously. Thomas supplemented his income with a little journalism, but his passion was the theatre. His first opportunity to perform publicly was at Baker Street schoolroom, Hull, where he sang and recited at Saturday temperance evenings. He was introduced to William and Madge Kendal, on tour in 1876, as a potential future actor. 
In 1879 Thomas left for London and joined the Hare-Kendal team at the Court Theatre. He made a pseudonymous debut there, as Mr Brandon, in G. W. Godfrey's 'The Queen's Shilling'. Under the same management at the St James's he played a variety of small parts and, during the off-seasons, gained provincial touring experience. In September 1885 he embarked on a gruelling but successful nine-month American tour with Rosina Vokes. On his return, though in continuing demand as singer and reciter at private At Homes and working men's clubs, he sought primarily to broaden his acting experience. He was well cast ('natural and true', said 'The Theatre') in Pinero's 'Sweet Lavender' (Terry's, 21 March 1888) as the banker Geoffrey Wedderburn, his first important West End part. His speciality was Scots characters, such as Tammy Tamson in his own 'A Highland Legacy' and Macphail in Pinero's 'The Cabinet Minister' (Court, 23 April 1890). In 1891 Thomas successfully invested $1000 in a syndicate backing an experimental triple bill, comprising the premiere of his own play 'The Lancashire Sailor', coupled with 'A Commission' and Cecil Clay's 'A Pantomime Rehearsal' (Terry's, 6 June). He took prominent roles in all three and logged 152 performances. Pinero, considering him for casting as Cayley Drummle in 'The Second Mrs Tanqueray' in 1893, was impressed by his 'vein of sympathetic kindly geniality' ('Collected Letters', 143); and Shaw praised his effectiveness as Sir Lucius in 'The Rivals' (Court, 11 November 1895) 'mainly by not doing what is expected of him' (Shaw, 1.254). 
Thomas's debut as a playwright, with 'Comrades' (Court, 16 December 1882), was generally regarded as promising. Several other pieces followed, including 'The Colour Sergeant' (Princess's, 26 February 1885), 'A Highland Legacy' (Strand, 17 November 1888) -- his earliest play, dating from the 1860s, described by 'The Times' as 'a little masterpiece' -- and, least successfully, 'The Gold Craze' (Princess's, 30 November 1889). But nothing in Thomas's career foreshadowed the phenomenal success of 'Charley's Aunt', a farcical comedy written for W. S. Penley as the Oxford undergraduate cajoled by two friends into impersonating an aunt (from Brazil, 'where the nuts come from') to act as chaperone for their respective sweethearts. First performed at Bury St Edmunds (29 February 1892) and toured through the provinces, it opened in London on 21 December at the Royalty and transferred to the Globe on 30 January, where on 19 December 1896 it completed a record 1469 performances. Continually revived in Britain and elsewhere, it was performed in London at Christmas every year from 1904 to 1930 (excepting 1906 and 1927). Thomas hoped posterity might remember him as a great actor, but he was destined to be known only as the author of 'Charley's Aunt'. Though the plot is relatively slight, it is a clever, energetic piece, and deserves its status as a minor classic. 
Thomas's acting career continued to flourish, notably as Pius X in Hall Caine's 'The Eternal City' (His Majesty's, 1902) and John of Gaunt in 'Richard II' (Her Majesty's, 1903). He also went on writing moderate successes, such as 'The Queen of Brilliants' (Lyric, 8 September 1894) and 'No 22a Curzon Street' (Garrick, 2 March 1898), but 'A Judge's Memory' (Terry's, 13 March 1906) was not well received. He acted Colonel and Sir Francis Chesney, his role in the original 'Charley's Aunt', for the last time during the 1913-14 Christmas season at the Prince of Wales's. 
An essentially clubbable man, Thomas belonged to the Hogarth, Eccentric, Savage, and Garrick. Between 1883 and 1903 he was a volunteer in the Artists' Rifles. Of soldierly bearing, but slim build, he stood just under 6 feet tall. Not from affectation, but owing to poor eyesight, he sported a monocle, which became a kind of trade mark. 
On 22 December 1888, two days before his fortieth birthday and following long opposition on religious grounds from her Jewish family, Thomas married Marguerite Blanche Leverson (died 1930). After his death she supervised revivals of his most famous play. There were three children, the two eldest of whom -- Amy (1890-1974) and Jevan Brandon-Thomas (1898-1977) -- pursued theatrical careers, partly sustained by performing in 'Charley's Aunt'. Thomas died at his home, 47 Gordon Square, Bloomsbury, on 19 June 1914, and was buried on the 22nd in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51460


Thorne, Sarah (1836-1899), actress and theatre manager, was born in London on 10 May 1836, the eldest of the ten children of Richard Samuel Thorne (died 1875), an actor and theatre manager, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Rogers ('c'.1813-1896). A member of a family connected extensively for several generations with the stage, Sarah Thorne was to become a talented and versatile actress and an able theatre manager. Her stage debut was on 26 December 1848 in a pantomime put on by her father at the Pavilion Theatre, Whitechapel. After further appearances there, as Little Pickles in 'The Spoiled Child' and in E. G. Burton's blank-verse play 'The Warrior Boy', for which she practised broad-sword combat, she played in minor roles at the Surrey Theatre in the spring of 1854 under Richard Shepherd and William Creswick. In the next years she performed in stock companies at Ryde, Sunderland, Newcastle upon Tyne, Sheffield, Hanley, and the Britannia Theatre, Hoxton. She also joined her father for the summer seasons at Margate (which he had taken in 1855); playing opposite some of the leading actors of the day, she contributed to the growing status of that theatre. She first appeared there on 6 August 1855, shortly after Thorne's opening on 28 July. In time, most of her seven brothers and three sisters also performed at Margate. 
For three seasons in the late 1850s Sarah Thorne was the leading lady at the Theatre Royal, Dublin, where, 'inter alia', she played Desdemona to Charles Kean's Othello and Lady Macbeth opposite Gustavus Vaughan Brooke. There followed starring tours in Ireland and Scotland. Some time between 1856 and 1859 she was married in Ireland to Thomas Macknight (1829-1899), already the author of an anonymous book attacking Disraeli, who later became editor of the 'Northern Whig'. The couple had two children, Edmund ('b'. 1860) and Elizabeth ('b'. 1862), who married the actor-manager Henry Dundas (Arthur Harrison) in 1883. However, Sarah Thorne's commitment to the stage and Macknight's interests in politics and philosophy proved incompatible, and after only a short period they lived separately. In August 1863 she starred at Brighton and in 1865 she appeared, again in leading roles, including that of the eponymous Leah, at Paisley Theatre Royal, the Prince of Wales's Opera House, Edinburgh, and the New Theatre Royal, Jersey. Between October 1865 and March 1866 she played at the National Standard Theatre, Shoreditch, taking principal parts in a lengthy season of Shakespeare's plays. 
Sarah Thorne's first experience of management came in 1867, when she succeeded her father as lessee of the Theatre Royal, Margate; she opened on 29 July with H. T. Craven's 'Meg's Diversions' and 'The Child of the Regiment'. Her declared policy was to offer the 'newest pieces approved in the metropolis as occasion permits' but never to neglect 'old and legitimate productions' ('Era', 4 Aug 1867). Her lease ended when the theatre was sold at auction in August 1873 to Robert Fort, and for the 1874 stock season she held a lesser management role. She returned briefly to Margate at Christmas 1874 during the tour of her now established annual pantomime. 
Thorne's second period of management was at the recently rebuilt Theatre Royal, Worcester, where she opened on 27 March 1876. There she engaged touring productions and provided, as at Margate, a stock company with a repertory of both classical and contemporary drama. Her association with Worcester came to an abrupt end when the theatre burnt down on 24 November 1877. She then formed a touring company to support the ageing Charles James Mathews. 
The withdrawal of Fort's latest tenant enabled Thorne to resume a lease at Margate in January 1879. Committed to the rapidly disappearing stock-company system, she maintained an annual summer season. For the remainder of the year she opened the theatre to some of the burgeoning touring companies, among them that of her brother Tom Thorne (1841-1918), who brought productions he had first put on at the Vaudeville Theatre, London (where he was manager from 1870). For a brief period in the autumn of 1879 she also leased Astley's Amphitheatre, London, where she appeared with her youngest brother, George Tyrrell Thorne (1856-1922), who had been apprenticed to her, in Boucicault's 'The Flying Scud'. George was later a leading member of the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company. 
Sarah Thorne gained a substantial reputation for training young players. In 1885 she opened her School of Acting, advertising for 'Ladies and Gentlemen' wishing to enter the theatrical profession and charging $20 for three months' or $30 for six months' training. The regime, in which she was assisted on occasions by her sister Emily (Mrs Frank Parker Gillmore, died 1907), included classes in 'voice production, gesture and mime, dialects and accents, make-up, the portrayal of characters, the value of pace and the value of pauses' (Morley, 110). Among her pupils were Harley Granville Barker, Helen Brinckman, Sarah Brooke, Louis Calvert, Gertrude Kingston, Beatrice Lamb, Evelyn Millard, her niece Nellie Thorne, Irene and Violet Vanbrugh, and Florence Ward. While it was customary for actor-managers to take apprentices, this school is regarded as the country's first formal drama school. In 1894 she leased the Chatham Lecture Hall, which she renamed the Opera House and used as a second venue for her stock company. 
Although she was acclaimed in a wide range of parts and genres, Sarah Thorne's preferences were for Shakespeare's Beatrice, Desdemona, Juliet, and Lady Macbeth, Kate Hardcastle in 'She Stoops to Conquer', Lady Teazle in 'The School for Scandal', and Leah. She insisted on good taste in her choice of plays and in their production, avowedly rejecting 'anything vulgar in costume or language' ('Chatham, Rochester and Brompton Observer'). She is said to have had a 'somewhat imperious manner' ('Thanet Times', 3 March 1899), but a Margate contemporary spoke of her generosity, especially to the poor and elderly, whose rent she would sometimes pay herself ('Chatham Observer'). 
Thorne's last performance was in September 1898, at her benefit at Margate, when she took the part of Parthenia in Maria Lovell's 'Ingomar'. Her last appearance on the Chatham stage had been in May 1896, as Lady Gay Spanker in 'London Assurance'. She died at 3 New Road Avenue, Chatham, on 27 February 1899, just as what was to have been a celebration of her theatrical jubilee was being arranged by George Alexander and Gertrude Kingston for 16 March at St James's Theatre, London. She was buried at Brompton cemetery on 3 March 1899. After her death her son, who had been her business manager since the early 1880s, took over the leases of the Chatham and Margate theatres. 


@@@@@


doc= 51461


Wood, Matilda Charlotte (bap. 1831, d. 1915), actress and theatre manager, was baptized on 28 November 1831 at St Peter's Church, Liverpool, the second daughter of the actors Henry Vining and Amelia Vining, 'nee' Quantrell (1803/4-1874) ['see 'Vining family]. Despite going on the stage when she was ten, Matilda Vining, whose 'forte was low comedy' ('ILN', 28 Feb 1885), came to prominence in England only in the late 1860s after gaining a reputation in America, principally in burlesque, and reached the height of her success in the 1880s in farces by Pinero. Her first stage appearance was in 1841 in Brighton. Shortly afterwards she joined a company playing in Southampton, where, on 25 March 1848, she married an actor, John William Wood (died 1863), the son of John Wood, a silversmith; both declared that they were 'of full age'. She thereafter was known as Mrs John Wood. In October 1849 the couple joined John Knowles's company at Manchester Theatre Royal, where Mrs Wood's cousin George J. Vining (1824-1875) was already engaged and where they came to be regarded as the leading comedians. While Mrs Wood played principally 'pert waiting women or the heroines of extravaganzas' ('Manchester Guardian', 10 May 1853), she also sang, and she exhibited a rare 'sweetness and pathos' when appearing as Ophelia to George Vandenhoff's Hamlet in May 1853 (ibid.). 
In August 1854 the Woods sailed for America. Mrs John Wood won immediate acclaim when she appeared in Boston, under Thomas Barry's management, on 11 September 1854, as Gertrude in Planche's 'The Loan of a Lover'. She also played at Wallack's Theatre, New York, in California, and in New Orleans. Her first experience of management was at the American Theatre, San Francisco, in 1859. Her husband, from whom she had separated, died in May 1863. Again undertaking management she reopened Laura Keene's theatre in New York on 8 October 1863 as the Olympic. Among other roles she played Jenny Leatherlungs in the burlesque 'Jenny Lind at Last'. Her management lasted three years. 
Mrs Wood's London debut was on 12 November 1866 at the Princess's Theatre, then managed by George Vining, as Miss Miggs in a dramatization of Dickens's novel 'Barnaby Rudge'. Here, too, she created the part of Pocahontas in 'La Belle Sauvage'. After a further visit to America she leased the St James's Theatre, London, which had been closed for ten months, and opened it on 16 October 1869 with 'She Stoops to Conquer'. A month later 'La Belle Sauvage' began its 197-night run; there were successful productions also of John Poole's 'Paul Pry', 'Fernande' (in which Fanny Brough made her London debut), 'Anne Bracegirdle', and 'Jenny Lind at Last'. 
In 1872 Mrs Wood sub-let the St James's and went again to America, but returned to London a year later to appear at the Queen's Theatre on 15 November 1873 as Philippa Chester in Charles Reade's 'The Wandering Heir', at the opening of the Criterion Theatre on 21 March 1874 in the title role in H. J. Byron's 'The American Lady', and at the Gaiety as Mistress Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor'. After a further spell of management at the St James's she played in 1879-81 at the Haymarket and Criterion theatres, then appeared in central roles in a number of plays by Pinero at the Royal Court. When the Royal Court was rebuilt in 1888 she undertook the management herself, although she leased the theatre in partnership with Arthur Chudleigh. It opened on 24 September, when Mrs Wood's daughter Florence (whose father was 'Stephen Fiske, gentleman') played the title part in 'Hermine'. Among the successes of Mrs Wood's nine-year management were Pinero's 'The Cabinet Minister' and the farces 'Aunt Jack' and 'The Volcano' by Ralph Lumley (1865-1900), who married Florence in 1890. 
Mrs Wood refused ever to give an interview, believing that 'artists should be silent off stage' ('The Sketch', 10 Oct 1894). On stage, however 'her intelligence and experience made the most of a strong natural humour' ('The Times', 13 Jan 1915). A pen portrait of her in 1874, which praised her as the 'Queen of comedy and song', commented: 'To a piquant chic peculiarly French and derived doubtless from the Quantrells -- her ancestors upon the mother's side -- she adds a frank-hearted humour... [She is] a female Charles Mathews' ('ILN', 1874). 
Mrs Wood's final years on the stage were spent principally in minor comic roles at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. In 1905 she played the part of Margaret Neilson for 105 performances there in Hall Caine's 'The Prodigal Son'. Her last appearance was at the Ellen Terry jubilee celebration matinee, again at Drury Lane, on 12 June 1906, with Gertrude Kingston (1866-1937) and Genevieve Ward (1838-1922) as 'seats on the bench' in Gilbert and Sullivan's 'Trial by Jury'. She died on 11 January 1915 at her home, Dilkoosha, Spencer Road, Birchington, Kent, and was buried on 16 January at the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 51462


Macintyre, John (1857-1928), laryngological surgeon and radiologist, was born on 2 October 1857 in the slum area of 343 High Street, Glasgow. His father, Donald Macintyre, had migrated from his native Argyll to Glasgow in search of work, and became a journeyman tailor there. His mother, Margaret, 'nee' Livingston, was a relative of David Livingstone. Macintyre had a somewhat heavy build, humorous but sententious speech, grey-hazel eyes, and dark brown hair which marked him as a Celt of highland origin. After a brief school attendance curtailed by ill health, he was self-educated. Macintyre later obtained a job as temporary electrician at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary and graduated MB, CM from Glasgow University in 1882. He was then engaged as a ship's surgeon, and gained postgraduate experience in London, Paris, and Vienna, before returning to Glasgow as assistant surgeon to the Lock Hospital. 
During 1885 Macintyre returned to the infirmary as full-time medical electrician and set out to equip the hospital with electrical current for medical and surgical purposes. In the same year he obtained positions at the two extramural schools of medicine attached to the infirmary: dispensary surgeon at Anderson's College and demonstrator of anatomy at the infirmary school of medicine. He later became professor of surgery at Anderson's. In 1886 he was appointed assistant surgeon in the throat department of the infirmary. He developed a large consulting practice in Glasgow, from 1891 in his rooms at 179 Bath Street. Many of Macintyre's patients and visitors were famous actors, singers, or musicians. He owned a very early phonograph and liked to collect recordings of his callers. He had become council member of the British Laryngological and Rhinological Association in 1889, and vice-president in 1890. In 1891 he became co-editor of the 'British Journal of Laryngology' (and later joint proprietor and chief editor). Macintyre became president of the association in 1893 and was appointed surgeon in charge of the infirmary's ear, nose, and throat department. He always considered himself to be an ear, nose, and throat surgeon with an interest in X-rays, and only forty-five of his 111 published papers were on X-rays. However, in 1887 he had overseen the establishment of a separate electrical department in the infirmary, which included equipment built and donated by the aristocratic technologist Lord Blythswood. 
The medical uses of electricity, which was initially used only for the illumination of body cavities, had by 1887 expanded to include therapeutic applications. The professional corollary was the evolution of the post of hospital medical electrician from that of a mere technician to one suitable for a trained clinician with a scientific bent. The further expansion of the electrical department in 1894 meant that the hospital was in a unique position to exploit the discovery of X-rays by Rontgen in November 1895. Clinicians who were also medical electricians were one of the conduits through which the new X-ray technology first entered hospitals and became used in diagnosis and therapy. 
Rontgen had pre-circulated details of his experiments to international scientists, including Kelvin in Glasgow. Kelvin passed the paper to his nephew, J. T. Bottomley, of the Glasgow University Physical Laboratory, who, in turn, passed it on to his fellow members of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow, Lord Blythswood and Macintyre. These men began experimenting with X-rays. The Glasgow group benefited from the input of a range of expertise and assistance, which, as well as Macintyre's experience, included Kelvin's electrical equipment and knowledge, Blythswood's technical knowledge of machines, and the co-operation of local electrical and manufacturing firms. Macintyre persuaded the infirmary managers to further expand his electrical department and to include an X-ray unit in February 1896. Macintyre moved his experiments from Bath Street to the hospital. This was the first such unit in any British hospital, and, perhaps, in the world. A. A. C. Swinton claimed to have produced the first X-ray of a human hand in Britain on 13 January 1896; on 5 February Macintyre, Blythswood, and Bottomley gave a paper and demonstration on the new rays to the Philosophical Society entitled 'On the Rontgen rays, or, The new photography' ('Proceedings of the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow', 27, 1896, 156-64). Here both Rontgen's original images and the Glasgow group's repetitions were shown depicting the frog and the human hand, forearm, and skull. During 1896 Macintyre published eighteen papers on technical developments in X-ray photography; he produced the first instantaneous X-ray (with the fluorescent screen cryptoscope which he believed would ultimately replace photographs); the first X-ray of a renal stone; of the spine; of the interior of the cranium; the heart, lung, and contents of the middle intestine; and of a foreign body in the oesophagus. 
In March 1896 Rontgen wrote to Macintyre for details of his technique for X-raying soft tissues. Macintyre's greatest technical achievement came in the second half of 1896 when his advances in reducing exposure time allowed him to produce the first X-ray cinematograph of a frog's legs, which paved the way for later developments in radiography. The number of referrals to the infirmary X-ray unit he received was so large that the managers were again approached to build an extension, and the new electrical pavilion was opened in 1902. Reflecting the growing status of the medical use of electricity, Macintyre had been appointed consulting electrician to the infirmary in 1900. He was quick to realize the potential harmful effects of exposure and insisted early on protection for himself and his staff. By the end of the nineteenth century he was using X-rays therapeutically on tumours, and his first published paper on this was in 1902, 'Recent electro-therapeutic work in medicine and surgery' ('Transactions of the Medico-Chirurgical Society of Glasgow', 4, 1901-3, 131-52). 
Macintyre was elected president of the British Laryngological and Rhinological Association for a second time in 1900, and in 1901 he became president of the Rontgen Society. In 1915 he was made a knight of grace of the order of St John of Jerusalem, and was elected to the fellowship of the Royal Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow in 1918. He married Agnes Jean (died 'c'.1926), the daughter of H. R. Hardie, in 1892. They had two children: one became a radiologist and served on the Glasgow Royal Infirmary staff. Macintyre died at his home, 179 Bath Street, Glasgow, on 29 October 1928 after suffering from chronic blood poisoning for some months. 


@@@@@


doc= 51463


Crace, John Dibblee (1838-1919), interior decorator and author, was born on 19 January 1838 at 14 (later renumbered 38) Wigmore Street, Cavendish Square, London, the eldest of eleven surviving children of John Gregory Crace (1809-1889), interior decorator and author, and his wife, Sarah Jane Hine Langley (1815-1894), the daughter of John Inwood Langley (1790-1874) of Greenwich, a civil servant at the Royal Naval Hospital. His father was renowned as a decorator who was in partnership for eight years with A. W. N. Pugin, the eminent Gothic revival architect, and was head of a decorating firm founded in 1768 by his great-great-grandfather Edward Crace ['see under 'Crace family], a coach-decorator and keeper of the king's pictures. 
Possessing a quiet, even reserved, personality, J. D. Crace was artistically gifted from an early age. He studied the classics at Romanoff House School in Tunbridge Wells, Kent, from 1848 to 1852, where he was tutored by Thomas Alifree, who had spent three years in Russia teaching the children of Tsar Nicholas I. Crace was apprenticed in 1852 to his grandfather Frederick Crace (1779-1859), renowned as the decorator of the Royal Pavilion, Brighton. From 1852 to 1854 he studied at King's College School, London, but was recalled from school in the autumn of 1854, when his father's health broke down in the midst of important commissions. This marked the end of his formal education, but he continued to study continental decorative art by means of study tours for the rest of his life. 
At the age of seventeen, and aided by his 75-year-old grandfather, young Crace took over the running of the family decorating firm until his father's recovery in the spring of 1855. The principal work in hand was the preparation of rooms at Windsor Castle for the reception of the French Emperor Napoleon III and Empress Eugenie on the occasion of their first state visit to Britain, in April 1855. Two letters written by J. G. Crace from Spain to his eldest son, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum archive of art and design, testify to the close working relationship between the two men. In 1855 they travelled together to Paris for the Universal Exhibition, then on to Berlin for study. 
In his memoirs, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum archive of art and design, J. D. Crace recalled having grown up in a house where Pugin and Sir Joseph Paxton, designer of the Crystal Palace, were frequent visitors. Despite this, he was never to become a leading practitioner of the Gothic revival style. In early life, and into adulthood, Crace was subject to bronchial infection, which occasioned his first trip to the Middle East -- Egypt (partly in the company of Frederick Leighton) -- in 1868, followed by a visit to Palestine in 1869. The result was a lifelong fascination for Islamic design and active membership of the Palestine Exploration Fund. This was second only to his fascination for the art of Renaissance Italy, the result of a study tour in 1859 on the advice of another family friend, Sir Matthew Digby Wyatt, a leading Victorian designer. Crace was to return to Italy frequently throughout the next forty years of his career, and his interpretation of the Renaissance style was to characterize his career. 
In 1859 J. D. Crace had been granted the freedom and livery of the Painter-Stainers' Company, but he first came to public notice for his role in assisting his father at the 1862 exhibition in London, where he exhibited his own designs and assisted his father with the latter's difficult task of decorating the exhibition building in a very short time. In 1866 J. D. Crace was admitted as a contributing visitor to the RIBA, followed by his participation in the 1867 Universal Exhibition in Paris. 
The 1870s and 1880s were busy decades for Crace, who increasingly took over the running of the firm, having become a full partner with his father in 1873 on the occasion of his marriage on 6 February that year to Caroline Elizabeth Foster (1845-1947), daughter of Richard Foster, banker, of Lostwithiel, Cornwall. Important commissions during this time include Knightshayes, Devon (1874-82), where Crace worked in a mixed Gothic-Islamic style after the dismissal of the architect William Burges, and the Pompeian Room at Ickworth in Suffolk (1879) in conjunction with the architect Francis Penrose, a personal friend. J. D. Crace later noted that the principal figurative paintings had been executed by Henry Scholtz, a decorative painter his father had engaged in Paris to work on the lower library of Chatsworth in Derbyshire (1840-44). Such continuity is typical of the Crace firm and ensured its recognizable decorative style throughout the nineteenth century. 
The most important work of J. D. Crace's career was undoubtedly the series of state and private rooms in a rich Renaissance style at Longleat House, Wiltshire (1874-82), for the fourth marquess of Bath. In Lord Bath, Crace found a patron completely attuned to his own passion for Renaissance Italy, which resulted in Crace's publication of 'The Art of Colour Decoration' in 1912. Major late commissions were the redecoration of Leeds town hall in 1894, replacing his father's scheme of 1857, and the redecoration of the Royal Pavilion, Brighton (1884-98), replacing the work of his grandfather (1815-22) and great-grandfather (1801-4). During the 1890s Crace worked extensively for W. W. Astor, designing in a rich 'Francois Ier' manner at Cliveden, Buckinghamshire, 18 Carlton House Terrace, London, and the Astor estate office in London. 
In 1884 J. D. Crace was elected master of the Painter-Stainers' Company; in 1908 the eminent painter Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema presented him with a gold medal on behalf of the Institute of British Decorators, of which he was a founder and first president. In addition he held memberships of the Society of Arts and the Architectural Association. In 1889 his father died, and, feeling the loss keenly, he closed the business ten years later and worked as a consultant from home. In 1916 he suddenly lost his eyesight, and the last of the Crace decorators died quietly at home at 15 Gloucester Place, London, on 18 November 1919, leaving his wife and two children. He was buried in Norwood cemetery, London. His son, John Foster Crace, had been apprenticed to his father in 1900 but instead became a classics master at Eton College. His daughter, Mabyn Crace Collingham, did much organizing of the family papers after her father's death. In his own lifetime J. D. Crace prepared large gifts of drawings to the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal Institute of British Architects, ensuring the legacy of this remarkable family of designers to future generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 51465


Emerson, Sir William (1843-1924), architect, was born on 3 December 1843 at 28 Spital Square, Whitechapel, London, the son of William Emerson, silk manufacturer, and his wife, Jane Robinson. He was educated at King's College School in London and began his architectural training about 1861, with Habershon and Pite of Bloomsbury Square, before moving in 1865 to the practice of William Burges, the most scholarly and visionary of the Gothic revivalists. In his first year with Burges he assisted with the designs for a new school of art in Bombay, and in 1866 was dispatched to Bombay with the plans, but they were never realized, owing to a disagreement over fees. Emerson, who had family connections in India, stayed in Bombay, however. His first major commission there was the Crawford market (1865-71), in which Burges's influence was strongly evident, both in its style and structure, and in the fantastical character of its decorative ironwork and fountain, sculpted by John Lockwood Kipling (1837-1911), the father of Rudyard Kipling. 
In 1869 Emerson returned to London and established offices in Westminster. For a few years he exhibited designs annually at the Royal Academy. He was married on 27 July 1872 to Jenny ('b'. 1852), daughter of the architect Coutts Stone and his wife, Mary, of Bayswater, and built a house for his family, Little Sutton, at Chiswick (1879). His relatively few buildings in England also included the church of St Mary and St James, Brighton (1877-9), and the Clarence Wing of St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, London (1896). Some of his best schemes were not built. His competition designs for the parliament in Berlin (1872) and the South Kensington Museum (1892) were not successful, and his entry in the limited competition for Liverpool Cathedral (1885), which was selected, was never started as the site and scheme were abandoned. 
Emerson's Indian work continued to flourish, however. For churches -- Girgaum church, near Bombay ('c'.1870-73), and All Saints' Cathedral, Allahabad ('c'.1869-93) -- he preferred Gothic forms, but for secular buildings he championed the eclectic combination of neo-Gothic planning and construction with Eastern, so-called Indo-Saracenic, details. He did not believe that purely European buildings worked satisfactorily in the East. In the case of his Muir College, Allahabad (1872-8), his most startling and thoroughly eclectic work, he drew on Egyptian, as well as Indian and European, models. Other works included a hospital ('c'.1879-83) and huge new maharaja's palace (1894-5) at Bhaunagar. His final and most prestigious Indian work was the Victoria Memorial, Calcutta (1903-21), a museum of British rule in India commissioned by the viceroy, Lord Curzon, which dominates the centre of Calcutta. 
Emerson was active on the council and committees of the Royal Institute of British Architects from 1885, and served as its honorary secretary (1893-9) and president (1899-1902). During his presidency he advised the government on the competition for improvements to Buckingham Palace and St James's Park. He was also president of the Royal Architectural Museum and oversaw its amalgamation with the Architectural Association in 1902. He was knighted that year. As well as achieving public eminence, the sociable Emerson also maintained a wide circle of friends in the profession. On his retirement, Emerson's son William Ernest continued his practice. Emerson died at his home, Eastcliffe, Shanklin, on the Isle of Wight on 26 December 1924, aged eighty-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 51467


Burton, William Shakespeare (1824-1916), painter, was born in London on 1 June 1824, the son of the actor William Evans Burton (1804-1860) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Loft (died 1876). To escape from his difficult wife Burton's father moved to the USA in 1834, where he became a highly successful actor, publisher, and theatrical entrepreneur, collaborating at one time with Edgar Allan Poe. Burton attended King's College School, London, where John Sell Cotman taught drawing, and in 1842 the Government Schools of Design under William Dyce. He also undertook his own studies at the British Museum. He became a probationer at the Royal Academy Schools on 6 July 1846 and full student on 18 December. Earlier that year he exhibited at the Royal Academy a portrait of his favourite dog, Grip. 
Burton's dedication and capacity for work (sometimes sixteen hours a day) were soon noted. He was befriended by a printseller who allowed him use of a garret, commissioned illustrative work, and exhibited his products in his shop window. A copy of a picture from the National Gallery impressed the journalist Tom Taylor, who arranged for Burton to supply decorative capital letters for 'Punch' and encouraged his painterly ambitions. Burton's father sent him money and invited him to America, advising him against becoming 'a beggarly painter', but to no avail (Dibdin, 290). 
In 1849-52 Burton exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution and in December 1851 was awarded a gold medal for 'Delilah Asking Forgiveness of Samson in Captivity', illustrating Milton's 'Samson Agonistes'. It was shown at the Royal Academy in the following May and at the Irish Industrial Exhibition, Dublin, in 1853. 'The First Shot to Freedom, Switzerland', a meticulously painted portrayal of the small son of William Tell (priv. coll.), showed an evident debt to Pre-Raphaelitism, and in 1856 was followed by Burton's greatest success, 'A Wounded Cavalier' (City of London Guildhall), probably inspired by Millais's 'Proscribed Royalist' (1853; priv. coll.), which similarly illustrates the triumph of human charity over religious and political differences. 'A Wounded Cavalier' was immediately hailed as a triumph of Pre-Raphaelitism and appeared subsequently at the Manchester Jubilee Exhibition (1887) and the City of London Guildhall (1890 and 1897) before being purchased by the latter gallery in 1911. 
In Burton's picture human tragedy and emotional conflict are conveyed through a technique equal to that of any member of the brotherhood. The cavalier, who has had his dispatches taken and lies mortally wounded, has been discovered by a passing puritan couple whose feelings are diametrically opposed. The woman, forgetful of everything but pity and compassion, comforts the dying man, while her male companion stands rigidly aloof, bristling with disapproval and resentment. The precision with which every detail, from the faces and costumes of the figures to the silver birch tree, red admiral butterfly, moss, lichen, dead fern, and leaf, is painted adds to the immediacy of this powerful image. 
The circumstances surrounding the exhibition of 'A Wounded Cavalier' in 1856 support Burton's claim that he was the victim of a conspiracy among the porters at the academy because of his objections to their demands for tips from students; a claim which was corroborated by one of the porters shortly before his death ('Bazaar, Exchange and Mart', 2 July 1897, 6). In reprisal they withheld 'A Wounded Cavalier' from the selection committee. Charles West Cope, a committee member, accidentally discovered it and insisted on its being hung, removing one of his own paintings to make way for it. When Burton's 'London Magdalen' was also rejected in 1857 Tom Taylor confronted the selection committee with it, and they assured him that they had never seen it before. Burton subsequently suffered a breakdown and developed severe eye trouble. He was cared for by wealthy friends, including Taylor and Lord and Lady Duff Gordon. On 13 March 1857 he married a cousin, Maria (1821/2-1863), daughter of Edward Rainford, corn factor. Their only child, a son, was born about 1861. 
Burton's father had died a rich man in New York in 1860, but had left his estate to charity. Burton paid for his mother to travel to the USA, where in 1864 she made legal history by becoming the first alien to be granted right of dower. But instead of sharing the inheritance with her son, she spent it on an annuity for herself ('The Times', 4 Feb 1916, 7). Money troubles and other misfortunes were to dog Burton for decades. 
Altogether Burton exhibited seventeen works at the Royal Academy and fourteen at the Liverpool Academy, although some were shown at both venues. 'In a Convent' appeared at the Royal Academy in 1858; in 1864 'Guinevere' and 'Elaine' reflected the Pre-Raphaelite move towards more poetical subjects; and 'The Angels at the Sepulchre' (exh. Liverpool Academy, 1864; RA, 1865) heralded Burton's increasing taste for religious subjects. He also painted portraits, and genre subjects in oil and watercolour, and in 1864-5 four illustrations were published in 'Once a Week'. He later produced eighteen illustrations for his second wife's first novel, 'Annabel' (1889), and probably also designed the cover. Burton clearly excelled in the field, and it is likely that more of his illustrative work remains to be identified. 
Burton's first wife died suddenly and he was remarried, on 3 December 1863, at St Peter Port, Guernsey, to Mina Elizabeth Adlington (1839/40-1911), daughter of Thomas Ellis Adlington, registrar of the courts of exchequer and chancery. They settled in Essex, where two daughters, Violet and Laura, were born before the family left for Florence in 1868. There Burton produced original work and also made copies of paintings by Botticelli and other pre-Raphael painters; but ill health, money troubles, and about 1870 the death of his nine-year-old son incapacitated him. Subsequently the family travelled to Naples, Cassino, and elsewhere, living in dire poverty. A third daughter, Lucy, was born in Rovezzano, Florence, in 1872. An infant son born in 1874 died aged eleven weeks. 
In letters to the Royal Academy (1874-5) Burton graphically described the serious illnesses of himself, his wife, and children, and the death of his son; and denied rumours current in London that drink was the cause of his distress. In 1874 Burton named Tom Taylor and Millais as referees. In 1875, in two further letters, Burton renewed his pleadings; but Millais, exasperated by the constant flood of 'piteous letters' from him over the years, and the fact that he had been helped many times, advised against further help, saying that a previous donation from the Artists' General Benevolent Institution had been followed by unsatisfactory reports about him. 
In 1876, on the death of his mother, Burton returned to England, where he lived at Belmont Street, Bognor. He was now almost forgotten as an artist and his work, including the dramatic 'Angel of Death' (Purcell, 245), suffered further refusals. In 1882 he had a major breakdown complicated by severe neuralgia, which forced him to abandon painting completely. He recovered suddenly in 1889, experiencing 'clairvoyantly' a vision of a blood clot disappearing from his brain, and immediately returned to painting (V. Burton, xvi). 
Burton's later years were more productive. Dibdin mentions portraits, genre and other subjects, and various designs as well as a number of major works, now known only through photographs (White, vol. 3; Dibdin; Purcell; Bate; Witt Library). One painting that has survived is a copy of Perugino's fresco of the transfiguration in the Collegio del Cambio, Perugia, which is at Tyntesfield, Somerset. Dated 1882, this may have originated in one of the copies Burton is known to have made in Italy. In 1886 Frederick Stephens (while claiming that Burton was dead) discussed in detail 'A Wounded Cavalier' in his 'Athenaeum' review of Albert Wood's collection. The painting was included in an exhibition to celebrate the opening of the Guildhall Art Gallery in 1890 and again in the queen's diamond jubilee year, 1897. In the same year, one of his most ambitious works, 'Faithful unto Death (Auto da Fe)' -- another Royal Academy reject -- was hung in the 'Victorian Era' exhibition at Earl's Court. 
Also in 1897 Burton's strikingly hieratic 'King of Sorrows' attracted considerable attention at the Royal Academy. Burton's name being little known, it was assumed to be the work of a gifted young man (V. Burton, xvii), probably because of its symbolist overtones. Another portrayal of Christ, 'The World's Ingratitude and St Michael' (1903-4), also illustrates this tendency. Probably as a result of confusion with his near-namesake William Paton Burton (1828-1883) it was again necessary in 1901 to reaffirm that Burton was alive and still at work ('The Times', 30 Jan 1901). When 'A Wounded Cavalier' was purchased by the Guildhall Art Gallery in 1911 a committee was formed 'with very influential support' to provide for him financially for the remainder of his life ('The Times', 4 Feb 1916, 7). 
Burton's wife, Mina Elizabeth Burton, the author of at least three novels, died late in 1911. Burton's remaining years were sustained by his two remaining daughters (Laura had died after their return to England), supportive friends, and a strong religious faith. Shortly before his death, aged almost ninety-two, he was persuaded by M. H. Spielmann to record his artistic opinions, which were published posthumously in 'The Times'. Burton felt out of touch with modern developments. He disliked the overly realistic religious art of Holman Hunt, and was especially horrified at what he had witnessed in major exhibitions in London in 1910 and 1912. Post-impressionists, cubists, and futurists had consigned art to 'gloomy darkness', Burton wrote. He singled out Matisse's 'La danse' as the personification of the new trends: 'senseless, unfeeling Ignorant Brutality [revelling] over the grave of murdered Art, with all its Beauty, Grace, Love, Tenderness, Imagination, Poetry, and Friendliness -- all swept away in Art-Attila destruction' ('The Times', 7 Feb 1916, 11). 
Burton died at his home, 4 Belmont Park, Lee, London, on 26 January 1916. Spielmann praised him as a 'noble spirit and a holy mind, a man whose retiring nature and modest refinement deprived him of the recognition he fancied he had wholly missed. No honester artist ever breathed' ('The Times', 7 Feb 1916, 11). All Burton's biographers echoed Gleeson White's view that 'Of all artists whose early promise led the world to expect much, few have enjoyed less recognition' (White, 3.36). A strange but appropriate footnote to Burton's unworldly life is that for a period after the first anniversary of his death, with the aid of a spirit guide he seemed regularly to communicate with his daughter Violet Mina Burton (1866-1934), who recorded his revelations in 'An Artist in the Great Beyond: Messages from a Father' (1925). 


@@@@@


doc= 51472


Church, Sir Arthur Herbert (1834-1915), chemist, was born on 2 June 1834 in London, the fourth son of John Thomas Church, solicitor, and his wife, Maria Susannah Booty. He was educated at a preparatory school in Brighton, then at King's College School, London. He went back to Brighton to a private school that encouraged an interest in both art and science, which he retained all his life. In 1851 he went to the Royal College of Chemistry (at that time in Oxford Street), with A. W. Hofmann as professor and such demonstrators as Frederick Abel and William Crookes. W. H. Perkin was a fellow student, and Church also met Faraday and Tyndall. He went to Oxford in 1855, first as assistant to Benjamin Brodie, and then in 1856 as an undergraduate at Lincoln College. He graduated BA in 1860 and was made MA in 1863. He became a DSc, and was a fellow of King's College, London. 
In 1863 Church was appointed professor of chemistry at the Royal Agricultural College at Cirencester. Although his first commitment was to agriculture, his interests spread very widely -- to mineralogy, mainly that of gems and precious stones, and to colouring matters, both organic and inorganic. His artistic talent led him to make a special study of paints and pigments, and his study of mineralogy took him to archaeology. While at Cirencester he became active in the Corinium Museum to which he prepared a guide. 
On 3 May 1879 Church married Jemima Pope, younger daughter of J. Buckingham Pope, in the parish church, Leeds. He then removed to London where he was appointed professor of chemistry at the Royal Academy of Arts. His interests and accomplishments were exceptionally wide. He lectured on the connections of art and science, as well as on agricultural chemistry. He discovered a hitherto unknown bird pigment, turacin. His most important publication was his 'Chemistry of Paints and Painting' of 1890, which ran into several later editions. He also wrote on English porcelain, on precious stones, and on other subjects of antiquarian interest. He became active in many learned bodies, such as the Society of Antiquaries. Elected to the Royal Society in 1888, he later supported it by a generous benefaction for the preparation of a catalogue of manuscripts of the period 1741-1806. When this was published in 1907 he prepared a guide. He served on the society's council from 1911 to 1912. He was a juror at some of the international exhibitions which were held at South Kensington in the later years of the century. 
Church collected several kinds of antiques, showing particular interest in Japanese metal work, oriental and English pottery, and Italian and oriental embroidery. He enjoyed painting, exhibited early in his career at the Royal Academy, and presented Kew Gardens with some fine herbarium illustrations. He was exceptional in his ability to relate chemical science to the properties of works of art, a faculty which led to his being consulted about the restoration of the frescoes at the Palace of Westminster, which had been inadequately painted after its reconstruction by Barry following the fire of 1834. He was also asked to advise on arresting the decay of the stonework at Westminster Abbey. 
Church's many publications included several training manuals for practical chemists. In 1909 he was created KCVO. Photographs taken in later life show him relaxed and bearded but of commanding appearance. His circle of personal acquaintance in the fields of art and science was wide. He died at home in a house he had built, Shelsey, at Kew Gardens, on 31 May 1915. His wife survived him. They had no children. 
In 1912 Church had published a collection of obituaries of his brother, the classical scholar Alfred John Church (1829-1912). After his death his wife piously followed his example and had privately printed a collection of appreciations of her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 51476


Adams, William (1820-1900), surgeon, was born on 1 February 1820, the eldest son of James Adams, surgeon, of 39 Finsbury Square, London. He was educated at W. Simpson's private school in Hackney and then at King's College School, London, from 1835 to 1837. He trained at St Thomas's Hospital between 1838 and 1842 under Joseph Henry Green. Training as a surgeon when anaesthesia and antiseptic methods were undeveloped Adams gained an exceptionally thorough grasp of anatomy and a meticulous operating technique, described as 'careful but slow'. He shared the contemporary view that post-operative infection was caused by excessive exposure of the wound to the air; consequently he favoured subcutaneous surgery with minimum excision of the skin, and was slow to adopt Lister's techniques of antisepsis. 
Adams was admitted MRCS in 1842, the year that he was appointed curator of the museum and demonstrator of morbid anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital, posts that he held until 1854. The hospital had just purchased Grainger's Medical School and a member of the latter's staff who had been a leading body snatcher in the 1820s became Adams's 'chief dead-house assistant' and provided him with numerous gruesome anecdotes. In 1850 Adams married Mary Anne Mills, daughter of John Mills, who predeceased him. There were two sons of the marriage. 
Adams was admitted FRCS in 1851. During the same year he became assistant surgeon to the Royal Orthopaedic Hospital and in 1857 was promoted joint senior surgeon. His resignation in 1872 followed a confrontation with the hospital committee. This arose from criticisms of the two senior surgeons in the annual report on the hospital. When it was put to the vote that these criticisms be deleted since they were fallacious, the motion was defeated. It was later revealed that an assistant surgeon, B. E. Brodhurst, had rigged the vote by paying the membership fee of 1 guinea each for thirty-two new governors to vote against Adams and his colleague. Brodhurst subsequently accepted the post of senior surgeon, despite general condemnation of his conduct. The 'British Medical Journal' commented: 'The services of the two senior surgeons, who have chiefly made the hospital distinguished through a long series of years, have been lost, and their long career of brilliant and gratuitous exertions rewarded with insult and crowned with ingratitude' (Plarr). 
After his appointment as lecturer on surgery and medical practice at the Grosvenor Place medical school in 1854 Adams elected to specialize in orthopaedic surgery. However, it was while acting as surgeon to the Great Northern Hospital, London, from 1855 to 1891 that he established his reputation as the leading orthopaedic surgeon in England. There he devised the operation, subsequently known by his name, of osteotomy of the neck of the femur within the capsule of the hip-joint to relieve ankylosis of the joint, for which he invented a special knife that he called 'my little thaw'. As surgeon to the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic, 1874 to 1891, he performed much general surgery. 
Adams was elected vice-president of the Pathological Society of London, 1867; president of the Harveian Society, 1873; and president of the Medical Society of London, 1876, in which year he travelled to the USA as the society's representative at the International Medical Congress. He was the author of some fifteen medical books and papers, the best known being his Lettsomian lecture of 1869 on diseases of the joints and his Jacksonian prize essay on club foot, later praised as 'a classic, for it is an epitome of the knowledge of the time' (Plarr). 
Adams devoted most of his time and energy to hospital work but established a private practice at 5 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, between 1853 and 1896. In 1896 he moved to 7 Loudoun Road, St John's Wood, where he died on 3 February 1900. Adams was regarded by his colleagues with a mixture of affection and irritation. 'He was a good but prolix talker, with a soft voice and a pronounced lisp' (Plarr). Sir James Paget complained that 'he never finished his sentences' (ibid.). The museum curator at St Bartholomew's Hospital recalled that 'he would often come in later days and waste two or three hours of valuable time, having nothing to do' (ibid.). But his reminiscences of the old body-snatching days were enthralling, and a contemporary described him as 'a most genial and humorous man, hospitable, exceedingly kind and a voluminous talker' ('The Lancet', 812). 


@@@@@


doc= 51478


Chisholm, George Goudie (1850-1930), geographer, was born in Edinburgh on 1 May 1850, the second child and first son of David Chisholm, actuary with the North British Insurance Company, and Anne Goudie. The family were strong United Presbyterians. After attending preparatory school, in 1860 or 1861 Chisholm entered Edinburgh high school, leaving as dux in 1865. In 1867 he matriculated at the University of Edinburgh, graduating MA in 1871. That year he joined the editorial department of W. G. Blackie & Sons, of Glasgow, where he compiled reference books, probably under the guidance of Dr W. G. Blackie, the middle son, who admired the German system of education and who corresponded with many notable German geographers. While working there Chisholm published 'The Two Hemispheres' (1881), a world geography which showed his interest in the economic, rather than the physical side of the subject. Realizing, none the less, the importance of natural science to geography, he returned to Edinburgh to take a BSc in natural science in 1883. 
In 1884 Chisholm married (Victoria) Florence Bright, the youngest daughter of Samuel Jones, a Manchester businessman. They moved to London, probably in the early 1880s, and lived happily there. Elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1884 and of the Royal Statistical Society in 1888, and a member of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, he earned a comfortable living from his numerous, meticulously researched geographical articles, school textbooks, and reference works, as well as his 'Handbook of Commercial Geography' (1889), which ran to many editions. His writings show his interest in school geography, following the Keltie report on geographical education in 1885, and his high estimation of German geography (his 'Longman's School Geography', 1886, for example, was modelled on Kirchoff's 'Schulgeographie'). He began to lecture at the University of London extension courses and to the Geographical Association, hoping -- though the hope was sometimes frustrated -- to convey to his students the importance of finding causal links to give meaning to seemingly endless lists of facts. Through the Royal Geographical Society and many examination boards, he worked to raise standards of geographical teaching. 
Chisholm was appointed lecturer in geography at the University of Edinburgh in 1908, the first such appointment at a Scottish university at a time when reformers were pressing for a broader curriculum and the inclusion of more vocational subjects. Geography teaching expanded and he was made reader in 1920. From 1910 he was secretary of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society, then particularly active and successful. He retired in 1923 but continued to work, though he relinquished responsibility for revising his 'Handbook' which had become something of a burden. He was particularly interested in how economic development might be harnessed to solve population problems and promote peace and democracy, interests which rested on his strong Unitarian beliefs. Two mild strokes in 1928 preceded his sudden death on a tramcar coming home from church on 9 February 1930. 
Although many geographers did not share his passion for commercial geography (Rudmose Brown once commented that he was more concerned about the price of currants than the conquest of Everest), Chisholm's stress on the importance of economic power as the basis for political power proved prescient, and his contribution to the teaching of geography considerable. 


@@@@@


doc= 51479


Armstrong, Thomas (1848-1920), pitman and poet, was born on 15 August 1848 in Wood Street, Shotley Bridge, co. Durham, the son of Timothy Armstrong, labourer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Wilson. Childhood rickets bowed his legs to such an extent that when at the age of nine he started work as a trapper boy in the pit his brother had to carry him there; he never exceeded 5 feet in height. He fathered fourteen children, became a champion quoits player, and was a prodigious beer drinker. As an entertainer he interlarded his readings and recitations with spontaneous witticisms and, though no singer himself, he excelled in composing topical words to well-known tunes. He earned the title of 'pitman's poet' by ardently espousing his fellow miners' cause when they suffered pit disaster or battled through strike or lock-out. 
Indignant, sombre, or sardonic though Armstrong could be, he also wrote playfully. 'The Row between the Cages', which describes a quarrel between old and new lifts, is a piece of 'holy daftness' -- Armstrong's own term for the true poet's stance (Lloyd, 382). 
Armstrong chronicled with humour and sympathy events in his local community such as a new railway, a flood, a brawl, an outing, or a drinking bout. In his songs, printed on single sheets and sold at 1died a time, he used both standard English and a sort of phonetic rendering of the vernacular which can be irksome to read, yet convincing when sung. One item in this vein is the wryly funny 'Dorham Jail', written as a result of Armstrong's six-month sentence for stealing a pair of stockings from the co-operative shop at West Stanley, awarded despite his plea that 'he was drunk at the time and the stockings seemed from the way they were displayed the only pair of bowlegged ones he had come across' (Graham, 3). 
Armstrong continued writing at least until 1916, when he published a jingoistic song about the Kaiser. After his death all of his compositions which could be found were gathered by one of his sons and published in a slim volume, baldly entitled 'Song Book Containing 25 Songs of the Late Thomas Armstrong' (1930). Some items, such as 'Stanla Markit' and 'Nanny's a Maisor', have continued to circulate in the north-east of England to the present day. Others -- 'Trimdon Grange Explosion' and 'Durham Strike', for example -- fell into disuse but were given fresh currency (sometimes to new tunes) by the national folk revival which started in the 1950s. Several were later available on cassette or record. 
Armstrong died at 4 Havelock Terrace, Tantobie, co. Durham, on 30 August 1920, and was buried in Tanfield cemetery. A new headstone unveiled there in 1986 by Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of Mineworkers, bore a reproduction of part of the only known photograph of the cloth-capped, sharp-featured, smiling 'pitman's poet'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51480


Wilson, Joseph (1841-1875), songwriter and performer, was born at 49 Stowell Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 29 November 1841. He and his younger twin brother, Thomas, were the children of Joseph Wilson (1816-1844), joiner, and his wife, Ann ('b'. 1816). Joe, as he was called, would say that his parents were 'byeth natives o' the canny aud toon o' Newcassil' ('Tyneside Songs and Drolleries', xvii), but the 1841 census appears to give his father's birthplace as Ireland. In 1851 his sister Ann was working as a milliner, aged seventeen, and his elder brother John was apprenticed as a brass finisher, aged fourteen, while Joe and Tom were scholars at St Andrew's church school. In 1862 they set up in business together with a small printer's shop in Marlborough Crescent. In December 1864 Joe made his professional debut at Pelton, a pit village in the heart of the Durham coalfield, and by the end of 1865 he was appearing regularly at the best venues in Newcastle -- the Tyne and the Oxford -- and touring the northern and Tyneside circuit of music halls, clubs, pubs, and 'free-and easies'. Wilson's first printed songs had been third-rate poesy ('Dear brother Tom, our birthday's come') but now he switched to dialect and real life. He also did 'drolleries' -- a sort of stand-up comedy, although in Joe's case when not performing he preferred to be sitting down. Never in good health, and with infirmity in his legs, the time-served printer minded his press from a special seat. Joe would make his workmates weep so hard with laughter that at tea breaks some refused to sit with him. 
By the time of his marriage to Isabella English ('b'. 1849) of Jarrow on 3 August 1869 Joe Wilson was the star of northern music hall. He sang his own songs to mainly Irish melodies (in 1873 he promised a new song with every engagement), his voice being described as a 'gentle, thin tenor' ('Newcastle Daily Chronicle', 26 Dec 1891). It is true that he had joined a long line of Tyneside singers and song writers, and it is true that he was a lucky entertainer in the sense that the two established stars of the circuit (George Ridley and Ned Corvan) died shortly before and after his stage debut, but it is indubitably the case that Wilson brought new life and vigour to the halls. He did not play the clown, nor did he exploit the viler aspects of club room banter. Instead he stood in everyday clothes and told of the trials and comforts of the people. Most of his songs were specific to north-east England, many were funny, and a good few were sentimental, but all of them took working-class life and bathed it in the limelight of his own indomitable good sense. 
Born in a street with a lead works at the back and a fever hospital at one end, Wilson knew what he sang about. The census shows that the neighbours down below were not posh. When he was nine his father was dead and his mother and sister were struggling to bring up the family on the pittances of millinery and straw-bonnet making. He died in a house that faced the engine sheds of Newcastle central station. Wilson wrote where he stood, and the dialect was vital to the humour: 'Keep Yor Feet Still Geordie Hinney' (George, please keep still in bed); 'Dinnet Clash the Door' (young persons, shut the door quietly); 'Maw Bonnie Gyetside Lass' (I appear to have trodden on your dress); and 'Aw Wish Your Muther Wad Come' (the consequences of men holding babies): '
Cum, Geordy, haud the bairn, 

Aw's sure aw'll not stop lang, 

Aw'd tyek the jewel mesel, 

But really aw's not strang. 

Thor's floor and coals te get, 

The hoose-turns thor not deun: 

So haud the bairn for fairs, 

Ye've often deund for fun! 

' In 1871 Joe took the Adelaide Hotel in New Bridge Street. This was not a success. He returned to the stage the following year but this time as a fully pledged Good Templar, extolling temperance and the amelioration of the people. In 1873 he went back on circuit but in the summer of 1874 he was taken ill in Glasgow and his health went into rapid decline. He knew about tuberculosis; his father had died of it. He said he'd 'like to see me children reared... I should like to pull through' ('Newcastle Weekly Chronicle', 21 March 1914) but early in September the first of two benefits was held for Isabella and the three children. Joe Wilson died from phthisis on 14 February 1875 at 47 Railway Street, Elswick, and was buried on 17 February at the old cemetery, Jesmond. The local newspapers ran short obituaries. 

'Joe Lives' was the title of a Tyneside Theatre production by Alex Glasgow and John Woodvine in 1971. Joe has certainly not been forgotten. In 1869 the Newcastle booksellers Thomas and George Allan gained copyright over his songs. As a printer Joe had always been able to publish his own penny numbers but now his works found their way into wider and richer markets, including collector's editions. At the same time, a cultural coalition of 'new Northumbrians' -- liberal intellectuals intent on a new popular identity for the region -- found in him a Tyneside Robbie Burns. Some twenty years after his death Joe Wilson's star shone bright again in books and compilations, in Joseph Cowen's newspapers, in Ralph Hedley's paintings, and in the adult education campaigns of Robert Spence Watson's Literary and Philosophical Society, where his songs were hailed as ballads in a great tradition of Northumbrian balladry starting with Caedmon. After 1918 Catcheside-Warrington's piano song books took him into front room sing-songs. After 1945 a second regional revival spearheaded by another left-of-centre cultural coalition, this time in TV and radio, found that Joe's songs still made their mark. The people had changed less than post-war affluence suggested. More than any other person Joe Wilson showed the Geordies their best side: brave, sporting, sentimental, generous, and as daft as a brush. 


@@@@@


doc= 51481


Corvan, Edward (1830-1865), entertainer and songwriter, was born in Liverpool of Irish parents, but was brought up from the age of four in Newcastle upon Tyne. Three years after the move his father, Matthew Corvan, a mason, died, and the young Corvan tramped the streets in search of odd jobs to help the family budget. He was eventually apprenticed to a sailmaker but as a stage-struck teenager he forsook his indentures to join the company of Billy Purvis's music-hall, the Victoria Theatre, in the capacities of small-part actor, scenery painter, orchestra violinist and 'entr'acte' singer. He soon began to write his own songs on local topics, setting them in time-honoured fashion to existing traditional or popular tunes. He achieved considerable success with items as disparate as 'Jimmy McKenny', a lament for a fairground and racecourse drummer and conjuror, and 'He wad be a Noodle', a good-humoured but sharp reproach to those who volunteered for the militia. 
In 1849 Corvan moved to the newly opened Olympic Music Hall as resident singer and songwriter. In addition he played the violin -- his standard was up to Paganini's 'Carnaval de Venise' -- and did impromptu cartoons in chalk on a blackboard. He adopted costume, either male or female, appropriate to his songs, delivered prose monologues between verses, and engaged in impromptu repartee with members of his audiences. In what was probably his best-loved song, 'The Toon Improvement Bill, or, Ne Pleyce noo ti Play' (a complaint at the loss of recreational space when Newcastle Central Station was built in 1849) he came on 'as a schoolboy in a white pinafore, with leathern belt, and trundling his hoop'. The comment is from an eye-witness, who adds that Corvan had 'a bony, muscular frame, surmounted by a head which suggested a certain kind of rough power, and a countenance whose expression betokened infinite good nature and a rare fund of comicality', and that 'his appearance on the stage created quite a 'furore', altogether eclipsing the other performers' (Embleton Smith, 522). 
Corvan married Isabella (1828-1890), daughter of Robert Arrowsmith, mariner, at Tynemouth on 17 March 1851, when he was not yet twenty-one. His health was not good, and he died from tuberculosis at Haddoch's Court, Newgate Street, Newcastle, on 31 August 1865, aged thirty-five. He was buried in an unmarked grave in St Andrew's cemetery. In his lifetime Corvan had performed all over the Tyneside area. He was celebrated both for the skill of his performances and for the fervour of his advocacy of the cause of working men and women, who were the protagonists of his songs. His subjects included sports such as rowing (a local passion), prize-fighting and horse-racing; the seamen's strikes of 1851 and the Hartley pit disaster of 1862; enforced emigration and adverse economic conditions. The tenor of his songs varied widely, from comic to satirical, from elegiac to indignant. Their language was the Tyneside vernacular, with sometimes irritating adaptations of standard spelling. They appeared as street ballads, singly or in groups of ten or twelve, were often reprinted, but gradually fell out of favour, although one turned up in oral tradition in Aberdeenshire in 1907. The first man on Tyneside to make a full-time profession of writing and singing local songs, Corvan retains a place in scholarly writing on the subject. 


@@@@@


doc= 51485


Sir Philip Bealby Reckitt, third baronet (1873-1944), was born at Hessle, near Hull, on 1 January 1873, the second son of James Reckitt. He was educated at Oliver's Mount School, Scarborough, and King's College, Cambridge, where he read natural sciences. He joined Reckitts in 1898, became a director in 1904, and as chairman of the company's works council assumed responsibility for welfare policy. On 19 April 1900 he married Hilda, daughter of Frederick Brent Grotrian. She died in 1935. Despite ill health he became company chairman in 1930 and was chairman of Reckitt and Colman Ltd from 1938 until his death in 1944. He was a JP for the North and East Ridings, and also the first chairman of the City of Hull Conservative Association. For twenty years he was president of the Hull Institute for the Blind and of the Deaf and Dumb Institute. As treasurer of the Royal Infirmary between 1911 and 1932 he was instrumental in financing expansion. His donations to local institutions also included the new Hull University College, founded in 1928 by Thomas Ferens, then chairman of Reckitt & Sons Ltd. In 1918 Reckitt was appointed OBE for his services as commandant of the military hospital set up in the firm's social hall. He succeeded his brother, Harold, as baronet in 1930. On 28 April 1939 he married Margarida Elizabeth Bishop ('nee' Barrington), a widow. Shortly before his death an endowment of $20,000 launched the Philip Reckitt Educational Trust for the purpose of encouraging employees to travel and study abroad. He died at his home, Little Green, Compton, near Chichester, on 17 November 1944. 


@@@@@


doc= 51486


Boot, John Campbell, second Baron Trent (1889-1956), retail and manufacturing chemist, was born on 19 January 1889 in Nottingham, the only son of Jesse Boot (1850-1931), the founder of Boots retail chain and manufacturing chemists. His mother, Florence Annie Boot, nee Rowe (1863-1952), being as absorbed in the business as his father, young John was brought up alongside their day-long attention to the continued development of Boots shops. 
Boot was educated at the Leys School, Cambridge, and then spent a year at Jesus College, Cambridge, but was no scholar and greatly disappointed his father. He was employed in trivial work in the business until the First World War, when he was commissioned in the Sherwood Foresters, but served without distinction. In 1914 he married Margaret Joyce Pyman, the daughter of a shipowner. Jesse Boot's opinion of his son was so low that in 1920, following a period of ill health, he sold his controlling interest in Boots to an American group, the L. K. Liggett Company. 
One of the few conditions attaching to the sale was that Liggetts should find jobs for Boot and the young finance director, J. E. Greenwood. To the elder Boot's surprise, the two were made directors, and took the lead as the first Boots executives to visit the US, where they studied efficient management practice and devised a new system to replace the autocracy left by the founder. Boot deeply resented his father's sell-out and took a sequence of initiatives to increase the company's independence, beginning with the sale of 25 per cent of the shares and flotation of a public company in 1923. This commitment to British control climaxed in the autumn of 1932, when the American owners became insolvent and were forced to sell. Boot placed himself at the head of a financial consortium which succeeded in driving off a more powerful syndicate in which Liggett allied himself with Philip Hill, the property tycoon and chairman of Beechams Pills, Taylors Cash Chemists (a northern retail chain), Timothy Whites (a southern chain), and a clutch of proprietary medicine companies. Boot's father had died the previous year and the new Lord Trent inherited not only his title but also, after the twelve years of American interregnum, his personal authority in the firm. 
Despite their personal differences, Trent's interests within the business proved strikingly similar to those of his father. He made himself an undisputed authority on Boots shops and retail trade generally, and developed an almost instinctive sense of the efficiency of any branch he entered. But he was not so interested in manufacturing, which consequently continued to be the Cinderella of the business. Export sales were no more than a spillover from the firm's domestic retail operations. He calculated the strength of the business by the number of retail branches and regarded the closure of a shop as a defeat. In the 1920s the head of his estates department was opening a shop nearly every week; almost all of them were small pharmacies carrying traditional chemists' lines, as Trent believed that these were still the most profitable form of retailing in his sector of trade. The overall effect of this concentration on small shops was to reduce the importance of Boots departmental stores; by 1936 non-chemists' merchandise was down to a mere 13 per cent of turnover. The concentration on new retail outlets was challenged by Greenwood but Trent's policy prevailed until his retirement in 1954; he proudly opened the thousandth shop in 1933, and by the outbreak of war in 1939 another two hundred had been added. Probably the only divergence between Trent and his father on retail policy was that the former consciously strove to avoid the model of the popular American drug store. His aim was to raise Boots from a chain of cut-price medicine stores to well-appointed shops that offered value for money with variety, quality, and courteous service. 
Trent's style of living was in total contrast to that of his father. He pursued to the full the life of a rich and distinguished businessman and public figure. He enjoyed hunting, shooting, fishing, and farming, indulging his passion at the 45,000 acre estate at Glenborrodale that his mother bought for him soon after his father's death. He liked to tour agricultural shows, exhibit pedigree animals, and distribute prizes. He was always immaculately dressed, owned a yacht and a fleet of cars, and entertained lavishly through the autumn at Glenborrodale and at Christmas at Lenton House, Nottingham. He was passionate about Scotland, prided himself on the Scottish line in his ancestry (commemorated in his name, John Campbell Boot), and loved to be a laird, wear a kilt, and retain his own piper. He fed this romantic streak by spending hours reading about Scotland and its history. 
Trent inherited something of his parents' benevolent interest in the labour force, and the prosperity of Boots in the 1930s encouraged him to allow a substantial welfare dividend to factory workers. They in turn offered him their personal loyalty, as they had to his father. He toured the factories each Christmas to greet hundreds of staff and provide a direct personal connection. The opening of the first model factory at Beeston, Nottingham, in May 1932 not only introduced more pleasant working conditions for 1140 staff, but also led to an appreciable increase in productivity which allowed the company to reduce the working week from 47.5 to 42.5 hours per week and inaugurate the five-day week in 1934. A second factory was built on the Beeston site in two stages in 1936 and 1938, allowing the transfer of 'dry goods' from the jumble of buildings in the city centre. A general pension fund for all male staff over twenty-one and female staff over thirty-five was launched in 1935, and a new building for Boots College, a day continuation college for the youngest employees, was built in 1938. These attractive innovations placed Boots in the forefront of progress in workers' welfare in Britain. Trent was as proud to demonstrate his achievements for his workers as any manorial lord was to show off his model estates. 
During the Second World War Trent became civil commissioner for the east midlands region, effectively leaving J. P. Savage in charge of Boots. He was made KBE in 1946. The war years took their toll on Trent's health and in 1951 he suffered the first of a series of illnesses which forced him to retire in 1953. There were no major initiatives in Boots in the early post-war years, except that falling profitability compelled Trent to appoint a bright young accountant, Arthur Cockfield, whose policies laid the foundation of the later resurgence of the firm. Trent died at his home, The Grove, St Lawrence, Jersey, on 8 March 1956, after a long period of ill health. He had four daughters but no heir in the business, so that control passed out of family hands when his son-in-law, W. R. Norman, retired from the chairmanship in 1975. 


@@@@@


doc= 51487


Cowles, (Harriet) Virginia Spencer (1910-1983), journalist and author, was born on 24 August 1910 in Brattleboro, Vermont, USA, the second of the two children of Edward Spencer Cowles (1878-1954), a New York psychiatrist, and his wife, Florence Wolcott Jaquith (1887-1932), a writer and social columnist. Virginia rarely mentioned her past. Her mother, after eloping aged nineteen, divorced and moved to Boston; she was twenty-seven, with two daughters. A court awarded $60 monthly maintenance, but this was bitterly contested, and never came. Her mother survived by writing social columns for the 'Boston Herald', hand-setting each letter, her ankles swollen from standing as a compositor. From the age of eleven Cowles boarded in Massachusetts at the Waltham School for Girls, where, without other academic distinction, she was voted by her peers as the 'girl most likely to succeed'. 
In Manhattan, New York, during the depression, Cowles lived off earnings precariously eked from selling advertising copy and magazine subscriptions. Her mother's death in 1932 left a $2000 life insurance windfall which funded a tour of Egypt, Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, Siam, China, and Japan with her sister, Mary, in 1934. She wrote an account of these journeys for William Randolph Hearst's 'March of events' column, and later wrote 'Men are so Friendly' (1938), a light-hearted Nancy Mitford-like romp under the pseudonym Nancy Swift. 
During the period from 1932 to 1937 Cowles, usually 'immaculate in her American war correspondent's uniform' (Crawley, 207), which included high heels and make-up, reported from a number of front lines. Her columns appeared in Hearst's 'Sunday Syndicate', the 'New York Times', and also in the British 'Sunday Times' and 'Daily Telegraph'. The 1937 headline 'New York society girl sees Americans fighting in Madrid's front trenches' (Sebba, 97) conjured up a carefree, wealthy image; that its human cost was considerable never saw print. In 1935 she interviewed Mussolini in Rome, two weeks after the Abyssinian invasion. She covered both sides of the Spanish Civil War, alternately detained by a Russian general commanding republicans and arrested by Franco's nationalists. In London her dispatch (unsigned) was quoted by Lloyd George in the Commons and she met Churchill at Chartwell through her friendship with Randolph Churchill. Just returned from Prague, where she had witnessed the response to Chamberlain's Munich betrayal, she sat next to Chamberlain at dinner and answered his query, 'What was it like?' In 1939 Cowles toured Russia to review Red Army purges; by new year she had tracked its relentless progress through sub-zero Finland. In Berlin she scooped the last peacetime report: in Paris she recorded the day of German invasion. At the age of thirty-two, crammed hurriedly into a small Hudson aeroplane in London with a surprised Harold Macmillan, on special assignment to north Africa and in civilian dress, Virginia was denied access to the front line. She appealed to General Eisenhower, who promptly cabled back: 'Miss Cowles can go where she likes; she is to be given every possible assistance' (Sebba, 155). 
According to Sir Fitzroy Maclean, reporting by Cowles 'had a light touch... She was very ambitious, that was one of her great gifts -- and she was unstoppable' (Sebba, 119). Charting female journalism a decade after her death, Anne Sebba noted that for Cowles 'writing was a way of understanding... world events' (ibid., 103). In 'Looking for Trouble' (1941), her autobiography twice reprinted in that war-torn year, Cowles wrote: 'I had no qualifications as a war correspondent except curiosity' and, 'I wrote about the things I had seen and heard but did not try to interpret them' (pp. 7, 61). In 1941 she rallied support for the allied cause in the USA; during 1942-3 she served as special assistant to the American ambassador to London, Gilbert Winant. Cowles wrote 'How America is Governed' (1944) and then covered the Italian campaign, the liberation of Paris, and the allied invasion of Germany. Churchill, seeing her in rowdy Walthamstow stadium two days before polling day in 1945, exclaimed: 'What a bad omen! 'You' only appear when the established regime is falling to the ground!' (Cowles, 'Winston Churchill', 335). Captain Nigel Nicolson, actively engaged in holding a pass in Tunisia in February 1943, later remarked: 'her appearance was doubly startling: that she should be there at all at so critical a moment; and that she was the most beautiful young woman on whom, until then, I had ever set my eyes' (Nicolson, 'Long Life', 82-3). She combined objectivity with feminine charm: 'Even Monty adored her, and that was saying quite something!' (Nicolson, Memorial address). 
Virginia Cowles married Aidan Merivale Crawley (1908-1993), son of Canon A. Stafford Crawley, on 30 July 1945. The couple had two sons and a daughter. By nature compassionate, Virginia was variously described as ferocious, very direct, and, according to Evelyn Waugh, unprincipled. Asked if he minded, Aidan Crawley said: 'One thing you must remember about Virginia. She isn't 'boring'' (private information). Both of them took their work, but never themselves, seriously. The arrival of Virginia's appointment as OBE for brave conduct, made on 1 July 1947, went unremarked in Aidan Crawley's memoirs. Her play, 'Love Goes to Press', brightened 1946 London before chilling Manhattan in January 1947. Her work after the war included 'No Cause for Alarm' (1949), answering American questions on the Labour government, and also a major biography, 'Winston Churchill: the Era and the Man' (1953). 
Virginia's regular attendance at children's cricket, active canvassing for Aidan Crawley's Labour and subsequently Conservative parliamentary seats, entertaining in Chester Square, London, and running an active farm did not impair her relentless writing schedule; nor did her research for her husband's BBC documentaries on India, the Middle East, and Africa. Eight more biographies appeared, notably 'Edward VII and his Circle' (1956), 'The Phantom Major' (1958), 'The Kaiser' (1963), 'The Romanovs' (1971), and 'The Rothschilds' (1973). While Rothschilds and Churchills dined with the family, she also made lifelong friends, many obscure, and often changed their lives. 
In 1947 Virginia Cowles stated that 'being on English soil has a magic of its own for me' (Crawley, 217); but by 1974 the magic had run out. While she was living in Italy, France, and Spain, three last biographies appeared. She dropped her American citizenship and had no English home: allegiance to place had ended. Diagnosed with imminently terminal emphysema, Virginia was driven by her husband through the tortuous Spanish hills of her youth at her request. 'En route' for Mouton on 16 September 1983, their car turned over on the flat road across Les Grandes Landes; she was killed instantly. Her husband, although seriously injured, survived. Her body was cremated in Archeron, France. 


@@@@@


doc= 51491


Blaschko, Hugh (1900-1993), biochemist and pharmacologist, was born on 4 January 1900 in Friedrichstrasse, Berlin, the only son and second of the three children of Alfred Blaschko (1858-1922), dermatologist and venereologist, and his wife, Johanna (1873-1943), daughter of Karl Litthauer, medical doctor. Surrounded in Berlin by many Jewish relations and by medical and socialist friends of his father, Hermann (or Hugh as he was known in England) developed an early interest in natural science and became an internationalist. An extraordinarily detailed and vivid account of this period is given in his posthumously published book 'Memories of my Early Life' (1997). He was educated at a private school on the Landsberger Platz, Berlin (1906-9) and at the Prinz Heinrich Gymnasium, Berlin Schoneberg. With so much medicine in the family (father and both grandfathers), it was inevitable that he would then study medicine, first in Berlin (1917-19), then in Freiburg im Breisgau (1919-21), then back in Berlin for his clinical studies (1921-2). It was at Freiburg that he first met, as a fellow student, Hans Krebs, who was to join him at Oxford thirty-five years later. His first post was at the university clinic for internal medicine in Gottingen (1923), but it was his period with Otto Meyerhof (just awarded the Nobel prize) in Berlin and later Heidelberg (1925-32) that gave him an insight into scientific method and also introduced him to many of the leading biochemists of the time. Blaschko's warmth and sincerity led to lifelong friendships with many he met at this time. One of his outstanding qualities was the way in which he nurtured his friendships, however far away his friends lived. 
Blaschko's first period in England was with Archibald Vivian Hill (who shared the Nobel prize with Meyerhof) at University College, London, in 1929-30. It was while he was with Hill that Blaschko carried out his first truly independent piece of research, perhaps reflecting the different attitude of British and continental professors to their young proteges. The visit to Hill was to be of great importance for another reason. After his return to Germany Blaschko suffered several recurrences of tuberculosis (which he first contracted in 1926), and one of these was in 1933, when the advent of the Nazi regime made him realize that he had no future in Germany. He was in hospital in Freiburg, being attended by Hans Krebs as physician, but while convalescing he worked in Krebs's laboratory to improve his skills in manometry -- a technique crucial to several of his later discoveries. While he was still in hospital, a letter arrived from Hill inviting him to return to University College, London. He did not hesitate to accept: as he wrote later, his return 'felt more like a homecoming'. Instead of beginning independent research in Hill's laboratory, Blaschko had to continue his convalescence, and so spent most of his time helping Hill with the Academic Assistance Council. The society had been founded by Hill, Archbishop William Temple, A. D. Lindsay, and Sir William Beveridge to help refugee scholars. Blaschko's main job was to interview scholars from Germany and advise Hill about their needs. He later claimed to have learned from Hill that a scientist's duty does not end in the laboratory but extends to the support and care of the human being, something that his own life clearly demonstrated. 
One of the most productive periods of Blaschko's scientific life followed his move to Cambridge in 1934; upon the advice of Hill and Krebs he went to Joseph Barcroft's physiological laboratory with a grant from the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning. It was in response to a question from Barcroft, who asked him how adrenalin was destroyed in the body, that he did the crucial experiments that led to the discovery in 1937 of the enzyme amine oxidase. Blaschko's grant only lasted for two years, and so he had to support himself by teaching at Cambridge -- a somewhat precarious business, since he never knew until the beginning of each term whether he would have any students. He often used to recount the future careers of his Cambridge pupils. He told these stories at times when his young colleagues became despondent about the heavy teaching load they had to bear: 'Never mind, you never know whether one of your pupils will be another Sanger', he used to say (private information). (Frederick Sanger won the Nobel prize twice and was one of Blaschko's pupils.) In 1939 he proposed the sequence of reactions that led to the synthesis of adrenalin in the body; his idea had to wait ten years for convincing experimental proof. 
The last and long-lasting flowering of Blaschko's scientific life occurred after he moved to Oxford in 1944 in response to an invitation from J. H. Burn to join the department of pharmacology. Blaschko had the great fortune to move from a department that was the mecca for physiologists to one that rapidly became the mecca for pharmacologists. There he discovered how the potent substance adrenalin was safely stored in the adrenal gland at very high concentration. This discovery paved the way for the understanding of how chemical transmitter substances are stored in, and released from, nerves throughout the body. Not only did Oxford give him his first and only permanent post (he retired in 1967), but there he met and, on 29 December 1944, married Mary Douglas Black (1908-2000), daughter of John Robert Black, of Yelverton, Devon. She was a Quaker and a teacher at the Dragon School, Oxford. The marriage was one of exceptional harmony, mutual support, and happiness, although childless. However, the Blaschkos made up for a lack of children by embracing all who came into their life, such that they had a remarkable extended family throughout the world. Their home at 24 Park Town became a haven for innumerable scientists of all ages. Blaschko kept up with his 'family' by correspondence and could remember the finest details of their lives. Indeed, one of his extraordinary attributes was a phenomenal memory, extending back into his childhood. In his relationships he was open-minded, thoughtful, and low-key. He found good in everyone, and had an impish sense of humour and a total lack of conceit. He was a most delightful person to be with. 
In 1965 Blaschko became 'ad hominem' reader in biochemical pharmacology in the department of pharmacology, University of Oxford, and a fellow of Linacre College, a college he helped to found. He retired in 1967, becoming emeritus reader and emeritus fellow of Linacre. For nearly half a century he was one of the great figures in Oxford science and in its community. His greatness was not flamboyant but lay in his ever-alert mind, his sense of curiosity and wonder, and his belief in, and encouragement of, others younger than himself. He was author of more than 200 scientific articles, was elected FRS in 1962, and was awarded many distinctions around the world, including the Purkinje medal (Prague, 1963), the Schmiedeberg Plakette of the German Pharmacological Society (1972), the first Thudicum medal of the Biochemical Society (1974), and the Wellcome gold medal of the British Pharmacological Society (1979). He was a member of the editorial boards of numerous journals, including 'Pharmacological Reviews' and the 'Journal of Physiology'. He died at his home in Oxford, following a sudden internal haemorrhage, on 18 April 1993. A commemoration was held on 22 May 1993 at the Friends' meeting-house, Oxford. His wife, who survived him, endowed the Blaschko visiting scholarship at the department of pharmacology, Oxford, and Linacre College (where there is a Blaschko Room), in order to continue the tradition that he began of bringing young scholars from Europe into his laboratory. 


@@@@@


doc= 51492


Brown, Francis Charles Claypon Yeats- (1886-1944), soldier and author, was born on 15 August 1886 in Genoa, Italy, the third son of Montagu Yeats-Brown (1834-1921), who was British consul-general in Genoa, and his wife, Agnes Matilda, 'nee' Bellingham. He was educated at Harrow School and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. In 1904 he joined the King's Royal Rifle Corps and was posted in 1906 to Bareilly, India, as a second lieutenant. In 1906 he was gazetted to the Bengal lancers and stationed in Bannu in the North-West Frontier Province. While he enjoyed the danger of skirmishes with the tribesmen and the camaraderie of regimental life, he was fascinated by India itself. He saw it as 'avid for life and colour and gaiety, yet preserving always a sense of a world unseen' (Yeats-Brown, 'Indian Pageant', 290), and he began a search for teachers who could give him an understanding of Hinduism's spiritual practices and beliefs. 
In 1907 Yeats-Brown was posted to the 17th cavalry of the Indian army and made adjutant in 1913. He went on leave to England in 1914, joined the 5th Royal Irish Lancers, and served for six months in France before being sent to Mesopotamia, where he was transferred to the Royal Flying Corps with the rank of captain. He was captured by the Turks in 1915 near Baghdad, and after a number of attempts to escape, one time disguising himself as a woman, he finally got away in 1918. His first book, 'Caught by the Turks' (1919) was a light-hearted, but graphic, account of the miseries of Turkish prisons. Surrounded by 'dirt and drunkenness, savagery and stupidity', he used yogic practice to become 'poised and relaxed and completely in my body' (Yeats-Brown, 'Bengal Lancer', 197-9). Awarded the DFC, he returned to India as a major, and retired from the army in 1924. 
From 1925 to 1928, Yeats-Brown was assistant editor of 'The Spectator', but what brought him literary fame was the publication in 1930 of 'Bengal Lancer', which went through many editions in both Great Britain and the United States, and won the James Tait Black memorial prize. Much of the book consists of episodes and anecdotes about Yeats-Brown's life in the Bengal lancers, interspersed with colourful descriptions of the author's travels throughout India. What attracted many readers, however, was the quality that led Rabindranath Tagore to describe it as unmatched as 'a genuine psychological record of an intimate touch of a western mind with the mind of the east' ('Book Review Digest', 1930, 1153). Some reviewers, however, while praising his accounts of army life and the Indian scene, were displeased with what seemed fulsome praise of Indian spirituality: 'if the triumph of man's spiritual achievement be the perception that all is one, that god and man are confounded in a cosmic process, to some this will seem a dismal triumph' ('TLS'). The Hollywood film company Paramount bought the rights to the book before it was published; but the very popular film that was made (in 1935), using the book's American title 'The Lives of a Bengal Lancer', with such famous actors as Gary Cooper and C. Aubrey Smith, was not really based on the book. The success of the book led Yeats-Brown to revise 'Caught by the Turks', with new background on the last decade of Ottoman rule; he published it in 1932 as 'Golden Horn' and in the United States as 'Bloody Years'. In 1934 he turned his attention to the issue of Britain's military preparedness. Angered by the success of Beverly Nichols's pacifist book, 'Cry Havoc!' (1933), which he felt showed the failure of the British to see the dangers of pacifism, he wrote a reply called 'The Dogs of War!' in 1934. Some of its themes were expanded in 'European Jungle' in 1939 but its antisemitism, coupled with arguments in support of Hitler and Mussolini, brought deserved criticism from reviewers in both Britain and the United States. 
Yeats-Brown continued to explore Indian themes in 'Lancer at Large', published in 1937, which covered much of the same ground as 'Bengal Lancer'. But his comments on Indian politics show little awareness of the forces that were to challenge his belief that British rule would continue in India. In the same year he published 'Yoga Explained', one of the earliest attempts to popularize yoga in the West as beneficial to both physical and spiritual health. It has pictures of him standing on his head and in other yogic poses. He lectured in Europe and the United States on India, yoga, and religion. 
Yeats-Brown remained single until 1938 when he married Olga, widow of Denzil Phillips, and daughter of Colonel Apollon Zoueff. During and after the Second World War, he collaborated with E. W. Sheppard in compiling five volumes with texts and pictures on the record of the British army from 1939 to 1942 (published 1943-7). He continued to write on India, and 'Indian Pageant', published in 1942, emphasizes the splendour of India's spiritual and intellectual achievements. He appeared on BBC radio programmes on Indian themes, notably a series in 1941 called 'Gods, Saints, and Heroes of Hindustan'. 'Martial India' (1945), his last book, published posthumously, is an affectionate picture of the Indian army, but has little historical depth. While generally well reviewed none of those books on India achieved the popularity of 'Bengal Lancer'. 
Yeats-Brown died of heart failure at 38 Cheriston Gardens, Kensington, London, on 19 December 1944, his wife surviving him. His funeral was at Golders Green crematorium on 23 December, and a memorial service was held at Grosvenor Chapel on 28 December, where he was praised for his patriotism, courage, and love of India. While his reputation was diminished by his political views, his books remain very readable and provide interesting insights into British attitudes between the two world wars. 


@@@@@


doc= 51494


Bolton, John Gatenby (1922-1993), astronomer, was born on 5 June 1922 at 3 Clarkehouse Road, Broomhall, Sheffield, Yorkshire, the elder of two children of John Gatenby Bolton (died 1952), schoolmaster, of Skelton, Cleveland, and his wife, Ethel, 'nee' Kettlewell (died 1942), schoolteacher of Goole, Yorkshire. He was educated at King Edward VII School, Sheffield, from which he won a state scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1940. The exigencies of war led to a shortened course and in 1942 he was awarded the degree of BA with honours in physics. 
In 1942 he obtained a reserve commission in the Royal Navy and after a short course in electronics and radar he was sent to the Telecommunications Research Establishment in Malvern, Worcestershire, to assist in the installation in naval fighter aircraft of the 11/2 metre air interception radar already developed for the Royal Air Force night fighters. After D-day he was appointed radio officer to HMS 'Unicorn' of the East Indies fleet. At the end of the war in Sydney he was seconded to the Royal Australian Navy and then to the army, who demobilized him. He remained in Australia for the greater part of the remainder of his life, marrying, in 1948, Letty, daughter of Edward and Ruby Pearl Burke, of Mandurama, New South Wales, and widow of E. T. Leslie, a navigator in Coastal Command who had been killed in action during the Second World War. There were two sons of her first marriage, Brian and Peter, whom Bolton adopted. 
In the light of his qualifications, Bolton was advised to meet E. G. Bowen, one of the pioneers in the development of radar in England, who had joined the radiophysics laboratory of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (later the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)) in Sydney in 1944. When Bolton joined the radiophysics division in 1946 Bowen was abroad and J. L. Pawsey was in charge. It was this circumstance that determined Bolton's subsequent research on the radio waves arriving on earth from outer space -- a subject soon to be known as radio astronomy. Pawsey's interest was in the recently discovered emission of intense bursts of radio waves by the sun. In February 1942 J. S. Hey of the Army Operational Research Group had discovered, during a secret investigation of the enemy jamming of British radars, that bursts of radio waves were emitted by sunspots and solar flares. It was this phenomenon that Bolton was asked to investigate. He built the appropriate metre wave radio receiver and installed it at Dover Heights, an ex-wartime station near a cliff edge. He did not observe any radio bursts from the sun and decided to direct his aerials over the sea in the hope of observing the radio waves emanating from the Milky Way. When Pawsey discovered this he ordered Bolton to return to the radiophysics laboratory and so this initial excursion to Dover Heights ended. At that stage Bolton joined Gordon Stanley and built equipment to observe the solar radio emission during an eclipse in Brazil, but the equipment was not ready before the last ship, which Pawsey had intended to take to Brazil, had sailed. 
This misfortune led to one of the historic events in astronomy. Instructed by Pawsey to find some other use for this radio equipment, in March 1947 Bolton and Stanley returned to Dover Heights and soon they observed the radio emission from a giant sunspot on three widely separated radio frequencies. Their interpretation of these observations formed the subject of their first scientific publication. It was soon realized that on this cliff site, radio waves from the sun or other object reached the aerial through two paths, one direct and the other after reflection from the surface of the sea. From the interference pattern so generated it was possible to locate the source of the emission (in one dimension) to an accuracy of a few minutes of arc. This was the radio analogue of the Lloyd's mirror interferometer in optics. 
Bolton and Stanley then searched for sources of extraterrestrial radio emission. In his survey of the extragalactic radio emission J. S. Hey had discovered a localized source of emission in the constellation of Cygnus. He observed that the intensity was fluctuating and concluded that the source of the emission must have small angular dimensions. Bolton and Stanley found that, as this source in Cygnus rose, the chart records of the intensity of the emission showed a maximum and minimum (a fringe pattern) from which it was possible to set an upper limit to the angular size of 8 minutes of arc. The variation in intensity observed by Hey was subsequently discovered to be a consequence of the passage of the radio waves through the earth's ionosphere and was not inherent to the source. By chance Hey had reached the right conclusion for the wrong reason. 
Three other extragalactic radio sources of small angular diameter were discovered. There was no obvious optical identification and in order to make possible a search with the large optical telescopes a more precise position for the radio sources had to be determined. Bolton and Stanley moved their interferometer to New Zealand, and by measurements from a number of appropriate cliff sites they were able to place close enough limits on the position of these radio sources to facilitate a search for the optical counterparts by the large American telescopes. These searches with the 200 inch Palomar telescope, particularly by Walter Baade and Rudolph Minkowski, revealed that one of the radio sources was the supernova remnant of the Crab nebula in the Milky Way. The other two, in Virgo and Centaurus, were shown to be objects of large red shift, that is extragalactic, soon to be accepted as typical of a new class of objects to be known as radio galaxies. Thereby began the radio study of the universe and the mapping of many radio galaxies -- faint optically but emitting radio waves of an intensity observable by the relatively crude radio equipment of that epoch. 
By 1953 the system at Dover Heights could no longer compete with superior equipment evolving elsewhere for the radio studies of the universe. Pawsey would not agree with Bolton's plans for the future development of his own group, and that prompted Bowen (then head of the radiophysics division) in August 1953 to persuade Bolton to join his cloud physics research. For eighteen months Bolton worked on cloud physics, then in January 1955 took leave of absence from CSIRO to initiate research in radio studies of the universe at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), where he was appointed a senior research fellow. In 1956 he was appointed professor of radio astronomy at Caltech and resigned his position with CSIRO. 
Bolton spent six years at Caltech, during which he created the Owens Valley Radio Observatory. He built an interferometer consisting of two 90 foot diameter steerable paraboloids, on railway tracks so that they could be separated up to 1600 feet either in a north-south or east-west direction. The system, operated at higher radio frequencies than previously, and the location of radio galaxies and their identification using the large optical telescopes, flourished. This equipment measured the accurate right ascension of the radio source known as 3C48, interest in which had been stimulated by the angular diameter measurements at Jodrell Bank, which implied that it could be the most distant object yet known. The subsequent search by the 200 inch Palomar telescope revealed a hitherto unknown type of blue object without a measurable red shift. This result, first presented at the December 1960 meeting of the American Astronomical Society, was the first step towards the conclusion, two years later, that a hitherto unknown class of distant galaxies had been discovered -- soon to be known as quasars. 
During Bolton's stay at Caltech, Bowen had begun the construction of the 210 foot diameter steerable radio telescope at Parkes, New South Wales. Late in 1960 Bolton left Caltech to supervise the final stages in the construction of this telescope. The Parkes telescope was commissioned in late 1961, and Bolton became the director of this Australian national radio observatory. Under his direction the telescope had widespread use in many radio astronomical researches. His own major interest remained in the discovery and identification of the extragalactic radio sources, and the Parkes catalogue soon extended to many thousands of these sources. In particular he was involved with Cyril Hazard in the precise measurement of the position of the source known as 3C273, by means of lunar occultation. This led to the conclusive discovery that, like 3C48, this was one of the new class of nebulae (quasars) with very high red shifts and hence at great distances in the universe. The catalogue of some 8000 radio sources assembled under Bolton's direction, and the search for the optical identifications, remained his primary interest. With his Australian and American collaborators he found identifications for about 1000 radio sources; this work was published in more than forty papers from 1965 to 1982, and through it he gained considerable experience with the large American optical telescopes. This led to his association with the planning and commissioning of the 4 metre Anglo-Australian optical telescope at Siding Springs. 
Bolton was involved on a number of occasions with the NASA space programmes; the signals from Neil Armstrong's landing on the moon in 1969 came via the Parkes telescope, as did the transmissions during the drama of the endangered Apollo 13 mission. He retired as director of the Parkes telescope during the changes of 1971-2, when Bowen retired as chief of the radiophysics division, but he continued to work at Parkes and elsewhere as astronomer-at-large. In 1979 he suffered a severe heart attack but recovered sufficiently to continue the analysis with his colleagues of the Parkes data. In 1981 he retired to Buderim, a coastal resort in Queensland. 
Bolton was a keen sportsman; an avid cricketer, he also enjoyed competitive games of golf, table tennis, and billiards. He received many honours and awards, being appointed CBE in 1982. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1973 and a fellow of the Australian Academy of Sciences in 1969. In 1977 he was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society and in 1988 the Bruce medal of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. He died at his home in Buderim after a final attack of pneumonia, following persistent heart trouble, on 6 July 1993. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51498


Bligh, Edward Vesey (1829-1908), Church of England clergyman, was born on 28 February 1829 at 37 Grosvenor Place, London. He was the second son of Edward Bligh, fifth earl of Darnley (1795-1835), and his wife, Emma (1804-1884), daughter of Henry Parnell, first Baron Congleton. His mother was a strict Irvingite trembling on the edge of religious mania. Although Bligh's uncle and guardian, Longley, later archbishop of Canterbury, ensured that he was reared in the Church of England, a strain of ultra-protestantism was nevertheless grafted onto the boy. Bligh was educated at Eton College (1839-45), in Hanover and France (1845-6), and at Christ Church, Oxford (1848-50), where he chiefly hunted and raced. Leaving Oxford without taking a degree, he worked in the Foreign Office under Palmerston, and served as an attache at Hanover (1850-51), Florence (1851-2), and Berlin (1852-3). His most important work in Florence was on behalf of Englishmen who had been insulted or arrested by the Austrian military authorities protecting the regime of Grand Duke Leopold; his intervention saved from execution the three Stratford brothers, sons of the fifth earl of Aldborough. 
At this time Bligh fell in love with Lady Isabel Mary Frances Nevill (1831-1915), whose family at Eridge Castle were county neighbours of the Darnleys at Cobham Hall. As a precondition of their marriage her father, the fourth earl of Abergavenny, insisted that Bligh abandon diplomacy and settle in Kent. Yielding to this ultimatum, and committing vocational suicide, Bligh was married on 23 February 1854. The couple had two children, a son and a daughter. As a married undergraduate Bligh attended Downing College, Cambridge (MA 1854), before ordination (1855). He was a lieutenant in the West Kent yeomanry (1853-5), chaplain to that corps (1855-70), and curate at Snodland (1855-6); in 1856 was appointed to a living within Abergavenny's gift near Eridge at Rotherfield. Bligh, whose detestation of Roman Catholicism had increased in Tuscany, found that his congregation had been alienated by the sacerdotalism of the previous rector. As an evangelical who preached in the open air he won back some parishioners, but was so disheartened by the difficulties of his poor, sprawling parish that in 1863 he broke down. While recuperating he was impressed by the lay evangelical Sir Arthur Blackwood and henceforth allied himself with low-church reformers such as lords Radstock and Ebury. He was active in the Prayer Book Revision Society and from 1864 had numerous letters published in 'The Times' and the 'Daily Telegraph'. He controversially preached to the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion in order to promote Anglican intercommunion with Reformation, rather than with what he regarded as ritualistic priest-ridden, churches. 
In 1865 Bligh became vicar of Birling, a moribund parish in Abergavenny's gift, and initiated the Birling religious revival of 1866. Supported by lay evangelists he achieved some conversions and deathbed confessions but raised social unrest against the Abergavennys, who suppressed his zeal. He was relieved when his wife's inheritance enabled him to buy Fartherwell Hall, near West Malling, in 1874, and to resign his incumbency the following year. Although active as a Kentish magistrate, deputy lieutenant, and county alderman, Bligh was long oppressed by a sense of failure. After visiting Palestine in 1890 and publishing 'Lord Ebury as a Church Reformer' (1891) he emerged from his depression to enjoy an affectionate and contented old age. Like most Blighs he was a talented cricketer (his grandson in 1887 was christened Harroweton after the match) and a superb game shot. He died of chronic gout and heart failure on 22 April 1908 at Fartherwell Hall, and was buried at Birling churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 51501


Boyd, Margaret (1913-1993), schoolteacher and lacrosse player, was born on 17 January 1913 in Strasbourg, Alsace, Germany, the daughter and fourth of five children of Dr Harold de Haven Boyd, manager of a Manchester oil company, and his wife, Charlotte Elisabeth, 'nee' Austin. She was educated at Berkhamsted Girls' School in Hertfordshire and Wycombe Abbey in Buckinghamshire, the latter a school to which lacrosse had been introduced in 1896 by Francis Jane Dove. At school Boyd excelled in games and was an able pianist. 
After training as a physical education teacher at Bedford College, Boyd taught first at Roedean School and then at Berkhamsted until the beginning of the Second World War. During the war she motorcycled daily to Ashridge House, near Berkhamsted, where she worked as a physiotherapist. Finally she returned to Wycombe Abbey, first as a teacher in charge of physical education and subsequently also as a housemistress -- positions she held until her retirement in 1975, though even then she often helped out when there was a staff shortage. As with most of her activities she participated to the fullest and at Wycombe, in addition to her specified duties, she co-ordinated the school appeal, was in charge of careers advice, organized the sixth-form social work in High Wycombe, played a major role in the seniors (old girls') association, and generally became renowned as 'a superb crisis handler' ('Wycombe Abbey Gazette'). 
Boyd played lacrosse for Bedford College and then for Boxmoor Ladies. A strong defence wing, she gained her first England selection in 1934 and captained the national side from 1937 until 1951, playing on the first official English tour to the United States in 1949. 
During the war the annual home nations' tournament was interrupted for the first time since its inception in 1913. Women's club lacrosse came virtually to a standstill, but the schoolgirl game continued, thanks very much to the work of Boyd; she scavenged for balls and other essential gear, placing advertisements in the national press which produced large quantities of equipment. In 1946 she established the national schools' tournament, held annually at the close of each season. This became a five-day competition, one of the trophies competed for being the Boyd cup. 
When she finished playing international lacrosse Boyd worked on the staff of Winsor School in Boston, Maine, for three years. She also began to coach lacrosse in Maine and returned there annually for over twenty years to coach in summer camps. As a coach she had the ability to spot the potential in players and nurse it to fruition. On her return to Britain she moved into administration of the game, becoming vice-president of the English Women's Lacrosse Association in 1955 and holding the presidency from 1967 to 1972. In 1969 she organized and managed a combined British and United States team -- the Pioneers -- which made the first overseas tour to Australia and played exhibition games there and also in New Zealand, Hong Kong, Japan, and Holland. Two years later she was awarded the OBE for services to lacrosse. 
In April 1972 Boyd was elected foundation president of the International Federation of Women's Lacrosse Associations when it was established at Williamsburg, Virginia. Essentially a modest person who was easily embarrassed, she took little personal credit for the worldwide development of the sport and the establishment of a world cup. She simply said that she was 'thrilled that the small beginning had blossomed into such a thriving organisation due to the outstanding leadership of the presidents that followed me' ('The Independent'). Others thought differently, and only a few days before her death she was elected to the lacrosse hall of fame in Baltimore, the first woman to gain that honour. 
Boyd had a great sense of fun, often interrupting other teachers' lessons with notes requesting the solution to a particular clue in the 'Times' crossword, of which she was a devotee. She was also a good golfer and bridge player. Never married, she died of heart failure on 21 November 1993 at her home, 16 Crossways, Berkhamsted, which she had shared with her sister Etheldreda, leaving an estate of $1,696,159. She gave $1000 of this to Wycombe Abbey with the wish that it be used for any seniors who needed financial help. 


@@@@@


doc= 51502


Boyle, Sir Dermot Alexander (1904-1993), air force officer, was born on 2 October 1904 at Belmont House, Rathdowney, Queen's county, Ireland, one of five children and the second of the three sons of Alexander Francis Boyle, estate agent, and his wife, Anna Maria, 'nee' Harpur. He was educated at St Columba's College, Dublin, from where he entered the newly established RAF College, Cranwell, in 1922. 
After graduating in 1924 Boyle flew with 17 squadron at Hawkinge and then on air policing duties in Iraq, quickly gaining invaluable experience of air operations. Next, having qualified as a flying instructor, he was able to demonstrate his exceptional piloting skills in display flying at Hendon and elsewhere. In the 1930s he served with the Auxiliary Air Force, spent three years on the headquarters staff in India dealing with airmen's personal affairs, and later became chief flying instructor at Cranwell. He married on 5 September 1931 Una ('b'. 1907/8), daughter of the late Edward Valentine Carey, rubber planter. They had two sons and a daughter. 
When the war started Boyle went to France with the advanced air striking force and ended up arranging its evacuation. Duties followed at Bomber Command headquarters, in command of a Hampden bomber squadron, and in 1941 in the Cabinet Office secretariat, where he gained an invaluable insight into the higher realms of policy making. He then commanded Stradishall, a large Bomber Command station, before becoming senior air staff officer in 83 group, one of the major tactical formations specially set up for the invasion of north-west Europe. 
The war over, Boyle attended the Imperial Defence College, served as assistant commandant at the RAF Staff College, and directed personnel matters in the Air Ministry before returning to the bomber world in command of 1 group. Here his primary task was to see the RAF's first jet bomber, the Canberra, into squadron service. A wonderful aircraft, he called it, and he often flew it himself, most notably in 1952 when he led a flight on a 24,000 mile tour of South America. In 1953 he moved on to become commander-in-chief, Fighter Command, where after taking charge of the queen's coronation review at Odiham he oversaw the introduction of another of the RAF's great post-war aircraft, the Hunter. He was made KCVO and KBE in 1953, and GCB in 1957. 
Boyle took over as chief of air staff from Sir William Dickson on 1 January 1956 -- despite never having served on the Air Council, the usual prerequisite. He was the first incumbent not to have served in the First World War, and also the first Old Cranwellian. Lord Trenchard, the founder of the RAF College, had always looked forward to the day when a former cadet would reach the top of the RAF and none was more delighted when Boyle was appointed. Sadly, the new chief of air staff's first engagement was to attend the great man's funeral. 
Soon afterwards Boyle became embroiled in the mounting crisis that followed Egypt's nationalization of the Suez Canal. While the military planning and preparations occupied much of his time, Boyle himself refused to become involved in the politics. He knew nothing of the Israeli connections, though he certainly shared his colleagues' misgivings about a situation in which the prime minister, Anthony Eden, was being steadily overwhelmed. His task was essentially to ensure that the RAF could play its part in operation Musketeer, and he shared the credit for the success of the air offensive carried out by the RAF in co-operation with the Fleet Air Arm and the French air force. 
Boyle now faced problems of a different order in the course of a new major defence review. Inspired by the government's conviction that large savings in expenditure on conventional forces were essential to the improvement of Britain's economic performance, Duncan Sandys, the minister of defence, wrote a white paper which caused consternation around the RAF. Admittedly Boyle applauded one key aspect, its confirmation of the role of the V-bomber force in providing the United Kingdom's nuclear deterrent, in which he was a passionate believer. Sandys's other ideas were anathema, in particular his prediction that the advent of missiles could mean the end of manned fighter aircraft, and Boyle -- deciding that resignation would serve no purpose -- resolved to defend his corner. While he had no choice but to accept heavy cuts, especially in Fighter Command and Germany, he sought the backing of many influential friends, notably when he staged a special 'Prospect' conference in London in April 1958. Here, in the presence of 300 important personalities in public life, he affirmed that the air staff still saw the manned aircraft as the ultimate means of defence. Amid the subsequent political uproar the prime minister, Harold Macmillan, had to come to the rescue in the House of Commons. Boyle trod somewhat more carefully from now on, but in tours to bases throughout the world he sought to keep the RAF itself informed about developments and to restore its personnel's belief in themselves and confidence in their future. His was a timely demonstration of inspired leadership whose result, as he himself later put it, was to preserve the fabric of the RAF. 
Many other matters, too, engaged Boyle's attention, including an attempt by the navy, strongly encouraged by Lord Mountbatten when he became chief of defence staff, to take over the aircraft of Coastal Command, and a full-scale study of the future roles of air transport. In the nuclear field there were the successful tests of Britain's hydrogen bomb at Christmas Island; the agreement to deploy the American Thor nuclear missile in the United Kingdom -- a decision which Boyle supported since it brought the RAF into a new field of technology and would help prepare for the advent of Britain's intercontinental ballistic missile, Blue Streak; and the growing questions about Blue Streak itself, coupled with the possible acquisition of the air-launched Skybolt in its place. Moreover -- a major achievement -- he persuaded Sandys to agree to the development of the RAF's new strike and reconnaissance aircraft, the TSR 2. 
At the end of 1959 Boyle handed over the post of chief of air staff to Sir Thomas Pike and accepted new challenges both in industry and in continuing connections with the RAF. As vice-chairman of the British Aircraft Corporation from 1962 to 1971 his service experience was invaluable for many aircraft projects, including the multi-role combat aircraft (MRCA), which eventually became the Tornado. The cancellations, on the other hand, horrified him, especially that of the TSR 2 in 1962; he simply could not believe that Sir Charles Elworthy, then chief of air staff, had gone along with it. Boyle also found time to guide the establishment of the RAF's own museum, at Hendon; as the first chairman of its board of trustees from 1965 to 1974 he provided much of the inspiration for this widely admired RAF institution. The RAF Benevolent Fund, of which he was deputy chairman, and the RAF Club, of which he was president, also owed him much, and to the end of his life he maintained his interest in the modern RAF, in its history, and in Cranwell, his alma mater. 
Boyle died at Sway, Hampshire, on 5 May 1993, survived by his wife. He was one of the great father figures of the RAF. Superb flying ability, great staff skills, inspiring leadership, dominating presence, power to command an audience, charm, kindliness: such qualities made him one of the most respected and best-loved of all the RAF's high commanders. 


@@@@@


doc= 51503


Bradbrook, Muriel Clara (1909-1993), literary scholar, was born on 27 April 1909 in Glasgow, the eldest child of Samuel Bradbrook (died 1928) and his wife, Annie Wilson, 'nee' Harvey ('b'. 1872). Samuel Bradbrook was superintendent of HM water guard, first at Glasgow and then at Liverpool. Muriel Bradbrook was educated at Hutchesons' Girls' Grammar School, Glasgow, and at Oldershaw School, Wallasey, from where she proceeded to Girton College, Cambridge. She graduated with a double first in English in 1930 and was Ottilie Hancock research fellow at the college from 1932 to 1935. In 1935 she was made an official fellow. 
During the Second World War Bradbrook worked in London for the Board of Trade, and returned to Cambridge as university lecturer in 1945. Even before that she had already published five books of literary criticism: 'Elizabethan Stage Conditions' (1932), 'Themes and Conventions of Elizabethan Tragedy' (1935), 'The School of Night: Study of the Literary Relationships of Sir Walter Ralegh' (1936), 'Andrew Marvell' (1940), written in collaboration with Gwyneth Lloyd Thomas, and 'Joseph Conrad: Poland's English Genius' (1941). While busy in London with her war work she managed to write one more book, 'Ibsen the Norwegian: a Revaluation', published in 1946. Having learned Dano-Norwegian so as to be able to read Ibsen's early work in the original, Bradbrook placed great emphasis on the poetic power of his language. She devotes a chapter to some of his more significant lyrical poems and links the themes of several of them with particular aspects of some of the plays written later. In the preface she wrote, 'The book was written during the intervals of war work in London, where many of Ibsen's countrymen shared the night watches with me, and on one occasion rescued me and my manuscript from the debris of a flying bomb.' This book, and two or three others of hers, are telling testimonies to the breadth of her range. There is, for example, an excellent commentary on Beckett's 'En attendant Godot' in chapter 1 of 'Literature in Action' (1972). Although a specialist in Elizabethan and Jacobean literature (especially dramatic literature), Bradbrook saw poetry, from Aeschylus to Beckett, as being all of a piece, the finest and truest expression of the human spirit. 
Bradbrook was one of the earliest of twentieth-century critics to begin the rehabilitation of Elizabethan drama 'as drama', that is to say to undertake the task of restoring it, whole and undiluted, to the theatre. She was herself an avid theatregoer, trenchantly critical of productions that did less than justice to the text but quick and eager to praise moments of truth perceived and visual poetry realized. Often, both in her writing and in her lectures, she expressed her disapproval of the nineteenth-century tendency to regard Shakespeare as 'mere literature': even the great A. C. Bradley comes under her lash in this regard. The essay for which she won the Harness prize was the basis of her first book: 'Elizabethan Stage Conditions' (1932). For the second edition in 1962 she wrote a brief prefatory note: 'Some sentences in this essay may sound less than just to that great Shakespearean, Harley Granville Barker. When as a youthful student I wrote them, I knew that Granville Barker was one of the adjudicators for the Harness Prize, and was determined not to curry favour. So I slapped the examiner. I have not forgotten his genial kindness then and would like to say now how much I have always admired his work.' Throughout the 1950s and 1960s Bradbrook's work on Shakespeare and the Elizabethans continued to be greeted with superlatives by the best critics of the day: 'The sanest and most stimulating book about Shakespeare to have appeared since the war', said Kenneth Muir about 'Shakespeare and Elizabethan Poetry' (1951); Frank Kermode, in 1962, described 'The Rise of the Common Player', published in that year, as 'A highly original book, which constantly illuminates the drama of the period... A rich, rewarding book'. And James Reeves said the same book 'has the merit of integrating literary history with sociology, instead of separating it off in the manner of earlier writers on the theatre'. 
The University of Cambridge appointed Bradbrook reader in 1962 and professor of English in 1965 (the English faculty's first woman professor). In 1968 she was appointed mistress of Girton. At various times during her career she held visiting professorships at Santa Cruz (California), Kuwait, Seoul, Tokyo, Kenyon College (Ohio), and Rhodes University, South Africa. Reputed to have been tentative, and even somewhat disorganized and vague in everyday matters in her early days at Girton, when she became chairman of the English faculty she very quickly established a reputation for vigorous action and firm decision (with, perhaps, just a touch of the authoritarian). Her clashes with Dr George Steiner, for instance, are still part of Cambridge folklore. But her capacity for clarity of vision, imaginative planning, and sheer hard work was never anywhere in question. 
At the personal level Bradbrook was kind, patient, generous to a fault, and quite without any arrogance or pretentiousness. Her judgement was shrewd without being shrewish, her conversation witty without being facetious. To dozens of her professional colleagues and scores of her former students she was affectionately known as Brad; to her many friends outside her immediate Cambridge circle she was Mollie, though she always wrote as M. C. Bradbrook. In 1969 she had written a history of Girton under the ironic title, 'The Infidel Place'. Girton was, in a very special sense, her second home, the centre of her life and of her remarkable career. She never married. She retired in 1976 and was recognized by Girton as a life fellow. 
In all Bradbrook wrote some seventeen books, several quite brilliant and none negligible. She died at her home, 91 Chesterton Road, Cambridge, on 11 June 1993, and was cremated in Cambridge on 22 June. She left an estate of $705,250, much of it bequeathed in trust for her brother Samuel J. Bradbrook for life, but reverting absolutely to Girton College on his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 51504


Bernard Chastey Braden (1916-1993), actor and broadcaster. Braden, also from Vancouver, was born on 16 May 1916, the son of Edwin Braden, a nonconformist minister, and his wife, Mary, a music teacher. After an education at local schools he began work in 1935 as a radio singer, then an announcer and engineer. After contracting tuberculosis, which interrupted his career for a year, he returned to radio, writing and performing for the CBC. 


@@@@@


doc= 51505


Brandon, (Oscar) Henry (1916-1993), journalist, was born on 9 March 1916 in Liberec, Bohemia -- then part of the Austro-Hungarian empire, but shortly to become part of Czechoslovakia -- the only child of a banker in Prague whose family name was Brandeis. After secondary education in his native country he studied in Lausanne, Switzerland, and at the Charles University of Prague. In 1939, as Hitler's armies swept into Czechoslovakia, he decided, given his Jewish origins, to emigrate to England. His father had died in 1935 and his mother planned to join him as soon as he was settled: that this proved impossible was one of the great sorrows of his life, and fifty-four years later he was buried, by his own wish, beside his parents in Bratislava. 
Arriving in England without a word of the language, Brandon enrolled at the London School of Economics and found employment of a sort in a briar pipe factory. He was lucky enough to fall in with Iain Lang, the foreign editor of the 'Sunday Times', who encouraged him to aim at serious journalism. His first article for the 'Sunday Times' appeared in December 1939, under the heading 'Economic havoc in Prague'. A year later, the paper sent him, by now speaking English proficiently, on a three-month assignment to report on American defence industries. In the event, he remained working in the USA for four years and in 1943 he joined the staff of the paper, after which he became a war correspondent in north Africa, Italy, and France. At the end of the war he reported on the peace conferences and diplomatic meetings in Paris, London, and Moscow, as well as on the early stages of the United Nations in New York. 
By the time he was appointed to the key post of Washington correspondent for the 'Sunday Times' in 1949 -- a move supported by Ian Fleming, then Kemsley Newspapers' foreign manager -- Brandon had come a long way from his modest beginnings. To a good brain and retentive memory he had added wide knowledge of the issues and personalities of post-war politics and diplomacy, and had also won a deserved reputation for discretion -- not a characteristic of most journalists. His own political inclinations, if any, were never made apparent, which is perhaps why so many politicians trusted him. As Washington correspondent for the 'Sunday Times' -- a post he held until 1983 -- he established and maintained a unique relationship with successive American political leaders and influential people. This enabled him to report with singular accuracy on the evolution over a period of thirty-four years of American foreign, defence, and economic policies, especially in the context of the Anglo-American alliance. Among the impressive list of his American contacts and friends were Dean Acheson, President John Kennedy and his wife, Jacqueline, and brother Robert, McGeorge Bundy (Kennedy's national security adviser), Robert McNamara, presidents Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, and Ronald Reagan, Henry Kissinger (this was an especially close relationship), Katherine (Kay) Graham (the owner of the 'Washington Post'), a long stream of British ambassadors, and many others. There was no other representative of a foreign media concern in Washington who enjoyed the access he did. Nor was this extensive network confined to the USA: because of his reputation and standing in Washington, he came to know, inform, and entertain leading British figures ranging from George Brown and Harold Lever to Edward Heath and Margaret Thatcher. 
A journalist for a weekly paper is under less pressure than one filing two or three messages daily. Brandon was able to spend his week garnering information from friends and contacts, so that Sunday after Sunday he could reveal to his readers what was going on, or was due to go on, in Washington's seats of power. To those readers, that is, who read him. This was not popular journalism, in the modern and not always favourable sense. It was aimed at a relatively small group of politicians, policy-makers, diplomatists, and foreign-affairs communities in London, Paris, and perhaps Moscow. And for all its quality of content, this meant, especially as the readership of the 'Sunday Times' widened, that his material often had to be rearranged, sometimes rewritten, by his London editors. The task was made doubly necessary by the fact that English was not his native tongue. He acquiesced in the practice, though he occasionally expressed regret at the loss of a treasured but abstruse allusion. He won numerous prizes for his journalism, and was appointed CBE in 1985. 
The high esteem in which Brandon was held in Washington added greatly to the international lustre of the 'Sunday Times', but his individualism did not make him always an easy colleague on his own ground, which he defended with an unshakeable sense of possession. A good skier, a respectable tennis player, and an interesting if somewhat slow-paced talker, he was welcome at many Washington dinner tables. But it was noticeable that on such occasions he tended to direct most of his attention to the newsworthy rather than to the lesser lights who might be present -- a habit common to many eager journalists. His marriage, in 1970, to Mabel Hobart Wentworth, former wife of Eric Wentworth, did much to smooth these rough edges and to induce a more relaxed manner. He was devoted to their daughter, Fiona. Mabel Brandon later became the social secretary to the White House during the first administration of President Reagan. The Brandons entertained extensively in a splendid house whose garden marched with that of the British embassy. No other foreign correspondent lived in such state, which may perhaps explain the rather grudging attitude towards him of some of Brandon's journalistic colleagues. 
As well as his regular contributions to the 'Sunday Times', Brandon wrote several books, most of them expanding ground already covered in his journalism. Thus 'In the Red: how Sterling Came in from the Cold' (1967) described the events leading up to the devaluation of the pound that year. 'The Retreat of American Power' (1973) analysed the foreign policy of Nixon and Kissinger, and was published in Britain, Germany, and Japan as well as in the USA. His autobiography, 'Special Relationships' (1988), containing some shrewd judgements of men and events, was well received in America but made little impact in the UK. His last book was 'In Search of a New World Order: the Future of US-European Relations' (1992). 
After his retirement Brandon continued to live in Washington, where he was made a senior scholar-in-residence at the Brookings Institute. He maintained his literary output with contributions to American publications, and also produced two small volumes of discussions of foreign policy, under the Brookings imprint. He was a cultivated man; his published interviews with artists and writers were proof, if such were needed, that his interests and range were by no means confined to politics. The kind of 'top people's' journalism to which Brandon was recruited and which he continued to practise had become by the time of his retirement largely a thing of the past. But nothing should detract from his achievements at the height of his Washington career, when his insider knowledge was deemed to be so important that the Nixon administration authorized the tapping of his telephone. It was, in its disagreeable way, a special kind of tribute. 
Brandon died at the Queen Square Neurological Hospital, London, on 20 April 1993, of a cerebral haemorrhage. After his death his widow and daughter, helped by donations from more than 150 friends in Britain and the USA, established the Henry Brandon memorial fellowships, one of whose aims is to take Czech and Slovak journalists to the USA to study the workings of a free press. 


@@@@@


doc= 51506


Ogden, Peter Skene (1789/90-1854), fur trader and explorer in North America, was baptized on 12 February 1790 at the cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Quebec. He was the youngest of the six children of Judge Isaac Ogden (1740-1824) and his second wife, Sarah, 'nee' Hanson. In 1794 the family moved to Montreal, centre of the Canadian fur trade, and in 1809 the young Ogden joined the North West Company. This was a period of fierce competition in the fur trade between the North West Company and the London-based Hudson's Bay Company, and Ogden soon earned an unenviable reputation for violence. When in 1821 the two companies agreed to a coalition, Ogden was specifically excluded from future employment; the ban was lifted when the Hudson's Bay Company realized that he would be a dangerous rival. In 1815 or 1816 he married an unknown Cree Indian woman with whom he had at least one child; when this marriage dissolved in 1818, he married Julia Rivet, a Spokan Indian, in a second 'country marriage', which lasted until 1854. Seven children of this marriage survived him. In 1823 he was appointed chief trader with orders to lead a trapping expedition into the Snake River country. 
On Ogden's six Snake country expeditions between 1824 and 1830 his combative temperament was given full rein. The region extended south of the Columbia River from the continental divide to the Pacific coast, and was one of natural hazards, unpredictable Indians, and rival American traders. Accompanied by 'brigades' of men and horses, he travelled across present-day Oregon and Idaho, and much of California, Nevada, Utah, and Wyoming. He discovered the Humboldt River and sighted Great Salt Lake; on his last expedition in 1830 he may have reached the Lower Colorado River and the Gulf of California. He did much to determine the geography of a region with confusing watersheds and drainage areas, at a time when existing maps showed mysterious westward-flowing rivers and inland seas. 
For the Hudson's Bay Company exploration took second place to trapping. In 1818 the British and American governments had agreed that until a permanent boundary was established the region should be open to nationals of both countries, and company policy was to trap it bare. It was, in effect, a 'scorched-earth' policy to keep the Americans at bay. Ogden proved the ideal man for this task, and under him the Snake country yielded 100 per cent profits. They were profits made at a cost, for even by the tough standards of the fur trade the hardships of the region were exceptional. Men and horses fell sick, were killed by Indian attack, froze in winter, and suffered from heat, lack of water, and fever in the summer. Either to explore or to trap furs was difficult across such terrain; to combine the two as Ogden did was an impressive achievement. 
The rest of Ogden's long career was less remarkable. Promoted chief factor in 1834, he supervised the company's operations in northern British Columbia before returning to Fort Vancouver on the Columbia in 1845. Under the Oregon treaty (1846) this territory became American, and although in 1847 Ogden earned widespread respect when he negotiated the release of forty-seven American settlers taken hostage by Indians after the Whitman massacre, his last years were frustrating ones. Settlers and prospectors replaced fur traders, and in August 1854, in ill health, Ogden left the Columbia for Oregon City, where he died of a brain disease on 27 September 1854 at the age of sixty-four, and was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 51508


Broadbent, Donald Eric (1926-1993), psychologist, was born on 6 May 1926 at 361 Station Road, Yardley, Birmingham, the youngest of the three children of Herbert Arthur Broadbent ('b'. 'c'.1890), accountant, and his wife, Hannah Elizabeth (Margie) Williams (1893-1965), a secretary before her marriage. Although born in Birmingham he resolutely identified himself as Welsh, partly on grounds of ancestry but also because he spent much of his childhood there. His father worked as a sales manager for a multinational company. Although from a poor background he advanced rapidly, and the family was briefly affluent. But at the start of the Second World War he parted from both the company and the family, and Donald never saw him again. His mother 'was determined', wrote Broadbent: 'that never, under any circumstances would I later be handicapped in dealing with people who had a heavier ballast of educational advantage. So instead of getting me to the best schooling she could afford, she made up her mind with sublime arrogance as to which she thought was the best school in the country, and that was were I went: Winchester.' His exhibition was not sufficient to cover all the fees, but his father's pension fund and the school made up the difference. He was steered towards classics by the school, with an assurance that he could follow it up with science. He did not feel at home with history, classics, or later the physical sciences. Already at school he developed an interest in social 'real world' problems. The question of which career to pursue was cut short, apparently with some relief, by the imminence of military service. 
Long fascinated by flying, Broadbent joined the Royal Air Force in 1944. He was first sent to Cambridge for a short engineering course, and later that year went into the RAF proper. In 1945 he sailed on the 'Aquitania' to New York for flying training in the USA. His experience there had several important spin-offs. He became aware of the practical problems of equipment design in relation to human usage. He recounted how in the AT6, a plane with two identical levers close together under the seat, 'with monotonous regularity one or another of my colleagues would pull the wrong lever and drop an expensive airplane onto its belly in the middle of the field'. He also noted the difficulty of reading instruments. A second spin-off was that his training put him in contact with students, and he discovered that psychology was a respectable subject in America. He had also been greatly impressed by the personnel selection battery used by the RAF, which had a concrete and practical quality untouched by his formal studies, and used the 'progressive matrices test' when asked for an assessment of some airmen while still in the RAF. 
On returning to Cambridge, to the surprise and suspicion of the admission committee at Pembroke College, Broadbent announced his determination to study psychology, despite the college's urging him to read chemistry. The college eventually relented and Broadbent joined Sir Frederick Bartlett's department. Bartlett had been actively involved in wartime research on human performance under various demanding, stressful conditions, and this was a context into which Broadbent fitted easily. Bartlett instilled a philosophy that psychological principles should derive from real-life situations whenever possible: that data should determine theory, rather than theory being used to search for data. Thirty years later Broadbent still found this approach 'sound and vital'. A major influence in the department was the brilliant young Kenneth Craik, who died in a tragic accident just before Broadbent arrived, but the intellectual interest in 'cybernetic' control systems was clearly established. The department was poor -- there was only one copy of the standard textbook (Woodworth's 'Experimental Psychology'), for which students queued up on a rota -- but there was an air of excitement over these new developments, and a gifted group of staff and colleagues, including Alan Welford, G. C. Grindley, J. T. MacCurdy, R. H. Thouless, and Derek Russell Davis. 
Broadbent graduated with a first-class degree in moral science in 1949, and on 23 June that year he married his childhood sweetheart, Margaret Elizabeth 
(Peg; 'b'. 1924)
, daughter of Frederick Holden Wright, a proprietor. They had two daughters (one of whom died in a traffic accident in 1979). He remained in Cambridge after his marriage, having secured a post with the Medical Research Council's Applied Psychology Unit (APU) in Cambridge, of which Bartlett was director, studying the effects of noise on performance, for the Royal Navy. Broadbent remained at the APU in Cambridge for the next twenty-five years, during which time he developed his highly influential approach. 
It was a natural experimental move for Broadbent to study the effects of noise using 'vigilance tasks', such as radar watching and other repetitive monitoring demands, as these had been a long-standing interest in the unit. Fortunately he was also able to study less boring tasks, such as air traffic control systems, in which listeners characteristically are confronted with a multitude of signals arriving more or less simultaneously, but can react only to a limited subset. This led him to pursue fresh developments in communication engineering and control theory, and he began to formulate models of systems that showed 'attentional selection' in the context of information theory. The topic of attention, which had remained fallow for many years, was thus reinstated but in information-theoretic terms. Experimental work led Broadbent into the area of short-term memory, from which emerged a model that postulated a limited capacity for input and storage of information. He proposed a selective filtering device located early in the nervous system, preceded by a temporary buffer store. These and other ideas were put together in his book 'Perception and Communication', first published in 1958, which quickly became recognized as a turning point both for him and for the field. In it was planted the germ for a fully flowering growth widely labelled 'cognitive psychology'. Information processing analyses cast in 'box-and-arrow' flow charts became commonplace over the next thirty-five years. 
In the same year as the publication of 'Perception and Communication', the directorship of the APU became vacant, and the Medical Research Council displayed courageous judgement in appointing Broadbent to the post at the relatively young age of thirty-two. The appointment came as a relief to him as until then he had held no tenured post. By this time the APU was one of the largest psychology laboratories in Europe, with a well-developed arrangement with the Royal Navy (which also supplied not only equipment but also many of the human subjects for experiments) and with government departments. The period of Broadbent's directorship from 1958 to 1974 was one of consolidation and development, and the pursuit of interactions with a wide range of potential 'customers', helped by two assistant directors, R. Conrad and E. B. Poulton. Broadbent's own burden was greatly eased by his acquiring, for the first time, a graduate assistant, Margaret Hope Pattison Gregory ('b'. 1929), who was an active and invaluable collaborator for the rest of his career. She was the daughter of the Revd Romney Moncrief Pattison Muir. She and Broadbent married on 11 November 1972, their first marriages both having ended in divorce. 
While director of the APU Broadbent devoted a very large amount of time to promoting psychology, appearing regularly on radio and television. He also foresaw the practical relevance of cognitive psychology to the imminent computer age. Despite heavy administrative burdens in the late 1960s he sat on numerous national committees. But the very size of the APU meant that a great deal of political organization was required, especially when outstations were opened in Oxford, Sussex, and another location in Cambridge. Broadbent was increasingly weighed down -- perhaps even marginalized -- in the organization he had so successfully shaped and nourished. As he ruefully remarked, his colleagues began to apologize when they asked to discuss a scientific point with him, but never apologized if they wanted to raise an administrative matter. 'They saw administration as my job now, on which I 'ought' to spend time.' In 1971 he gave the Medical Research Council three years' notice of his intention to resign, and in 1974 he moved to the Oxford department of experimental psychology as a member of external MRC staff. 
In Oxford the Broadbents gathered around them an active and varied team of research students and post-doctoral collaborators, pursued further developments on the relationship between attention and memory, and initiated new lines of work, such as on the effects of stress and anxiety on the health of industrial workers (in which Broadbent collaborated with psychiatric colleagues), and on implicit learning in complex situations. Despite his reluctance to pursue a university career (he spoke with a touch of pride of the fact that he had never held a university post), he devoted himself to academic and university life with energy and aplomb. He was, in many ways, a more active and donnish member of the university than many of its own appointees. He accepted a fellowship at Wolfson College (he had been a fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge, from 1965 to 1974), chaired the faculty board, sat on many committees, helped with the university campaign, and gave numerous seminars. He also sat on several national committees, and fostered collaborative research links with groups in Germany and Belgium. 
Broadbent injected a 'paradigm shift' into both academic and applied psychology, which continued to permeate wide reaches of both domains. His own breadth of interest was such that he excluded absolutely nothing as a proper subject for study, provided that it was soundly based on empirical observation. He gave encouragement from his prestigious position to groups and areas of research from which others shied away, such as personality research, aptitude assessment, and the study of mood and emotional assessment. He was a perspicacious role model. Paradoxically, although he was adamant about his credentials and commitment to applied psychology, his own contribution may well be considered that of a theoretician, or at least a paradigm maker, a provider of a general theoretical framework, and a brilliant analyst and synthesizer. 
Personally Broadbent appeared as something of a contrast with the all-embracing nature of his intellectual interests. He was a very private person, inscrutable in his personal interactions with colleagues. He once told a former colleague at the APU that he wished he could engage in small talk, but did not know how. He had a puritanical streak, acknowledged and attributed by him to the rigours of his Welsh childhood, which made his judgement on ethical issues invaluable, sound, and trusted. Many were puzzled by his commitment to camping holidays even at a very mature age. He is said to have eschewed the use of taxis if there was any possibility of using public transport, even on arrival after a long transatlantic flight. He continued his solitary walks, especially in the Welsh hills -- where, fittingly, his ashes were ultimately scattered. His seriousness about moral matters no doubt made it more painful for him when he was led to renounce his Christian faith, deeply and strongly held well into middle age, after the death of his daughter as an innocent victim of a road accident in October 1979. One feature of his personality universally commented upon by students and colleagues was his generosity. He was never too busy to speak, listen, or write to people, absorbing each topic or problem and then devoting himself to a full and serious answer. He rarely, if ever, put anyone down -- at most he would produce only a quizzical expression or a muted chuckle. 
Broadbent was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1968, and a foreign associate of the US National Academy of Science in 1971. He was appointed CBE in 1974. He received nine honorary doctorates. He died suddenly and unexpectedly of heart failure at his daughter's home, 31 Narbeth Drive, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, on 10 April 1993. He was survived by her and by his second wife, Margaret. He was cremated at Oxford crematorium on 20 April 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51509


Broadbent, Sir Ewen (1924-1993), civil servant, was born at 23 Vesta Road, Brockley, London, on 9 August 1924, the only child of the Revd Wilfred Broadbent (1880-1945), Baptist minister, and his Scottish wife, Mary, 'nee' Ewen (1890-1972). He attended King Edward VI School, Nuneaton, where he was an almost precocious schoolboy, excelling at languages and games, and was head boy and captain of cricket. In 1942 he moved on to St John's College, Cambridge, to read modern languages, but in 1943 war interrupted his studies. He joined the Gordon Highlanders, in which he rose to the rank of captain, and saw service in Egypt and Norway. He returned to Cambridge in 1947 and graduated in 1949 with a distinction in oral German. 
After leaving Cambridge, Broadbent took the home civil service and the Foreign Office examinations. He was in the top three of both. He joined the Air Ministry as an assistant principal in 1949. He rapidly made his mark and after being private secretary to two official members of the Air Council he was private secretary to three successive secretaries of state for air, from 1955 to 1959. These were difficult times -- the Suez crisis, spiralling costs of equipment, and much argument both within the Air Ministry and among the three services. Broadbent maintained a steady hand and earned widespread respect. In 1959 he was promoted assistant secretary and in 1961 he was dispatched to Cyprus as deputy chief officer of the recently established British sovereign base areas, becoming chief officer in 1964. He established an administration which stood the test of time remarkably well. After returning to Whitehall in 1965 he was private secretary to the secretary of state for defence, Denis Healey, from 1967 to 1968, and spent eighteen months deeply involved in the contentious arguments of the time, particularly those concerning the withdrawal of British forces from the Far East. 
In January 1969 Broadbent became an assistant under-secretary, but soon after disaster struck. He was rushed to hospital following a heart attack and suffered another heart attack after leaving intensive care. It was a measure of the man that he returned to work in the autumn of 1969 and in 1972 became deputy under-secretary of state (air) with a seat on the air force board. It had become increasingly apparent that Broadbent had a particular talent for management and organization, coupled with the ability to persuade people to do what he wanted. Hence in 1975 he became deputy under-secretary of state (civilian management) for the whole of the Ministry of Defence. In 1982 he became second permanent under-secretary of state with a seat on each of the three service boards, which were primarily concerned with the organization and management of their services. For nearly a decade he took pride of place in bringing about changes in management and organization. He was firm but fair. One yardstick of his success was that during this period the number of civilian employees in the Ministry of Defence was reduced by about 25 per cent. Broadbent oversaw and managed these changes with great skill, and rightly earned the respect of the trade unions. He tackled the thorny question of reorganizing the Ministry of Defence police and placing them on a statutory footing. He was deeply involved in implementing the reforms that Michael Heseltine introduced soon after he became secretary of state for defence in 1983. 
Broadbent was renowned for his immense ability to bring about change without too much bloodshed. He was a fine judge of what was possible, but with a strong bias for moving forward. His skills in dealing with people had no doubt been honed by his six private secretary appointments. His determination and courage were exemplified by his success in rising to the highest ranks of his service, despite his illness in 1969. His character was perhaps the result of his Scottish ancestry and of his being a son of the manse. He was by any standards a first-class administrator. His benign and gentle appearance belied his effectiveness. He had an ironic sense of humour and a generally quizzical approach, and much enjoyed the company of his many friends. 
Following his retirement Broadbent was in much demand. He was vice-chairman of the Council of the Royal United Service Institute for which he wrote a book, 'The Military and Government', published in 1988; vice-chairman of the Farnborough Aerospace Development Foundation and of the Carroll Foundation, which endowed the chair of Irish history at Hertford College, Oxford; chairman of International Military Services; and an enthusiastic trustee of the Royal Air Force Museum. He was also as a trustee deeply involved in seeking to recover the missing millions from the Daily Mirror pension fund. Perhaps closest to his heart was his chairmanship of the Council of Voluntary Welfare Work from 1985, and from 1988 of Look Ahead -- the latter dedicated to providing temporary homes in south London for single homeless people, and training them for jobs. In both these active appointments he felt he was partly redeeming a debt to those less fortunate than himself. 
Broadbent was a fine sportsman all his life. In his earlier days he played much squash and cricket. He later concentrated on golf and found time to be captain of his club and write its centennial history. He was appointed CMG in 1965, CB in 1973, and KCB in 1984. On 3 February 1951 he married Barbara David ('b'. 1919), then a squadron leader in the Women's Royal Air Force. They had one son. Broadbent died of a heart attack on Hampstead golf course on 27 February 1993; his remains were cremated at Breakspear crematorium, Ruislip, Middlesex, on 4 March. He was survived by his wife and son. 


@@@@@


doc= 51515


Menchik, Vera Francevna (1906-1944), chess player, was born in Moscow on 16 February 1906, the daughter of Franz Mencik (died in or before 1937), a mill owner, who was of Czech origin. Her mother was English. The family moved to Hastings in 1921 and the young Vera, who had been playing chess since the age of nine, became a pupil of Geza Maroczy a year or so later. 
In 1927 the Federation Internationale des Echecs (FIDE) organized both the first chess Olympiad and the first world championship for women; both events ran concurrently, apart from 1928, until the outbreak of the Second World War. Menchik won every one of the women's competitions, in London (1927), Hamburg (1930), Prague (1931), Folkestone (1933), Warsaw (1935), Stockholm (1937), and Buenos Aires (1939). Such was her domination of the women's game that in these seven tournaments she won seventy-eight games, drawing four and losing only one. She also put her title at stake in two privately arranged matches against her closest rival, Sonja Graf, defeating this German-born opponent in 1934 and 1937. 
Menchik played her first championship tournament as a Russian, the next five as a Czech, and the last as a Briton, having married Rufus Henry Streatfield Stevenson (1877/8-1943), secretary of the British Chess Federation, on 19 October 1937. Her husband, a pharmacist, was a widower twenty-eight years her senior. She also played in such men's tournaments as did not exclude women. Although she usually finished in the second half of the score in these contests, her positional style and mastery of the endgame occasionally brought her victories over the greatest masters of the day. Men she defeated were granted the dubious honour of membership of the 'Menchik Club'. Among these were the Dutchman Max Euwe and the American Samuel Reshvsky. Another victim was the 77-year-old Jacques Mieses, whom she beat in 1942, but this victory was not widely reported, to lessen the veteran's indignity at defeat at the hands of a mere woman. 
Vera Menchik was not only the foremost woman player of all time: she devoted her life to the game. A professional player, she also wrote articles for chess magazines, gave lessons, and undertook lecture tours. In 1939 she was appointed manager of the National Chess Centre, which had been set up largely at the instigation of herself and her husband. In 1940 the building was totally destroyed in an air raid. She herself died along with her mother and her sister Olga, also a chess player, on 26 June 1944, when her home, 47 Gauden Road, Clapham, London, was hit in a German V1 flying bomb raid. She was immortalized in 1957, when FIDE inaugurated the women's Olympiad. The trophy for the winning team was called the Vera Menchik cup. 


@@@@@


doc= 51517


Yates, Frederick Dewhurst (1884-1932), chess player and journalist, was born plain Fred Yates at Huddersfield Road, Birstall, near Leeds, on 16 January 1884, the son of John Thomas Yates, a mechanical fitter, and his wife, Ada Ellen, 'nee' Dewhurst. On leaving Birstall Wesleyan day school in 1898 he took employment in the accounts department of the Birstall district council. In 1901 he moved to London, seeking work as a freelance journalist, with modest results. By 1905 he was back in Yorkshire, and his chess career began. He was not a born chess genius, but achieved his status by diligence. In 1906 he barely scraped into the Yorkshire team, but by 1909 he had become the county champion and made his first appearance in the British championship, held that year in Scarborough. He tied with Joseph Henry Blackburne for the fourth prize. Blackburne, near the end of his career, was the only English player to make a living solely from chess in the nineteenth century, and now Yates decided to follow the same path. 
In 1910 Yates played in his first international tournament, held at Hamburg. The leading German player Dr Tarrasch objected to Yates's presence on the grounds that he was not yet strong enough. The only win Yates scored there was against Tarrasch. This is an early example of an aspect of Yates's character -- a strengthening of resolve when under fire. In 1913 Yates won the first of six British championships (1913, 1914, 1921, 1926, 1928, 1931), and also his first prize in a foreign event. Perhaps because of his frail physique and nervous disposition Yates did not serve in the First World War, but in the post-war decade his career reached its peak. By then the emphasis of his play had shifted from violent tactics to subtle positional manoeuvring. 
Between 1919 and 1932 Yates played in almost sixty international tournaments. Although he never quite reached the highest level, he defeated all the leading players with the exception of Capablanca and Lasker, two of the four world champions he met. A curious feature was that the better the opposition the stronger his game became. Against weaker opponents his play could be lacklustre and careless. Perhaps his best performances in grandmaster tournaments were at San Remo in 1930, when he was fifth out of sixteen, and at Carlsbad in 1923, when he won six games, drew seven, and lost four. He was awarded a special brilliancy prize there for his defeat of the future world champion Alekhine. 
In many events Yates played under the serious disadvantage of also working as a journalist covering the whole competition. Some experts consider this to be equivalent to giving the odds of a pawn in each game. His reports and weekly chess columns appeared in the 'Manchester Guardian', 'Daily Telegraph', 'Yorkshire Evening Post', and 'Yorkshire Weekly Post'. With his close friend William Winter, Yates wrote three books; two covered each of the world championship matches of 1927 and 1928, and the third was 'Modern Master Play' (1929). Having begun an autobiographical work, 'One-Hundred-and-One of my Best Games of Chess', Yates was found dead from gas poisoning on 11 November 1932. Last seen alive at midnight on 9 November, he did not emerge from his room at 32 Coram Street, St Pancras, London, on the 10th, and his door was forced on the 11th. He was buried five days later at Birstall. The autobiography was completed by William Winter and published in 1934. 
A great conversationalist over a wide range of topics, Yates enjoyed convivial company late into the night. Some disliked his bohemian lifestyle and false rumours spread, never to stop completely, that he had taken his own life. At the inquest on 15 November a gas company employee demonstrated that the tap was turned off and that a faulty fitting of an obsolete type had caused the gas leak. A verdict of accidental death was returned. As the nearest relatives, two sisters, were almost penniless, the costs of Yates's funeral and his debts to his landlady were met by the chess world. In those lean days it was not possible for a British chess professional to have a wife, family, or home. 
Emanuel Lasker, world champion for a record twenty-seven years, said of Yates: 'At first he went unnoticed but very soon one awoke to the fact that he was intensely likeable and before long his great moral power became evident. He never indulged in intrigue, he never pushed himself to the fore, he never quarrelled. Cheerfully going his very straight way, ready, if need be, to undergo privations, he never did aught contrary to his self-respect. (Yates and Winter, 22-3)' 



@@@@@


doc= 51518


Brown, James (1921-1993), petroleum engineer, was born on 13 March 1921 at 151 Cartvale Road, Glasgow, the son of William Brown, engineer's toolmaker, and his wife, Margaret-Ann, formerly Cameron. Brown was educated at Queen's Park secondary school, Glasgow, then became a tax officer, an experience which stood him in good stead when he joined Shell. The Second World War changed his life. Enlisted in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, he underwent tough commando training in Lochaber, and volunteered -- the youngest to be accepted -- for the hazardous raid on the U-boat pens of St Nazaire in 1942. Along with other members of no. 5 commando, Brown protected HMS 'Campbelltown', which, disguised as a German ship, rammed the dock gates with explosive; inevitably, he was captured. He was dispatched to Stalag 8B, 60 miles east of Breslau. An ever-determined escaper, his first attempt ended in tragi-comedy. He managed to dye his overcoat and scarf with polish. Alas, with sweat, the polish began to run on to his neck and skin, presenting a most remarkable spectacle. So he dived into a public lavatory in the town of Opeln, only to find that five minutes later the door was forced open by two members of the Gestapo. They frogmarched him, and made him sit between them on a tramcar on the way back to camp. Nothing daunted, when the conductor came along, Brown said sweetly: 'A penny half to Sauchiehall Street, Missus!' Even the Gestapo, one of whom had been in Britain before the war, did not suppress a smirk. After further unsuccessful attempts to escape, it was 'Fifth Time Lucky', the title of his memoirs, and a dramatic escape to Switzerland, where he worked on an English-language publication until the autumn of 1944, when the American army reached the Franco-Swiss border. Brown was awarded the Military Medal. 
On demobilization Brown became a miner in Auchengeoch colliery, near Glasgow. A grant from the commandos gave him entrance to the mining engineering course at the Royal Technical College in Glasgow, and subsequently Glasgow University. On 18 June 1948 he married Catherine Ann MacDonald (1923-1990), a clerk, and from 1948 until 1975, he worked for Shell in Trinidad, Turkey, Kuwait, and Venezuela, but frequently returned to London and the Netherlands to participate in Shell's most advanced training courses. 
Brown had a global understanding of the oil industry. Briefing government officials and ministers on legislation on North Sea oil in the period 1975-90, he would insist: 'If you do things purely for the advantage of Britain in UK legislation, just remember that there is a tit-for-tat effect.' 
At fifty-four Brown was recruited as the first professor of petroleum engineering at Heriot-Watt. This Edinburgh engineering and science-based university had by 1975 an internationally formidable reputation in offshore engineering, and now needed to develop the expertise needed to get the reserves out of the sea-bed. He also brought to Heriot-Watt immense and important goodwill: Royal Dutch Shell crucially lent him the services of a clever young Dutchman, Bau van Ort. Brown was uniquely placed to get money out of the oil companies for the young department and gathered around him a talented and subsequently distinguished staff who were united in their respect for the blunt and genial professor. 
Brown and his ever supportive wife entertained many overseas students at their house at Dundarroch on Loch Ard, near Aberfoyle. Incalculable goodwill towards Britain remained with many of those who shared these beautiful surroundings, and subsequently attained important posts in their own country's oil industry. After Brown retired in 1981 he worked for Britoil, and set up a company: Edinburgh Petroleum Services. His wife died suddenly in Tenerife, where they had gone for health reasons in 1990. Brown moved to Hampshire, where his son William Allan Brown was living, and he died at Frimley Park Hospital, Surrey, on 5 December 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51522


Bufton, Sydney Osborne (1908-1993), air force officer, was born on 12 January 1908 at Teviot, Temple Avenue, Llandrindod Wells, Radnorshire, the second son in the family of four sons and one daughter of James Osborne Bufton, a tobacconist, and later an estate agent, alderman, and JP, and his wife, Florence, 'nee' Peters. Educated at Llandrindod Wells community school (1920-22) and Dean Close School, Cheltenham (1922-6), he showed an early aptitude for radio, constructing one of the first crystal sets in Wales. In 1926-7 he was an engineering pupil at Vickers; he attended evening classes at Erith Technical College and in June 1927 gained an intermediate BSc. 
Bufton then successfully applied for RAF pilot training, reporting to Uxbridge on 16 December 1927 for an initial drill and discipline course, and was posted to 4 flying training school, Abu Sueir, Egypt. Instructed on Avro 504Ks, he gained his wings on 22 October 1928; then, as a pilot officer, he was posted in December to 100 squadron, which had Horsley day bombers. After seventeen months there he was sent to the Central Flying School, and in August 1930 he was posted to 5 flying training school as an instructor. But in order to gain a specialist qualification and a permanent career in the RAF he applied for an aeronautical engineering course at the home aircraft depot in Henlow. In September 1932 he was awarded a permanent commission, and in July 1933 he completed his course. 
In October 1933 Bufton was posted as engineering officer to the aircraft depot in Hinaidi, Iraq. Having bought a Rolls-Royce Silver Ghost for $8, he had it shipped out to Basrah, then drove it to Baghdad. It proved to be an invaluable unit transport. In June 1934 he passed a colloquial Arabic exam; and while on UK leave in August that year he was cabled by Lady Hoare, the wife of the British minister in Tehran, asking if he would fly out a DH Gipsy Major Moth. He agreed and made the flight with Flying Officer Jack Larking of 55 squadron, based at Hinaidi. Then in June 1935 he was asked by the Iraq Petroleum Company if he would fly a DH Dragon back to the UK, which he did in July after applying for twenty-eight days' annual leave. When in July 1936 his overseas tour ended he was posted to the department of training in the Air Ministry, where his work involved overseeing the practical implications of the RAF expansion schemes. 
In January 1939 Bufton was sent on the Staff College course at Andover and completed it just before the outbreak of war, when he was posted to France with no. 2 mission. He then served at the British air forces headquarters until they were ordered to move to Nantes; he left there as the Panzers rolled in and was flown back to the UK on 17 June 1940. Bufton was posted to nos 19 and 20 operational training units to fly Whitleys before being sent to command 10 squadron, with which he undertook nineteen operations. In November 1940 he was awarded the DFC. On the night of 24-5 October his youngest brother, John, flying with 49 squadron, had been lost when his Hampden came down in the sea near Skegness. 
On 12 April 1941 Bufton was posted to Linton on Ouse to form 76 squadron with Halifaxes. He converted to the new type but was then promoted group captain and ordered to open up Pocklington, which he commanded to the end of October. With effect from 1 November he was deputy director, bomber operations, at the Air Ministry. In this appointment, and as director from March 1943 to June 1945, he deployed his considerable writing skill to bring about operational improvements in Bomber Command -- the provision of three emergency airfields, radar navigation, and target-finding aids, and the establishment of a Pathfinder force (which he proposed, despite opposition from the commander-in-chief, Sir Arthur Harris, and in which his younger brother Hal served with great distinction). In 1944 he advocated attacks on precision targets such as oil supplies and the ball-bearing industry rather than area bombing of German cities. Arguing cogently and with clarity, he was 'beating Bert [Harris] at his own game', as the chief of the air staff, Sir Charles Portal, put it. 
On 1 January 1943 'the little Air Commodore' (as Churchill called him) married (Maureen Anthony Osra) Susan Browne ('b'. 1921), who served in the WRNS and modelled for recruiting photographs; she was the daughter of Colonel Edgar Browne, army officer. They had two daughters, Carol and Marilyn. In the 1945 new year honours he was made a CB; he was also made a commander of the Legion of Merit by the president of the USA in October 1945, and a commander (with swords) of the order of Orange Nassau by the queen of the Netherlands in November 1947. 
Bufton held a succession of important post-war appointments: air officer commanding Egypt (1945-6); officer commanding tactics wing, central bomber establishment (1946-8); assistant chief of air staff (operation/plans), air forces, Western Europe (1948-51); director of weapons, Air Ministry (1951-2); air officer administration, Bomber Command (1952-3); air officer commanding British forces, Aden (as an air vice-marshal) (1953-5); senior air staff officer, Bomber Command (1955-8); and finally assistant chief of air staff (intelligence) (1958-61). He retired in October 1961. 
Bufton then returned to one of his youthful interests, radio, and founded Radionic Products, which after eight years' successful trading was bought out by Philips. He was often called upon to comment upon books and programmes about the bombing offensive in the Second World War, telling a BBC researcher that 'without Bomber Command the war would have been lost' (private information). In 1967 he was appointed high sheriff of Radnorshire, and three years later he was elected a fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society, sponsored by Dr Barnes Wallis and Sir Frank Whittle. 
Buf Bufton was a keen sportsman, playing hockey for Wales, the combined services, and the RAF, and excelling at other sports; he was also an amateur artist and poet. He died at Epsom General Hospital on 29 March 1993 following a stroke, shortly after he and his wife had celebrated their golden wedding; he was survived by his wife and their two daughters. At a service of thanksgiving for his life in St Mark's Church, Reigate, on 6 April his poem 'Flight', extolling the airman's freedom in his element -- 'Gods now, not men. No longer bound to earth' -- was read by his grandson Alex Hieatt. 


@@@@@


doc= 51523


Bulmer, (George Henry) Bertram (1902-1993), cider manufacturer and business entrepreneur, was born on 30 August 1902 at Fair Oaks Cottage, Kings Acre Road, Hereford, the eldest of the three sons of Edward Frederick Bulmer (1865-1941) ['see under 'Bulmer, Henry Percival] and his wife, Sophie, 'nee' Rittner (1874?-1968), who was of German parentage but was born in Liverpool. Educated at Bedales School, Shrewsbury School, and King's College, Cambridge, he obtained a master's degree in modern languages before joining his father's family firm. H. P. Bulmer had been founded in Hereford in 1887 with a loan from Bertram's clergyman grandfather, the Revd C. H. Bulmer. Beginning as a small family organization, Bulmer's was for many years the largest employer in Hereford. 
Fluent in both German and French, young Bulmer worked in every department of the firm and strongly believed that such experience was vital to understanding the nature of business. Appointed a director in 1924, he went to Normandy and Brittany to purchase apples at a time of company expansion. On 29 July 1933 he married, in King's College chapel, Christine Mary Frederica Laughton (1912-2000), who had been born in San Francisco. Then, with the repeal of prohibition, Bulmer went across to the United States to sell to Americans the concept of cider drinking. Company policy was to buy up small troubled cider factories, and in 1937 a 50 per cent interest was acquired in Bulmer, Magner & Co., along with W. Magner's extensive cider fruit orchards in the vicinity of Clonmel, co. Tipperary. During the Second World War Bulmer preferred to remain a sergeant in the Home Guard, unwilling to leave the ranks but enjoying the occasional romps inseparable from army life near to home. In the 1940s he served as a Liberal member of the Hereford rural district council, and in his younger days he had chaired the Hereford co-operative housing venture. Holidays were spent often in the company of Bancroft Clark, of the well-known firm of shoe manufacturers C. & J. Clark, of Street, in Somerset, or rough shooting and fly fishing for trout. 
A profitable sideline was initiated with the establishment of a plant in Hereford to make pectin preservative for jam-setting from waste apple pomace, which until then had been dumped or sold to the pectin producers of the day. In the ongoing quest for citrus peel to improve the quality of the firm's pectin base, the 1960s saw production companies set up in Ghana (since the 1940s a supplier of this peel) and Australia, the latter for cider brandy. 
A director for sixty-three years, Bulmer succeeded his cousin Howard Bulmer as chairman from 1966 to 1973, when he handed over the chairmanship to the first non-family member, although he stayed on as a non-executive director until 1987. In 1970 he steered the company through a heady period of expansion leading up to stock-market flotation. He is best remembered, however, for reviving the art of apple brandy distillation -- something not attempted in England for at least two centuries. Brussels was not amused, and thereupon a spirited fight was waged against European bureaucracy on methods of distillation and hostility to the notion of British brandy. In retirement Bulmer was in robust form, battling with the obfuscation and entrenched prejudice that tried to confine the term brandy to grape distillation. Eventually he won the right to be the first man in England since 1763 to be granted a customs and excise licence to distil apple brandy, using a Heath Robinson contraption of copper drum and curling pipes discovered in Normandy, to produce King Offa Cider Brandy. The queen and the prince of Wales conferred royal patronage on his cider and donated oaks from royal estates to make the maturation casks, and her majesty was rewarded with the first bottle of legitimate apple brandy at the firm's centenary in 1987. Bulmer held the queen's warrant for cider supply for many years and became a freeman of the city of Hereford. When buyers began to take the word 'offa(er)' too literally, the brand label was changed to Hereford Cider Brandy, although King Offa is still made available at the Cider Museum. 
In retirement, Bulmer oversaw the Bulmer cider festival, and, after some years of planning, in 1973 he founded the Hereford Cider Museum Trust; the museum opened in 1981. Aged seventy, he opened the road race at the festivities of 1973 on a penny-farthing bicycle which he had learned to ride for the occasion. As was remarked at the time, there was no shortage of his own brew to steady the nerves. Such activity probably surprised and delighted the majority of the workforce, Bulmer's image being a microcosm of the paternal, punctilious employer of yesteryear, demanding respect, loyalty, and reliability in return for caring, compassionate, and structured stewardship of employees' livelihoods. Bulmer was honoured with the presidency of the National Association of Cider Makers and was life president of the European Cider Markets Association. He valued highly his election to membership of the Worshipful Company of Distillers and the French Calvados Connoisseurs' Association. Bulmer died at his home, Little Breinton, Breinton, Herefordshire, on 5 January 1993, survived by his widow, four sons, and a daughter. He was cremated. Christine Bulmer died on 30 September 2000 and was buried at Credenhill church, where many Bulmers lie. 


@@@@@


doc= 51524


Thomas, Ivor Bulmer- (1905-1993), writer and politician, was born Ivor Thomas on 30 November 1905 at Cwmbran, Monmouthshire, the third of four children of Alfred Ernest Thomas (1876-1918), brick drawer, and his wife, Zipporah Jones (died 1954), domestic servant. 'He trailed great clouds of intellectual glory. His academic performance was dazzling': thus in a memorial address Lord Jenkins of Hillhead, a protege of whose father, Arthur Jenkins MP, Ivor Thomas was. In 1918 he entered Jones's West Monmouth School, Pontypool, and in 1924 he won a scholarship to St John's College, Oxford. He attained a first in mathematical moderations in 1925 and a first in 'literae humaniores' in 1928. While studying divinity, a doctrinal dispute with the college's president led him to move to Magdalen College as a senior demy in theology (1929-30). He represented Oxford against Cambridge at athletics and cross-country running, winning the 3 miles in 1927. In 1926 he was a member of the Welsh international cross-country team. But for an injury he would have been selected for the 800 metres in the 1928 Olympic games. 
In 1930 Thomas wrote the first of his thirteen books, 'Our Lord Birkenhead', which resulted from its subject's keen interest in university athletics. It was full of 1920s Oxford wit and was dedicated to 'my creditors'. His biography of Lord Gladstone of Hawarden, the prime minister's son, was published in 1936. It resulted from a year's study at St Deiniol's Library, Hawarden, in 1930. His 'Top Sawyer', a biography of the businessman and politician Lord Davies of Llandinam, followed in 1938. His first book dealing with current affairs, 'Coal in the New Era', appeared in 1930, when the trend was, as he put it, 'definitely away from coal to oil' ('Coal in the New Era', 213). In that year he joined 'The Times' as a sub-editor, contributing occasional leaders, articles on sporting and scientific subjects, and, later on, obituaries. In 1937 he moved to the 'News Chronicle' as chief leader writer for two years. Fourteen years later he became for a year acting deputy editor of the 'Daily Telegraph'. Over many years he wrote articles for numerous newspapers, and especially reviews for the 'Times Literary Supplement'. 
On 5 April 1932, at the church of St Mary the Virgin, Pimlico, Thomas married Dilys (1910-1938), daughter of Dr William Llewelyn Jones of Merthyr Tudful; they had one son. Many years after her death he published 'Dilysia: a Threnody' (1987), the quality of whose verse was of a very high order. On 26 December 1940, at Hereford Cathedral, he married (Margaret) Joan, daughter of E. F. Bulmer of Adam's Hill, Hereford; they had a son and two daughters. He added Bulmer to his surname by deed poll in 1952. 
Having joined the Territorials in 1938, Thomas served during the Second World War as a fusilier in the Royal Fusiliers, and in 1941 was promoted captain in the Royal Norfolk regiment. His command of Italian (one of the six languages he spoke and read fluently) led to a post in Hugh Dalton's Ministry of Economic Warfare, from where he fed propaganda into Mussolini's Italy. In 1942 he published 'Warfare by Words', which 'The Times' called 'a direct, if guarded, attack on British propaganda'. This was followed in 1946 by 'The Problem of Italy'. 
In 1935 Thomas contested Sir John Simon's Spen Valley seat in Yorkshire, as a Labour candidate, losing by only 600 votes. In 1942, under the wartime truce, he was elected unopposed at a by-election at Keighley. This seat he easily retained in the 1945 election. Attlee then appointed him parliamentary under-secretary at the Ministry of Civil Aviation. In 1946 he steered the controversial 'Civil Aviation Bill' through the Commons. Typically, he obtained a pilot's licence so as to appreciate the difficulties facing civil airline pilots. Late in 1946 he was transferred, still as an under-secretary, to the Colonial Office, becoming a delegate to the general assembly of the United Nations and the first British member of the Trusteeship Council, but after a year of much globe-trotting he was summarily dropped from the government in a reshuffle. His disillusionment with socialism had already become apparent. During the debate on the king's speech in 1948 he resigned from the party. In a witty but heartfelt speech from the opposition benches, almost designed to elicit rage from his former colleagues, he excoriated 'the planners, who are trying to make a land fit for zeros' ('Hansard 5C', 113). His 'The Socialist Tragedy' was published in 1949. It is dedicated to 'all Social Democrats', hoping that they would choose democracy and eschew socialism. He joined the Social Democratic Party in 1981. He was soundly defeated as Conservative candidate for Newport, Monmouthshire, in 1950. Thus ended his political career, though in 1965 he published his two-volume 'The Growth of the Party System'. Typically, on losing the election he drove with friends across the Sahara Desert in a jeep. 
Brought up a strict Baptist, at Oxford he became a devout high-Anglican. He was chairman of the Faith Press and a vice-president of the Church Union. In 1950 he was elected to the house of laity of the church assembly (later the general synod), serving for thirty-five years. The force and pungency of his numerous interventions in debate were much admired but not always agreed with. In the second half of his life his overriding interest lay in the conservation of buildings of historical and architectural quality under threat, especially redundant churches. In 1952 he presented the archbishop of Canterbury with his seminal report, 'The preservation of 'our' churches'. This led to the creation of the grant-giving Historic Churches Preservation Trust, which he ran from its inception. In 1955 he piloted through the synod the inspection of churches measure, which made structural surveys compulsory quinquennially, thus largely eliminating 'repairs crises', which hitherto had carried off many fine churches. 
In 1956 there occurred Bulmer-Thomas's tempestuous public row with Archbishop Fisher. This led to his resignation from the Historic Churches Preservation Trust. The essence of the quarrel was the trustees' insistence, backed by Fisher, that its funds be withheld from churches that were closed or facing closure, and allocated by diocese irrespective of architectural or historic merit. Bulmer-Thomas is said to have declared that Fisher had 'held a pistol to my face, while the Dean of Gloucester plunged his dagger into my back' ('The Times', 8 Oct 1993). In time Bulmer-Thomas got his way when the report of the Bridges commission, set up by the two archbishops, appeared in 1960. This led to the 1968 pastoral measure which created the Redundant Churches Fund, of which Bulmer-Thomas was chairman until 1976. The measure established the principle of church and state sharing the cost of keeping redundant churches as monuments in the fund's possession. The Friends of Friendless Churches, which he founded in 1957, maintained those that fell through the net. From 1958 he was for thirty-five years first secretary and then chairman of the Ancient Monuments Society. When he was appointed CBE in 1984 for his conservationist efforts, he quipped that, in his case, CBE stood for 'Churches Before Evangelism'. 
Throughout his varied career Bulmer-Thomas pursued his interest in ancient and medieval mathematics. His two-volume 'Selections Illustrating the History of Greek Mathematics' (1939-41) remained in print for many years. His contributions, in various languages, to learned journals were numerous. He conversed with Einstein and knew Planck and Rutherford, but he regarded Newton as 'the supreme genius' ('The Independent', 13 Oct 1993). In 1979 Warwick University awarded him an honorary DSc degree at the instigation of the mathematics department. 
Bulmer-Thomas was a strongly-built, soft-spoken man of exceptional mental and physical stamina, who needed at most five hours' sleep, reading Dante in the original nocturnally. He was a great fighter for what he believed to be right, attacking -- no holds barred -- big targets, never any that could not return fire. He had virtually total recall, never keeping an engagement diary. Without personal vanity, unpretentious, almost sloppily dressed, he was a workaholic. 'I 'like' cold omelettes', he would reply to his wife's despairing call to a meal. He was working a few minutes before he died of a heart attack at his home, 12 Edwardes Square, Kensington, London, on 7 October 1993, having just written a letter to the 'Daily Telegraph' (printed on the same day as his obituary) and another to a friend declaring that he was 'refreshing his memory of the theory of relativity'. He was survived by his second wife; his ashes were interred on 22 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 51526


Wilson, John Burgess (1917-1993), writer and composer, was born on 25 February 1917 at Carisbrook Street, Harpurhey, Manchester, the only son of Joseph Wilson (1883-1938) and his wife, Elisabeth Burgess (died 1919). Joe Wilson was a bookkeeper who played the piano in picture houses and pubs; his wife was Beautiful Belle Burgess of the local music-halls. Both parents came from recusant Catholic stock -- he Lancastrian, she Scots -- and they met playing the halls. 
Belle died of influenza in 1919; the eighteen-month-old boy was found next to her body and that of his sister, born in 1914. Joe remarried, but neither he nor his new wife, Maggie Dwyer, a publican, cared much for the child. In 1924 they gave up the pub and crossed town to run a tobacconist's shop at 21 Princess Road, Moss Side. The memory of Maggie informs the cruel muses and dominatrices who recur in Burgess's writing. 
Although educated at Xaverian College, Manchester (1928-37), and Manchester University (1937-40), Burgess was self-taught in his lifelong disciplines: linguistics and music. Xaverian was a Jesuit school the purpose of which, Burgess implied many years later, was simply 'to get you through this world with a pass into the next' ('Celebration', Granada Television, 1980). He lost his faith while still at school. For a 'cradle' Catholic to leave the church, he explained, was like the draining of the contents of the skull; but he never lost his belief in original sin nor his faith in the unexpected revelations of everyday life. 
Burgess most wanted to be a composer. Manchester was a musical city, and at twelve Burgess built a crystal radio through which he first heard Debussy's 'L'apres-midi d'un faune'. Although his father would not pay for piano lessons, he took him to the Mancunian world premiere of Constant Lambert's jazzy 'Rio Grande' in the same year, and this confirmed Burgess as a kind of eclectic musical impressionist with a passion for counterpoint. Before even leaving school, he had written a cello concerto and a symphony, but he was unable to read music at Manchester University because he had failed physics, then thought essential for understanding acoustics. Instead, he read English for a BA honours degree, emerging with a second in 1940. 
Between 1940 and 1946 Burgess served in the British army education corps. Sergeant-Major Burgess taught 'The British way and purpose' to prepare squaddies for the egalitarian peace none of them -- least of all himself -- believed in. Earlier he had managed to be musical director of the 54th division entertainment sector. 
On 22 January 1942 Burgess married Llewela Isherwood Jones (1920/21-1968), whom he had met at university. Known as Lynne, she was half-Lancastrian, half-Welsh. It was a stormy and very public marriage, much of it conducted in home counties pubs and the bars of Soho and Chiswick, with vigorous infidelity on both sides. While he was serving in Gibraltar, Lynne was beaten up by four American deserters in the London black-out and lost the child she was carrying -- the bitter aftershock resounds, unmistakably, in 'A Clockwork Orange'. She became alcoholic, dying from cirrhosis of the liver on 20 March 1968; Burgess, close to alcoholism as Lynne grew worse, pulled clear of it after her death. He remembered writing in the 1960s as 'an agony mitigated by drink' (Burgess, 'You've had your Time', pt 2). 
After the war Burgess taught for fourteen years, first with the Central Advisory Council for Forces Education, then at Banbury grammar school. He wrote the first of thirty-one novels in 1949, but 'A Vision of Battlements' was rejected by publishers in London on the grounds that it was a 'second' novel, not a first. He was advised to go away and write the first one first. 
From 1954 to 1959 Burgess was an education officer in Malaya and Brunei, training teachers, and himself teaching at the Malay College, Kuala Kangia, 'the Eton of the East'. He loved the diversity of Malaya, then undergoing a violent war of independence from the British. More than anything else, Malaya was the experience that turned John Wilson the teacher into Anthony Burgess the writer. Anthony was his confirmation name and was first used on 'Time for a Tiger' (1956). 
The Malayan trilogy of novels -- 'Time for a Tiger', 'The Enemy in the Blanket' (1958), and 'Beds in the East' (1959), eventually assembled under the title 'The Long Day Wanes' -- chronicles the end of empire. Burgess's Malaya takes its place alongside Forster's India, Waugh's Africa, and Greene's Indo-China. But two distinctions set Burgess apart. The first is the protean comedy of speech, which leads a riotous, uncontrollably resourceful life of its own; the second is a pagan sense of nature and mankind sharing one common life, which owes more to Asia than to Europe. Burgess would write more rigorous and experimental fiction than 'The Long Day Wanes' -- novels containing poems, film treatments, transcripts of television shows, music, and librettos -- and it became commonplace to assert that he was more interested in form than in people. But the Malayan trilogy denies this: the broad sympathies, tuned ear, and unsleeping eye for detail of the born novelist are evident throughout. 
In 1959 doctors were said to have diagnosed an inoperable brain tumour, giving Burgess twelve months to live. Whether they ever did is unclear, since many years later he told one journalist that he heard the diagnosis only from his wife Lynne. He wrote five novels in the following year, to provide royalties for his future widow, and even when the diagnosis proved incorrect, he continued to write as if writing were always a race against time. The diagnosis got him out of Malaya and back home -- which may also have been intentional. The Burgesses settled in Sussex, first in Hove, then in the village of Etchingham. 
Since no single publisher could publish as fast as he could write, Burgess began to publish under two imprints and two names: his own and Joseph Kell, striking an exotic, 'Mittel'-European note. When Anthony Burgess reviewed Joseph Kell's 'Inside Mr Enderby' (1963) for the 'Yorkshire Post', he did so with commendably cautious approval ('This is, in many ways, a dirty book'). He lost the job, and became a Grub Street legend overnight. 

'A Clockwork Orange' (1962), the short, violent novel which became his most celebrated book, invented a potent myth for the last years of the twentieth century. The story of Alex, the intelligent young thug, and his gang of Droogs who terrorize a dim, dystopian London of the future, touched a fear and a nerve that gave the book success in languages across the world, despite being written in a devised polyglot English composed partly of Cockney and Russian slang (with a glossary at the end). 
The popular notoriety of 'A Clockwork Orange' arose from the scandal of Stanley Kubrick's powerful film version in 1971. Kubrick was accused of glamorizing Burgess's original with sado-eroticism and the emotional use of Beethoven's ninth symphony (Alex's passion) and Purcell's funeral music for Queen Mary. Burgess did not care for it. Both men came to feel they had opened a Pandora's box and Kubrick withdrew the film completely. In its view of human nature, its scepticism over earthly solutions, and its picture of collusion between murderers, politicians, and police, 'A Clockwork Orange' is a deeply pessimistic tale. 
Much of Burgess's fiction proceeds simultaneously on the broadest planes -- language, death, God, guilt, sin -- and on the most confessional, as he plays endless variations on the theme of himself. In four comedies -- 'Inside Mr Enderby' (1963), 'Enderby Outside' (1968), 'The Clockwork Testament' (1974), and 'Enderby's Dark Lady' (1984) -- he turned a distorting fairground mirror on his own progress and the events of his career. 
The adventures of Enderby, a stained and flatulent 'alter ego', are often repetitive, and ring with revenge and the settling of old scores. But they are also very funny. For Burgess the Enderby quartet was a device through which he could let his paranoia out on a longer leash than would have been wise in the world where he had to make a living, and could air unfashionable opinions -- on black writing, American students, lesbians, women in general, pop stars, the Shakespeare industry, and the protestant Reformation -- with the robustness allowed by a fictional mask. 
Enderby understands that to be a writer is to fight battles, to be anarchic, absurd. He envies 'nobody but the great, proved dead', and Burgess himself chose only an exalted brotherhood of the past in his fictions of other writers' lives: Shakespeare ('Nothing Like the Sun', 1964), Keats ('Abba Abba', 1977), Marlowe ('A Dead Man in Deptford', 1993), and Byron ('Byrne', 1996). Burgess creates, with true tenderness, a possessed, bisexual Shakespeare, while the death of John Keats is no less moving because much of 'Abba Abba' plays Anglo-Italian word games and floats yet another parallel fiction to the career of John Burgess Wilson. As well as the great, proved, dead of Britain, Burgess took on the lions of Europe -- Tolstoy, Napoleon, and Beethoven -- and survived with no more than a few scratches. 'Napoleon Symphony' (1974) narrates the life of the emperor in a prose and verse approximation to the form of the 'Eroica' symphony. 
Burgess claimed to write better in the heat, and after his second marriage, on 9 September 1968, to Countess Liliana Macellari 
(formerly Liliana Johnson; 1929-2007)
, daughter of Gilberto Macellari, an actor, he lived most of the time abroad: Malta, Rome, Bracciano, Monaco. 'I have no friend except my wife', he told the psychiatrist Anthony Clare in 1988 ('In the Psychiatrist's Chair', BBC Radio 4, 1988). Burgess and Macellari -- known as Liana -- were wonderfully well suited. Their son, Andrew 
(Andrea; died 2002)
, Burgess's only child, was already four when they married. Liana had been a research student at Cambridge and became, in effect, Burgess's watchdog, manager, agent, and greatest fan. His work became more disciplined, more adventurous, and more European; while his productivity -- books, music, reviewing -- remained phenomenal. 
Burgess adapted Greek, Russian, and French plays, notably Rostand's 'Cyrano de Bergerac' for the Royal Shakespeare Company, which enjoyed great success in London and New York in the mid-1980s. For Scottish Opera he translated 'Carmen' and wrote a new libretto to Weber's 'Oberon'. As a composer himself, he wrote more than 175 pieces, embracing not only concertos, symphonies, and quartets, but also music for jazz groups, dance bands, opera, Broadway, and the movies. He rarely composed with thought of performance, but rather for pleasure, and as therapy. (He liked to emulate Bach and lay out the exposition of a new fugue every day.) Most of the scores written before 1970 are thought to have disappeared. The $500 royalties he earned for the incidental music to his version of 'Cyrano de Bergerac', produced at Minneapolis in 1971, gave him enormous pride, and when his third symphony was premiered four years later by the University of Iowa orchestra, which had commissioned it, he said it was the truly great artistic moment of his career to date. Burgess's modernism in literature was never matched by a zeal for experiment in his own music or in his response to the visual arts. As a composer, he was most drawn to Debussy, Elgar, Holst, and Vaughan Williams. 
Between 1971 and 1976 the Burgess family lived in Rome, where to his prodigious workload he added hack work for Cinecitta Studios. Movie scripts included 'Will!', a Hollywood musical about Shakespeare (unmade) and 'Jesus of Nazareth' (1977) for Franco Zeffirelli, in which he aimed to replace the gentle Jesus of popular piety with a fiery 'Christ the Tiger'. He genuinely believed that you had to write an enormous amount in order to leave anything of value at all, and thus came to be patronized as 'a great writer who never wrote a great book'. All his gifts and amplitude of spirit came together in the 1980s, when he produced two richly remembered volumes of 'confessions' -- 'Little Wilson and Big God' (1987) and 'You've Had Your Time' (1990) -- and 'Earthly Powers' (1981), a fictional hellfire tract on the freedoms and horrors of the twentieth century. In this, his most acclaimed and successful novel after 'A Clockwork Orange', Burgess combined the disciplines of sermon, tall story, parody, and cabaret spot into a narrative of one century and two men: Ken Toomey, writer and sinner; and Carlo Campanati, dead pope and possible saint. The message that the devil is not only in man but actually is man has rarely been delivered with such zest. 'Earthly Powers' was Burgess's best chance to win the Booker prize for fiction, but he was beaten by William Golding's 'Rites of Passage'. 
Burgess was a superb and remarkably fair critic, of tireless curiosity and range. He became one of the last weekly broadsheet 'star' reviewers in Britain with his love of literature and respect for the critical craft. He was always eager to take on something new (a huge life of St Anselm, the 'Oxford English Dictionary' on CD-ROM), always well-mannered, punctilious with deadlines, length, and copy: a Burgess review almost always went in unchanged. Careless sub-editing was keenly monitored by both Burgesses from their Monaco redoubt, but even carelessness was a matter for pained reproach rather than anything more aggressive. Arcane words were employed with absolute precision, and patiently explained. The best neologisms filled gaps in the language no one had noticed before. There is a huge amount to enjoy -- and learn from -- in the collections taken from nearly four decades of newspaper and magazine writing: 'Urgent Copy' (1968), 'Homage to Quert Yuiop' (1986), and 'One Man's Chorus' (1998). 
In two books on words -- 'Language Made Plain' (1964) and 'A Mouthful of Air' (1992) -- and in his work on James Joyce, Burgess shared his gift of spontaneous communication with the adventurous general reader. He wrote two fluent and enticing critical introductions to Joyce and his language: 'Here Comes Everybody' (1964) and 'Joysprick' (1973). Burgess wrote a successful radio musical -- 'Blooms of Dublin' -- for the Joyce centenary in 1982. 
Burgess was made an honorary DLitt of Manchester University (1982), a commandeur de merite culturel of Monaco (1986), and a commandeur des arts et des lettres of France (1986). But he received no honours from the British state, which was bewildered by his absence and failed, entirely, to place him. In his final years there was a growing consensus that Anthony Burgess was the most original British writer alive. France had long revered him, and 'Le Monde' ran a front-page article on his seventieth birthday in 1987. 
Burgess had a splendid voice: robust, rich, boozy, and well-smoked, perfect for melodrama and denunciation. He rarely indulged in either (except on the subject of Graham Greene, whom he considered overrated), but he would sometimes pronounce mock-pompously on literature and contemporary life in the company of younger English writers, to whom he was both Socrates and Falstaff. He looked as though he might once have been in a terrible fight, and his face -- beneath its strange slick of stray hair -- not quite put back together properly. But he combined his pugilism with grace, and the best photographers saw this. On early snapshots the face is pale and hostile, but in the portraits of later years, Jane Bown of 'The Observer' and Denis Waugh (National Portrait Gallery) relished the watchful, crumbling grandeur and cigar smoke. The older and wilder he appeared, the more photogenic he became: Enderby as angry, cunning bard. A natural performer, like his parents, he appeared on television talk shows, playing the role of 'The writer Anthony Burgess' with a raffish exactness. Interviewers rarely got behind the performance. 
By the early 1990s death really was at Burgess's heels, and his body wracked by the most fearful coughing. Like Mozart and Schubert at the end of their lives, he was driven to start new assignments, but continued to smoke his Schimmelpenninck Duets with prodigious ease. He seemed to acquire in old age a humility which placed the passion for experiment above the mere temptation to succeed. Anthony Burgess died of lung cancer on 22 November 1993 at the Hospital of St John and St Elizabeth, Westminster, London. A celebration of readings, memories, and music took place at St Paul's Church, Covent Garden, on Bloomsday, 16 June 1994. It was an elegiac but affectionate occasion, made doubly so by the unscheduled arrival of a buskers' brass band in the piazza outside as it came to a close. To the sounds of 'Roll out the barrel' John Burgess Wilson, Joseph Kell, F. X. Enderby, and Anthony Burgess were triumphed on their way. 
After his death, 'The Times' mourned the loss of a 'great moralist'. An Anthony Burgess Center was set up at the University of Angers on the Loire, directed by Ben Forkner, and publishing an 'Anthony Burgess Newsletter' twice a year. The centre includes most of his libraries from Monte Carlo and Malta, his desk, typewriter, briefcase, electronic organ, and cigar box. In April 2000 an Anthony Burgess Society was founded near Saumur, under the sponsorship of local winegrowers and the Salon du Vin et du Livre, a festival inspired by Burgess hero and 'genus loci', Francois Rabelais. 


@@@@@


doc= 51527


Barton, Pamela Espeut (1917-1943), golfer, was born on 4 March 1917 at 118 Castelnau, Barnes, Surrey, the daughter of Henry Charles Johnston Barton, a tea buyer, and his wife, Ethel Maude Espeut. She began playing golf at the age of twelve, with her elder sister Mervyn (later Sutherland-Pilch), who also became an international golfer. The sisters had lessons from J. H. Taylor at their home course of Royal Mid-Surrey, but afterwards went to Archie Compston at Coombe Hill, where their lessons were paid for by a golfing uncle. Compston was 'a forthright, unconventional teacher' and much sought after in the game (Lucas, 131). He had a profound influence on Pamela Barton, shortening her backswing and transforming her from a good but erratic player into one who could consistently challenge the best. Without his help it is unlikely that she would have climbed so high, so quickly in the years ahead. Nevertheless Barton's one great defining attribute, apart from natural talent and enormous competitive enthusiasm, was her sheer physical strength, which set her apart from almost all her female contemporaries. 
The Barton sisters cut their competitive teeth in the girls' championship, but their first major success was in winning the 'Bystander' foursomes at Ranelagh in the autumn of 1933: they had thirty-four years and a combined handicap of eleven between them. Soon after leaving school, Pamela played at Porthcawl in her first ladies' championship and reached the final, losing to Helen Holm. This made her reputation, and at seventeen she was picked to play for Great Britain against France at Chantilly. Her England debut came the following year, and she played in all of the international matches from 1935 to 1939. She won the French championship at Le Touquet in 1934 and was then sent with the British team to contest the second Curtis cup match at Chevy Chase, Maryland, which the Americans won fairly comfortably. 
In 1935 the Barton sisters met in the semi-final of the ladies' championship at Newcastle, co. Down, and Pam (as she was always called) emerged victorious, only to lose in the final once again, this time to Wanda Morgan. She was selected for a lengthy tour of Australia and New Zealand, an experience which stood her in excellent stead for what was to become her 'annus mirabilis', the season of 1936. In that year she at last won the ladies' title, defeating Bridget Newell in the final at Southport and Ainsdale, and then played for Britain and Ireland in the team that drew the third Curtis cup match over the King's course, Gleneagles. In the autumn she travelled to America, and at Canoe Brook, New Jersey, became only the second lady to have won both British and American ladies' championships in the same year, defeating Maureen Orcutt 4 and 3 in the thirty-six-hole final. Only Dorothy Campbell had ever done this before, in 1909, and it was to be another thirty-three years before the great French player Catherine Lacoste was to repeat the feat. 
Barton did not defend her American title in 1937, which was by her own standards rather a lean year, although she did publish a golf book, 'A Stroke a Hole', but retained her amateur status by making no money from it. In 1938 she was runner-up in the French championship and in 1939 she won the British title for the second time, at Portrush, a course well suited to the 'pugnacious and powerful golfer' that she had become (Wilson, 92). This effectively ended her brief but brilliant career. 
Barton worked as an ambulance driver during the worst phases of the London blitz, and in the summer of 1941 she joined the Women's Auxiliary Air Force as a radio operator. She was commissioned within the year and was afterwards based at RAF Manston in Kent. She was killed in a flying accident at RAF Detling on 13 November 1943. She had flown there from Manston with a pilot friend to attend a dance and the accident happened in the early hours of the morning, as they were taking off to return home. She was buried in St John's cemetery, Margate. 
With Pam Barton's death British women's golf lost its leading personality, somebody who, in the words of Henry Cotton 'had the proportions of life right and did not make herself a slave to golf. 'She loved golf but she loved life more'' (Cotton, 174). As Laddie Lucas wrote many years later, 'Relatively short of stature and well built, Pam possessed, beneath a head of reddish hair, an engaging freckled face which mostly wore a smile. A warm friendliness, and a modesty which brushed success easily aside, drew people to her. A totally unaffected personality allowed her to devote her days to golf without people saying she had surrendered herself unreasonably to the game. It camouflaged an intense ambition to get to the top. And stay there. (Lucas, 134)' It was a saying of hers that 'Gentility never pays in bunkers' (Barton, 'A Stroke a Hole', 55). Her example of cheerful, hard hitting was much missed after the war, as British women struggled to compete on the international stage. In America a Pam Barton Fund was established to raise money for the visiting Curtis cup side of 1950, and supported by clubs all over America, but few in Britain were aware of this act of kindness in memory of their former champion. 


@@@@@


doc= 51528


Burkill, (John) Charles (1900-1993), mathematician and college head, was born on 1 February 1900 at Holt, Norfolk, the only child of Hugh Roberson (Rob) Burkill (1867-1950), a schoolmaster, and his wife, Bertha, 'nee' Bourne (1866-1937). His father's family had farmed for generations in the Winteringham area of Lincolnshire; his mother came from a family of farmers and builders in Woodchurch, Kent. From 1911 to 1914 he attended Richmond county school, and from 1914 to 1918 St Paul's School, to which he won a scholarship. Though he later averred that it was a howler in his Latin prose which steered him into the mathematical stream, he was in fact a good Greek and Latin scholar: his recreational reading in later life included the preface to A. E. Housman's great edition of Manilius. He was always deeply grateful for the superb teaching he received at St Paul's in what has been described as the university atmosphere inspired by F. S. Macaulay FRS and maintained by his successors; and his election as a governor of the school in 1940 gave him much pleasure. In 1917 he won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge. After leaving school in 1918 he joined the Royal Engineers, but he was demobilized shortly after being commissioned and went up to Trinity in January 1919. In the mathematical tripos he was placed in the first class in part one in 1919, and in 1921 he was a wrangler in part two, with distinction in his special subject in schedule B. In 1922 he was elected to a research fellowship at Trinity on the strength of a dissertation on surface areas, and in the following year was awarded a Smith's prize for an essay on 'Functions of intervals and the problem of area'. 
In 1924 Burkill was appointed to the chair of pure mathematics in the University of Liverpool, where soon after his arrival he secured the appointment to his staff of A. S. Besicovitch, later himself a fellow of Trinity and Rouse Ball professor. On 9 August 1928 Burkill married Margareta (Greta) Braun [
In 1929 the Burkills had returned to Cambridge on Charles Burkill's appointment to a university lectureship in mathematics and election to a fellowship and lectureship at Peterhouse. He was also appointed assistant tutor to the redoubtable P. C. (Paul) Vellacott, and when Vellacott became headmaster of Harrow School in 1934 he succeeded to the senior tutorship, which he held until 1948 and again briefly during an emergency in 1953. During the Second World War he was one of the four resident fellows who were in effective charge of the college while Vellacott, now master, was away on war service. He also joined the university senior training corps with his demobilization rank of second lieutenant, rising by the end of the war to command the Royal Engineers section of the corps with the rank of major. Release from these administrative responsibilities allowed his creative energies to be redirected into mathematics, and the flow of his publications, arrested after 1936, resumed in 1948. Recognition of the quality of his work was forthcoming in the shape of an Adams prize for 1947-8 for an essay on integrals and trigonometric series, and election to fellowship of the Royal Society in 1953. In 1961 he was appointed university reader in mathematical analysis (becoming emeritus reader on his retirement in 1967). 
The deep respect felt for Burkill by his colleagues at Peterhouse was strikingly demonstrated on his retirement. Sir Herbert Butterfield had announced his intention of retiring as master in 1968, and though under the existing statutes of the college Burkill's age debarred him from election, a rapid -- not to say opportunistic -- amendment made it possible to offer him the position. He was genuinely surprised by the offer, and accepted with some hesitation. In the event his tenure was notably successful. The Peterhouse statutes give the master the alternative title of keeper ('custos'), and it was as keeper of the college and its traditions that Burkill saw his role. Coming to office at a time of widespread student unrest, he took a far-sighted view of its eventual course, and devised effective machinery for consultation and dialogue with junior members without saddling the college with a statutory commitment to full participation in its government more easily incurred than shed. His relationship with the fellows was also based on consultation, and in particular on cultivating a spirit of trust and co-operation between the master and the tutors -- something which his own relationship with Vellacott had taught him to appreciate. In the master's lodge the Burkills entertained generously, understanding its importance as a place where all sections of the society could meet on common ground. His memory was perpetuated in the college by the annual award of a Burkill prize for mathematics. 
In 1948 Burkill had put on record a policy of keeping undergraduate numbers at about their existing level (about 180) and increasing the number of fellows and research students. The college adhered broadly to this intention; and when he became master Burkill acted to assist graduate students by securing the abolition of college fees, for which they received little or nothing in exchange, and providing more and better accommodation for both married and unmarried graduates. In the university context both the Graduate Society, which ultimately developed into the University Centre, and the Society for Visiting Scholars were established largely on Greta's initiative. The idea of the Society for Visiting Scholars had originated during a visit to the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study in 1947, when the Burkills were forcibly struck by the contrast between the hospitality on offer there and the lack of any such provision in Cambridge; that of the Graduate Society was inspired by the feeling of isolation which they had encountered in graduate students whom they had taken into their own home. Other related initiatives with which Greta was closely associated included the foundation of New Hall, Cambridge's third women's college, and of University (later Wolfson) College, for graduates and holders of university posts without college fellowships. She was also active in fund-raising for her own college, Newnham. In all these activities her restless drive and determination, and her often outspoken intolerance of bureaucracy and red tape, were complemented by her husband's imperturbable patience and solid judgement. 
Burkill's mathematical publications were distinguished by quality rather than volume. His most important legacy was in the field of integration. Examples are his Adams prize work, in which he elegantly solved a long-standing problem in the theory of Fourier series, and his strikingly original contribution to the notoriously difficult notion of surface area; it was here that the 'Burkill integral' featured (though in fact it was not so called by him). In addition he produced a series of papers on less closely related topics and a number of textbooks which for many years ranked as standard works. 'These all display... not only his mastery of the field but a lucidity and elegance that encourage his readers to appreciate the profound aesthetic quality of good mathematics' (Pitt, 59). 
Brevity, precision, and conciseness were as characteristic of Burkill's conversation as of his written style, and his silences could be eloquent. He was an accomplished mimic. As a boy he had been given to practical joking, and though in later life his sense of humour was well under control it was never far from the surface. Fellows of Peterhouse were familiar with (and were indeed known to imitate) the slight sideways vibration of the body which betokened amusement and often preluded a mildly ironical or deflationary quip. The uncompromising austerity of the moral standards that he set himself and expected of others could make him sometimes appear hard; but although he begrudged what he thought unnecessary expenditure of money of which he was a trustee, from his own resources he was unfailingly generous to those in need. It was typical of him that on retiring as master in 1973 he became editor of the 'Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society' on the grounds that his younger colleagues should be left free to concentrate on their research. The journal's high reputation when he eventually stood down reflected his own exacting standards. 
In retirement Burkill continued to be active so long as his health permitted. Before the war, skiing had been a favourite recreation, and he was a keen walker until his eighties. Greta Burkill died of heart failure at their home, 2 Archway Court, Barton Road, Cambridge, on 14 June 1984. After her death Charles Burkill put in order her voluminous papers on her refugee work and secured their safe deposit in the Cambridge University Library. He died on 6 April 1993 in a Sheffield nursing home of bronchopneumonia and Alzheimer's disease. He was cremated and his ashes buried at the Hutcliffe Wood crematorium in Sheffield. He was survived by his son and by Harry Burkill, his two daughters and Harry Reuter having predeceased him. 


