@@@@@


doc= 51529


Campbell, Dorothy Iona (1883-1945), golfer, was born on 24 March 1883 at 1 Carlton Terrace, Edinburgh, the daughter of William Campbell, a metal merchant, and his wife, Emily Mary Tipper. Her father was a native of Edinburgh, but her mother was born in England and they were married in London in 1861. She had several older siblings, all of whom were born in Edinburgh. 
Dorothy Campbell learned to play golf at North Berwick, about 20 miles east of Edinburgh, under the instruction of the renowned Ben Sayers. She is reported as stating that she began playing at the age of ten and won her first medal when she was twelve. In 1897 the British ladies' championship came to Scotland for the first time and Dorothy's older sister reached the quarter-final stage. The Campbells did not venture out of Scotland to compete in subsequent years, so Dorothy's debut in championship golf was at the age of twenty. In June 1903 she played in the inaugural Scottish ladies' close championship at St Andrews and reached the semi-finals. In May 1904 the British championship was played at the Scottish links of Troon. Dorothy represented Scotland for the first time in the preceding matches against England and Ireland, beating both her opponents. She then advanced to the semi-finals of the championship, where she was defeated by Lottie Dod, the eventual winner. 
On 25 May 1905 at Cromer in Norfolk, Dorothy Campbell took part in the historic first international between the British Isles and America, which inspired the eventual establishment of the biennial Curtis cup matches, and she contributed to the overall victory of the home side. This match was followed by the ladies' internationals between England, Ireland, and Scotland, in which she again won both matches. Then in the British championship she won the preliminary stroke competition and again reached the semi-finals. After returning home, she took her first Scottish title with a nineteenth-hole victory over the holder, Molly Graham, on her home course of North Berwick. 
In 1906 Campbell made her third appearance in the semi-finals of the British championship and retained her Scottish crown. In 1907 her form early in the season boded well. She took first place on both days of the Ranelagh stroke-play tournament in April, leading Scotland to victory in the international division. However, a bout of influenza the week before the British championship meeting forced her withdrawal from the ladies' internationals and ruled her out of contention for the championship. Nevertheless, she subsequently managed to reach the final of the Scottish close, though she lost the title to Frances Teacher. 
The British championship was held at St Andrews in May 1908 and Dorothy Campbell contested the final against her fellow Scottish international Maud Titterton. They attracted a gallery of several thousand spectators, including the famous open champion Old Tom Morris, who died two days after the final. In adverse weather conditions which made the course almost unplayable Titterton squared the match on the final hole and won the championship on the nineteenth. Campbell went on to take the Scottish close title for a third time. 
1909 was a pivotal year in Dorothy Campbell's career. In May at Birkdale she led Scotland to victory in the ladies' internationals before taking the British championship title for the first time, at the age of twenty-six. She then contested her fifth consecutive Scottish close final, losing 3 and 1 to Elsie Kyle. In the autumn she crossed the Atlantic to compete in the US ladies' championship at the Merion cricket club, Philadelphia. In the final she defeated Nonna Barlow to become the first player to win the two most important titles in ladies' golf, the British and US championships. After this achievement she settled in Canada, taking up residence in Hamilton, Ontario. 
As a result of her move Campbell was unable to defend her British title in 1910. However, in that year she won the first of three consecutive Canadian ladies' championships in Toronto before travelling to Chicago, where she successfully defended her US title, also winning the preliminary stroke-play event. In 1911, accompanied by four North American golfers, she sailed from New York to Glasgow on board the 'Caledonia' to take part in the British championship at Portrush in Ireland. Just days after her arrival she lined up for Scotland in the ladies' internationals, but lost both matches, to May Ross ('nee' Hezlet) of Ireland and Cecil Leitch of England. However, her form evidently improved over the next few days, as she advanced through the championship to defeat Violet Hezlet, a local player, by 3 and 2 in the final, confirming her status as the best female golfer in the world. Though she retained the Canadian title later that year, she lost at the semi-final stage of the US championship to Margaret Curtis by 4 and 3. 
After winning her third and final Canadian title in 1912, Campbell married J. V. Hurd on 11 February 1913. She went to live in Pittsburgh and her golfing career took second place to motherhood. However, she managed some notable performances in the late 1910s. In 1916 she won the preliminary stroke-play event at the US championship, and two years later at Pinehurst, North Carolina, she took the North and South championship, an important event in the American golfing calendar. She won the North and South for a second time in 1920 and reached the final of the US championship, where she was defeated by the defending champion, Alexa Stirling. A third win in the North and South came in 1921, when it is said that during the final she twice holed out from 40 yards using a goose-necked mashie she called Thomas. 
In or about 1923 Mrs Hurd moved to Philadelphia and joined the Merion cricket club, where she had won her first US title. At about this time she recognized that her style of golf, with no wrist movement, a two-fisted grip, and a broad swing, was somewhat out of date. While it produced a straight but short shot, those using more modern techniques were gaining more length. Under the guidance of the professional at Merion, George Sayers, son of her old mentor at North Berwick, she adopted the Vardon grip and greater hand action. In September 1924, at the Rhode Island country club, she put her new style into action to remarkable effect, winning her third US championship. At the age of forty-one she became the oldest winner in the championship's history, a record that still stood at the end of the twentieth century. 
Dorothy Campbell Hurd visited the British Isles in 1928, played on the Scottish international team for the first time since 1911, and reached the quarter-finals of the British championship. After returning home she made her last appearance in the semi-finals of the US championship at Hot Springs, Virginia. On her last competitive visit to Britain in 1930 she again lined up for Scotland in the ladies' internationals, winning two matches by 7 and 6 and losing the third by one hole. She later married Edward Howe. She died tragically on 20 March 1945 when she fell underneath an express train as it left Yemassee, South Carolina. She had been staying over the winter at the Tidalholm guest house in Beaufort, South Carolina, and had planned to take the train for New York. A funeral service and cremation took place at Ardsley, New York, on 24 March. 
Dorothy Campbell was the first woman golfer to score major victories on both sides of the Atlantic and thus the first to make a truly international impact on the game. Her two British, three US, and three Canadian titles, won before the advent of women's professional golf, secure her position among the greatest female players in the history of the sport. In 1978 she was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame, and in 1991 her name was added to the Canadian Golf Hall of Fame. 


@@@@@


doc= 51532


Stuart, John Crichton-, sixth marquess of Bute (1933-1993), benefactor and patron of the arts, was born at 10 Charles Street, Mayfair, London, at 9.50 a.m. on 27 February 1933, fifteen minutes before his twin brother, David; they were the two eldest among the four children of John Crichton-Stuart, fifth marquess of Bute (1907-1956), and his wife, Lady Eileen Beatrice Forbes (1912-1993), younger daughter of Bernard Arthur William Patrick Hastings Forbes, eighth earl of Granard. As a member of a prominent Roman Catholic family, Lord Cardiff, as John was known before becoming earl of Dumfries on the death of John Crichton Stuart, the fourth marquess, in 1947, was educated at Ampleforth College. After national service in the Scots Guards he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read history and attended the Slade lectures in art history given by Nikolaus Pevsner. He succeeded to the marquessate on the death of his father in 1956 and was immediately faced with a heavy burden of death duties. One consequence of this was the sale of family property in Cardiff to the corporation and, in 1969, the transfer of the Robert Adam houses bought by his grandfather on the north side of Charlotte Square, Edinburgh, to the National Trust for Scotland: 6 Charlotte Square became the official residence of the secretary of state for Scotland. 
In addition to serving on Bute county council and as lord lieutenant of Bute and, subsequently, of Argyll and Bute, and chairing several charities -- all 'tasks befitting his station, rather than his character' (Drummond, 23) -- John Bute contributed much to the artistic life of Scotland and towards preserving its artistic treasures. He did so first as chairman and then vice-president and president of the National Trust for Scotland after 1969, as a trustee of the National Galleries of Scotland (1980-87), and as chairman of the Historic Buildings Council for Scotland (1983-8). In all these and other roles he commanded respect by his assured mastery of the business in hand. Tam Dalyell observed that 'In the second half of the century, when the notion of public service is somehow going out of fashion, Bute was one of the aristocrats who stuck to the age-old tradition whereby those who inherited wealth believed that privilege brought with it responsibilities to the nation or local community. ('The Independent', 22 July 1993)' Like his grandfather and his great-grandfather the third marquess, whom he resembled physically as well as in a certain dandyism in dress, Bute achieved much by stealth and through influence: 'If criticism were to be levelled, it would have to be that he played his cards very close to his chest, and did not always inform his committee members of the options before they were presented with a 'fait accompli'' ('The Independent', 22 July 1993). Conscious of his position and of his predecessors' work in both commissioning new architecture and in preserving historic buildings, he was unable himself to build on such a scale, although he loved architecture; nevertheless, he was able to patronize modern design in enterprises he supported, notably the Dovecot Studios of the Edinburgh Tapestry Company. This concern was also evident in the livery of his estates on Bute, in which he took a close and constructive interest, and in the industries he promoted on the island to attempt to stem the haemorrhage of its population. In 1992 he was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
Although assured in his many public roles, Bute was withdrawn and essentially shy in private. In middle age he seemed melancholy and lonely, especially after the premature death of his twin brother and that of his beloved daughter Caroline in a road accident in 1984. He had married (Beatrice) Nicola Grace Weld-Forester ('b'. 1933), only daughter of Lieutenant-Commander W. B. C. Weld-Forester RN, on 19 April 1955 but this ended in divorce in 1977. On 12 November in the following year he married Jennifer Home-Rigg ('b'. 1933), a wine merchant, the former wife of Gerald Percy and the daughter of J. B. Home-Rigg of Plaston, South Africa, who brought him much happiness and encouraged him to restore and enhance Mount Stuart, the vast and lugubrious Gothic revival house on Bute designed by Sir Robert Rowand Anderson for his great-grandfather. 
John Bute's last important contribution to the artistic life of Scotland was to chair the trustees of the National Museums of Scotland after 1985. In this role he was the guiding force behind the commissioning of the new building for the Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh; when the prince of Wales attempted to undermine the architectural competition because he disliked the winning design (by Benson and Forsyth), Bute ensured that the project proceeded regardless. At the laying of the foundation-stone in April 1993 Bute gave an 'excellent oration' despite being by then disfigured by cancer of the throat. Tam Dalyell recalled how, 'conversing with everybody afterwards, there was not a trace of self-pity. It was a courageous and supremely dignified curtain call' ('The Independent', 22 July 1993). Bute died at Mount Stuart on 21 July 1993 and was buried at Shore Chapel there. His eldest son, John Colum Crichton-Stuart ('b'. 1958), succeeded to the marquessate. 


@@@@@


doc= 51537


Hezlet, Mary Elizabeth Linzee (1882-1978), golfer, was born in Gibraltar on 29 April 1882, one of eight children of Richard Jackson Hezlet ('b'. 1840), a major in the Royal Artillery, and his English-born wife, Emily Mary Linzee Owen. Richard Hezlet inherited Bovagh House in co. Londonderry on the death of his brother in 1887 and retired later as a lieutenant-colonel. Most of May Hezlet's formative years were spent in Ulster, her time divided between Bovagh and the resort town of Portrush about 15 miles away, where both her parents played golf. It was here also that May and her five surviving siblings learned the sport. She is said to have started at the age of nine and she had no professional tuition. In 1895 both the Irish ladies' close and British ladies' open championships were held at Portrush. Competing along with her mother and her older sister Emmy, thirteen-year-old May made her debut in both events but lost her first match in each. It was three years before she made another attempt at championship golf. On this occasion she reached the final of the 1898 Irish close and lost to Jessie Magill by just one hole. 
In the following year the Irish close and the British championships were held in Newcastle, co. Down, in successive weeks. On 6 May 1899 May Hezlet won her first Irish title by defeating Rhona Adair in the final. Two days later the British championship began with the preliminary stroke competition, which she won, and on 12 May she emerged as champion. At the age of seventeen years and thirteen days she set a record that lasted throughout the twentieth century as the youngest winner of the event. She defended the two titles unsuccessfully in 1900, when her friend and arch-rival Rhona Adair claimed both. In 1901, in a team which included her mother, May represented Ireland for the first time, in a friendly match against England. In later years her younger sisters Violet and Florence were to become regular members of the national team; in 1904 May, Violet, Florence, and their mother all played in the Irish team. Much later her brother Charles became a leading amateur golfer who reached the final of the British championship in 1914 and played on the Walker cup side three times in the 1920s. 
May Hezlet took a second British title in 1902, when she beat Elinor Nevile on the twentieth hole in the final at Deal in Kent. In 1904 she won the Irish championship a second time and reached the final of the British again, but on this occasion lost to Lottie Dod by one hole. Parallel to her success as a golfer, May Hezlet developed a reputation as a commentator on the game by writing articles in periodicals such as the 'Irish Golfer'. Her one book, 'Ladies' Golf', first published in 1904 and updated in 1907, included instruction for lady golfers and touched on etiquette as well as commenting on the skills of leading players and recording the results of important events throughout the world. Her style was lucid and her book provided one of the few first-hand insights into the early years of ladies' golf. 
In 1905 May Hezlet defeated her sister Florence in the final of the Irish close, and on 25 May both played in the historic first international between the British Isles and America at Cromer in Norfolk, the match which led eventually to the biennial Curtis cup series. The home side won, with May Hezlet defeating Margaret Curtis. In 1907 the British championship returned to Newcastle, co. Down. Preceding the event, Ireland won the ladies internationals, but May Hezlet lost her matches against England and Wales. However, in the championship she advanced to the final, where again she overcame her sister Florence to claim her third and final British title. She won the last of her five Irish close championships in 1908 with another final victory over Florence. She did not compete in either championship in 1909 because of her marriage on 27 April that year to Arthur Edwin Ross (1869-1923), then Church of Ireland rector of Portrush parish, the son of David Ross of Glenageary, co. Dublin. Though they had no children, her subsequent participation in important golf events was noticeably reduced. There is a suggestion that this was because her husband thought competitive golf unbecoming for a clergyman's wife. 
May Hezlet's last appearance for the Irish team was in 1912; she also contributed to Horace Hutchinson's 'The New Book of Golf', published in that year. Also in 1912 her husband was appointed rector of Ballymena. After serving as an army chaplain in the First World War he became rector of Holywood, co. Down, in 1919 and in January 1920 he was elected bishop of Tuam, Killala, and Achonry. He died on 24 May 1923. As a 41-year-old widow, Mrs Ross returned to Portrush for a time before moving to London, where she worked for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. In later years she shared the house of her sister Violet in Wiltshire, but in the late 1970s she moved to a nursing home, St Bart's, Dover Road, Sandwich, Kent, where she died on 27 December 1978. 
May Hezlet was one of the most accomplished and successful players of the early days of ladies' golf. As a writer she contributed to the popularity of the sport and to the development of the ladies' game. Her commentary on her contemporaries provides a valuable record for golf historians. 


@@@@@


doc= 51540


Holm, Helen Warren (1907-1971), golfer, was born on 14 March 1907 at 3 Manor Road, Jordanhill, Partick, one of two daughters of Thomas Gray (1869-1932), professor of technical chemistry at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow, and his wife, Violet Irene Emma Warren. In 1928 she married Andrew Mackie Holm, a farmer, with whom she had a son. 
Holm twice won the (British) ladies' championship in a playing career that spanned three decades and is cited as an example of the golfing longevity often attributed to the Scots. Her first championship title came at Porth-cawl in 1934, with an emphatic victory over the young Pam Barton in the final. This was the first time the championship had been won by a Scot since 1911. She repeated her success at Burnham in 1938, defeating Miss Corlett 4 and 3 in the final. Holm was also a member of three Britain and Ireland Curtis cup teams. In May 1936 she played in the drawn match at the King's course, Gleneagles, and was on the losing side at Essex Country Club, Massachusetts, in September 1938. When the match resumed after the war she was included in the British side to face the Americans at Birkdale in May 1948, and once again the visitors triumphed, extending their impressive record in the series. 
Holm was the dominant figure of her generation in Scottish women's golf, reaching at least the semi-final round of the national championship no fewer than fifteen times between 1929 and 1964, winning the title five times and losing in five other finals. Her first victory was at Turnberry in 1930, and she won again in 1932, 1937, and 1948, securing her final title at St Andrews in 1950 at the age of forty-three. Appropriately her last appearance in the final was very close to home, at Troon in 1957. She won numerous regional championships and represented Scotland in international matches for a quarter of a century from 1932. She also played annually for the British Isles against France from 1933 to 1938 and from 1947 to 1949, and was non-playing captain of the British teams that faced France and Belgium in 1951. 
Writing in 'Golf between Two Wars' (1944), Bernard Darwin thought Mrs Holm 'the most striking lady player since Miss Wethered had left the lists', than which there could be no higher praise: 'She was not the most consistent and was capable of unexpected and perhaps light-hearted mistakes, but when in full tide of play she had a majestic power and a capacity for playing the counting shot rarely seen' (p. 132). Holm was 'exceptionally tall and possessed a slow, graceful swing that was given extra propulsion by moving on to her toes at impact' (Crane, 101). Her longevity in championships can be attributed to a deftness of touch which she retained into her fifties, when her strength and stamina naturally declined. It gave her a continued edge over younger opponents, and Belle Robertson, who lost to her at Turnberry in the Scottish championship of 1960, acknowledged her mastery: 'the sheer brilliance of her touch on a course which was that week dry and bouncy had to be seen to be believed' (Mair, 56). And like all enduring champions, Holm was both mentally and physically tough: she won the second of her five Scottish titles in 1932 with a victory at the fifth extra hole. 
Holm died of lung cancer on 14 December 1971 at Broomfield Nursing Home, Ayr, her husband having predeceased her; her funeral took place at Masonhill crematorium, Ayr. Two years later the Helen Holm trophy event was begun at Holm's beloved Troon Portland, where she once held the ladies' record with 69 and had holed the fourteenth in one. Now one of the premier stroke-play events in the ladies' calendar, with a very high calibre entry, the final round of the trophy is played over the open championship links of Royal Troon, and the victor is awarded Holm's putter as the trophy. 


@@@@@


doc= 51545


MacKenzie, Alister (1870-1934), golf course architect and medical practitioner, was born at The Orchard, Normanton, near Leeds, on 30 August 1870, the second of six children of Dr William Scobie MacKenzie ('c'.1820-1917), medical practitioner, and his wife, Mary Jane Smith. The family came from Lochinver, Sutherland, where Dr William's father, Alexander (Meal Mhor), managed the duke of Sutherland's Assynt estates. The Scottish connection remained strong and, though baptized Alexander, MacKenzie adopted the Gaelic form Alister. 
After schooling, probably at Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Wakefield, MacKenzie went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1888, intending to study medicine, probably under paternal pressure. He obtained his BA in 1891, with a third in the natural sciences tripos. After moving to Leeds medical school, he showed his unconventionality by extending his undergraduate career to seventeen years. In 1895 he obtained the MRCS and LRCP, which permitted him to practise medicine, but he took only desultory advantage of this. He obtained the Cambridge MB, BCh, in 1897 but in 1905 he was still registered as a Leeds undergraduate and concluded his aimless degree collecting with the Leeds MB, ChB. That year he married Edith Wedderburn; it was a childless union which ended in divorce in 1929. 
MacKenzie served in the South African War as 'civil surgeon' with the Somerset light infantry, but became more interested in the way that the Boers repeatedly confused the British by intelligent camouflage than he was in any medical matters. On returning to Leeds to study and, occasionally, to practise medicine he started experimenting with golf course design, an activity with many similarities to camouflaging. In August 1914 he won a 'Country Life' competition to design a hole for a course on Long Island, New York. A nascent career was, however, stalled almost immediately by the outbreak of the First World War. 
As a territorial major, MacKenzie served with the Royal Army Medical Corps in Flanders from the outset, but again it was camouflage rather than medicine which interested him. In 'Country Life' (6 March 1915) an article on military entrenchments gave MacKenzie's views on camouflage, criticizing the officers responsible. Court-martial might have resulted; instead he was transferred to the engineers to work on camouflage, albeit at the reduced rank of lieutenant. This marked the end of his transient medical career, though he continued to enjoy using the prefix Dr. 
From 1918 MacKenzie's true career, golf course design, blossomed. He was convinced of the enormous medical, social, and cultural benefits of golf, and was an early champion of municipal golf in England: in his book 'Golf Architecture' (1920) he wrote that municipal golf courses 'would help enormously in increasing the health, the virility, and the prosperity of the nation, and would do much to counteract discontent and Bolshevism' (p. 119). Contracts came from both sides of the Atlantic and the balance of his work gradually shifted to America. Much of it was done in co-operation with his younger brother Charles, who supervised construction. In 1926 MacKenzie made a remarkably productive trip to Australia, where he left his mark with many distinguished courses, none more so than Royal Melbourne. 
In 1929 MacKenzie moved permanently to California and in 1930 he married Hilda ('nee' Sykes), widow of Edgar Haddock. They had been friends as students and she brought him two stepsons. His remaining years combined great happiness and achievement. They established a home on the edge of Pasatiempo, one of his own courses. As with Sir Harry Lauder, then popular in American music-halls, American life suited him and he it. Kilted, they flaunted their Scottishness and shared a penchant for pawky but rather feeble jokes. 
MacKenzie designed over 100 new courses in all, the majority in California, including the wonderful links at Cypress Point on the Monterey peninsula, which opened in August 1928. It was the latter which brought MacKenzie's work to the attention of Robert Tyre (Bobby) Jones, the greatest of all amateur golfers and controller of a new development at Augusta, Georgia. Jones contracted MacKenzie to design the course, and the undulating Augusta site, which had been established a century earlier as a private estate with many and varied trees and shrubs, gave MacKenzie a unique opportunity to combine the preservation and creation of beauty -- his benchmark in all his architectural work. 
MacKenzie died from coronary thrombosis at his home, 70 Hollins Drive, Pasatiempo, on 6 January 1934, before the first playing of what would come to be called the masters' championship over the US national course at Augusta. His second wife survived him. He wished to be buried in the family grave at Nedd, near Lochinver, but circumstances precluded this and his ashes were scattered over Pasatiempo course. His name is now on the family stone. Two publications appeared posthumously, 'Military Engineer' (on camouflage) and 'The Spirit of St Andrews' (on golf). 
How great was MacKenzie's achievement? He has been compared to Holbein, to Rembrandt, and to Picasso but perhaps a more apt and appropriate comparison is with another artist of the landscape, Capability Brown. As golf has developed, so has an appreciation of the unique blend of aesthetic, technical, and commercial sensibilities embodied by the best course designers, of whom there has been none greater than Dr Alister MacKenzie. 


@@@@@


doc= 51547


Ray, Edward Rivers (1877-1943), golfer, was born at Marais, Grouville, Jersey, on 6 April 1877, the son of Stephen Ray, a mariner who captained an oyster trawler, and his wife, Mary Ann Arm. In common with the other boys of the village of Grouville (from where also came Harry Vardon), he swung a makeshift golf club from a very early age. Ray's own first club was made by his father and was unusual, even by Grouville standards, in using, for the head, a wooden pin of the kind used by Jersey fishermen for mending nets. The shaft was a simple thorn stick. With this and other home-made implements Ray and his fellow villagers practised obsessively, when not caddying, on the links at Grouville, and this was to prove, as Ray confessed years later in his book 'Inland Golf' (1912), invaluable training for his future career. His golfing enthusiasm was encouraged by George Boomer, the headmaster of La Moye School, which he attended. 
Ray turned professional in 1894, aged seventeen, and was employed as a club-maker at the Royal Jersey Golf Club before working briefly as professional to a small club outside St Malo. He played in the open championship at Sandwich in 1899, and became the professional at Churston Golf Club in Devon, where he met his wife, Edith Hooper. His first major success came in 1903, when he was runner-up in the 'News of the World' match play championship to James Braid, an outcome that was repeated in 1911. In 1912 he lost again in the final, this time to fellow islander Harry Vardon, but gained ample compensation by winning the open championship at Muirfield in the same year, where his winning score of 295 equalled the championship record set by J. H. Taylor three years previously. His book 'Inland Golf', with suggestions on the techniques necessary for inland (as distinct from links), courses appeared shortly after his open victory. 
In 1913 Ray and Vardon toured North America under the sponsorship of Lord Northcliffe, proprietor of the 'Daily Mail'. They travelled 35,000 miles in three months, and played forty-one well-paid exhibition four-ball matches, of which they won all but one. In the US open championship at the Country Club, Brookline, both Ray and Vardon shared the lead at the end of four rounds with the young Boston amateur Francis Ouimet, but the following day, in perhaps the most famous play-off in the history of golf, the unknown American Ouimet saw off his two illustrious British rivals. Play-offs had not been kind to Ray: in 1912 he lost both the German and Belgian opens in this way. 
On returning to the USA in 1920, Ray once again found himself in close competition with Harry Vardon for the open title, and in a raging storm became one of only three Britons to date (Vardon and Tony Jacklin were the others) to win open championships on both sides of the Atlantic. At forty-three Ray was then also the oldest winner of the American title, until overtaken by Raymond Floyd in 1986. In the open championship itself, Ray had an excellent record: he finished in the first six on seven occasions apart from his solitary triumph, and came second by one stroke to Jim Barnes at Prestwick in 1925. He played his last open at Prince's, Sandwich, in 1932, aged fifty-five, and his last tournament victory came in the Hertfordshire open in 1935. Like almost all the great professional champions of his era, Ray also held a club position and, having succeeded Harry Vardon as professional at Ganton, Yorkshire, in 1904, he moved south in 1912 and for much of his career was attached to the Oxhey Park Golf Club at Watford Heath, north of London. 
In 1926 Ray was appointed captain of a British Isles team which played an American team at Wentworth in what was a precursor of the Ryder cup. He also played three times in the Ryder cup itself, on the first occasion as replacement captain when Abe Mitchell was struck down with appendicitis on the way to catch the boat at Southampton. 
Ray was a founder member of the Professional Golfers' Association (PGA), established in 1901 to protect and promote the interests of golf professionals. In later years he took an active role on the executive and it was Ray who persuaded the earl of Wilton to donate $500 to the PGA coffers when the organization faced a financial crisis immediately after the First World War. The executive committee minutes of the PGA show that Ray proposed a way of determining how many qualifying places for the open should stem from each qualifying section. He also seconded a motion in 1927 that those clubs that held gate-money tournaments should donate a proportion of the profits to the PGA benevolent fund. He was the major shareholder and a foundation director of the Professional Golfers' Co-operative Association, established in January 1921. The idea behind this successful enterprise was to buy golf equipment in bulk at discounted prices from the manufacturers and sell on to individual club professionals so that they could compete with the sports stores. Ray was a man of fierce integrity. When, in 1925, he was accused of leaking confidential information from executive committee meetings, he not only satisfied his colleagues that he had refused to answer questions from the press, but also insisted that an inquiry be held. 
A huge, lumbering man with enormous hands, Ray was outgoing and ebullient, always prepared to voice his opinion, but with a relaxed attitude to life and golf. Once, when teaching, he was asked by a young pupil how the latter could gain more distance: 'hit it a bloody sight harder, mate!' was Ray's legendary response. Ray himself was always a powerful player who often finished off-balance after some of his long shots. He pioneered the high-flying approach, favouring the niblick (akin to a number nine iron) for shots to the flag. Surprisingly for such a big man, he was an excellent putter, with a delicate stroke around the greens. This touch served him well at lawn bowls, another sport at which he excelled. Most pictures of him in action show the buttoned-up jacket (even in the August heat of the central United States), trilby hat, and, very often, a characteristic pipe clenched between his teeth. He died at the Peace Memorial Hospital, Watford, on 26 August 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 51548


Rees, David James (1913-1983), golfer, was born on 31 March 1913 in the village of Ffontigari y Barri, Glamorgan, the son of David Evans Rees (died 1959), greenkeeper at Barry golf club, and his wife, Louisa Alice Trow. He attended St Athan primary school at Gileston, then Jenner Park School in Barry, where he played football and gained a Welsh schools trial. Not until he was twelve did he become dedicated to golf, when his family had moved to Aberdar and Dai became a pupil at Aber-nant School. 
The young Dai Rees was brought up in a golfing environment, as his father was professional successively at The Leys and Brynhill, both small Welsh clubs. Nevertheless his early golfing education came from a Leys club member, R. J. Middle. At the age of five Rees played a downhill hole of 300 yards in just five strokes, holing his approach shot. In February 1929, aged fifteen, he turned professional, working as assistant to his father, when his entry to the Welsh boys' championship was rejected on the grounds that he had earned money as a caddy. 
In 1934 Rees secured an assistantship at Surbiton and in 1935 and 1936 he won the British assistants' championship. Non-selection for the 1935 Ryder cup tempted him to emigrate to South Africa, but he was dissuaded by the lack of tournaments there. In spring 1939 he married Eunice Thomas, about the same time that he moved as professional to Hindhead. He left that club in 1946, feeling that the atmosphere had become rather stuffy and snobbish, and moved to become the professional at South Hertfordshire, Totteridge, where he remained for over twenty years, before turning to golf clinics and journalism. During the Second World War he enlisted in the RAF, hoping to become a pilot, but he was, like many professional sportsmen, selected to be a physical training instructor. Eventually, however, he became a driver, and served in the Middle East. 
Rees made his debut in the Ryder cup in 1937 when, as the Professional Golfers' Association (PGA) match play champion, he was an automatic choice. He made an auspicious start by beating Byron Nelson in the singles. This was the first of a record-breaking ten appearances, three of them as team captain, including the famous match of 1957 at Lindrick, where the British team finally regained the trophy after twenty-four years. He was also non-playing captain in 1967. His Ryder cup singles record of five wins from ten games was strong at a time when the British Isles usually lost. After the Lindrick triumph Rees was voted BBC sports personality of the year and made a CBE in the new year's honours list. 
A non-smoker and virtual teetotaller, Rees kept himself fit and believed that strength was important to a golfer. He developed this in his legs by walking and cycling in the hilly terrain of the Welsh countryside as well as, in his teenage years, working during the winter at Aberdar golf club loading barrows with rocks, earth, and turf and trundling them for miles along the fairways. He also felt that being Welsh and of small stature gave him the need to prove himself. Never a long hitter, he was a confident putter and a very gritty, competitive match play golfer -- something he attributed to an individualistic childhood in which he spent much time on his own. A perfectionist, Rees was often dissatisfied with his own game or with the course, his caddy, the gallery, and any number of extraneous agencies beyond the match in hand. But as he said when asked to consider the difference between Welsh golfers and others, 'Remember we are Celtic, and Celts sometimes blow their tops. But you'll never find a Welsh golfer with ulcers!' (Houghton, 118). 
Rees was elected to the executive committee of the PGA in 1946 and served on its trade subcommittee from its inception in 1947. However, by 1950 he had left the executive. Although a supporter of the PGA, he, like many other tournament professionals, felt that the executive was prejudiced towards the interests of the club professional. Rees was among the group who lobbied for an improved tournament structure in the late 1950s. In 1960 he led another challenge to the PGA hierarchy by delivering a players' manifesto that demanded more diversification in its list of sponsors. 
Rees's tournament record included victories at both ends of the age spectrum, the assistants' championship in 1935 and the seniors' title in 1966. In between he won the British PGA match play four times (1936, 1938, 1949, and 1950) and lost in the final in 1955, 1967, and 1969, the last when aged fifty-six. The open itself always eluded him, although he finished runner-up to three great golfers: Ben Hogan, in 1953; Peter Thomson, in 1954; and Arnold Palmer, in 1961. In 1959, to the delight of his father, he won his first tournament in Wales, the British closed PGA championship. His last title was the South of England PGA in 1975; in the following year he became an honorary member of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews. He wrote five books on the game, 'Golf my Way' (1951), 'Dai Rees on Golf' (1959), 'The Key to Golf' (1961), 'Golf Today' (1962), and 'Thirty Years of Championship Golf' (1968). He died at Barnet General Hospital, Barnet, on 15 November 1983. 


@@@@@


doc= 51549


Ross, Donald James (1872-1948), golf course architect, was born on 23 November 1872 in Dornoch, Sutherland, the son of Murdo Ross, a stonemason, and his wife, Lilly Campbell. As a teenager he was apprenticed to a local carpenter, Peter Murray, but was persuaded by John Sutherland, secretary of Royal Dornoch Golf Club, to move to St Andrews and learn the club making trade in Robert Forgan's workshop, close by the old course. Clearly Sutherland had seen something in the young man's golfing abilities and in 1893, after two years in the Fife capital, he brought Ross back to be club professional and greenkeeper at Dornoch with his younger brother Alec as assistant. 
Four years later Ross moved again, this time across the Atlantic. He had given some lessons, played a few rounds, and talked golf with an American visitor, Robert Wheeler Willson, professor of astronomy at Harvard University. Like Sutherland, he was impressed with Ross and he convinced the young professional to migrate to the United States, where a golf boom was providing job opportunities for many emigrant Scots. Thus in 1898 Ross took up a position, arranged for him by Wilson, at the Oakley golf club at Watertown in suburban Boston. Here he made the acquaintance of James Tufts, whose family had made its money in the soft drinks industry. Tufts's health was such that he wintered in the warmer climate of North Carolina, where his entrepreneurial spirit led to his buying some 5000 acres of land at Pinehurst which he intended to turn into a winter resort with a golf course as part of the plans. 
Tufts offered Ross the position of winter professional at Pinehurst, a job that he took up in 1900. In 1904 he married Janet Conchie of Ayr, Scotland, with whom he had a daughter, Lillian. Course design soon replaced playing as Ross's major activity, although he still managed to finish in the top ten in the United States open championship on four occasions (his brother, Alec, who had followed him to the USA, won the US open in 1907), and returned to St Andrews to play in the open championship of 1910, when he finished eighth. For a dozen years Ross concentrated on improving the existing course at Pinehurst, but in 1912 he began work on the prosaically named Pinehurst no. 2, which, after it opened in 1925, was acclaimed as one of the finest courses of any era. Ross adapted his vision of Scottish links terrain to an American situation of pine forests, scrubland, and quick-draining sandy soil. Initially, until suitable strains were developed, he made the greens of sand, but they remained full of challenging subtleties, and were reminiscent of Dornoch in that they repelled anything less than a good shot. He eschewed water as a hazard, believing that the impossibility of making a recovery shot was too punitive. He believed in strategic rather than penal course design. His course architecture had two basic tenets: first, there should always be more than one way of playing a given hole, so that the audacious player should be properly rewarded for his daring, with the less skilled finding an alternative route home; second, that his courses should test every facet of the game -- long and accurate tee shots, controlled iron play, precision around the green, and consistency upon it. Mastery of only one of these skills would never be enough to tame a Ross course. 
The success of the Pinehurst resort, which eventually boasted seven courses, all designed by Ross, led to his being in great demand, and he became at least peripherally involved in designing and constructing hundreds of courses (about 415 courses in the USA, Canada, and Cuba have been credited to him). With summer offices in Rhode Island and branches in Chicago, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania, by 1925 Ross and his 'associates' employed up to 3000 people on architectural projects across America. When fully engaged, he produced truly outstanding designs. In the eight US open championships staged between 1919 and 1926, no fewer than six Ross courses were chosen as the venue: Brae Burn, Inverness, Skokie, Oakland Hills, Worcester, and Scioto. Yet his two greatest creations remain Pinehurst no. 2, which did not stage its first US open until 1999, and Seminole in North Palm Beach, Florida, which has never done so. The latter was one of the few courses for which Ross actively sought the design contract. Another legendary Scottish figure in the story of American golf, Tommy Armour, maintained that 'the man who doesn't feel emotionally stirred when he golfs at Pinehurst... should be ruled out of golf for life' (Green, 195). 
Apart from making a few suggestions for his native Dornoch course, Ross did no work outside North America. He remained at Pinehurst for the rest of his life, and finally became golf director of the Tufts enterprise. He was elected honorary president of the American Society of Golf Course Architects when it was formed in 1946; the society continues to present the annual Donald Ross award to an individual who has made a significant contribution to golf in general and golf course architecture specifically. In 1989 the Donald Ross Society was formed for the restoration and preservation of courses designed by him. Unlike his contemporary course designers, Ross did not publish much, but a collection of his observations on golf and course design, originally intended to have been published in 1914, came to light posthumously, and was published in 1996 as 'Golf Has Never Failed Me: the Lost Commentaries of Legendary Golf Architect Donald J. Ross'. His first wife died in 1922 and in 1924 he married a widow, Florence Blackington of Pinehurst; there were no children of this marriage. 
Ross died of a heart attack at Pinehurst, North Carolina, on 26 April 1948 and was interred at Newton, Massachusetts, next to Janet Conchie. 


@@@@@


doc= 51562


Ian, Leslie Charles Bowyer Charteris (1907-1993), writer, was born Leslie Charles Bowyer Yin in Singapore on 12 May 1907, the son of Dr Suat Chuan Yin (1876-1958), a wealthy Chinese surgeon who claimed descent from the Shang emperors, and Lydia Florence, 'nee' Bowyer (1876-1953). 
Yin's part-Chinese origins, which were clear from his good-looking features, grated with him and he reinvented himself as often as his famous fictional character Simon Templar, 'the Saint'. He was brought up speaking Chinese and Malay as well as English. At ten he produced a four-page magazine, with his own illustrations of matchstick men -- the prototype for the Saint's distinctive haloed logo. 
After the breakup of his parents' marriage in 1919, Yin and his mother went to England, where he attended Rossall School in Fleetwood, Lancashire, from 1920 to 1924 and King's College, Cambridge, which he left in 1926 after a year because, to his father's dismay, he wanted to write thrillers like Edgar Wallace and Sapper. 
To support himself initially, Yin worked in a goldmine in Malaya and as a bartender, professional bridge player, and temporary policeman in Britain. He published his first stories as Leslie C. Bowyer. On 16 October 1926 he changed his name by deed poll to Leslie Charles Bowyer Charteris-Ian; he adopted 'Charteris' after Colonel Francis Charteris, the eighteenth-century rake who was a founder member of the Hellfire Club. From then on he was known as Leslie Charteris. 
Charteris's first book, 'X Esquire', published in 1927, told of a plot to destroy Britain with poisoned cigarettes. He experimented with a couple of heroes -- a Bulldog Drummond lookalike, Terry Mannering, and the cavalier Ramon Francisco de Castila y Esproneda Manrique -- before settling on the debonair Templar, who first appeared in 'Meet the Tiger' in 1928. The character also appeared in stories for the magazine 'The Thriller' and found popularity with 'Enter the Saint' in 1930. 
On 24 June 1931 Charteris married Pauline Schishkin (died 1975), daughter of a Russian former tsarist diplomat. Unlikely to grow rich on 'The Thriller''s rate of 2 guineas per 1000 words, Charteris began visiting the United States in 1932 and wrote Hollywood film scripts, starting with 'Midnight Club', adapted from an E. Phillips Oppenheim novel. 
Charteris continued his increasingly successful Saint books -- the mix of light humour, sophisticated settings, and story-line emphasizing the role of a crusader tackling the forces of evil having special appeal in the depression. He enjoyed the quasi-mythical element evident in his hero's 'nom de guerre', derived from the initials of Simon Templar -- itself a nod to the legend of the knights templar. 
During the 1930s the Saint, who had many similarities with his author, went through a process of Americanization, apparent in the harder-edged 'The Saint in New York' (1935). In 1938 the first Saint film was produced in Hollywood, starring the South African Louis Hayward. George Sanders later took up the role in 1939 in 'The Saint Strikes Back'. By then Charteris was effectively living in North America, where his divorce from his first wife in 1937 was followed by marriage to Barbara Meyer (died 1950) on 15 May 1939. His second marriage ended in divorce in 1943. 

'The Saint in Miami' (1941) was an anti-Nazi thriller designed to encourage the United States to enter the Second World War. After Pearl Harbor, the Saint was transformed into a sober patriotic hero who worked alongside FBI chief Edgar Hoover's G-men. 
On 7 October 1943 Charteris married his third wife, Elizabeth Bryant Borst ('b'. 1909), and in 1946 he became a naturalized American. He was divorced again in 1951, but on 26 April the following year he married actress Audrey Gwendoline Long (1922-2014). From 1953 his stories appeared in his own 'Saint Magazine', as well as in ongoing novels, films, radio features, and cartoon strips. 
The Saint metamorphosed again into a mere private detective, operating in colourful locations, but after more than a quarter of a century Charteris was tiring of his creation. In 1962 he sold the rights to make twenty-six television episodes of 'The Saint' for $500,000. The series starring Roger Moore gave Simon Templar a new lease of life, though, in reality, the Saint had been superseded in the public imagination by Ian Fleming's James Bond, a figure whom Charteris found vulgar and violent. 
Having returned to Europe, Charteris became increasingly right-wing politically, backing Enoch Powell and capital punishment. Wealthier than ever, he devoted his time to pleasures such as eating, drinking, and racing. (He was a columnist for 'Gourmet Magazine' and ran his own racehorses.) He maintained his intellectual interests, becoming a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and inventing a pictorial language called Paleneo. He also founded the Saint Club which raised money for east London charities. In the early 1970s he was resident in Dublin for tax purposes, though his main house was a large bungalow in Surrey and he also kept a hotel apartment in the south of France. 
Further television adaptations of 'The Saint' followed in the 1970s (featuring Ian Ogilvy) and 1980s (with Simon Dutton) and Charteris was happy for 'novelizations' by others to appear under his name. He spent his final years in Britain as something of a recluse. He and his reputation were cared for by his fourth wife. In 1992 he won the Crime Writers' Association's diamond dagger award for lifetime achievement. In all he wrote fifty books, which were translated into twenty-one languages. Though his later novels were formulaic, his early work had a mischievous 'jeu d'esprit' and understated sophistication not unlike that depicted by Roger Moore in his cinema James Bond -- significantly after he had played the Saint on television. Leslie Charteris died at the Princess Margaret Hospital, Windsor, on 15 April 1993 and his remains were cremated at Woking on 20 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 51563


Christison, Sir (Alexander Frank) Philip, fourth baronet (1893-1993), army officer, was born at 40 Moray Place, Edinburgh, on 17 November 1893, the elder of the two sons and eldest of five children of Sir Alexander Christison, second baronet (1828-1918), surgeon-general in the Bengal army, and his second wife, Florence (1861-1949), daughter of F. T. Elworthy, of Foxdown, Wellington, Somerset. He had one half-brother and three half-sisters from his father's first marriage, to Jemima Anne (died 1876), daughter of James Cowley Brown, a civil servant in India. Like his grandfather and his father (who lived to eighty-five and ninety respectively) he was destined for a long life, and began a career in medicine. Indeed his grandfather, Sir Robert Christison, first baronet, had been physician to Queen Victoria in Scotland. For six weeks in 1914 he himself was an officer in the Royal Army Medical Corps: in his last days he hoped to be remembered as a general who 'had a great part in beating tropical disease in Burma' ('The Independent'). From Edinburgh Academy he went to University College, Oxford, to read medicine: he joined the Officers' Training Corps of both. At 'Univ' he rowed for the college and played rugby for the university. The First World War prevented his qualifying medically; so he turned pro tem to soldiering, taking up not scalpel but sword. In 1973 he was made an honorary fellow of University College, together with Prime Minister Harold Wilson. 
Christison was commissioned into the Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders in 1914. During 1915 he fought as a captain with his 6th battalion at the battle of Loos, was severely wounded, evacuated to the UK and earned both a mention in dispatches and a (newly created) Military Cross. His younger brother, Frederick John ('b'. 1894), a lieutenant in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, was killed in action on 2 December 1915. On 29 February 1916 Christison married his childhood friend, Lizzie Isobel 
(Betty; 1894-1974)
, daughter of the Rt Revd Anthony Mitchell, bishop of Aberdeen and Orkney; they were to have one son, John Anthony Alexander, and three daughters, Heather Cameron, Alison Ann, and Fiona. Shortly after the marriage Christison returned to France, fought at the battles of the Somme and Passchendaele, won a bar to his MC, and was again mentioned in dispatches. Peace found him in the Rhine occupation, as adjutant to 4th King's Own Scottish Borderers and his Camerons. Though the scalpel had by then been forsaken, he ever kept a mind keen to heal rather than destroy. In 1924 he co-managed the British team for the Paris Olympics -- the year that the Scottish runner Eric Liddell won gold. He had to house the team and get it to the start line. It was a time of fishing and shooting by day, of opera and theatre by night in Germany. 
In 1927 Christison went to Camberley Staff College: Oliver Leese passed out first, and he fifth. In 1934 he returned there as a tactics instructor: finding his commandant, Lord Gort, wholly outdated (though destined for high responsibility during the period 1937-41), he redesigned the tactics course from root. As a brevet colonel, in 1937 he was advanced to command 2nd battalion, the duke of Wellington's regiment on the north-west frontier. (For a decade from 1947 he became the regiment's colonel, and colonel of the 10th Gurkha rifles.) A young forty-four, he was climbing high hills and writing new drill books for Auchinleck in Delhi. His son was at Keble College, Oxford, on the edge of a rugby blue; one of his daughters was at Girton College, Cambridge. He took leave to survey Baluchistan ornithology, writing a bird book (published 1940). Alanbrooke approved! In 1938 Christison advanced to command 4th infantry brigade in Quetta (headquarters western command), going on to be the Staff College's commandant, as Leese left instructing at Quetta to join the British expeditionary force and to command the 15th Scottish division, which Christison commanded next. In 1942 he returned a third time to Quetta to form an army corps to protect India's western flank. By late 1943 Slim was given his Fourteenth Army; Mountbatten ordered Christison to take over Slim's 15th Indian corps in Arakan, in eastern Burma. His son and heir, a captain in the 2nd Duke of Wellington's regiment, had been killed in the long retreat from Sittang Bridge, in 1942. 
Christison (who was promoted major-general in 1941 and lieutenant-general in 1942) at once developed the hedgehog principle of Bruce of Bannockburn -- a defensive ring served by supply and casualty evacuation by air. The Kohima front equally adopted the hedgehog method: Japanese initiatives were eroded piecemeal. The Arakan coastal area was compared to Norwegian fjords, the Japanese holding the jungle spines of over 3000 feet. It became known as 'the battle of the admin box'. Air supply being crucially successful, the strategy steadily paid off. Of the Second Arakan Battle, Slim wrote in 1956: 'It was one of the historic successes of British arms. It was the turning point of the Burma campaign. For the first time a British force had met, held and decisively defeated a major Japanese attack, driving the enemy out of the strongest possible positions. (Slim, 245)' Churchill signalled: 'You have burst the bubble of Japanese invincibility' (Christison, 130). Slim wrote for Christison on the flyleaf of his memoir: 'Phil, you won the first British victory over the Japanese on land: Bill' (personal knowledge). Together they were knighted in the field by Wavell, the viceroy (the first such event since the middle ages). Invested CB and KBE in 1944, Christison -- unusually for a general -- was appointed to the DSO in 1945; and there was a third mention in dispatches. On 15 May 1945 Christison's half-brother, Sir Robert Alexander Christison, third baronet (1870-1945), died childless, and Christison succeeded to the baronetcy. 
In May 1945, after further operational successes at Akyab and Ramree and the Rangoon River, Christison was drawn into a command 'cause celebre'. Leese, then commander-in-chief allied land forces, south-east Asia, summoned him to Akyab and told him: 'Christie, Dickie [Mountbatten] has felt awhile that Slim has become a tired man, and I agree. I have been told to ease him out; and you are to take over command of 14th Army at once' (Christison, 164). This caused consternation in cabinet. Eventually it was Leese who was relieved and Slim who was promoted. Christison filled the command of allied land forces, south-east Asia, until Slim completed needed leave, returning to his 15th corps. On 3 September 1945, being alone available, he took the surrender of the Japanese Seventh Army and south-east fleet with air forces, at Singapore, reversing the shame of General Arthur Percival in 1942. He had just presided over 'Sittang, the last battle', where almost the entire Japanese army was annihilated by the Indian army before its own sad partition. Christison wrote: 'I saw such scenes at Passchendaele: many went mad or wandered... Thus the War's last battle, 20,000 Japanese perishing under most terrible conditions' (Christison, 172-3). 
In September 1945, Mountbatten side-stepping the task, Christison was sent as allied commander to the Dutch East Indies to disarm 60,000 enemy; to succour 20,000 prisoners of war; and to govern the area until the Dutch governors, then in Queensland, returned. As 'guests of the Dutch', it was a political-referee task. Yet the word 'Indonesia', as a new republic, intimating self-government, was emerging. Japanese arms were falling to freedom fighters -- who rounded up 200,000 Dutch and Eurasians into over-full camps. Unrealistically, the government of The Hague refused to support their East Indies officials. Christison was driven to rearm Japanese troops, for their survival and for law enforcement in the face of civil war: they became guards to civilian convoys. Sokarno's Indonesia had come, the Dutch were never to return, and the British became targets. Christison compared it to the bestialities of the French Revolution. His task became no more than the control-to-rescue of mainly internees or prisoners of war and European families. He was allowed little response to extreme violence, and yet got a bad press, for example for casualties. At the last stage peace and the press came his way. Christison claimed it was the most delicately difficult task he was ever given. No honours came from it, except a Chinese order of Cloud and Banner. Prime Minister Attlee later said: 'We were lucky to have a soldier-statesman there' (Christison, 189). 
Christison returned home in 1946 to be general officer commanding-in-chief, northern command, in York. Prince Bernhard came to be briefed on Indonesia, refused earlier by his own Dutch prime minister. Northern civics treated the general as below-high-table; so he went back to field sports. He was soon sent to Scotland as general officer commanding-in-chief, with the rank of full general, collecting his furniture from a decade of storage in Camberley. He established the first military tattoo in 1947. He was advanced to GBE in 1948, where -- with such a record -- GCB might have been more fitting for a full general; though George VI made him his Scottish aide-de-camp general. The most senior general, he was entitled to promotion to field marshal, but refused. He and Betty conquered full rationing to entertain many, and were duly gathered to greater functions in Scotland. First World War commanders retired with golden handshakes. The Christisons, with their four children to see established, got no more than a 'maximum pension' of $1500 p.a., after a life with no chance to save. They found The Croft at Melrose in 1949, becoming fruit farmers near the River Tweed, next to the abbey. Triple colonelcy caused travel, as did multiple presidencies and chairmanships, including those of the Scottish Unionist Party (1957-8), the Earl Haig Fund, the Lodge Trust for Ornithology, and the Clarsach Society. His wife, Betty, died in March 1974; on 10 December the same year Christison married Vida Wallace Smith MBE (1901-1992), a WRNS officer and civil servant. Christison himself died at his home, The Croft, Melrose, Roxburghshire, on 21 December 1993, shortly after celebrating his hundredth birthday; he was buried in Melrose on the 23rd. A memorial service was held in St Mary's Cathedral, Edinburgh, on 28 January 1994. The baronetcy became extinct on his death. 
In 1929 Christison came to know a diminutive Japanese officer, on staff attachment for a year. In 1945, at a ceremony in Jakarta, General Yamamoto was called to surrender to Christison, now the general officer commanding-in-chief. Yamamoto said: 'I hoped you would not recognize: my shame is great... have my family sword, which was made at Bizen in the 16th century' (Christison, 178-9). The general took that sword back to Melrose. In 1990 the Japanese Army Association honoured Christison's memory in Indonesia. So he decided to return the Bizen sword to the officer's widow, with the words: 'I shall forgive, but I shall not forget' (personal knowledge). Others afterwards did the same, notably Bernard Weatherill, speaker of the Commons. Wounds were salved, as a doctor might say. 


@@@@@


doc= 51567


Plomer, Henry Robert (1856-1928), bibliographer, was born on 13 December 1856 at Upper Rohais, Guernsey, the third son of George Daniel Plomer (1816-1875) of Canterbury and his wife, Charlotte Amy Burrows of Dublin. His parents lived on a private income and spent the early years of their marriage in Dublin. Plomer began work at the age of nineteen as a bank clerk, but abandoned this to invest his small private income in a livery stable. The enterprise failed, and after writing short stories for small newspapers Plomer supported himself by copying work at the British Museum, the Public Record Office, and Somerset House. He spent most of his life in London, living mainly in Willesden. On 6 October 1884 he married Ellen Esther, the daughter of Thomas Young of Essex; they had two daughters and a son. Plomer's first substantial publication was 'A Short Account of the Records of Canterbury' (1892); he published further material relating to Kent and Canterbury, where he worked in the recruiting office during the First World War, preparing four volumes relating to wills and to churchwardens' accounts for 'Kent Records' between 1915 and 1927. 
Plomer's contribution to scholarship in the emerging field of bibliography and the history of the printing trade in Great Britain was substantial and original. In 1892 he offered his services as secretary to the newly formed Bibliographical Society: although he was not appointed to the post, he began a long association with the society and especially with A. W. Pollard (1859-1944). His earliest bibliographical publications were articles in 'Notes and Queries' in 1885 on English almanacs. These were followed in 1891 by an account in 'The Library' of 'Literature of the plague': Plomer had wanted to compile a bibliography of early English books on the subject, but was persuaded instead to pursue his interest in the sixteenth-century printer Robert Wyer. A preliminary article in 'The Library' in 1891 was expanded in 1895 into one of the first of the Bibliographical Society's small quarto publications, containing bibliographical descriptions of Wyer's books and an account of his types. Plomer contributed to six more of the society's volumes and wrote more than sixty articles for 'The Library', the 'Transactions of the Bibliographical Society', and 'Bibliographica', as well as pieces for 'Notes and Queries'. His most substantial contributions were to the series of dictionaries of printers and booksellers at work in England between 1501 and 1775: he was largely responsible for the volumes covering 1641 to 1667 (1907), 1668 to 1725 (1922), and 1726 to 1775 (1932), which was published posthumously. This biographical work suited Plomer's talents as a researcher among records, which also yielded the society's 'Abstracts from the Wills of English Printers and Stationers from 1492 to 1630' (1903). His many articles, mostly about the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, showed how much could be uncovered about the history of the book trade through a systematic study of archives and records. Plomer's great knowledge of the relevant documents and his understanding of their importance can be illustrated by his being probably the first writer to draw on printers' ledgers, referring to those of Henry Woodfall in 'A Short History of English Printing, 1476-1898' (1900) and in 1901 publishing an article in 'The Library' on the Whittingham ledgers. 
When mechanical reproduction replaced copying by hand Plomer's finances suffered. At the inception of the 'Short-Title Catalogue of English Books, 1475-1640', he was commissioned to report on the Bodleian's books and attempted to supplement his income by rapidly publishing three books: on 'English Printers' Ornaments' (1924) and on Wynkyn de Worde (1925), which contain valuable material but were not well received, and on William Caxton (1925). An attempt to recognize the importance of his work and help him out financially by a civil-list pension was frustrated and rendered unnecessary by the death of his elder brother, who left him an inheritance. His long-standing interest in Edmund Spenser bore fruit in contributions relating to the latter's handwriting (1923) and in an edition with Tom Pete Crosse of the life and correspondence of Spenser's friend Lodowick Bryskett (1927). Just before he died, at London on 20 August 1928, Plomer was awarded a grant by the committee of the Royal Literary Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 51568


Wickham, William Arthur (1849-1929), photographer and Church of England clergyman, was born on 3 February 1849 at Trowbridge, the eldest of the five children of William Wickham (1806-1865), grocer, of Trowbridge, and Emma Sophia (1815-1905), daughter of John Rumming, farmer, of Wingfield, Wiltshire. He was educated privately in Trowbridge until shortly after his father's death, and first earned his living as a schoolteacher at Highgate, Middlesex. There followed itinerant work as a tutor. Wickham inherited his parents' religiosity and later recalled his confirmation as his 'greatest blessing'. In 1873 he entered Lichfield Theological College, and was ordained deacon in 1874 and priest in 1875. Between 1874 and 1878 he held a curacy in the Staffordshire colliery parish of Talke-o'-th'-Hill. 
In 1878 Wickham rejected a good living in the west country in favour of a new district in the parish of Wigan, beginning his ministry as vicar of St Andrew's on 3 November. At that time public worship was conducted in a school-church, the benefice was worth less than $200, and there was no vicarage. It was a poor district on the edge of a large industrial town. Wickham achieved much at St Andrew's. He had a church built and consecrated within four years and cleared the debt by 1886. Parish schools and a vicarage followed. His work grew with the population, including the establishment of a host of parish organizations and a parish magazine. His prohibition of drink (and raffles) at bazaars, among parishioners for whom drink was itself a religion, illustrates his principles. During the coal strike of 1893 he established a soup kitchen to alleviate distress. He aired his views on labour relations and on education (as a vociferous opponent of secular board schools), opposed Welsh disestablishment, and was criticized for high-churchmanship. 
Wickham was interested in photography as a young man, and his earliest images date from 1869. During the 1880s he put on public lantern shows, using mainly borrowed slides. In 1891, however, he had the idea of using photographs of his parishioners and their surroundings. At the first of these shows on 5 October it was reported that the local views 'were received by the audience with constant rounds of applause as they recognized their friends and neighbours'. This was Wickham's brief period of documentary photography. The most remarkable of these slides (made from dry quarter-plates produced with a bellows camera) were of photographs taken in Wickham's local colliery, Douglas Bank, and 'were examined with the greatest interest, being quite unique in the neighbourhood'. He may have got the idea for these from Arthur Sopwith, whom Wickham might have met while at Talke and who had experimented with flash-lit photography in the Staffordshire pits during the 1880s. Wickham's plates of this type convey graphically the cramped, dirty, and arduous conditions faced daily by the miners. The images of working people above ground are epitomized by a series depicting the St Andrew's soup kitchen. Others include colliers squatting, washing, and awaiting their pay, and some vivid individual portraits of domestic and other occupations, such as those of street vendors. The photographs were deposited with the Wigan Archives Service. 
Wickham also undertook ecclesiological researches, producing a number of papers, most of them published by the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire between 1907 and 1916. Typical of these is 'Some notes on Hindley Chappell' (1910). 
On 21 June 1892 Wickham married Clara (1862-1926), daughter of John Henry Peck, oilcloth manufacturer of Wigan, and his wife, Martha, at St Andrew's. They had one son, Bernard (died 1917), and four daughters -- Myrtle, Cicely, Monica, and Caroline -- who all survived, unmarried, into their eighties, keen to keep alive the memory of their father's achievements. Wickham was described as having a generous disposition and was self-effacing in his career. He was also said to possess a 'domineering will power' and an inability to compromise. His strict teetotalism was well attested, as was his keen and ironical sense of humour. 
Failing health and increasing work caused Wickham to leave Wigan in November 1916 for the quiet parish of Ampton, Suffolk, where he remained rector until his death, at the rectory, on 30 May 1929, aged eighty. He was buried on 1 June at Ampton church next to his wife. 
In his own time Wickham was known as an industrious clergyman and an ecclesiastical antiquary. His photographic work was not widely known, nor did he ever regard it as other than a hobby and a means to entertain his parishioners and raise funds for the parish. Wickham was no Frank Sutcliffe, certainly, but none the less his lasting significance lies principally in the small but fine legacy of photographic images of working people that his hobby bequeathed, and in his pioneering efforts in underground photography. 


@@@@@


doc= 51575


Durell, Clement Vavasor (1882-1968), mathematics teacher and textbook writer, was born on 6 June 1882 at the rectory, Fulbourn, near Cambridge, the son of John Vavasor Durell (1837-1923), rector of Fulbourn, and his wife, Ellen Annie Carlyon. Educated at Felsted School, he entered Clare College, Cambridge, in 1900, was seventh wrangler in 1903, and, in 1904, gained a first class in part two of the mathematical tripos (which was soon to become part three in the major reform of 1907). 
Durell started teaching at Gresham's School, Holt, but moved in 1905 to Winchester College, where he was appointed senior mathematical master in 1910; he remained there until his retirement. He served in the First World War as a lieutenant in the Royal Garrison Artillery and was mentioned in dispatches. Back at Winchester College, Durell became a housemaster in 1920. He fulfilled his duties at Chernocke House until 1927, but not with great success. He was a naturally shy and rather austere person, who had grown up in a family with four older brothers, and he never married. Through his textbook writing, however, he soon extended his influence on the teaching of mathematics far beyond the confines of Winchester College. 
Through his leadership, organization, and growing reputation, Durell did much to raise the status of mathematics at Winchester College. As early as 1900 he had joined the Mathematical Association, an influential organization involving secondary school and university teachers, and he became a life member. Before the First World War he became actively involved in the association's committee work and report production, and contributed articles on pedagogy to its journal, the 'Mathematical Gazette'. His first textbook, 'Elementary Problem Papers', was published by Arnold in 1906, but his scope and influence became unrivalled between the wars through his work for the Mathematical Association's publisher, G. Bell & Sons. 
Durell's textbook production grew rapidly from 1920 and within fifteen years his publisher was able to claim, in a special 32-page catalogue of his works: 'There can indeed be few secondary schools in the English-speaking world in which some at least of Mr Durell's books are not now employed in the teaching of mathematics' (Bell, 'Modern Mathematical Textbooks', 1). The list included twenty different titles, many available in separate volumes or parts, covering all the branches of school mathematics: arithmetic, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, calculus, and mechanics. The level ranged from introductory work for the aspiring school certificate pupil to advanced work for the university scholarship candidate. Exceptionally, he also produced one book on the pedagogy of algebra, 'The Teaching of Elementary Algebra' (1931), and one work of popularization, 'Readable Relativity' (1926). 
Durell's genius for exposition contributed to his success, and he continually improved and updated his textbooks in response to practical experience, the views of teachers, and the recommendations in the reports of the Mathematical Association. In geometry teaching, however, he joined a committee of the Incorporated Association of Assistant Masters and openly criticized the Mathematical Association's authoritative report of 1923 for its pedagogical elitism and impracticability. He kept in close touch with the Mathematical Association's work through fruitful textbook-writing partnerships with teachers from other leading public schools -- C. O. Tuckey (Charterhouse), A. W. Siddons (Harrow), R. C. Fawdry (Clifton College), G. W. Palmer (Christ's Hospital), and R. M. Wright (Eton College). In the writing of more advanced textbooks he also enjoyed a long and productive association with Alan Robson of Marlborough College, a leading figure in the Mathematical Association. 
Durell's early commercial success was helped by an expanding market for secondary school textbooks, which continued to grow on an international scale in the period of educational reconstruction after the Second World War. His 'General Arithmetic', first published in 1936, became an outstanding best seller and was still included in Bell and Hyman's list fifty years later, along with his mathematical tables and textbooks in geometry and general mathematics. The post-war shift towards general mathematical textbooks -- as opposed to textbooks on the separate branches -- was initially resisted by Durell but he was persuaded to produce a new series, in four volumes from 1946, which again proved a major success. 
Late in Durell's career he renewed his active involvement with the Mathematical Association by acting as secretary of the committee which produced a major report on higher geometry for schools (1953). He was described by another committee member as 'an indefatiguable ['sic'] worker, producing numerous drafts, and a courteous though persistent critic of anything he thought loose or inconsistent in the efforts of others' (Maxwell, 313). 
On his retirement from Winchester College Durell moved to 73 North Lane, East Preston, Sussex, where he was accompanied by a housekeeper, a gardener, and large dogs. Golf was, at one time, a chief recreation, and, in his old age, he escaped from English winters to the climates of Madeira and, latterly, South Africa, where he died on 10 December 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 51576


Geiger, Hans (1882-1945), physicist, was born on 30 September 1882 in Neustadt in the Rhine Palatinate, Germany, the eldest of the five children of Wilhelm Geiger (1856-1943) and Marie Plochmann (1858-1910). His father was a philologist, first at secondary school ('Gymnasium') in Neustadt and Munich and from 1891 as professor at the University of Erlangen. Geiger grew up in Erlangen and finished school (took his 'Abitur') there in 1901. After one year's military service he began to study physics and mathematics at the universities of Erlangen and Munich. Eilhard Wiedemann in Erlangen became his teacher, supervising Geiger's thesis on 'Strahlungs- Temperatur- und Potentialmessungen in Entladungsrohren bei starken Stromen' (1906). The dissertation involved experiments with and measurements of electrical discharges and made Geiger familiar with experimental skills that were of great importance for his later work on the development of electrical methods for the detection of nuclear particles. With the recommendation of his teacher Geiger went as a postdoctoral researcher to Arthur Schuster at the University of Manchester. He had planned to stay in Manchester for only a year, but remained for more than six years. Schuster's successor, Ernest Rutherford, made the talented German his assistant and educated him in radioactivity research. Geiger's scientific work centred on the development of electrical methods and instruments for detecting and counting atomic particles, and on their use for the investigation of atomic structure. In 1908, together with Rutherford, he invented an electrical technique (based on an ionization chamber) for counting single alpha particles, and was able to show the equivalence of the new technique with the common optical scintillation detector. Using the counter Geiger proved in 1908 the statistical character of radioactive decay. This result was important not only for radioactivity itself but for the further development of atomic physics and quantum theory, since it was a key for the general understanding of emission and absorption as a statistical process. Later, Geiger and Rutherford estimated the total number of alpha particles emitted per second from 1 gram of radium and also the half-life period for radium. With this number they could also determine the value of the elementary charge and that the alpha particle was a double charge particle. 
In 1910 Geiger investigated the linear relationship between the radius of action (R) and the third power of velocity (v) for alpha particles from various radioactive materials (Geigersche Reichweitegesetz R ~ v3) and in 1911 the relation between the half-value period (greekLettereta) and the radius of action (R) (Geiger-Nuttall rule ln greekLettereta ~ ln R). During this period Geiger had also observed that some alpha particles were scattered in a thin metal foil in a way which was inappropriate to a statistical scattering based upon multiple scattering. This observation, made together with E. Marsden in 1909, led to Rutherford's nuclear model of the atom (1911) and the so-called Rutherford's scattering formula, which was verified by Geiger and Marsden in 1911-12. Geiger earned such a large reputation in this new field of physics at Manchester that in 1912 he was appointed head of the new laboratory for radioactivity of the Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt (PTR -- Physical-Technical Institute) in Berlin and during the following years he made it one of the leading centres in radioactivity and early nuclear physics. 
It was during this Berlin period that Geiger carried out a great deal of metrological work in connection with the establishment of a radium standard and improved his Geiger counter to establish the so-called point counter. This was a detector which made possible much more rapid counting, not only of alpha particles but also of beta particles as well as other types of radiation. With the help of the new counter James Chadwick, who came as Rutherford's student to Geiger in 1913, was able to demonstrate the continuous beta spectrum. After the war Geiger developed, together with Walther Bothe, the coincidence method, the combination of two point counters for the detection of simultaneous events. Using this new precision technique they could test the exact validity of classic conservation principles for single atomic events (1925), which were then called into question by the Compton effect and its statistical interpretation by N. Bohr, H. A. Kramers, and J. Slater. Max von Laue stated that with this work Geiger and Bothe 'turned the course of physics from the path of error' (Laue, 153). In 1920 Geiger married Elisabeth Heffter (1896-1982), daughter of a famous Berlin family of scientists; they had three sons, born in 1921, 1924, and 1927. 
In 1925 Geiger accepted the chair of physics at the University of Kiel. In 1928 he and his student Walther Muller developed the counting device for which Geiger is still best known: the Geiger-Muller counter. It combined the virtues of the Geiger counter with that of the point counter and became the most important device in nuclear physics and related fields. During the following years Geiger endeavoured to improve this instrument in many studies and applications -- for instance for investigations in cosmic ray physics -- and led the way in making it a very commonly used piece of equipment. In 1928 Geiger moved to Tubingen as professor of physics. In 1935 he returned to Berlin as director of the Institute of Physics at the Technical University. 
Besides his scientific work Geiger was a talented and fascinating teacher and also found time for a great deal of literary work: between 1926 and 1933 he was the editor of the 'Handbuch der Physik' (with K. Scheel) and from 1936 he edited the 'Zeitschrift fur Physik'. Geiger was a member of several scientific societies and academies (Leipzig, 1932; Leopoldina, 1935; Berlin, 1936); in 1929 he was honoured with the Duddell medal of the Physical Society and in 1938 with the Hughes medal of the Royal Society of London. Further, in 1954 Walther Bothe, Geiger's closest colleague at the PTR, was awarded the Nobel prize for the coincidence method of counting particles that Geiger and Bothe had developed together in the mid-1920s. The outbreak of the Second World War and a painful rheumatic condition soon led to a cessation of his research activities. His poor health and the chaotic events of 1945 (his home was damaged by bombs and later occupied by the allies in connection with the Potsdam conference) were instrumental in his early death, on 24 September 1945 in Potsdam. He was buried on 29 September at Neuer Friedhof, Potsdam. 


@@@@@


doc= 51577


Kirkman, Thomas Penyngton (1806-1895), mathematician and philosopher, was born on 31 March 1806 in Bolton, Lancashire, the only son of John Kirkman (died 1839), cotton dealer, and his wife, Elizabeth. Baptized Pennington, he adopted the spelling Penyngton in later life. He was educated at Bolton grammar school, where he was the best scholar in the school, but in spite of protestations by the headmaster was removed at the age of fourteen to work in his father's business. During his years in the cotton trade he studied the classics and taught himself French and German. At the age of twenty-three he broke away and enrolled as a student at Trinity College, Dublin, supporting himself financially by private tutoring. He studied the required subjects of philosophy, classics, mathematics, and science, and graduated BA in 1833. 
After a year as private tutor to an Irish baronet Kirkman returned to England and took holy orders in 1835. Following curacies in Bury, Lancashire, and Lymm, Cheshire, he moved in 1839 to a curacy in Croft, near Warrington, and in 1845 became rector of the newly created parish of Croft-with-Southworth, where he remained for over fifty years. At the Croft rectory: 'with an expenditure of mental labour that only the finest of physical constitutions could have sustained, he devoted, practically, the whole of his time (for the parochial work was small) to the study of pure mathematics, the higher criticism of the 'Old Testament', and questions of first principles. (W. W. Kirkman, 238)' On 8 June 1841 he married Eliza Ann Wright of Runcorn, Cheshire, with whom he had seven children. To support his family he supplemented his parish income by private tutoring, later augmented by the income from some property inherited by his wife. 
It is not known when Kirkman's interests in mathematics developed, but in 1844 he was inspired by a combinatorial prize question in the 'Lady's and Gentleman's Diary', set by the editor, the Revd William Woolhouse. This led to a pioneering paper in 1847 on the arrangements of objects into groups of three with each pair of objects appearing just once; such arrangements are now called 'Steiner triple systems', after the Swiss mathematician Jakob Steiner, even though Kirkman had priority and contributed much more than Steiner to the subject. In 1850 Kirkman presented the problem for which he is best remembered, the 'fifteen schoolgirls problem', of arranging fifteen young ladies in groups of three on each of seven days so that each young lady walks with every other one just once. He continued to write in this area for a further twelve years, and is now recognized as the founding father of design theory. 
Kirkman's next area of mathematical interest was hypercomplex numbers, or 'pluquaternions', as he named them, following Sir William Rowan Hamilton's 1840s work on quaternions; Kirkman's election as a fellow of the Royal Society on 11 June 1857 arose partly from his studies in this area. About 1850 he also wrote on geometry -- in particular, the sixty points of concurrence that arise from Pascal's six-points-on-a-hexagon theorem when the six points are permuted in all possible ways; this work did much to establish his reputation in British mathematical circles. 
From 1853 Kirkman made pioneering contributions to the classification and enumeration of polyhedra (or 'polyedra', as he called them), and to the emerging theory of groups. Unfortunately his writings were couched in such obscure terminology that a substantial memoir on polyhedra was turned down by the Royal Society as being unreadable. Later, when the Paris Academie des Sciences proposed a 'grand prix de mathematiques' for advances in these areas, Kirkman's entry for the 1860 groups prize was unsuccessful; in consequence he chose not to submit for the 1861 polyhedron prize. The resentments he felt against the Royal Society and the Paris Academie made him increasingly embittered, and his disillusionment spilled over into his relationships with leading mathematicians of the day. In spite of this he collaborated with Tait on the classification of knots with up to eleven crossings, and regularly contributed difficult mathematical questions to the 'Educational Times' until he was well into his eighties. 
Kirkman's contributions in other areas have barely survived. He wrote a book, 'Philosophy without Assumptions' (1876), and became embroiled in theological controversies, such as his support for the rebel Bishop Colenso, who asserted that the early books of the 'Bible' need not be taken literally. Kirkman also wrote pamphlets supporting free enquiry and free expression, but criticized the materialistic and evolutional philosophy espoused by such as Tyndall, Huxley, and Spencer. In his 'Philosophy' he memorably paraphrased Spencer's description of evolution as 'a change from an indefinite, incoherent, homogeneity to a definite, coherent, heterogeneity; through continuous differentiations and integrations' (H. Spencer, 'First Principles', 1863, 216), as 'a change from a nohowish untalkaboutable all-likeness, to a somehowish and in-general-talkaboutable not-all-likeness, by continuous somethingelse-ifications and sticktogetherations' (T. P. Kirkman, 292). 
Thomas Kirkman died at his home, Fernroyd, St Margaret's Road, Bowdon, near Altrincham, on 3 February 1895. In a letter he summarized his career: 'What I have done [is] not likely to be talked about intelligently by people so long as I live. But it is a faint pleasure to think it will one day win a little praise' (Macfarlane). His wife survived him by less than a fortnight. 


@@@@@


doc= 51582


Ramanujan, Srinivasa (1887-1920), mathematician, was born on 22 December 1887 in Erode, India, the third of five children (two older sisters died in infancy) of Kuppuswamy Srinivasa ('b'. 1863), a clerk in a silk merchant's shop, and his wife, Komalatammal ('b'. 1868), both Tamil-speaking south Indians. He grew up in Kumbakonam, a mid-sized temple town in Tanjore district, about 160 miles south of Madras. His family was of the Brahman, or priestly, caste but poor. To supplement his father's meagre income, Ramanujan's mother sang Hindu devotionals, and the family took in boarders to their small house, which stood within sight of a temple. Ramanujan attended the local high school, then briefly Government College in the same town and, later, also briefly, Pachaiyappa's College in Madras. 
During his early school years Ramanujan showed marked mathematical ability but it was not until he was about sixteen, when a student boarding with the family showed him a copy of an English mathematics text, G. S. Carr's 'Synopsis of Elementary Results in Pure and Applied Mathematics', that he blossomed. Charging into the dense mathematical thicket of the book's 5000 theorems, Ramanujan, by now a first-year college student, lost interest in other subjects, failed them, and dropped out. 
Ramanujan had first set out to prove the theorems in Carr's book -- a workaday text used to prepare Cambridge students for the mathematical tripos examination -- but soon left his remote mentor behind, going where Carr had never gone before or, in many cases, where no one had. Some time between about 1904 and 1907 he began keeping notebooks bearing the record of his mathematical discoveries. For the next few years he worked on his own, along the way reinventing large parts of Western mathematics. 
On 14 July 1909 Ramanujan was married to Janaki, who was nine at the time of her betrothal (the institution of the child bride was still entrenched). Janaki did not go to live with Ramanujan or his family for another three years, but his marriage and the urgings of his parents apparently moved him to seek a livelihood. Soon the impoverished youth, notebooks under his arm, was shuttling up and down south India in search of a job or a patron. He found one in R. Ramachandra Rao, district collector of Nellore and sometime mathematician, who supported him modestly for about a year. In 1911 Ramanujan's first paper, on a class of numbers conceived by the Swiss mathematician Jacob Bernoulli, was published in an Indian mathematics journal. 
His prodigious talents and a widening web of contacts at last brought Ramanujan to the attention of the British colonial administration in Madras. At first no one knew what to do with him but in 1912 he was given a sinecure in the Madras Port Trust, as a clerk, that let him work on mathematics largely unencumbered. His immediate superior, S. Narayana Iyer, something of a mathematician himself, befriended him, and encouraged him to write to England for help and support. 
Several distinguished English mathematicians ignored Ramanujan's entreaties, but Godfrey Harold Hardy, of Trinity College, Cambridge, author of an important text on number theory and a leading figure in British mathematics, was intrigued by the pages of theorems he received from Ramanujan early in 1913. Some of them, he wrote later, 'defeated me completely; I had never seen anything in the least like them before' (Kanigel, 168). Conferring with a friend and colleague, J. E. Littlewood, he decided that this mathematics-strewn letter from a lowly Indian clerk was no hoax, a possibility he had first entertained; rather, it seemed to him, Ramanujan was a mathematician who, in raw ability, was on a par with Euler or Jacobi. In his reply he encouraged Ramanujan, but also urged him to prove some of the theorems he had blithely asserted as fact. 
The endorsement from Cambridge helped Ramanujan to obtain a research scholarship at the University of Madras. Ultimately Hardy prevailed on him to go to England, which he did in April 1914 -- in the face of a traditional proscription against voyages abroad. The mathematical collaboration between the two men lasted for five years and proved one of the most fruitful in the history of mathematics. 
The onset of the First World War, a few months after Ramanujan's arrival, drained Cambridge of mathematicians, including Littlewood, and left Ramanujan almost wholly dependent on Hardy. Hardy introduced the self-taught genius to areas of mathematics about which he knew little but, as Hardy acknowledged later, 'I learnt from him much more than he learnt from me' (Kanigel, 226). Teaching Ramanujan, another mathematician, Laurence Young, wrote later, 'was like writing on a blackboard covered with excerpts from a more interesting lecture' (Kanigel, 227). 
Between 1914 and 1919 Ramanujan turned out paper after paper in the area of mathematics known as number theory, which seeks out patterns among ordinary whole numbers. Several grew out of problems Ramanujan had worked on in India that now, under Hardy's tutelage, he had been able to develop and refine. One was on highly composite numbers -- numbers with numerous divisors (such as 24) -- that were, in Hardy's phrasing, 'as unlike a prime [number] as a number can be' (Kanigel, 232), and among which Ramanujan had discerned subtle properties and patterns. 
Perhaps the most notable product of the Hardy-Ramanujan collaboration lay in the area of 'partitions', which asks how one can add up whole numbers to get some other whole number: 3 can be viewed as the sum of 1 + 1 + 1, or 2 + 1, or 3 + 0, making for a total of three partitions. Hardy and Ramanujan discovered how to calculate the number of partitions for any number. Along the way they developed the 'circle method', a mathematically subtle approximating technique of broad application. 
In 1918, at the age of thirty, Ramanujan was elected fellow of the Royal Society, only the second Indian so honoured. That forever secured his name in the national affections of India and helped to make him, both before independence and after, a veritable icon of Indian genius. After having been previously denied a Trinity fellowship -- almost certainly on account of his race -- he was granted one soon after being named a fellow of the Royal Society. 
While in England, Ramanujan fell ill; cancer, vitamin deficiency, lead poisoning, and hepatic amoebiasis have been among the diagnoses advanced over the years, but he was treated mostly for tuberculosis. Ramanujan went from one sanitorium to another. At one point, poor health coupled with the absence of letters from home, loneliness in wartime England, and perhaps the suspicion that much of his earliest work had been for nought, drove him to a suicide attempt in the London Underground. He came away unscathed except for a bloodied shin. Soon after the end of the war, in March 1919, he returned to India to a hero's welcome. 
Ramanujan's early relationship with his child bride had been limited at best and, apparently at the behest of his mother, he had not taken her with him to England, where he lived alone in rooms at Trinity College. On his return five years later, however, Janaki was a grown woman and they may have shared something like a real marriage, though they did not have children. 
Ramanujan had a fleshy, pockmarked face, the vestige of a childhood bout of smallpox, and for most of his life, at least until his final illness, he was fat. Though immensely creative in higher mathematics, he was only modestly gifted at ordinary arithmetic manipulations. He took interest in philosophical matters. He could be charming and fun. He was not unmindful of society's plaudits; he was plainly delighted by his election to the Royal Society. 
Ramanujan was a practising Hindu of the Vaishnavite sect -- his caste name, Iyengar or Aiyangar, sometimes included as part of his name, indicates so -- and a scrupulous vegetarian, but whether or not he was genuinely devout has been a matter of some controversy. Hardy maintained that he was not, but much other evidence suggests he was more than mechanical in his observance and that he could in one breath bring logic, reason, and deep insight to the defeat of a mathematical problem and in the next pay homage to his family deity, the goddess Namagiri, to whom some said he attributed his mathematical gifts. 
In India Ramanujan's health continued to decline and, about a year after his return, on 26 April 1920, he died in Madras, where his body was cremated. Until just a few days before his death, he had continued his work, on a mathematical entity he called 'mock theta functions' that much impressed fellow mathematicians. In his brief life he made seminal contributions to several areas of mathematics, especially number theory, and he is deemed one of the most profoundly original figures in the history of mathematics. 
Ramanujan's papers were later published in the 'Collected Papers of Srinivasa Ramanujan' (1927), edited by Hardy, P. V. Seshu Iyer, and B. M. Wilson. His early 'Notebooks', brought out in 1957 in two volumes by Tata Institute (Bombay), have been the subject of a five-volume study, 'Ramanujan's Notebooks' (1985-97), by the American mathematician Bruce Berndt. 'The Lost Notebook and Other Unpublished Papers' (1988) was published by Narosa (New Delhi) in 1988. 
In the years since Ramanujan's death, many have commented on the fiercely original nature of his contributions particularly his early notebooks, with some wondering whether a more conventional mathematical education would have enhanced, or crimped, his creativity. As it is, Ramanujan's work is still plumbed for its insights, and many mathematicians have attested to the inspiration furnished by his life and work. 


@@@@@


doc= 51583


Alicia Stott (1860-1940), geometer, was born on 8 June 1860 in Blackrock, near Cork. Her interest in geometry started in her late teens when she began to experiment with a large collection of cubes. Although poverty and family circumstances had severely limited her education, she developed a remarkably clear understanding of four-dimensional geometry. She discovered for herself that there are six regular polytopes (convex regular solids) of dimension four, and, using purely Euclidean ruler-and-compass methods, built cardboard models of their three-dimensional cross-sections -- startlingly original work for a young person. Indeed, 'Alicia Boole had all the hallmarks of an extremely talented and creative pure mathematician' (MacHale, 261). 


@@@@@


doc= 51587


Horwood, Sir William Thomas Francis (1868-1943), army officer and police administrator, was born in November 1868, the youngest son of Charles Horwood of the Manor House, Broadwater, Sussex. At twenty he was commissioned into the 5th lancers, serving as recruiting officer and adjutant for the 49th regimental district from 1900 to 1902. After two years as brigade major in the 24th field artillery, he moved in 1904 to the War Office, where he spent six years on administrative duties. His first experience of the police was as chief of police of the London and North Eastern Railway, a post he held from 1911 until the beginning of the First World War. From 1914 to 1915 he was deputy assistant adjutant-general at the War Office, and in 1915 was appointed provost marshal at the general headquarters of the British expeditionary force in France. He was awarded the DSO in 1917. On 27 April 1897 Horwood married Violet (1864/5-1941), eldest daughter of Lieutenant-General James George Fife, of Goring-on-Thames, Berkshire, an officer in the Royal Engineers. The couple had one daughter. 
When Sir Nevil Macready was appointed commissioner of police to the metropolis in September 1918, after the first police strike and the resignation of Sir Edward Henry, the former commissioner, he chose Horwood, his former staff officer, as one of his assistant commissioners, continuing the tradition of appointing men from a military background to the highest posts in the police force. He later promoted him to the new rank of deputy assistant commissioner. Working closely with Macready, Horwood helped to restore the morale of the force after the strike, and when the police union called a second strike, in August 1919, only 5 per cent of the force went on strike, and were dismissed. He oversaw the introduction of an experimental force of women police in 1919, and the experiment with mobile patrols, which developed into the flying squad in the 1920s. When Macready was sent to command the troops in Ireland in 1920 he advised the prime minister, Lloyd George, to appoint Horwood as his successor. 
Horwood was a good administrator, preferring, like his predecessors, to surround himself with military men, including Major-General Sir Wyndham Childs, appointed assistant commissioner to replace Sir Basil Thomson in 1921. One of the first problems to face Horwood in the early 1920s was that of arson attacks by Irish terrorists in London, and attacks on the families of men serving in Ireland in the Royal Irish Constabulary and the British army. Although he began a big recruiting campaign in 1920 he had to end this after the imposition of the 'Geddes axe' in 1922 and the reduction in national expenditure, and had to cut the force by 1000, a 5 per cent reduction in strength. But following the decision of the government in 1925 to hand over the policing of naval and military establishments to the Admiralty and the War Office, 1300 policemen were able to return to regular duties, and the force was back up to strength by the time of the general strike in 1926, when the conduct of the police impressed the public. By 1927 criticism of the Metropolitan Police was growing, however, and despite the report of the Macmillan committee on the conduct and management of the police, which cleared the police of all but one of the charges in the newspapers that innocent citizens were being harassed, morale was low. 
Horwood's last few months in office were overshadowed by two scandals, which gained a lot of press publicity and contributed to the worsening reputation of the force. In May 1928 allegations accusing the police of using tyrannical methods in the interrogation of a Miss Savidge led to questions in parliament, and although a commission of inquiry vindicated the police officers concerned, the government decided in August 1928 to set up the royal commission on police powers and procedure because of the criticism of police methods. The Savidge case was followed by the Goddard scandal, when Sergeant Goddard, who had had the duty of suppressing brothels and gambling dens in London, and keeping an eye on nightclubs, was accused by his fellow policeman, Sergeant Joslin, of accepting bribes from bookmakers and the owners of brothels and nightclubs to save themselves from police investigation. Although Horwood referred the case to the Home Office, and an inquiry found Joslin guilty of making false accusations, Goddard was later charged, and imprisoned, in 1929. In February 1928, before these scandals broke, Horwood had already announced his intention to retire in November, and the home secretary, Sir William Joynson-Hicks, decided that the Metropolitan Police needed to be headed by a strong and well-known public figure who could restore confidence in the force. He appointed General Lord Byng of Vimy to succeed Horwood as commissioner on Horwood's retirement on his sixtieth birthday. 
Horwood was appointed KCB in 1921 and GBE in 1928. He had nearly died in 1922 after eating a box of poisoned chocolates sent through the post, but survived another twenty years, and died on 16 November 1943 at his home, The Hut, Coast Road, West Mersea, Essex, after a short illness. He was cremated at Golders Green on 22 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 51588


Young, Sir Mark Aitchison (1886-1974), colonial governor, was born on 30 June 1886 in India, the third son of the six children of Sir William Mackworth Young (1840-1924), lieutenant-governor of the Punjab from 1897 to 1902, and his wife, Frances Mary, daughter of Sir Robert Eyles Egerton and his wife, Mary Warren Hickey. He was educated at Eton College and then at King's College, Cambridge, where he graduated with a first-class degree in classics. Geoffrey Winthrop Young (1876-1958) was his cousin and Sir Hubert Winthrop Young (1885-1950) and Gerard Mackworth-Young (1884-1965) were his elder brothers. Young joined the colonial service as an eastern cadet in Ceylon in 1909. His career was interrupted by service in the First World War, but he rose to the rank of principal assistant colonial secretary in 1923-8. He then served as colonial secretary in Sierra Leone in 1928-30 and Palestine in 1930-33, before being promoted governor of Barbados, where he served from 1933 to 1938. From November 1937 to February 1938 he also administered the government of Trinidad and Tobago and then served as governor of the Tanganyika Territory in 1938-41. He married Josephine Mary, daughter of Walter C. Price, and they had six children. Young was appointed CMG in 1931 and was knighted in 1934. 
Sharp minded, intelligent, courageous, far-sighted, energetic, dedicated to doing his duties as well as possible, somewhat austere in character, and very able as an administrator, Young often appeared intimidating to people of lesser intellect. These personal qualities were put to test when he became governor of the Tanganyika Territory. With war looming in Europe there was considerable apprehension in the territory that it might be returned to its former German rulers as part of a deal for appeasement. To allay such concern Young quickly set about laying down plans for economic and other developments, and enlarged the legislative and the executive councils. Confidence returned. When war broke out he swiftly disarmed and interned the large German population, which removed a potential source of instability and maintained good order and morale. It was the strong leadership, resilience, and resourcefulness which he showed in Tanganyika that commended him to the British government to take charge of Hong Kong on the eve of the Pacific war. 
When Young assumed the governorship on 10 September 1941 a Japanese attack on Hong Kong was a real possibility, and Britain was in no position to relieve the colony. Prime Minister Winston Churchill knew Hong Kong could not be defended and instructed Young to hold it for as long as possible in order to give the British empire time to prepare for the eventual counter-attack. With about 10,000 men at his disposal, including two newly arrived Canadian battalions which were not combat ready, Young took Churchill's instruction to heart and put up the most gallant defence in Britain's Asian empire. Repeatedly he refused the demand of the overwhelmingly superior Japanese forces to capitulate. When he did eventually become the first British governor to surrender a colony during the war, on Christmas day 1941, he was told by the senior military commander Major-General Christopher Malby that useful military resistance was no longer possible. He surrendered in order to reduce further heavy loss of life and to avoid provoking the Japanese to brutalize the civilian population. Nevertheless, following Churchill's order to resist with utmost stubbornness 'in spirit and to the letter', the Hong Kong garrison under Young earned, in Churchill's words, the 'lasting honour' (Churchill, 3.563). He was a prisoner of the Japanese, in Taiwan and Manchuria until August 1945. 
Young's other major contribution was in energetically pursuing an albeit limited programme of democratic reform in post-war Hong Kong. At the end of the war, Young took about eight months to restore his health from the deprivations and sufferings as a Japanese prisoner of war. Advanced to GCMG, he was sent back to resume his interrupted governorship on 1 May 1946 so as to restore his, and above all, Britain's military honour. However, because of a recognition that a return to the 'status quo ante' would be seized upon by the Chinese government to clamour for the retrocession of Hong Kong, London felt it necessary to limit his remaining tenure to one year. Upon his return, Young carefully tested public opinion and vigorously pushed for the introduction of what in effect was a 'super municipal council', with 'a degree of administrative and financial autonomy unknown in other British municipal councils' (Tsang, 'Democracy Shelved', 183-4) of the time so that it could, if the political environment should permit, gradually replace the existing colonial government and give the local Chinese greater self-government. Young advocated such an unorthodox approach because he believed the only way to keep the colony British in the face of Chinese irredentism was to persuade the local people to embrace the idea of keeping Hong Kong within the British empire-Commonwealth. 
In order to achieve these objectives Young saw no better way than to involve the local people in the administration of their own affairs. He also recognized the reality that the Chinese people of Hong Kong in those days were divided in their loyalty, above all between the two warring factions in the Chinese Civil War, the ruling Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party, and normal democratization at the colonial legislature might lead to it being turned into a political cockpit of the two Chinese parties. Hence, his proposals for a 'super municipal council' by which the electoral elements could be introduced and gradually expanded and, if the elected members should prove politically responsible, its scope of government expanded without allowing Chinese politics to dominate its proceedings. Young advocated democratization in Hong Kong partly in response to the general British recognition that a new approach had become desirable, but mainly to pre-empt irrendentist pressure from China. Although his reform proposals were approved by London they did not survive his retirement on 17 May 1947. His successor, Sir Alexander Grantham, deemed him misguided and reversed course, leading to the eventual abandonment of any major political reform in 1952, a position that was maintained until the onset of Sino-British negotiations over the future of Hong Kong in the early 1980s. 
After he left Hong Kong, Young retired to Winchester where he devoted much time to his great love, music. In particular he enjoyed the piano and choral singing; but he also renewed his interest in the classics, and read widely. He died on 12 May 1974 at Bereweeke Nursing Home, Winchester. 


@@@@@


doc= 51589


Cannon, Sir Leslie (1920-1970), trade unionist, was born on 21 February 1920 in Cudworth Street, Wigan, Lancashire, the fourth of seven children born to James (Jim) Cannon, a miner, and his wife, Ellen (Nellie) Turner. He was brought up in poverty in Wigan between the wars. His father worked only sporadically after being victimized following the general strike of 1926. Family income came from temporary work such as newspaper rounds and selling firewood done by Cannon and his brothers. Les Cannon always acknowledged the influence of his father, who was a bookish man, joining the fledgeling Communist Party in 1920 only to leave it later over a dispute within the party over A. J. Cook, the miners' leader. 
Cannon won a scholarship to the Junior Technical School of Wigan and District Mining and Technical, but left aged fifteen to work as a van delivery boy. However, he was accepted a year later as an apprentice electrician by Wigan corporation. During his apprenticeship, he successfully studied at Wigan Technical College to ordinary national certificate level. 
Cannon joined the Electrical Trades Union (ETU) on 1 May 1936, and the Communist Party in 1939. Both his trade union and political views were influenced heavily by the triumph of fascism in Europe. However, he took little part in union or political affairs before 1941. He worked in a reserved occupation in the Tyneside shipyards, exempted from military service due to ear infections. He returned to Wigan in 1941 after Russia entered the war, and began a meteoric rise in the union at the same time as its leadership fell under communist influence nationally. 
Elected district secretary of the union in 1942, and to the national executive in 1945 aged twenty-five, Cannon was re-elected unopposed for his Lancashire seat at every election until 1954, when he became the ETU's education officer at its shop steward training college at Esher in Surrey. As a young communist 'high-flyer' within a communist-dominated union, he was spokesman on many key issues for the union in the period 1946-54 as the cold war intensified. Other unions resented the ETU for acting as a frequent spokesman for the Communist Party view of international and domestic affairs, often contradicting official Labour policy. Cannon's contribution to this period was especially influential in raising questions about the new discipline of 'work study', the social usefulness of automation, the need for the Communist Party to affiliate to the Labour Party, youth issues, and support for East European 'workers' states'. It was in this context that he met and quickly married his wife, Olga Julinava, in Czechoslovakia on 25 August 1947. Communist Party secretary Harry Pollitt was to be best man, but because of the short notice Willie Gallagher MP officiated instead. Two sons were born, Oleg in 1950 and Martin in 1952. 
While teaching at Esher from 1954 to 1957 Cannon's disillusion with the Communist Party developed. First, he returned to his father's view that Britain was too wedded to the Labour Party/trade union tradition to make a Leninist approach to political change in Britain possible. Second, his wife's family in Czechoslovakia were cruelly treated by the communist authorities, despite Cannon's influence within the highest echelons of the British Communist Party. Third, he resented some of the cruder power politics within the ETU. The Communist Party leadership of the ETU had failed to defend him when he was dismissed in 1950 from English Electric in Lancashire after a strike, and the union never paid him what he expected when he gave up his executive council seat to go to Esher. 
Cannon was especially moved by Khrushchov's speech to the Twentieth Congress of the Soviet Communist Party in 1956, in which Stalin's crimes were first revealed. Cannon's suggested reform documents were sent to the British Communist Party just as the invasion of Hungary by Soviet troops prompted large numbers of communists to leave the party. 
Cannon resigned from the party in November 1956. His communist opponents set about isolating him. He lost his job at Esher College in April 1957 when the ETU leadership shut the college for financial reasons, following the union's expenditure incurred during the 1957 engineering strikes. He was forced back into being an electrician. 
Instead of taking up a different job -- perhaps in the law, which already interested him -- Cannon set about opposing the Communist Party leadership of the ETU. He was greatly assisted in this by the events in Hungary, which brought together similar-minded former communists in the union such as Frank Chapple and Mark Young. There was also growing media interest in the communist domination of the ETU. Cannon had an immediate focus for opposition, as an executive council election was due in south-east England. The seat was held by Communist Party member Jack Frazer, seen by many as the successor to the president of the union, Frank Foulkes. Five years earlier, Cannon would have been that obvious choice. 
This 1957 election was rigged in favour of Frazer, as was later demonstrated in court. Cannon, who himself failed to gain election in 1957, toured the union's branches with sympathetic colleagues for three years amassing evidence on the methods used by the communists to corrupt ETU elections that would convince a court. The election to the ETU general secretaryship in 1959 was also rigged, and Cannon and John Byrne, district secretary in Glasgow, issued writs for alleged fraud. When their case was heard by the High Court in 1961, Mr Justice Winn declared the election void. This led to fair elections and the eventual defeat of the disgraced communists. Cannon was reinstated at Esher. In 1963 he was elected president of the union by a huge majority, and re-elected in 1968. Success was assured when he reformed the union in tandem with Frank Chapple, the new ETU general secretary. 
Cannon's period in office was short, but his impact enormous. He initiated revolutionary negotiating priorities to raise the standard of living for skilled craftsmen. In electrical contracting and the electricity supply industry he introduced productivity-based negotiations. In 1965 he was elected to the TUC general council, where he supported an incomes policy but only as far as it flexibly rewarded those who had higher skills. He gave evidence to the 1965 royal commission on trade unions and employer organizations, suggesting radical changes in trade union structure and purpose. Within the ETU he abolished the mechanisms through which the Communist Party had controlled the union and led the way to merger with the plumbing trades union in 1968. He sat on the Industrial Reorganization Corporation, which attempted structural reform of British companies, and the National Economic Development Council. 
Cannon's manner was readily abrasive, sometimes interpreted as arrogance, and his preferred style was often combative on behalf of the issues he cared about. He led the most bitter struggle to rescue the democratic integrity of a union and prevent, by example, such corruption gaining a widespread hold within the labour movement. He showed how unions could contribute intellectual resources in modernizing out-of-date work practices. Cannon died of cancer at the Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, Middlesex, on 9 December 1970. His knighthood was gazetted in the new year honours list in 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 51592


Culpin, Millais (1874-1952), psychologist, was born on 6 January 1874 in Baldock Street, Ware, Hertfordshire, the second of six children of Millice Culpin (1844-1942), a leather seller, and his wife, Hannah Louisa Munsey ('c'.1850-1937). The family moved to Stoke Newington, in north London. Millais attended the Grocers' Company's School, Hackney, and became one of a group of young entomologists, the North London Natural History Society (later part of the London Natural History Society). This hobby remained a lifelong interest. In 1891 Millice Culpin, now a qualified doctor, and his family emigrated to Brisbane, Queensland. Young Millais spent four formative years as a 'bush schoolmaster' in north Queensland; the lively letters he wrote from there to his former schoolmates were published, edited by his daughter, as 'Letters from Laura' (University of Townsville, 1987) and show a gift for scientific and human observation and his lasting affection for the country. 
Millais returned in 1897 to enter the London Hospital, where, after winning various prizes and qualifying in 1902, he graduated FRCS in 1907. He held various appointments there before taking up a practice in Shanghai; there he met, and married in 1913, Ethel Maude Bennett (1874-1966) of Trowbridge, Wiltshire, a London Hospital trained nursing sister who had come to take up the post of matron of the Shanghai-Nanking (Nanjing) Railway Hospital, the chief British hospital. Both experienced, in their professional roles, the revolution of 1911, and both retained a warm interest in the Chinese people. Culpin's two sojourns in the tropics were to lead to an interesting paper, 'Neurasthenia in the tropics' ('The Practitioner', August 1935). 
After a visit to his family in Australia, where the only child of the marriage, a daughter, Frances, was born, they returned to England in 1914, just as war broke out. Culpin joined the Royal Army Medical Corps as a surgeon, but soon his obstinate truth-seeking led him to question the diagnoses of his seniors in recognizing and treating hysterical / psychosomatic disorders (shell-shock). He worked as a surgeon in the Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth. Culpin was in France in 1916, but meanwhile in 1915 he and Dr E. G. Fearnsides wrote one of the first articles on the war neuroses ('BMJ', 9 January 1916). Finally Colonel Aldren Turner, a neurologist, sent Culpin to Maghull for training under, among others, T. H. Pear and Bernard Hart, only for Culpin to find fresh hostility to the psychoanalytical view when he moved to Moneyhull, Birmingham. Later, at Ewell Military Hospital, he met with understanding and co-operation, and the support of Colonel C. S. Myers. In these struggles Culpin must often have felt isolated and despairing: it is a tribute to him and his fellow workers in the field that their findings were accepted and acted upon in the Second World War. 
Culpin was demobilized in 1919. He took a London MD and never practised surgery again. His thesis, published in 1920 as 'The Psychoneuroses of War and Peace', was followed by 'Spiritualism and the New Psychology' (1920), and 'The Nervous Patient' (1924). He had by now thrown in his lot with the practitioners of psychological medicine. Just after the First World War he was appointed lecturer in psychoneuroses at the London Hospital, the first post of its kind, which he held until 1939, and he began private practice as a psychotherapist in Queen Anne Street, London. This he continued through the Second World War, and later practised in Guildford and St Albans. The family had been for some time settled in Loughton, Essex, near Epping Forest, the scene of his early 'bug-hunting' cycle rides from Stoke Newington and where friends from his student days were already living. In 1932 the family moved to Park Village East, on Regent's Park Canal in north London, until they were bombed out ten years later. 
In the early 1920s Culpin was called on to work for the Industrial Health Research Board ('A Study of Telegraphists' Cramp', by May Smith, Culpin, and Eric Farmer, 1927). He himself valued most his work for the Medical Research Council on miner's nystagmus ('The occupational neuroses (including miner's nystagmus)', 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine', 1933). While chairman of the industrial section of the British Psychological Society he investigated the bus drivers under treatment for gastric disorders at Manor House, the trade union hospital, revealing psychosomatic symptoms in a stressful job. This type of research became the basis of many job selection procedures in business and industry. 
In 1931 Culpin became professor of medical industrial psychology at the School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine at London University. He enjoyed his work there, the research, the students, and appreciated his colleagues, but remained unimpressed by the trappings of prestige or position. In 1944 he was elected president of the British Psychological Association; he never forgot his debt to Freud's theory of the unconscious which, he told a young colleague years later, he was reminded of every day of his working life, and he enjoyed a friendship with the German analyst Georg Groddeck, whom he visited several times at Baden-Baden. Culpin's chief publications were 'Medicine: and the Man' (1927), 'The Nervous Temperament' (1930), 'Recent Advances in the Study of the Psychoneuroses' (1931), and 'Mental Abnormality: Facts and Theories' (1948). 
During the years just before the Second World War, Culpin was active in the China medical aid committee and the Academic Assistance Fund (aiding professionals from Nazi Germany) and during the war he followed with interest the development of the provision of care and treatment for the psychiatric casualties of war through his son-in-law, Lieutenant-Colonel Stephen MacKeith RAMC. 
Culpin's father was a stern rationalist, but Millais described himself as a 'cheerful agnostic'. Physically he was tall, dark, regular featured, and mild mannered. He never owned a car, walked with a swift stride, and remained in good health until his death on 14 September 1952 at his home in Hatfield Road, St Albans, of a pulmonary embolism. His ashes were scattered at Wicken Fen, Cambridgeshire, haunt of his favourite swallowtail butterfly. Culpin's nature was as gentle as his mind was keen, and he led a quiet, fairly abstemious life, enjoying until the end a good game of bridge, the 'Times' crossword, the company of his family, and the first brimstone butterfly of spring. 


@@@@@


doc= 51593


Henry Prevost Babbage (1824-1918), who continued to work on the engines; his efforts were conscientious but without the inventive inspiration of his father. Henry was born on 16 September 1824 and after attending Bruce Castle School, Tottenham, Middlesex, from 1831 to 1834 he entered University College School, in 1835, and University College, London, in 1840. He graduated in 1842. On his father's insistence Henry and his brother Dugald attended the workshop and drawing office at Dorset Street several times a week. It was here in his teens that Henry learned workshop skills and mechanical drawing from Babbage's workmen. The brothers also attended several of Babbage's celebrated Saturday soirees which were frequented by the social, scientific, and literary elite. Henry sailed for India as a military cadet in April 1843 and retired with the rank of major-general in 1874. He was married in India on 17 February 1852 to Mary (Min or Minnie) Bradshawe. He twice returned to England on furlough: the first lasted from May 1854 to November 1856 during which he involved himself in his father's engine pursuits; the second stretched from March 1871 to November 1873, during which time he was present at his father's death. He returned from India in 1875 to settle in Bromley, Kent, where he lived for ten years, moving to Cheltenham in 1885. In November 1854 he met Georg and Edvard Scheutz, the Swedish father and son who were in London to promote a difference engine of their own, the construction of which had been stimulated by Lardner's account of Babbage's machine published in 1834. Babbage had devised a mechanical notation, an elaborate system of notational symbols used to identify parts of his machines and describe their interrelated motions. After viewing the Scheutzes' difference engine, exhibited at Somerset House in April 1855, Henry produced the mechanical notations for the Swedish machine. These were exhibited, pasted on calico, at the British Association meeting in Glasgow in September that year, in Paris the following month, and at the Institution of Civil Engineers in May 1856. In later years Henry attempted to interest others in the notation but the technique was almost completely ignored. Henry sold the contents of his father's workshop in March 1872 but kept some tools, a few lathes, and a planing machine. He retained a workman called Wight and engaged another (Doncaster) to progress a large four-function calculator designed as part of the mill of the analytical engine. In retirement he worked sporadically on the mill, which he assembled in the workshop of R. W. Munro. In 1910 the device calculated and printed the first twenty-two multiples of pi to twenty-eight places though not without error. Henry compiled a large volume of papers, 'Babbage's Calculating Engines', published in 1889. This consists primarily of selections of his father's published work on the design and history of the machines and papers by others, as well as some material by Henry himself. He assembled five or six small demonstration pieces from unused parts of Difference Engine no. 1. These he sent to the universities of London, Cambridge, Manchester, and Harvard, USA. He died at Mayfield, Lansdown Place, Cheltenham, on 29 January 1918. In the late 1930s the Harvard model, offered in 1896, came to the attention of Howard Aiken, an early pioneer of electronic computing who drew attention to Babbage's work in the early years of the electronic age. Despite Henry's efforts to keep his father's work alive the direct influence of Babbage's work on the electronic computer is tenuous. Even so, the late twentieth century saw a significant revival of interest in this remarkable Victorian. 


@@@@@


doc= 51595


Greenhill, Sir (Alfred) George (1847-1927), mathematician, was born on 29 November 1847 at Montpelier Row, Twickenham, the third son of Thomas Greenhill, an engineer, and his wife, Louisa, daughter of Thomas Tagg, a gardener in Oxford. In April 1856 he was admitted from St Pancras, London, as a pupil at Christ's Hospital; at that time his father had seven other children and an annual income of less than $250. He was presented to the school by the parish of Twickenham, which had been left money by John and Frances West, who were related to Greenhill, to endow a scholarship there. At school he showed considerable mathematical talent and when, in 1866, he went up to read mathematics at St John's College, Cambridge, he was successively Pitt Club exhibitioner, Somerset exhibitioner, and foundation scholar. Simultaneously he held a Whitworth engineering scholarship and a university scholarship at the University of London where he registered in 1868. In 1870 he was second wrangler in the Cambridge tripos, tied with the first wrangler for the Smith's prize and was elected to a fellowship at St John's; the following year he completed his London BA. 
In 1872 Greenhill was appointed professor of applied mathematics at the newly founded Royal Indian Civil Engineering College at Cooper's Hill, but the next year he returned to Cambridge as fellow and lecturer at Emmanuel College. Three years later, in 1876, he became professor of mathematics to the advanced class of the Royal Artillery officers at Woolwich; he remained in that post until his retirement in 1907. Greenhill was elected FRS in 1888 and knighted in 1908. The De Morgan medal of the London Mathematical Society was among the numerous honours he received from British and foreign learned societies. He was greatly admired by many of his contemporary mathematicians, although some considered that he did not sufficiently appreciate the developments in mathematics and physics of his own time. 
Greenhill's interests lay principally in applied mathematics; his work in pure mathematics grew out of a need to discover new tools to solve practical problems. He wrote many textbooks, was a prolific researcher, and examined in the tripos. In all these activities, and in his teaching, he insisted that mathematical problems and their solutions must correspond closely to the nature of the problems met with in engineering and everyday reality. He considered that numerical answers were an integral part of any solution -- a view not commonly held at that time. His greatest successes were achieved in the context of dynamics, hydrodynamics, and elasticity. He made extensive use of elliptic functions and wrote a textbook on their application in 1892; he directed the preparation of a table of these functions for the Smithsonian collection in 1922. 
Greenhill's text-book 'Differential and Integral Calculus' (1885) broke new ground by developing the differential and the integral calculus side by side, a practice which later became standard. His 'Treatise on Hydrostatics' (1894) was also an innovation; in order to write it, he hunted through the scientific and engineering literature for realistic problems in shipbuilding, aeronautics, and hot-air ballooning (among others) with which to introduce the principles of hydrostatics. Mathematics was only brought in when absolutely essential. He worked with Woolwich colleagues on ballistic and gunnery problems and derived particularly valuable results on the rifling of heavy breech-loading ordnance. 
In retirement Greenhill, who did not marry, lived in London, first at New Inn and then at 1 Staple Inn, Holborn, working in seclusion on mathematical and historical research. Despite his kindliness and light-heartedness, his idiosyncratic behaviour and opinions added to his long-standing reputation for eccentricity. He enjoyed the social life of the combination room of St John's, the Savile Club, the Athenaeum, and the tearoom of the Royal Society. He died at 19 Queen Adelaide Road, Penge, London, on 10 February 1927, partly from the effects of a fall from a bus the previous year. He was buried at Lewisham cemetery on 16 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 51596


Thomson, Louis Melville Milne- (1891-1974), applied mathematician, was born on 1 May 1891 at 4 The Avenue, Ealing, London, the eldest son of Colonel Alexander Milne-Thomson, physician and surgeon (died 1944), and Eva Mary, daughter of the Revd J. Milne. He was educated at Clifton College, Bristol (1906-9), and won a scholarship to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, to study mathematics; he gained first-class honours in the mathematical tripos part one in 1911, and graduated as a wrangler with distinction in 1913. On 12 September 1914 he married (Johanne) Gertrude, eldest daughter of Dr Karl Frommknecht. They had three daughters. In the same year he took up the post of assistant mathematics master at Winchester College, leaving in 1921 to go to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, where he later became professor of mathematics. During this time he was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Royal Astronomical Society, the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and, later, the Institute of Aerospace Sciences. He was made CBE in 1952. 
Milne-Thomson's career was based on teaching, table making, and research into applied mathematics. In 1929 he published a table of square roots. He then began a joint project with L. J. Comrie, an already established table maker, and together they published 'Standard Four Figure Tables' (1931), a book designed to be accessible to the non-specialist. His other great table-making project of the early 1930s was the calculation of 'Jacobian Elliptic Function Tables', published first in German (1931) and later in English (1950). Many of his publications of the 1930s (for example in the 'Journal of the London Mathematical Society', the 'Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society', and the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh') reflect his involvement with table making. In 1939-48 he served on the British Association for the Advancement of Science mathematical tables committee; he actively contributed to the work of this body and that of its successor at the Royal Society. 
In 1933 Milne-Thomson published the first of several textbooks. 'The Calculus of Finite Differences' (1933) was based on his own experience of making tables and, in its preface, he states that one motivation for writing it was the lack of other texts suitable for his students at Greenwich. The book went on to become one of the classic texts of student mathematics. However, by the mid-1930s his interests were moving away from tables and into other areas of mathematics related to his work at Greenwich teaching the Royal Corps of Naval Constructors. His books 'Theoretical Hydrodynamics' (1938) and 'Theoretical Aerodynamics' (1948) went through several editions right up until the mid-1960s. 
After retiring from Greenwich in 1956 Milne-Thomson travelled widely, taking up visiting professorships at: Brown University, Rhode Island; the US Army Mathematics Research Center, University of Wisconsin (1958-60); University of Arizona (1961-70); University of Rome (1968); University of Queensland (1969); University of Calgary (1970); and University of Otago (1971). At Wisconsin he carried out research into the application of the complex variable to plane and antiplane elastic problems. The results of this work were published as technical reports for the US army and as two textbooks, 'Plane Elastic Systems' (1960) and 'Anti-Plane Elastic Systems' (1962). During his time at Wisconsin he also edited a Russian-English mathematical dictionary (1962); he had learned to read Russian in order to keep abreast of Russian developments in applied mathematics, and prepared this dictionary as a result -- which reinforces the view that all his books were written with the intention of making mathematics accessible to the beginner or non-specialist. At Arizona, Milne-Thomson's leadership of a very active group of research students working on hydrodynamics resulted in the naming of a general type of integral equation after him. 
In 1971 Milne-Thomson finally retired, to 2 Bullfinch Lane, Sevenoaks, Kent. He died at Sevenoaks Hospital on 21 August 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 51597


Holden, Edith Blackwell (1871-1920), artist and illustrator, was born on 26 September 1871 at Holly Green, Church Road, Moseley, Birmingham, the fourth of seven children of Arthur Holden (1836-1913), a paint and varnish manufacturer, and his wife, Emma Wearing (1836-1904), formerly a governess. She was brought up a Unitarian. The family believed they had psychic powers and participated in seances where Edith was encouraged to demonstrate her powers of automatic writing. She received no formal elementary education but was taught by her mother. From 1884 to 1890 Edith studied part-time at the Birmingham Municipal School of Art. In 1891 she spent a year studying animal painting at an art school run by Joseph Denovan Adam at Craigmill, Stirling, and returned for a six-week painting holiday most summers for the next sixteen years. 
In 1890 Edith exhibited her first painting at the Royal Birmingham Society of Artists and continued to exhibit there annually until 1907. She also exhibited at the Royal Academy (1907 and 1917), the Walker Gallery in Liverpool, and the Society of Women Artists. The subjects of these oil paintings were usually animals in a landscape frequently inspired by Scotland. From 1906 to 1910 she taught art one afternoon a week at a private girls' school in Solihull, Warwickshire. In 1906 she encouraged the girls to paint wild flowers in their sketchbooks and select suitable verses to write alongside. Privately she compiled her own notebook, which she called 'Nature notes for 1906'. This was not her first venture; a similar, less developed version for 1905 was discovered in 1988. In 'Nature notes for 1906' she recorded the countryside around the family's new home at Gowan Bank, Kineton Green Road, Olton, Warwickshire. On completion she kept the nature diaries as useful source material for her developing career as a book illustrator. Between 1907 and 1910 Edith's concern about the treatment of animals led her to contribute about forty illustrations to the 'Animals' Friend', the magazine of the National Council for Animal Welfare. Some of these illustrations were also sold as calendars and postcards by the charity. Between 1907 and 1914 she illustrated at least seven children's books, such as M. M. Rankin's 'Woodland Whisperings' (1911), and 'Animals Around Us' (1912), by Martin Merrythought (A. J. Maas). 
On 1 June 1911 Edith married the sculptor (Alfred) Ernest Smith (1879-1938) by special licence at Chelsea register office. The couple lived in a small attic flat at 2 Oakley Crescent, Chelsea. Ernest was principal assistant to the sculptor Lady Feodora Gleichen at her studio at St James's Palace. Edith's marriage did not meet with her family's approval and relations with them deteriorated. Little is known about her marriage and there were no children. On 15 March 1920 Edith drowned in a tributary of the River Thames at Kew Gardens Walk, London, and her body was not discovered until the following day. An inquest at Richmond coroner's court heard that she had probably lost her balance while collecting chestnut buds to paint from a tree at the water's edge. The coroner recorded the verdict 'found drowned'. On 19 March 1920 Edith Holden Smith was cremated at Golders Green. 
When Edith Holden's personal 'Nature notes for 1906' was published by Webb and Bower in association with Michael Joseph as 'The Country Diary of an Edwardian Lady' in June 1977, it was an instant and exceptional best-seller. Translations of the book appeared in thirteen languages, making Edith's nature diary one of the great international publishing success stories of the twentieth century. The book was also influential in creating a fashion for rural nostalgia when merchandise appeared bearing designs from the book, a nostalgia unimpeded by the fact that its author was by background a suburban socialist, and not the leisured country-dweller conjured up by its title. 


@@@@@


doc= 51599


Lincoln, Ignatius Timotheus Trebitsch (1879-1943), political adventurer, was born in Paks, Hungary, on 4 April 1879, the second son of Nathan Trebitsch (died 1899), a merchant, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Freund ('fl'. 1870-1920). He was educated in the Jewish elementary school in Paks and at a secondary school in Budapest. In 1895-6 he enrolled in the Royal Hungarian Academy of Dramatic Art but left Hungary before completing his course after being accused of stealing a gold watch. He travelled to England and Germany where he fell in with missionaries and, in 1899, was converted from his native Judaism to Christianity, being baptized Ignatius Timotheus Trebitsch. After studying at a Lutheran seminary at Breklum in Schleswig-Holstein, in 1900 he moved to Montreal where he worked as a missionary to the Jews, initially for the Presbyterian church, later for the Anglican Church of Canada. In July 1901 he married Margarethe Kahlor ('b'. 'c'.1877, died after 1948), daughter of a German sea captain, with whom he had four sons. 
In 1903 Trebitsch returned to England and served briefly as a curate in Appledore, Kent. After failing an examination for the priesthood in April 1904, and squandering his wife's inheritance, he was engaged early in 1906 by the philanthropist Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree as an assistant. He gathered sociological information for Rowntree's book 'Land and Labour: Lessons from Belgium' (1911), which involved numerous visits to the continent. He quickly ingratiated himself with Rowntree who, being much impressed, deployed his influence in the Liberal Party to secure Trebitsch's nomination as candidate for the parliamentary seat of Darlington. Meanwhile Trebitsch took the surname Lincoln by deed poll on 11 October 1904 (and was known as Tribich Lincoln or I. T. T. Lincoln) and speedily secured British naturalization, on 5 May 1909. In the general election of January 1910 he campaigned on a platform of free trade and won an upset victory by a majority of twenty-nine votes. His first speech in the House of Commons, on 23 February 1910, earned him only ridicule, and his parliamentary career was short and undistinguished. In the election of December 1910 he was compelled to withdraw his candidacy, owing to financial difficulties. The following month he admitted to a creditors' meeting in York that he was insolvent. 
With large subventions from Rowntree he nevertheless embarked on a business career, floating a series of public companies to exploit Galician and Romanian oil. He raised large sums on the London stock exchange to finance these enterprises. One after another, they collapsed and by the summer of 1914 he was down and out in London. Upon the outbreak of the First World War he offered his services as a double agent to the British naval intelligence bureau, headed by Captain Reginald Hall. Rejected by the British, he turned to the Germans who engaged him to send reports on shipping activity in British ports. In 1915, fearing arrest, he abandoned his family and fled to the USA where he published embroidered accounts of his exploits as an 'international spy'. He was arrested, escaped, was recaptured and, after failing in an appeal to the US supreme court, was extradited to Britain in 1916. Tried for fraud at the central criminal court in July 1916, he was found guilty and sentenced to three years in prison. 
Released in August 1919, Lincoln was deported and his British naturalization rescinded. He quickly insinuated himself into German nationalist circles in Berlin, and in March 1920 served as 'director of foreign press affairs' in the short-lived militarist government of Wolfgang Kapp. After the collapse of the Kapp 'Putsch' he fled to Munich and devoted the next two years to complex intrigues with right-wingers in Budapest, Prague, and Vienna. He was indicted for high treason in Vienna but the charge was dropped. Deported from Austria in 1921, he wandered to China, where he spent most of the rest of his life. 
From 1923 to 1925 he acted as an arms dealer and political adviser to several warlords in northern China. In 1925 he converted to Buddhism, took the Chinese name Chao Kung, adopted oriental garb, shaved his head, and after six years of meditation and religious study was ordained a monk and raised to the rank of Bodhisattva. He established his own monastery in Shanghai to which he attracted a small flock of European Buddhist monks and nuns. During the Second World War he earned a meagre living as a low-level agent for Japanese and German intelligence agencies in Shanghai. He died at the general hospital in Shanghai on 6 October 1943, ostensibly as a result of a stomach ailment. Some evidence suggests that he was murdered by the Shanghai Gestapo. His wife, from whom he had separated in 1925, outlived him. 
Endowed with considerable linguistic facility and personal magnetism, Lincoln was an unscrupulous confidence trickster who ruined the lives of many of those with whom he came into close contact. Subject to swift changes of mood, he exhibited symptoms of manic depression. He was the only person ever to have been formally adopted by a major British political party as a parliamentary candidate while still a Hungarian citizen; he was also the only former British MP ever to serve as a member of a German government. A shameless self-promoter, he wrote a readable but unreliable account of his early life, 'Autobiography of an Adventurer' (1932), as well as several other books, mainly on Buddhist themes. He was buried in the Buddhist section of a municipal cemetery in Shanghai. 


@@@@@


doc= 51600


Leachman, Gerard Evelyn (1880-1920), army officer and traveller, was born in Petersfield, Hampshire, on 27 July 1880. Known to his friends as Gerald, he was the sixth child and only surviving son of Dr Albert Leachman, a medical practitioner, and his wife, Louise Caroline Singer. After four years at Charterhouse School (1893-7) he attended the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, passing out in the summer of 1899. He embarked for service in the South African War early in 1900 as a second lieutenant in the 1st battalion of the Royal Sussex regiment, and after two years' service in South Africa he was posted to India. 
Leachman's first postings in India were near the border with Nepal, and in June 1905 he made a daring (and unauthorized) journey into Tibet for several weeks, the first of many adventurous travels into the mountains and deserts of Kashmir, Persia, Iraq, and Turkey. Early in 1907 he left India for leave in England, travelling from Bombay to Muscat, up the gulf to Basrah, on by paddle steamer to Baghdad and Abu Kemal, and then by land to Aleppo. 
On his return to India Leachman was assigned to military intelligence in Simla. The Anglo-Russian convention of August 1907, setting out spheres of influence in Afghanistan and Persia, effectively marked the end of the 'great game', the struggle between Russia and Britain for influence over central Asia which had lasted for most of the nineteenth century. Russia had extended its borders and indirect influence hundreds of miles south, in a seemingly inexorable advance towards British India. By 1907 it had become clear to Britain, Russia, and France that a more imminent threat was the growing naval power and imperial ambition of Germany. 
In the early twentieth century the intelligence agencies of Britain and Germany were attempting to establish footholds within the Ottoman empire (and, to a lesser extent, in Persia), by such apparently innocent means as archaeology, mapping, exploration, the telegraph, and commercial activity, since -- apart from Britain's unequal treaties with the gulf sheikhdoms and her occupation of Egypt -- more direct forms of colonial rule could not be employed. In Simla, Leachman learned Arabic and German and studied intelligence reports from Arabia. He arrived in southern Iraq late in 1909 to begin his career in the field, one of a cohort of colourful contemporaries including Douglas Carruthers, T. E. Lawrence, Alois Musil, S. F. Newcombe, Conrad Preusser, Barclay Raunkiaer, William Shakespear, E. B. Soane, and Wilhelm Wassmuss. 
Like many of them Leachman took to wearing Arab dress. In 1910 he undertook a journey into the desert south of Baghdad, apparently in an effort to persuade the Rashids of Ha'il not to attack Ibn Sa'ud. In March 1911 the Royal Geographical Society awarded him its Gill memorial medal for his account of these travels (published in the 'Geographical Journal', 38, 1911, 265-74), and also offered to fund a modest expedition to central Arabia. He set off from Damascus at the end of 1912, probably with the connivance of 'Abd al- 'Aziz ibn Sa'ud (who was anxious to secure British protection against the Rashids, and subsequently, recognition of his independence 'vis-a-vis' the Ottomans), visiting Qasim and Riyadh and bringing back the first photographs of members of the Sa'udi royal family. 
Early in March 1915 Leachman was posted to Basrah to work among the tribes of southern Iraq as the Mesopotamia campaign moved northwards to Baghdad, competing for their allegiance with the German archaeologist Preusser on the Ottoman side. What appeared to be an unopposed advance was firmly halted at Kut, where the Indian expeditionary force was besieged by fresh Ottoman troops. In an act of extraordinary heroism Leachman entered the city and enabled some 5000 troops to escape in the first days of December 1915, before the Turkish troops were fully organized. 
At the same time as the defeated army of Kut was being marched to prison camps in Turkey, the Arab revolt was beginning on the west of the Arabian peninsula. Once Baghdad had been captured in March 1917, and the situation had become more stable, it was important that someone from Mesopotamia should be sent to Cairo to be briefed on London's plans for the post-war Arab world. The authorities in Iraq had not been informed either of the Sykes-Picot agreement or of the McMahon-Husayn correspondence. Leachman, who shared his Mesopotamian superiors' mistrust of the Arab revolt, went first to Cairo and then to Hejaz, where he met Faysal and T. E. Lawrence at Wajh in May. Captain Bray has described the meeting, with Lawrence in sumptuous Arab clothing, and Leachman in his army khakis: Faysal's aristocratic charm, Leachman's straightforwardness, Lawrence's condescending superiority. 
On his return to Mesopotamia in 1917 Leachman, gazetted brevet lieutenant-colonel, was posted to the Shi'i shrine city of Karbala'. Two of his contemporaries, Captain I. Chalmers and Edmund Candler, described him in 'Blackwood's Magazine' and 'The Long Road to Baghdad' (1919) as 'O.C. (Officer Commanding) Desert'; this description, which was later used in the title of a biography, referred to his 'parish' of some 20,000 square miles. He was awarded the DSO in November 1918. 
In April 1920 the treaty of San Remo awarded the Middle Eastern mandates to Britain and France. Arnold Wilson, together with many of his colleagues in the Mesopotamia administration, was unable to accept even the limited independence that this implied. Pent-up nationalist feelings, nourished partly by British support of the Hashemites over the previous years and partly by Shi'a seeking independence, combined to cause a major insurrection in Iraq in June 1920. Leachman, whom Wilson had asked to return to Iraq early in 1920, was killed in the course of the revolt, at Khan Nuqta near Baghdad on 12 August 1920, by Khamis, son of Dhari al-Mahmud of the Zuba' tribe. Leachman's body was subsequently reinterred at the British cemetery in Baghdad on 1 March 1921. He never married. 
Along with many of his contemporaries Leachman was largely unsympathetic towards aspirations for Arab independence (both from Ottoman rule and more generally) which were gathering momentum before and during the First World War. He was imbued with many of the stock attitudes of his generation towards 'inferior peoples' though he evidently respected many individual Arabs with whom he came into contact. Upright, cantankerous, and ascetic, he was a courageous and devoted servant of empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 51602


Stacy, Enid (1868-1903), socialist and campaigner for women's rights, was born on 10 June 1868 at 2 Fairlea Villas, West Park, Westbury, Gloucestershire, the eldest child of Henry Edward Stacy, an Irish artist, and his wife, Rosina Julia Deeley, the daughter of a midland hardware merchant. In 1881 the family moved to Bristol where Henry Stacy had a studio in Cotham. Enid was an able scholar and at sixteen took honours in her senior Cambridge examination. She studied at Bristol University, where she won the Whitworth scholarship. In the late 1880s she had a tutoring job at Redland High School for Girls in Bristol, and it was there that she became friends with Katharine Bruce Glasier ('nee' Conway) who was later to become a leading figure in the Independent Labour Party (ILP). 
The two women shared an interest in John Ruskin, Robert Browning, and high-church Anglicanism, but their lives were changed by the wave of strikes which occurred in Bristol in 1889. After an inspiring speech by the labour leader Tom Mann, Enid Stacy joined the Gasworkers' Union and threw herself into organizing work. She took part in the Bristol cotton workers' strike of November 1890, became honorary secretary of the Association for the Promotion of Trade Unionism among Women, and in 1892 led a long strike among Bristol confectionery workers. Katharine Bruce Glasier recalled that Enid Stacy often came home at midnight 'with draggled skirt and swollen feet after hours of patient standing about in the effort to win laundrywomen to a trade union' ('Labour Leader', 12 Sept 1903). Enid Stacy's participation in strikes and her frequent clashes with the police meant that she lost her job as a schoolteacher in the early 1890s, and from then on she gave a full-time commitment to propaganda for socialism and women's rights. 
Enid Stacy had been brought up in a Christian socialist household. Her younger brother Paul was joint founder of the Bristol and Clifton Christian Socialist Society and they had many friends in the Guild of St Matthew. During the labour unrest her circle of socialist friends widened. Her father's studio became a meeting-place for members of the Bristol Socialist Society and national leaders such as Edward Carpenter, William Morris, and Eleanor Marx. Katharine Bruce Glasier wrote in her pamphlet, 'Enid Stacy', that the studio: 'still lingers in my memory as some enchanted Hall of Dreams of an almost impossible beauty. There was music and song and dance... night after night bands of Socialists, young and old, would meet for study and debate, and terribly practical work too, for the unemployed and unskilled workers then enrolling in Will Thorne's Gas Workers' and General Labourers' Union.' At first Enid Stacy concentrated on trade union organizing and committee work, but by the early 1890s she was already speaking several times a week for the Fabian Society and the Labour church on topics such as women and the labour movement. She attended the founding conference of the Independent Labour Party in 1893 and in the same year began to live in the controversial Starnthwaite home colony for the unemployed near Kendal. She was one of the leaders in a dispute between the colonists and a clergyman who had founded the group and had to face forcible eviction. It was at this point that Enid Stacy's reputation as an exceptional speaker began to grow. In 1894 she addressed 122 meetings in 33 townships in Lancashire, Cheshire, and Cumberland and from 1895 was employed by the ILP as a travelling lecturer. Sylvia Pankhurst described her as a 'big, handsome woman with a very clear complexion' whose voice could carry to the back of any room (Pankhurst, 127). 
Enid Stacy was tireless as a propagandist. She supported ILP candidates at Bristol and Preston in the 1895 general election and made speaking tours with the 'Clarion' van. She was never afraid to enter into the thick of a fight -- at one meeting of the unemployed in Liverpool, when the police tried to prevent speakers from addressing the crowd, she: 'clung manfully to the railings and endeavoured to assert the right to free speech, but the minions of the law tore her rudely away. But 'Our Enid', not to be daunted, mounted a tramcar standing by, and from the roof addressed the maddening throng, and dared the law in all its authority to come outside and put her out -- which they didn't. (Tuckett, 45)' Enid Stacy's most enduring contribution to the revived socialist movement was to bring socialism and women's rights together. She was one of the few ILP leaders who spoke out in favour of women's suffrage. In the mid-1890s she became friends with Esther Roper, secretary of the Manchester National Society for Women's Suffrage, who shared her interest in the needs of working women. Enid Stacy spoke at the first annual meeting of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies in Manchester in 1898 and also joined Esther Roper at a suffrage deputation of women graduates to Westminster in 1903. She developed her ideas in articles for the socialist journal, the 'Clarion', where she was critical of the male prejudice of the labour movement. Her most systematic attempt to develop a theoretical framework to bring socialist and feminist ideas together was her essay, 'A Century of Women's Rights', published in the influential socialist anthology 'Forecasts of the Coming Century' (1897), edited by Edward Carpenter. In this she argued that women's legal rights were just one phase of the suffrage movement and that equality as a citizen could only come about with socialism. She was forward-looking in calling for fairer divorce, equality within marriage, and women's right to choose whether or not to have children, as well as for the vote. She also sought freedom for women as workers, arguing that protective legislation should apply to both sexes. 
Enid Stacy was a member of the national administrative council of the ILP for three years and in 1896 attended the International Congress of Socialists in London as one of two delegates from the Arbroath ILP. The other was the Revd Percy Widdrington ('b'. 1873/4), a devout Anglo-Catholic, whom Enid married on 29 May 1897. They lived in Newcastle until 1901 when they moved to the parish of Calderbrook in Lancashire. After the birth of a son Enid continued to spend six months of the year touring. She died suddenly of an embolism on 4 September 1903 at Littleborough, near Rochdale, and was buried at Calderbrook church; her husband survived her. Her friends believed that her early death was partly due to overwork and Sylvia Pankhurst claimed that she 'undermined her originally fine physique by unresting labours, constant open air speaking, constant journeying, poor food, uncomfortable quarters' (Pankhurst, 127-8). Enid Stacy was one of the best-known female propagandists for socialism in the 1890s and did all she could to further the advent of women into politics. 


@@@@@


doc= 51603


Davis, Hewitt (1804-1884), farmer and agricultural writer, was born on 16 August 1804 to Isaac Davis and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Kennard. He was baptized on 10 November 1804 at St Mildred Poultry, in the City of London. 
In his twenties Davis managed the 2000 acre estate of his former employer, a merchant who recognized his ability for sorting out the accounts of the farm bailiff. By 1829 he had moved to Croydon, the address he gave for a letter, written on 1 April 1830, to 'The Times' about the free importation of corn, later elaborated into a pamphlet, 'On Foreign Corn Importation', dedicated to Viscount Milton. On 13 September 1833 he married Maria Husbands, 'nee' Mennie (1805-1884). They had at least eight children, including a daughter named Ann Marie and a son named Hewitt. He became the land agent for George Smith, and later for his son, George Robert (of the City bankers Smith, Payne, and Smith) of Selsdon Park, south of Croydon, whose Selsdon Farm was a 149 acre chalk hill farm. 
Davis's model farm was the nearby Spring Park Farm at Addington, which he tenanted from 1834 to 1849, a 500 acre farm of former heathland, originally known as Coldharbour, which the radical MP John Temple Leader had bought in 1834. Davis farmed 200 acres as arable land, improving it by deep drainage, deep ploughing, and thin sowing, the increased yields of which he discovered accidentally in 1840 when his drill man sowed half the required quantity of seed corn. He farmed the 149 acre Oaks Farm for the see of Canterbury at Shirley, where he also farmed for the second earl of Eldon. 
Spring Park Farm attracted many visitors from throughout Britain but few from Surrey. The most publicized visits were those made by the Maidstone Farmers Club. Davis wrote many articles, little more than letters, for the agricultural press and the county newspapers; about eighty were published in three series of 'Farming essays' brought out in 1848, 1850, and 1855 and collected in 'Practical Essays for the Improvement of Farming' (1860). He wrote for tenant farmers, matter-of-fact men like himself. In the late 1830s he was joint managing director, with Dr Augustus Bozzi Granville, of the ill-fated Thames Improvement Company, formed in 1836 to use town manure for agricultural purposes. Davis blamed the City and the commissioners of sewers for its failure. 
From 1840 Davis was an inspector of works for the inclosure commissioners, whose sphere of responsibility was much enlarged by the 'Public Money and Private Money Drainage Acts' passed between 1840 and 1850. He promoted the interests of the Land Improvement Company which facilitated private loans. In 1849 or 1850 he gave up tenant farming to become a partner in Messrs Davis and Vigers, surveyors, of 3 Frederick's Place, Old Jewry, probably because his new career was more profitable. 
Davis gave evidence to two select committees of the House of Lords, in 1845 and 1849, about improving entailed estates. His advice to landowners helped to restore the profitability of their estates. His firm acted as surveyors to the Rent Guarantee Society, founded in 1850 to assist landlords manage their estates. His publisher, James Ridgway, was one of its trustees. Davis owned shares in the society. 
Davis died at his home, 17 Nottingham Place, Marylebone, on 19 July 1884, his wife predeceasing him early in the same year. They had lived there for the previous twenty years and were buried in Highgate cemetery. He advocated economical and scientific farming at a time where agriculture was threatened by the loss of protection; the 'Agricultural Gazette' in its obituary praised his clear and simple prose and said that none since William Cobbett and Arthur Young had written more truthful criticism or given sounder advice. 


@@@@@


doc= 51604


Leslie, May Sybil (1887-1937), chemist, was born on 14 August 1887 at Cloverfield, Woodlesford, Yorkshire, the daughter of Frederick Leslie, coalminer (and later bookseller), and his wife, Elizabeth Dickinson. She was educated at Leeds high school and on graduation in 1905 was awarded a West Riding county scholarship to study at the University of Leeds. She graduated with a first-class BSc degree in 1908 and the following year was awarded an MSc for research under H. M. Dawson. Her investigation, on the rate of reaction of iodine and acetone, has since become a classic in the field of chemical reaction kinetics. 
In 1909 Leslie was awarded an 1851 Exhibition scholarship which she used to travel to Paris to work with Marie Curie on the extraction of new elements from the products of the radioactive decay of thorium. She spent two years at the Curie Institute, then returned to England to work for the year 1911-12 at Manchester University with another famous pioneer researcher in radioactivity, Ernest Rutherford. There she continued her work with thorium and extended her studies to the element actinium. In 1912-14 she taught at the Municipal High School for Girls in West Hartlepool, while commencing a study on ionization in non-aqueous solvents with Dawson at Leeds. In 1914, at a time when women rarely obtained academic positions other than at women's colleges, Leslie was appointed assistant lecturer and demonstrator of chemistry at the University College in Bangor, Wales. 
In 1915, Leslie accepted a position as research chemist at the government explosives factory at Litherland near Liverpool. During the First World War, many male scientists had been called up for service in the armed forces and there was a desperate need for qualified research chemists to supervise the production of chemicals needed for the war effort. Her particular research elucidated the chemical reactions involved in the formation of nitric acid (a component for the synthesis of explosives) and as a result she was able to identify the optimum industrial conditions for the process. Increasing the efficiency of this process was so essential to maximizing explosives production that, after the war, she was awarded a DSc degree by the University of Leeds in recognition of her contribution. In 1916, she was promoted to chemist in charge of laboratory at Litherland. The following year, the Litherland factory closed and she was transferred with the same rank to the government factory in Penrhyndeudraeth, north Wales. 
In 1920, Leslie was appointed to the University of Leeds as demonstrator in the department of chemistry, rising through the ranks to a position as lecturer in the department of physical chemistry in 1928. She was an active researcher, and she also wrote 'The Alkaline Earth Metals' (1925) and co-authored 'Beryllium and its Congeners' (1926), two titles in J. Newton Friend's comprehensive series, 'A Textbook of Inorganic Chemistry'. Both books were published under her married name, M. S. Burr. 
Leslie married Alfred Hamilton Burr (1885-1933) a lecturer in chemistry at the Royal Technical College, Salford, on 29 September 1923. She resigned her position at Leeds in 1929 and moved with Burr to Scotland in 1931 when he was appointed head of the chemistry department at Coatbridge Technical College. Following Burr's death in 1933, she moved back to Leeds where her first project was the completion of her deceased husband's research on wool dyes. She also resumed research work with Dawson. Later, she was a sub-warden at Weetwood Hall, a women's residence, from 1935 to 1937. She was elected associate of the Institute of Chemistry in 1918 and fellow of the Chemical Society in 1920. She died of lung cancer at Mahlstan, Bardsey, near Leeds, on 3 July 1937, her early death possibly being the result of exposure to high levels of radiation during her time at the Curie Institute. She was cremated at Lawnswood crematorium on 6 July 1937. 


@@@@@


doc= 51605


Lefroy, Harold Maxwell (1877-1925), entomologist, was born on 20 January 1877 at Itchel House, Crondall, Hampshire, the fourth son of Charles James Maxwell Lefroy, landed proprietor, and his wife, Elizabeth Catherine McClintock. He was educated at Marlborough College and King's College, Cambridge, where he matriculated at Michaelmas 1895. Pursuing his boyhood interest in insects he achieved a first class in the natural sciences tripos, part one, and took his BA in 1898. After less than a year as assistant master of Seaford College, Sussex, Lefroy became the entomologist for the newly created department of agriculture in the West Indies, arriving at Barbados on 24 December 1899. In lectures to sugar planters, in pamphlets, and in articles for the 'West Indian Bulletin', he produced detailed accounts of the insect pests of sugar cane, and of thrips that attacked cacao trees. Lefroy's colonial experiences quickly convinced him of the centrality of the applied entomologist and his insecticides as 'tools of empire'. 
In April 1903 Lefroy arrived in Calcutta to take up an appointment as entomologist to the government of India. He began his career in India working under E. P. Stebbing at the Indian Museum, but soon became connected with the Imperial Agricultural Research Institute at Pusa. The following year he married Kathleen Hamilton O'Meara, daughter of William O'Meara of British Guiana. During the nine years that he spent in India, Lefroy 'revolutionized all previous methods of studying the insect pests of agricultural crops' (Stebbing). In addition to serving on the managing committee of the Bombay Natural History Society, and producing numerous entomological pamphlets and articles, he wrote two major texts. His first, 'Indian Insect Pests', appeared in 1906. With the assistance of F. M. Howlett, he followed this three years later with 'Indian Insect Life'. 
In 1912 Lefroy accepted a position as professor of entomology at the Imperial College of Science and Technology in South Kensington; he arrived in England in January 1913. Already a fellow of the Entomological Society (1900) and the Zoological Society (1902), he quickly became an active participant in London's scientific circles. But he openly declared himself an applied scientist. Identifying himself as the representative of colonial economic entomologists he asserted that the naming of insects was best left to metropolitan museum staff who were accustomed to working with dead specimens. He later reiterated this position in his definitive textbook, 'Manual of Entomology' (1923). Between 1911 and 1914 the British Museum (Natural History) engaged him to deal with economic entomological enquiries, and upon the creation of the Imperial Bureau of Entomology in 1912 he joined the committee of management as the representative for India. In 1913 he became honorary curator of the insect house at the zoological gardens. At about the same time he was asked to deal with an infestation of death watch beetles in the roof timbers of Westminster Hall. Contemporaries consistently remembered Lefroy as a man of boundless energy. One manifestation of this was his driving technique. A friend recalled: 'He was an ardent and dangerous motorist. It was an experience to be driven by him in a car whose battered wings gave little confidence, as fast as the car could go, through London traffic, in company with a biscuit-box of noxious living insects, a few glass bottles of poisons, and a cylinder of some lethal gas. ('The Times', 15 Oct 1925)' On 17 April 1914, this motoring passion resulted in a near fatal accident.Although rejected for service in the First World War Lefroy instructed sanitary officials, doctors, and army officers on the dangers of insects as vectors of disease. In the same capacity he served as temporary lieutenant-colonel in the Mesopotamian field force in 1916. And at the behest of the British Wheat Commission he and R. A. Lowe travelled to Australia to vanquish a large infestation of weevils in stored wheat in early 1918. An original member of the Association of Economic Biologists (established in 1904), Lefroy served as honorary secretary in 1914 and as honorary editor of the association's journal, the 'Annals of Applied Biology', from 1914 to 1916. His involvement with the association was indicative of his desire for professional recognition. Aware of his roles as both scientist and publicist Lefroy freely used Royal Institution lectures, newspapers, popular magazines, wireless broadcasts, and even cinematograph films to promote his subject. Lefroy's decision to become chair of the panel of applied biology at the College of Pestology was undoubtedly motivated by the same professional and entrepreneurial aspirations. 
In the end Lefroy succumbed to the thing that he saw as his greatest tool in the struggle for professional recognition -- insecticides. On Saturday 10 October 1925 he was overcome by a gas insecticide of his own invention while working at his laboratory at Imperial College. He rallied for several hours before exposing himself to a final fatal dose. Presciently he admitted, 'The little beggars have got the best of me this time' ('The Times', 17 Oct 1925). Later that day Lefroy was found unconscious on the floor of his laboratory; he never regained consciousness. He was rushed to St George's Hospital, where he died at 6.25 p.m. on 14 October 1925. At an inquest held two days later it was revealed that Lefroy was a victim of 'very chronic toxaemia which had been carrying on for a period of six or seven years' (ibid.). Mourned by his wife and only son, Cecil, Harold Maxwell Lefroy was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, London, on 17 October 1925. 


@@@@@


doc= 51607


Witchell, George (1728-1785), mathematician, was born at Birchin Lane, London, on 27 January 1728, the youngest of six children of Nicholas Witchell (1686-1761), a glover, and his wife, Elizabeth (1687?-1764), daughter of George Wass, members of the Society of Friends. In 1734 Nicholas Witchell moved to St Giles Cripplegate, where he opened a shop. Falling on hard times in later years, he applied to the Friends meeting in this area for relief, alleging prosecution for non-payment of tithes, but had to fight his case for seven years before he was accepted as a resident and given relief. 
According to his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', Witchell was descended on his mother's side from the renowned Quaker clockmaker Daniel Quare, and had been brought up to that trade. No evidence has been found to support this, although a John Witchell was apprenticed to a master of the same name in the Clockmakers' Company in 1742. It is not known where he was educated, but he claimed to have taught mathematics for many years in London. His first article on astronomy appeared in the 'Gentlemen's Diary' for 1741; thereafter he published frequently in the 'Gentlemen's Diary' and 'Gentleman's Magazine', over his name or the initials G. W. 
Disenchantment with the treatment meted out to his father may have soured Witchell's relationship with the Friends and led to his marriage to a non-Quaker. When this was investigated by the Friends they reported on 26 November 1755 that 'he acquainted 'em he did not look upon Himself as a Member of the Society, which he requested they would inform the Meeting of, neither would he be accountable for his Conduct to them' (Peel MM, minutes, 26 Nov 1755). 
In 1764 Witchell published a map of the passage of the moon's shadow over England during the eclipse of 1 April 1764, and in the same year the board of longitude engaged him, with John Campbell RN and John Bevis, to compute the difference in longitude between the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth and Nevil Maskelyne's observatory in Barbados. The following year Witchell and Israel Lyons the younger were engaged on astronomical computations for the first six months of 1767, destined for what became the first 'Nautical Almanac'. Witchell's paper, 'Calculations to explain the duration of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites due to Jupiter's oblate shape', published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of 1767, led to his election as fellow of the Royal Society in July that year. 
The Royal Naval Academy had opened in 1733 in Portsmouth Dockyard to instruct boys aged eleven to seventeen prior to their going to sea but it later acquired a bad reputation for the unruly behaviour of the students. In 1766 the head and his assistant were dismissed, and on 26 March 1767 Witchell was appointed head mathematical master, at a salary of $150, with John Bradley as his assistant. This move did not halt the academy's decline, although Witchell's own reputation was undamaged. Captain James Cook, returning in 1775 from his second voyage, sought Witchell's help in checking his chronometers at the academy's observatory; Witchell also checked the reduction of Cook's eclipse observations. The explorer's son, James Cook junior, aged eleven, was a student at the academy in 1774. During their years at the academy Witchell and Bradley also instructed masters on the taking of lunar observations. Witchell's will, made in 1777, reveals that his wife, whose name is not given, had died earlier, and that he desired to be buried alongside her in Kingston churchyard, at St Mary's, Portsea. His estate was to be divided equally between his six surviving children, Thomas (who was old enough to be named as his executor), John, Mary, Ann, Sarah, and Elizabeth. Witchell died on 29 January 1785, according to the probate, still teaching at the academy. He was buried at St Mary's on 5 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 51611


Conder, Peter John (1919-1993), ornithologist and conservationist, was born on 20 March 1919 at 81 Thornton Avenue, Streatham, London, the son of John Reynolds Conder, a shipbroker, and his wife Edna Frances, 'nee' Benson. Conder's interest in birds began with egg collecting, an activity he later opposed. He was educated at Cranleigh School, Surrey; he won a prize when in the junior school for completing a bird diary, and his basic training in ornithology came through the school ornithological society and one of his schoolmasters, Marston Henniker-Godley. Conder recalled sneaking from the school dormitory for early morning bird-watching expeditions. After leaving school he was sent to Lausanne to learn French and spent six weeks in Newfoundland on a British Schools Exploring Society expedition. In the spring of 1938 he became a clerk in the voucher department of the advertising agency of Samuel Herbert Benson (1854-1914), his maternal grandfather and one of the pioneers of advertising in England. 
As war approached Conder joined the Territorial Army and was commissioned into the Royal Corps of Signals. When the British expeditionary force was sent to France in 1939 his unit was part of the 51st Highland division, and in June 1940 he was captured at St Valery-sur-Somme. During almost five years' incarceration his interest in ornithology helped him to survive. For him the wild birds that flew freely in and out of the camp were objects of hope. He spent part of this period in Eichstatt in Bavaria, where he watched migrants passing over and studied the breeding behaviour of goldfinches, later publishing the results in 'Ibis' in 1948. He made notes of his observations on any paper he could find. The camp guards became accustomed to the lone bird-watcher wandering around the camp and constantly taking notes, an activity that gave him the opportunity to record the routine of his captors and thus to provide intelligence for escape attempts. 
After demobilization Conder did not relish spending the rest of his working life in an advertising agency and he resigned within a month of returning to S. H. Benson. In 1947, after a short period at the British Museum (Natural History), he became warden of Skokholm bird observatory, where he studied wheatears, the subject of his monograph 'The Wheatear' (1990). On 12 January 1952 he married Patricia Neale ('b'. 1919/20), daughter of John Freeman Higginson, an outfitter, of Tenbury Wells, Worcestershire. In 1954 he became assistant secretary of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) at the society's headquarters in London. His responsibilities were varied and Conder, who always claimed to be an amateur, described himself as a jack of all trades, dealing with reserves, prosecutions, and protection work. 
The RSPB, which had 20,000 members and few staff, moved from its London office to a country house in Bedfordshire in 1961. The move produced a financial surplus and the consequent opportunity to expand. When Conder became director in 1963 he appointed specialist staff to deal with nature reserves, research, education, publications, film, and financial administration. The competent, enthusiastic team he created built on the opportunities they had, so that when Conder retired thirteen years later membership had risen to over 200,000 and there had been some spectacular conservation achievements. The society had been a major contributor to the successful campaign to stop the use of organochlorine pesticides; ospreys had become established once more as a breeding species in Britain; and the society's list of nature reserves was added to each year. Perhaps more important was the growing realization of the significance of research to successful nature conservation, an applied science that was beginning to be taken seriously by government. 
Conder himself took most pride in the campaign against pesticides, but, almost certainly, his greatest achievement was to lay the foundations that made the RSPB one of the world's leading voluntary nature conservation organizations. His greatest disappointment was the failure of the RSPB and the Society for the Promotion of Nature Reserves (later the Wildlife Trusts) to merge in the 1970s. The result, he felt, would have created a really influential organization. 
Although a relatively shy man, Conder was able to communicate his passion for nature and its conservation both in writing and orally. His retirement at fifty-seven, at a time when the RSPB was growing, showed his understanding of the need for leaders not to outstay their usefulness, though one of his staff wrote that 'he could have easily gone for another 10 years and would have had the loyal support of his staff' ('The Independent', 18 Oct 1993). 
In the 1976 new year's honours Conder was appointed OBE. He was awarded the RSPB's gold medal in 1976 and an honorary MA from the Open University in 1977. He spent his retirement writing, birdwatching, and travelling, sometimes as a tour leader, sometimes as a consultant to overseas conservation organizations, and sometimes on holiday. He spent much of the year in Comberton, Cambridgeshire, and was a regular visitor to Alderney for over twenty years. He died at Arthur Rank House, Cambridge, on 8 October 1993 after suffering from cancer. He was survived by his wife, one son, and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 51616


Connor, Kenneth (1918-1993), actor, was born at 8 Leconfield Road, Highbury, London, on 6 June 1918, the son of John Francis Connor, a naval petty officer, and his wife, Ellen Mary, 'nee' Campling. From the age of two he was encouraged to perform in concert parties that his father organized. This experience, and later spells in revue, convinced him that he wanted to become an actor. He enrolled at the Central School of Speech and Drama in 1933, before going on to win the gold medal as outstanding student on his graduation in 1936. He made his professional debut the same year in J. M. Barrie's final play, 'The Boy David', with Elisabeth Bergner at Her Majesty's Theatre. His film debut followed in 1939, a small speaking part in a Flora Robson vehicle, 'Poison Pen'. During the Second World War he served in the Middlesex regiment, though he continued to perform both in ENSA revues and for the Stars in Battledress play section, appearing as a gunner in the latter's inaugural production, Terence Rattigan's 'Flare Path', directed by Edith Evans. On 20 October 1942, at Morpeth, Connor married Margaret Irene ('b'. 1919), daughter of Randolph Churchill Knox, miner, of Morpeth. They had a son, Jeremy ('b'. 1955), who appeared with him in a number of films. 
After the war Connor was invited to join the Bristol Old Vic where he stayed from 1945 to 1947. It was here that he played the Fool in 'King Lear' with William Devlin as the King, a performance he remained proud of for the rest of his life. The production transferred to the Embassy Theatre in London, and where a reviewer remarked that Connor 'conjures up, with the simplest possible means, the compassion one feels for the lost' ('The Times', 28 May 1947). He then moved on to the Old Vic Company in London for the 1947-8 season. 
Conner's film career, stymied by the war, continued in 1950 with a small part in the now forgotten farce 'Never Say Die'. More important was his work in radio. Connor had an extraordinary talent for manipulating his voice, and radio became a favoured medium, where he proved the perfect comic stooge. He had worked in radio before the war, performing a sketch with Syd Walker in a 1939 episode of the groundbreaking comedy 'Band Waggon'. But now his vocal talents were fully recognized, and he became known as the 'Man of Many Voices' while working with Ted Ray on 'Ray's a Laugh', 1953-61. Other important radio appearances include Eric Barker's 'Just Fancy' (1953-7) and multiple characters (including a parrot) for 'Meet the Huggetts' (1953-5). His association with Peter Sellers, which had begun on 'Ray's a Laugh', continued on television through Spike Milligan's 'The Idiot Weekly, Price 2d' (1956), 'A Show Called Fred' (1956), and 'Son of Fred' (1956). Connor's verbal virtuosity also enabled him to stand in for Sellers as well as Harry Secombe in separate episodes of 'The Goon Show'. His radio catchphrases 'Do You Mind?' and 'Oh Mate!' would later find their way into many a 'Carry On' script. 
The 'Carry On' films made Connor a household name. The series ran to thirty-one outings, and Connor appeared in seventeen, from the opener, 'Carry On Sergeant', in 1958, to the last genuine entrant, 'Carry On Emmannuelle', in 1978. As well as being a key member of the 'Carry On' team, he appeared in many of their stage and television offshoots. In the early films he was generally cast as a nerve-wracked romantic often with delusions of grandeur; in the later ones as an ageing, somewhat seedy roue. However, two of his finest films were outside the series, though the first was made by the same team. This was 'Watch Your Stern' (1960), in which Connor excels as a humble seaman who is incapable of making practical use of his electronics expertise. The second was a fine horror comedy, 'What a Carve Up!' (1961), an admittedly hackneyed story of relatives mortally threatened as they await the reading of a will, but one which is brought to life by a timid Connor and a not-so-timid Sid James. 
During the 'Carry On' years he also voiced a chimpanzee for the PG Tips adverts and was principal voice artist for two Gerry Anderson puppet series: 'Torchy the Battery Boy' (1958-9) and 'Four Feather Falls' (1960). After what was arguably his finest 'Carry On' moment -- 'Carry on Cleo', released in 1964, in which he is the timid inventor of the square wheel who becomes Julius Caesar's protector after being mistaken for an invincible warrior -- Connor took a six-year break from the series to concentrate on the theatre. In 1963 he was cast as Hysterium in the West End premiere of Stephen Sondheim's 'A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum' with Frankie Howerd. This was a huge success, running for 762 performances, after which it went on a national tour under Connor's direction. He also had a long run as King Louis XIII at Drury Lane in 'The Four Musketeers' with Harry Secombe during 1967 and 1968. 
In 1984 Connor gained the affection of a new generation in the role of Alfonse for the second series of ''Allo 'Allo', David Croft and Jeremy Lloyd's beautifully scripted Second World War French Resistance slapstick comedy. Connor is a joy as a prosperous funeral director with a 'dicky ticker' in hot pursuit of Carmen Silvera's bar owner. He stayed with the series until it ended in 1992. 
Connor's later years also saw him play a recurring character in 'Hi-de-Hi!' (1986-8), a memorable guest spot as a pompous, dandyish actor in 'Blackadder III' (1987), and, in an episode which was only screened after his death, a character part in 'The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes' (1994) with Jeremy Brett. He was appointed MBE in 1991. He died at his home, Home Oaks, South Hill Avenue, Harrow on the Hill, on 28 November 1993, following a short battle with cancer. 


@@@@@


doc= 51617


Corbet, Freda Kunzlen (1900-1993), teacher and politician, was born at 67 Trinity Road, Tooting, London, on 15 November 1900, the eldest of the three children of Adolf Frederic Hermann Kunzlen, a commercial clerk and later an insurance agent, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Hubbard. She was educated at various schools in south London before winning a scholarship to Wimbledon county technical school in 1911. Her mother fostered her political radicalism, and while at University College, London, where she held a scholarship, Freda Mansell (the surname which her family had adopted during the war) joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1919. 
After gaining a first-class degree in history, Freda Mansell taught in Wales and Cornwall (becoming mistress of Penzance Church High School for Girls). On 5 August 1925 she married a fellow ILP member, William Corbet (1887-1957), the son of William Corbet, shopkeeper, at the Friends' meeting-house, Streatham. Her husband ran a confectioner's and newsagent's shop in Tooting, and this became their joint occupation during most of their married life. She also resumed her studies and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1932 but, despite first-class exam results, she found it difficult to obtain legal work on account of her gender. 
After a failed attempt at acting, Corbet became a popular speaker at open-air meetings. At the urging of her friend Herbert Morrison, the London Labour Party leader, who was keen to recruit women candidates, she contested her first local council election in 1927. After three campaigns in North Islington she was finally elected to the London county council (LCC) for Camberwell North-West in 1934, when Labour began its twenty-five year dominance of the LCC. Her husband was also elected to Wandsworth council. 
As a former teacher, Corbet served on the LCC's education committee for sixteen years and supported comprehensive schools, co-writing a party report in 1934 which paved the way for their later introduction by the LCC. She also took an interest in housing and fought for lifts in council tower blocks. At the general election of 1935 she unsuccessfully contested the parliamentary seat of Lewisham East as Labour candidate. In 1940 she became a London magistrate and took a liberal approach towards juveniles who came before her; she later convinced the LCC to make a submission to the Ingleby committee on the treatment and punishment of young offenders. She also helped to persuade the TUC to support family allowances for women in the early 1940s, a measure which many male workers feared would undermine their traditional claims to receive a family wage. The Corbets themselves had been unable to raise children on account of the cost of domestic help. 
During the Second World War Corbet tirelessly assisted blitz victims in Camberwell, and in 1945 she was elected MP for Camberwell North-West (Peckham from 1950). She regarded the House of Commons as secondary to her municipal work: it was said that she rarely ventured north of the Thames, and she contributed to debates infrequently. Yet she could influence ministers on certain issues, represented Britain at the United Nations conference of 1948 which produced the 'Declaration of Human Rights', and took the unusual step of holding fortnightly surgeries for her constituents, which answered some local criticism of her record as an MP. 
In 1947 Corbet became Labour's chief whip on the LCC and, in conjunction with the new council leader, Isaac Hayward, exercised formidable authority. Despite her slight appearance (she was only 4 foot 11 inches in height), she was known as the 'tiny tyrant' for her tough enforcement of the party line. Councillors were forbidden from publicly dissenting or even asking questions at public meetings without Corbet's consent; Clement Attlee reportedly described the LCC in this period as 'the nearest approach to a totalitarian state in Western Europe' (Saint, 261). This system, coupled with her visceral dislike of Labour's Bevanite left, did not make her universally popular, and councillors strove for a more open council. After years of dissatisfaction, Labour councillors voted in March 1960 to replace her as chief whip -- a move which, despite previous challenges, took her by surprise. 
Corbet was soon appointed chairman of the LCC's general services committee. In this capacity she did some of her most important work, overseeing the expansion and transformation of the South Bank through the establishment of the Queen Elizabeth Hall and Purcell Room, the Hayward Gallery, and the National Theatre. The latter project had been delayed for over a decade until the LCC provided land and funding, and consequently the council had a seat on the theatre's board, held by Corbet from 1962 until 1965. During the Commons debates on local government reform, she strongly opposed the government's 'mischievous' plan to replace her beloved LCC with the Greater London council; she left local government when the LCC came to an end in 1965. 
After the death of her first husband, Corbet married, on 8 August 1962, Ian McIvor Campbell (1898/9-1976), a company director, who had also lost his first spouse; he was the son of Donald Frederick Campbell, publicity specialist. Wishing to spend more time with her invalid husband, she announced in February 1972 her intention not to seek re-election to the House of Commons in 1974, amid doubt whether she could have won Labour's nomination for the newly redistributed seat of Southwark Peckham. Her announcement followed her abstention, along with four other pro-European Labour MPs, in defiance of their party's three-line whip, on the second reading of the 'European Communities Bill', which narrowly passed, sanctioning Britain's accession to the European Common Market. This act of rebellion practically ended her political career in the Labour Party. None the less, her years of work were recognized on her seventy-fourth birthday, a few months after she left the Commons, with the freedom of the borough of Southwark. Her later years were marred by schizophrenia. She died of bronchopneumonia and heart failure at her home, 39 Gravel Road, Bromley, Kent, on 1 November 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51618


Cornford, Christopher Francis (1917-1993), artist and writer, was born on 9 February 1917 at Conduit Head, Madingley Road, Cambridge, the second son of Francis Macdonald Cornford (1874-1943), professor of ancient philosophy and author of best-selling studies of Plato, and Frances Crofts Darwin (1886-1960) ['see 'Cornford, Frances Crofts], well-known poet and granddaughter of Charles Darwin. His elder brother, by just over a year, was the radical poet (Rupert) John Cornford. There were five children, who grew up as members of the Darwin clan in 1920s Cambridge: Christopher's governess was Dorothy Bristow, who later became an influential art teacher. The Greek philosophy, the Darwin connection, the radicalism, the wit, and the visual art all resurfaced in later life. Educated at Stowe School (with John) and the Leys School, Cambridge, Cornford went to Chelsea College of Art in 1934 and was awarded an art teacher's diploma in 1937. He was a visiting instructor there and at Morley College from 1937 to 1939 and met his future wife, (Mary) Lucy Jameson (1912/13-1991), daughter of Julian Veitch Jameson, an indigo planter. They were married on 1 February 1941, and had two sons. 
Together with his brother John (who went to Cambridge), Christopher joined the British Communist Party in the mid-1930s and marched against Oswald Mosley's blackshirts. John then joined the International Brigades to fight against Franco in Spain, and was shot and killed by the fascists on or just after his twenty-first birthday. Christopher never quite got over this tragedy: it confirmed him in a lifelong commitment to creating a better-organized society. He once said that he and his brother 'were always seeking the reality behind surface appearance' (personal knowledge). During the Second World War Christopher served in the Royal Artillery. From 1946 to 1953 he was master of painting in the department of fine art at King's College, University of Durham, then from 1955 to 1962 visiting instructor in drawing and architecture in the school of architecture at Cambridge. 
But it was at the Royal College of Art in London's South Kensington, which he joined full-time in autumn 1962, that Christopher Cornford at last found a spiritual and intellectual home and a new set of causes with which to identify. He was appointed by his cousin Robin Darwin, who was then principal and a great believer in a dynastic approach to senior appointments, to take over (from Basil Taylor) the direction of the department of general studies. The department had been founded to offer courses on the history, philosophy, and criticism of art and design to all the practitioner students in the studios -- some of whom had been over-specializing in art from an early age. Darwin was convinced that young artists and designers, if they were to succeed, ought to be equipped with 'amused and well-tempered minds'; the reformers of British art education (the Coldstream and Summerson committees) were simultaneously proposing an expansion of theoretical studies within art schools. Cornford's unusual mix of an excellent eye, drawing skills, scholarship, and personal modesty was very well suited to this role as intellectual troubadour. 
Cornford assembled a supergroup of visiting authors (including Iris Murdoch and George Steiner) to supplement a committed team of staff tutors. The courses he conceived and directed and the long 'critical essays' which all students had to write about them as an integral part of their postgraduate studies became models in the post-1960s, national system; they also helped the Royal College of Art's progress towards university status, which it achieved on royal charter day in 1967. By the early 1970s he had introduced MA-by-thesis students into his department, and in the mid-1970s doctoral students. 
Cornford's own research interests centred on theories of proportion in art and design (on which he lectured and supervised theses), and in particular the geometry of the 'golden section'. Although the Darwin years at the Royal College of Art (1947-72) were partly about establishing the college as the artistic equivalent of 'walking past the great court of Trinity on crisp autumn evenings' (as the principal, who became rector in 1967, put it), Christopher Cornford remained magnificently anti-establishment: he had a lot of sympathy after 1968 with the student radicals, most of whom, in Britain unlike continental Europe and America, came from art schools; in the 1970s he became an early green activist, hosting a seminal 'Design for need' conference in April 1976, and even staffed a fair-trade stall in the college for the sale of varieties of rice until his impressionistic approach to weights and measures led to its closure. After retirement in summer 1979 he became a characteristically active chairman of the Cambridge Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and a mainstay of the University of the Third Age, as well as continuing to paint, write, and draw gentle political cartoons. 
Cornford's most important legacy is in the minds and memories of successive generations of artists and designers graduating from the Royal College of Art. They remember his humanity, his support (he once missed a key faculty board meeting to attend a student picnic in Kensington Gardens), his inspirational seminars, and his extraordinary impish performances as public orator every convocation day in early July -- performances which enlivened the proceedings and gave them a distinctive art school twist, through a combination of outrageous puns, a parody florid style, and misused quotations. His valedictory lecture of June 1979 was called 'The repeal of disillusion', and when he died at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge on 8 April 1993 -- after being admitted for heart surgery, only to discover that he had cancer of the spine -- he had just finished drafting his 'magnum opus' (begun twenty years earlier) on proportion in art and design. Lucy Cornford had died, after a debilitating illness, in 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 51620


Bury, Charles Rugeley (1890-1968), chemist, was born in Northfield End, Henley-on-Thames, on 29 June 1890, the first child of Charles Rugeley Bury (1849-1916), a non-practising solicitor, and his wife, Aimee Gwynneth Pryse (1867-1963). His mother was a direct descendant of Sir Richard Pryse of Plas Gogerddan Manor near Aberystwyth, who was created a baronet by Charles I. Her second name is a typical Welsh forename and she was very proud of her pedigree. Bury was nicknamed Dick by his nanny and this name persisted within the family. In 1895 they moved to Ellfield in Wotton under Edge in the Cotswolds. He was educated at a Leamington preparatory school and Malvern College, thence gaining an entrance scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford (1908), where he graduated in 1912 with first-class honours in chemistry. He then spent a year demonstrating in the joint Trinity-Balliol chemical laboratory and during 1912/13 spent some months at Gottingen University before being appointed assistant lecturer in chemistry in the University of Wales at Aberystwyth. 
Immediately the First World War started Bury volunteered for the 5th Gloucestershire regiment, was soon commissioned, and experienced a variety of active service in the western front trenches, the Middle East, and eventually as captain of an independent command which traversed Persia to the southern Caspian to secure the Baku oilfields. He suffered a skull wound at Kut in 1917 but recovered completely. 
After being demobilized in 1919 Bury returned to Aberystwyth to teach physical chemistry in an understaffed department heavily overcrowded with ex-service students and inadequately equipped for such numbers. In these difficult circumstances he composed his first and by far his most important publication, entitled 'Langmuir's theory of the arrangement of electrons in atoms and molecules', published in the 'J. Amer. Chem. Soc.', (43, 1921, 1602-8). This momentous advance in understanding electronic atomic and molecular structure was written independently with no opportunity for consultation with any chemist of like interest. In this very concise paper Bury corrected Langmuir's conclusions and gave an alternative unifying summary of the chemical properties of all the elements up to uranium in terms of his new electronic structures. This version, often attributed to Niels Bohr, appeared in many subsequent chemistry texts. 
Bury predicted that an, as yet unknown, element of atomic number 72 should exist, and that it would not be a rare earth but would resemble zirconium. The discovery of element no. 72 (hafnium) was announced by Hevesy and Coster in 'Nature' in 1923. There can be no doubt that their successful search was prompted by Bury's paper but there is no mention of the latter's prediction in their report. Another Bury prediction was that there would be a further series of elements heavier than uranium; twenty-five years later the transuranic elements were discovered. 
Bury's second major contribution to chemical theory, entitled 'Auxochromes and resonance', appeared later in 'J. Amer. Chem. Soc.' (57, 1935, 2115-17). By applying the concept of 'resonance' (later termed electron delocalization) he proposed a rational electronic correlation of the effects of structural variations on the colours of diverse classes of organic dyes. The London Chemical Society rejected this paper on the ground that it 'had no new experimental data' (Davies, 87). However, immediately after its American publication, Bury's ideas provoked the initiation of intense research activity in dye chemistry in Britain, Switzerland, and especially at the Eastman Kodak Laboratories in the USA. 
The laboratories at Aberystwyth possessed little sophisticated equipment. Nevertheless, Bury showed exceptional ingenuity in devising elegant research schemes requiring little beyond precise temperature control, accurate chemical analysis, and competent use of the sensitive Beckmann thermometer. These involved accurate measurements of physico-chemical properties such as freezing points, densities, specific heats, and viscosities, as well as phase rule studies; they were the basis of his third, less spectacular, but very substantial contribution to physical chemistry, recorded in some thirty publications over two decades. By using butyric acid solutions as a model system he unravelled fundamental aspects of soap and soap-acid chemistry. The intensely rancid odour of butyric acid pervading his research laboratories and lingering on clothing caused his research students occasional embarrassment in college social events and may well have terminated some budding romances. 
Soon after returning to Aberystwyth, Bury met Emily Frances Margaret Adams, known as Peggy, a striking golden-redhead who lectured in the agricultural botany department. They married on 11 July 1922. Their son, John (1925-2000), was keenly interested in theatre design and eventually became head of design in the National Theatre. Their daughter, Anne ('b'. 1927), worked at Barclays Bank. 
Bury was a tall, handsome man of upright military bearing but of few words, with a rather retiring, modest personality; he never quoted his own publications to his student classes. He did not seem to enjoy lecturing but was at his best in small tutorial groups which he conducted for final-year students. These were enjoyable occasions when he relaxed completely, and his criticisms of student essays were always constructive and encouraging, occasionally spiced with his logical, dry humour. He was a very individual, markedly unconventional character, especially in dress, hairstyle, and general appearance, and his ancient cars were often the subject of humorous student pranks. 
An acknowledged expert on the phase rule, Bury left Aberystwyth in 1943 to become leader of the phase rule section at ICI in Billingham. On retirement from ICI in 1952 he and his wife moved to a pretty old cottage in East Dean on the South Downs. Here he enjoyed his hobby as an amateur painter of considerable merit; he donated one of his canvases to the art department at Aberystwyth. 
Although Bury's major papers commanded worldwide interest there was little public recognition for his work apart from his election to the council of the prestigious Faraday Society. This may partly be due to his own retiring disposition and to the fact that these papers were published in America and fourteen years apart. However, there is no record of his having expressed any disappointment or bitterness. Bury died of a stroke at his home, Walnut Tree Cottage, East Dean, Sussex, on 24 December 1968 and was buried at East Dean church. 


@@@@@


doc= 51624


Clegg, John Atherton (1913-1987), physicist, was born on 15 May 1913 at 6 Moor Close, Middleton, Manchester, the son of Albert Clegg, a compositor, and his wife, Mabel Webster. He was educated at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Middleton, before completing an honours degree in physics at the University of Manchester in 1935. He qualified as a secondary school teacher the following year, and took up (after a succession of temporary posts) a job as physics master at Middlesbrough high school. In 1940 he was recruited to work at the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE), the major site of British radar development. The rapid expansion of the chain home coastal radar system relied on the training of staff, and after two years of radar research Clegg's teaching skills were mobilized as deputy head of TRE's teaching school. In 1943 Clegg married Marjorie Fuller (died 1986). He finished the war at the Ministry of Aircraft Production headquarters in London. 
As the Second World War was ending, many scientists returned to the universities armed with new techniques, equipment, and useful government and industrial contacts. Clegg, after preliminary arrangements to work on cosmic rays at Birkbeck College, was persuaded to join Professor Patrick M. S. Blackett's physics department in Manchester. On his return to his city of birth in 1946, Clegg, an expert on aerials, began work at Jodrell Bank, a Cheshire outpost of Blackett's department where Bernard Lovell was assembling ex-military equipment and staff to investigate radar echoes of unclear origin. The Jodrell Bank team soon identified the radar echoes with the trails of meteors. Since their technique of investigation was relatively undisturbed by the sun, the radar team soon found and published details about previously unsuspected daytime meteor showers. Clegg used his knowledge of radio wave propagation, learned during his wartime work, to assist the team's efforts to calculate orbital information from meteor trail reflections. Jodrell Bank's use of this information to claim that sporadic meteors were not of interstellar origin was one of the first interventions of radio techniques into astronomy. 
Clegg was elected a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1950. With Lovell he published 'Radio Astronomy', one of the first books on the subject, in 1952. He played a major part in designing and building the first elements of Jodrell Bank's pioneering radio telescope in 1946-7, but he did not publish on any observations made with it. 
Reminiscing in the 1970s Clegg recalled that his enjoyment of radio astronomy at Jodrell Bank diminished as the research station grew and the work became more routine and team orientated. Troubled also by his health, Clegg moved back to the physics laboratories in Manchester in 1951 to assist Blackett with his investigations of rock magnetism. Blackett was interested in the possibility that a massive rotating body could possess a magnetic moment independent of any electric currents within it. The extremely sensitive magnetometer he designed to measure the effect was also suited to measuring the magnetic field trapped in rock. A paper published by Clegg with Mary Almond (who had also worked at Jodrell Bank in the early years) and P. H. S. Stubbs in 1954 claimed that measurements from rocks collected from sites across the United Kingdom showed that the land mass had rotated clockwise by over 30 degree since the Triassic period. Such claims bolstered the emerging theory of continental drift. 
When Blackett left Manchester in 1953 to be appointed professor at Imperial College, Clegg went with him, continued the research on rock magnetism, and took up the post of lecturer in physics. He was promoted to senior lecturer in 1956, and reader the following year. In 1961 he was given leave of absence and seconded to Ibadan, Nigeria, as professor of physics; however, he once again suffered ill health, this time a viral complaint. On return to London he began teaching again, and was senior tutor of Imperial College physics department from 1967 to 1974. Contemporaries remember him as an excellent pedagogue, and he passed on this experience in his later years as an education consultant for the Institute of Physics. He retired in 1977 and died at 42 Shelley Road, Worthing, of heart failure on 28 August 1987. 


@@@@@


doc= 51626


Huxley, Sir Leonard George Holden (1902-1988), physicist, was born on 29 May 1902 at 14 Beauval Road, Dulwich, London, the son of George Hambrough (or Hamborough) Huxley (1868-1944), schoolmaster, and his wife, Lilian Sarah Smith. He was descended from an uncle of the Victorian scientist T. H. Huxley, and was a third cousin once removed of Aldous and Julian Huxley. His family moved to Australia when he was three years old, and he entered the Hutchins School in Hobart, Tasmania, in 1915. In 1920 he won a science and general scholarship to the University of Tasmania. As an undergraduate he gained distinction in the sciences, particularly in physics and mathematics. He was awarded the Philip Fysh prize for physics and was elected a Rhodes scholar for 1923. He entered New College, Oxford, in 1923 reading physics in the honours school of natural sciences. 
Huxley's anxiety to do research before the expiry of his Rhodes scholarship led him to take his BA degree in two years. He gained second-class honours and began research in the electrical laboratory, Oxford, under J. S. Townsend. The award of the J. T. Bowden scholarship by New College enabled him to continue his research in Oxford after the expiry of the Rhodes scholarship and in 1928 he was awarded a DPhil for his thesis, 'Corona discharge in helium and neon'. He was appointed a lecturer, demonstrator, and tutor in the electrical laboratory in 1926 where he remained until 1929, taking his MA in that year. He married, on 5 October 1929, Ella Mary Child (1904/5-1981), daughter of Frederick George Copeland, a clergyman. They had one son and one daughter. 
From 1929 to 1931 Huxley was on the staff of the Australian Radio Research Board. Before sailing for Australia he worked for some months with the British Radio Research Board at Datchet. In Australia he collaborated with the department of electrical engineering in Sydney University on the development of a cathode ray tube direction finder, and carried out investigations on atmospherics at the Commonwealth Solar Observatory, Mount Stromlo, Canberra. 
Huxley's sojourn in Australia was brief and in October 1931 he was appointed lecturer in physics in the University College, Nottingham. His teaching duties took him to University College, Leicester, for one morning each week and in July 1932 he made a successful application for the Frederick W. Bennett lectureship in physics in that college. In Leicester he continued his researches on collision of electrons with gas molecules and in the related problems of the conduction of electricity in gases. At that stage he became interested in the propagation of electromagnetic radiation and this proved of great value when he was released for wartime duties in 1940. 
The Air Ministry radar establishment, originally at Bawdsey Manor in Suffolk, had been evacuated to Dundee on the outbreak of war and to Dorset in the spring of 1940, where it remained until 1942, at first on a cliff site at Worth Matravers and at Swanage. It was at this stage with the name in transition to Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) that Huxley joined as a scientific officer. Many radar devices, already in operational use by the Royal Air Force, had evolved from TRE and it was clear that it was of little use devising complex equipment unless RAF personnel were taught how it worked and how to use it. That problem was handed to Huxley and led to the genesis of the TRE radar school. In the beginning Huxley was the sole lecturer, but his efforts were so greatly valued by the RAF that the school soon grew in strength. 
After the move of TRE to Great Malvern in May 1942 the development of the vital new radar systems working in the centimetre waveband -- such as the blind bombing aid known as H2S and the anti-submarine radar -- increased the importance of the radar school, and under Huxley's guidance many thousands of civilians and service personnel had passed through the school by the end of the war. 
Huxley conversed and lectured in a quiet and undemonstrative voice but with such authority that he soon attracted high-ranking RAF officers anxious to understand the basis of the new radar systems under their command. In paying tribute to the TRE school after the war A. P. Rowe, the chief superintendent, recalled that the air officer commanding, RAF Training Command, had remarked that even if the rest of TRE did not exist, the teaching school would be well worth visiting. 
Huxley had been appointed principal scientific officer and after the end of the war he wrote an important book, 'Wave Guides' (1947), based on the lectures he had given in the TRE school. Much of the material in this book related to technical developments in the microwave region, which until then had been available only in secret documents. Huxley had been given leave of absence from University College, Leicester, which had been placed on the list to receive exchequer grants in 1946. He did not apply for the newly established chair of physics but moved to the University of Birmingham as reader in electromagnetism in the department of electrical engineering. His stay there was brief and in 1949 he was elected to the Elder chair of physics in the University of Adelaide. 
Huxley soon became an important figure in Australian education and research. He continued as the Elder professor of physics until 1960 when he was appointed vice-chancellor of the Australian National University, Canberra. As the secretary of the physical science committee of the Australian Academy he became deeply involved with the British proposal to build a large optical telescope, as a joint project, in Australia. He was a member of the Australian large telescope committee which had discussions with the British delegation in 1964 and remained one of the principal Australian advisers in the complex negotiations that ultimately led to the joint decision of the British and Australian governments in 1967 to proceed with the construction of the Anglo-Australian 150 inch telescope at Siding Spring in New South Wales, for many years an outstanding instrument for astronomical research. 
Huxley remained vice-chancellor of the Australian National University until December 1967. During this period he served on many educational and scientific committees. He was created KBE (1964) and was awarded the honorary degree of DSc by Tasmania in 1962 and by the Australian National University in 1980. 
In his youth Huxley was a prominent athlete. He was captain of athletics at the Hutchins School and during his years in Oxford he was awarded the New College colours for athletics. He died during a visit to London on 4 September 1988 in the Royal Free Hospital, Camden. 


@@@@@


doc= 51630


Rowe, Albert Percival (1898-1976), scientific administrator, was born on 23 March 1898 at Bush Park, Launceston, Cornwall, the son of Albert Rowe, sewing machine agent, and his wife, Mary Annie Goudge. Educated at the Royal Dockyard School, Portsmouth, he went in 1921 to the Royal College of Science, London, and joined the scientific staff of the Air Ministry the following year. In 1925 he became assistant to H. E. Wimperis, the first director of scientific research at the Air Ministry, meanwhile serving as a part-time lecturer at Imperial College, 1927-37. On 18 June 1932 he married Mary Gordon ('b'. 1906/7), a solicitor, daughter of Douglas Mathews, solicitor. There were no children. Rowe acted as secretary to the Tizard committee which first met on 28 January 1935 to consider methods of defence of the country against hostile aircraft. In February 1935 he consulted R. A. Watson-Watt, the superintendent of the radio research station at Slough, about the possibility of a death ray, and his subsequent enquiry about methods of detecting aircraft by radio means led to the successful demonstration using the Daventry transmitter on 26 February 1935 and to the effective birth of British radar (then known as RDF), the initial development being carried out at Oxfordness and later Bawdsey Manor on the Suffolk coast. 
Rowe succeeded Watson-Watt as superintendent of the Bawdsey research group in May 1938 and on the outbreak of war he made an emergency move of the establishment to Dundee. In the spring of 1940 it was transferred to the Dorset coast, and in the spring of 1942 with the threat of capture by a German parachute division another move was made to Malvern College, Worcestershire. With various changes in ministerial arrangements the name of the original Bawdsey Research Station had become the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) in November 1940. Although not an active scientist during these years, Rowe guided the establishment with great success. In his office the service chiefs regularly assembled and the vital links between the operational needs and the research and development projects were forged. TRE was responsible for a host of ground based and airborne radar devices which were to exert decisive influences in many theatres of war. By the end of the war some 2000 people were working in TRE and Rowe's great achievement was the integration of so many individuals of diverse skills and temperaments into a coherent body. A commander-in-chief once complained that the most lowly assistant would not turn a screw unless he could be acquainted with the latest strategic situation in the Middle East. Indeed, it was precisely these personal contacts fostered and maintained by Rowe which so sharply distinguished the German and British scientific efforts. 
At the end of the war Rowe moved to the Admiralty as deputy controller of research and development. Advised to move to a warmer climate for health reasons he was appointed chairman of the defence advisory committee and defence scientific adviser to the Australian government in 1947. In 1948 he published 'One Story of Radar' (1948), an important account of the development of the major radar devices for which he had been responsible as chief superintendent of TRE in the Second World War. A year later he was appointed vice-chancellor of the University of Adelaide but his occupation of that post was not entirely a happy one. As he revealed in his book 'If the Gown Fits' (1960), his long association with defence and with service personnel was not a satisfactory preparation for entering the academic world at the age of fifty and in 1958 he retired to England and to Great Malvern, where he taught mathematics and astronomy part time at Malvern College, which led to his popular book 'Astronomy and Cosmology' (1968). 
Rowe was appointed CBE in 1942 and awarded the USA medal for merit in 1946. He received the honorary degree of LLD from the University of Melbourne in 1955. He was elected a fellow of the Imperial College of Science and Technology in 1957 and was a governor of Malvern College from 1972. Rowe died at Bromyard Hospital, Linton, Herefordshire on 25 May 1976; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51631


Young, Alfred (1873-1940), mathematician, was born at Birchfield, near Widnes, on 16 April 1873, the son of Edward Young, a Liverpool wine merchant, and his wife, Betsey, 'nee' Glynn. He was educated at Monkton Combe School, near Bath, from where he gained a scholarship to study mathematics at Clare College, Cambridge. He matriculated in 1892, graduated as tenth wrangler in 1895, and took part two of the mathematical tripos in 1896. After lecturing at Selwyn College, Cambridge, from 1901 to 1905 he was fellow, and later bursar, at Clare, and received the degree of ScD at Cambridge in 1908. In that year he was ordained, and he served as curate in Hastings from 1908 to 1910, when he was presented by Clare to the living at Birdbrook, Halstead, Essex. He married on 20 November 1907 Edith Clara Wilson, who survived him; they had no children. 
Young published twenty-seven scientific papers, the first in 1899, and the last posthumously in 1952. All but one (on electromagnetism) were on algebra. His original interest lay in the algebraic theory of invariants, an important area of nineteenth-century mathematics aiming to study properties of geometric figures which remain unchanged by projection. His first paper was on the invariant theory of quartic curves, and this led him to write his only book (with J. H. Grace), 'Algebra of Invariants' of 1903. This book synthesized the English work on invariants stemming from Arthur Cayley (1821-1895) with continental work by Paul Gordan and others; Young was the algebraist and Grace the geometer of the collaboration, and the book proved to be influential in its field. 
In 1901 Young began the long series of papers on quantitative substitutional analysis which became his great mathematical achievement. He published nine papers in this series (the last appeared in 1952). In modern algebraic terminology, quantitative substitutional analysis relates the theory of groups (perhaps the most important area of algebra in both the nineteenth and twentieth centuries) and their representations, a subject then undergoing intense development at the hands of William Burnside (1852-1927), Frobenius, and Schur. Young's theory forms part of the representation theory of the symmetric groups 'Sn' (the group of permutations of 'n' objects), where his name is commemorated in the 'Young tableaux' of which the theory makes systematic use. The significance of his work was realized after the publication in 1928 of the third paper in the series, which provided the algebraic machinery needed for important parts of the new subject of quantum mechanics. In Hermann Weyl's classic book 'Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics' (2nd edn, 1930) Young's work is used to study quantum numbers and the Clebsch-Gordan series, important in spectroscopy and elsewhere. His ideas have also been used in pure algebra, most notably in the work by G. James and A. Kerber, 'The Representation Theory of the Symmetric Group' (1981), in combinatorial theory, probability, and statistics. 'The Collected Papers of Alfred Young, 1873-1940', edited by his pupil G. de B. Robinson, was published in 1977 by the University of Toronto Press. 
Young was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1934. Unusually for a twentieth-century mathematician, he did not make mathematics his profession. He was rector of Birdbrook from 1910 to 1940. He died on 15 December 1940 at Saffron Walden General Hospital, Essex, and was buried in the churchyard at Birdbrook, where his widow was later interred. 


@@@@@


doc= 51632


Ince, Edward Lindsay (1891-1941), mathematician, was born on 30 November 1891 in King William Street, Amblecote, Staffordshire, the only son of Edward Ince, an Inland Revenue officer, and his wife, Caroline Clara Cutler. He attended Cricieth School and the county school at Portmadoc, and, after his family moved to Scotland, completed his secondary education at the Perth Academy. In 1909 he went to Edinburgh University to read mathematics, and graduated in 1913 with first-class honours. He played a prominent part in the communal life of the university as senior president of the students' representative council and convener of the international academic committee. A scholarship awarded to him on graduation enabled him to remain in Edinburgh for research. After being rejected for war service on medical grounds, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1915 as research student, and was a Smith's prizeman in 1917, but after four terms left for a national service appointment. 
In 1924 Ince married Phyllis Fry, with whom he had two daughters. After the war he held lectureships, first at Leeds and then in 1920-26 in Liverpool. In 1926 he was elected to the chair in pure mathematics at the newly founded Egyptian University, Cairo. Building up a new department was congenial to him and he proved a most successful teacher and organizer, but in 1931 he decided to return to Britain because of lack of facilities for educating his children and the effect of the climate on his health. After spending the session 1931-2 as lecturer in Edinburgh, and 1932-5 at Imperial College, London, he returned to Edinburgh as head of the department for technical mathematics, where he remained until his death. 
Ince's main work was in the theory of differential equations. E. L. Mathieu in 1868 had, in the study of vibrations of an elliptic membrane, introduced and solved the differential equation now bearing his name, but a thorough study, using modern function-theoretic methods, was only beginning when Ince graduated; he was to make important contributions to the theory of Mathieu equations, proving the uniqueness of periodic solutions, now called Mathieu functions, and extending this work to Hill's equation. He found that the equation admits a solution of period greekLetterpi or 2greekLetterpi for certain values of a parameter, the 'eigenvalues'. A knowledge of these eigenvalues is prerequisite for numerical computations with Mathieu functions; Ince felt that providing tables of these values for physicists and astronomers was essential, though he realized that a practicable method of construction depended on progress in theoretical analysis. By the use of convergent infinite determinants and continued fractions, with asymptotic formulae for large values, he succeeded in making computations practicable and after eight years' devotion to this task he published in 1932 tables of eigenvalues for Mathieu's equation, and zeros of Mathieu functions. These tables were useful not only in the problems originally envisaged but also in more recent investigations such as quantum-mechanical problems leading to Mathieu's equation. 
Ince's interests extended over a large part of analysis, and he put this to good use in his book 'Ordinary Differential Equations', which gave a modern presentation of the theory, using methods from algebra as well as analysis. Published in 1927, it immediately became a classic and remained in print for many years. In two papers published in the last year of his life he made important contributions to the theory of Lame's equation; in particular he introduced orthogonal functions for their expansions, thus simplifying and extending results of previous authors. 
In 1923 Ince was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; he was awarded its Makdougall Brisbane prize but did not live to receive the award. He was also a member of the London Mathematical Society and of the Royal Astronomical Society. He died of leukaemia at St Raphael's Home, Blackford Avenue, Edinburgh, on 16 March 1941. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51633


Heilbronn, Hans Arnold (1908-1975), mathematician, was born on 8 October 1908 in Berlin, the son of Alfred Heilbronn, timber merchant, and his wife, Gertrud. His parents were cousins, of Jewish descent; their surname (after a town in Baden-Wurttemberg) was not infrequent among Jews and suggests that the family was resident in Germany for a number of generations. 
From 1914 to 1926 he attended the Heinrich von Kleist Realgymnasium, Berlin, and then entered university, reading first medicine, then mathematics and natural science in Berlin, Freiburg, and Gottingen. Mathematics soon became his main interest and in 1930 he became assistant to Edmund Landau at Gottingen. In 1931 he gained his DPhil for a thesis using function theory to improve prime number estimates. With his first few papers on prime numbers and analysis (some written jointly with Landau) he had begun to make a name for himself when Hitler's rise to power in 1933 effectively barred academic careers for Jews in Germany. 
Landau, a man of high standards, had formed a good opinion of Heilbronn, and Harold Davenport, who had met Heilbronn in Germany, described him as 'one of the most promising German mathematicians' (Cassels and Frohlich, 120). In November 1933 Heilbronn moved to Britain, supporting himself at first until, with the help of the Academic Assistance Council, he obtained a one-year position at Bristol University. At this time there was much interest in a conjecture made by Gauss in the early 1800s on the class number of definite binary quadratic forms, which was closely related to a problem on quadratic number fields. Some progress towards its proof had been made; building on this work, Heilbronn was able to prove Gauss's conjecture. His work represented important steps in an area of research that has remained active. In 1935 he was awarded a Bevan fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, and he spent the next five years there, during which time he wrote a dozen papers, some with Davenport, mainly on 'Waring's problem'. At this time he was able to help his parents and sister leave Germany and they made their home in Cambridge. When his fellowship expired in 1940, Trinity College council resolved to continue his position and salary, but, like many other refugees, he was interned. On his release he joined the Pioneer Corps and later the intelligence corps. 
In 1946 Heilbronn returned to Bristol as reader; from 1949 he was professor and head of department. His research, interrupted by the war, resumed, as witness his elegant and decisive contributions on Euclid's algorithm, Zeta-functions, and the geometry of numbers. As a bachelor Heilbronn lived at Hawthorn's Hotel, across the road from the mathematics department, going to his family in Cambridge during vacations. Tall and athletic in appearance, he was keen on sports, especially rowing and tennis. His somewhat formal manner and the duelling scars he carried from his student days could be overpowering at first, but his friendly attitude, lacking all pomposity or aggressiveness, won him many friends. He was an excellent lecturer, always accessible to his students and taking an interest in their work, though his intellectual honesty did not allow him to pass over in politeness whatever he considered below standard. In all he exerted a major influence on mathematicians of the younger generation going well beyond what was recorded in print. 
Towards the end of the 1950s, feeling concerned that government plans for university expansion would lead to a drop in standards, Heilbronn tried to convince policy makers of the dangers that lay ahead. This remained without effect so with characteristic directness he resigned his chair at Bristol and left the university in 1964. On 19 March of the same year he married Mrs Dorothy Greaves (1899/1900-1990), daughter of Philip Henry Shaw, a widow who lived in Cambridge and with whom he shared a keen interest in bridge. He also took up an invitation to spend some time in Caltech, and later that year he and his wife settled in Toronto, where he had accepted a chair at the university. Here he built up an active research school. Heilbronn was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1951 and of the Royal Society of Canada in 1967. He was also a member (and during 1959-61 president) of the London Mathematical Society, the American Mathematical Society, and the Canadian Mathematical Congress. He was involved in planning the International Congress of Mathematicians in Vancouver in 1974, but at this time his previously robust health began to fail. He died on 28 April 1975 during an operation to implant a pacemaker. His widow on her death (13 September 1990) left a substantial sum to Trinity College, Cambridge, reportedly to fund scholarships for mathematics students from Europe. 


@@@@@


doc= 51634


(Gertrude) Constance Benson (1864-1946) was above average height, and had a slight build and a high, quick voice. Against the wishes of her mother, Anna, who died three months before Constance's wedding day, she had become an actress, beginning her career with bit parts at Irving's Lyceum. She and Benson married on 24 July 1886 and enjoyed a largely happy marriage which produced two children, Eric William (1887-1916) and Brynhild Lucy ('b'. 1888). Apart from acting, Constance designed costumes and discovered her vocation in teaching the students attached to the company. Indeed, she was closer to the company than her husband and loved company gossip. When she became too old to sustain leading roles she began her own acting school in London, and one of her early pupils was John Gielgud. She clearly had many strengths, which she drew upon to cope with Benson's many eccentricities. However, she could not tolerate his affair in 1921 with an actress, Genevieve Smeek, also known as Townsend (died 1 May 1927), and they separated, though they did not divorce. Constance wrote an autobiography, 'Mainly Players: Bensonian Memories' (1926), two novels, 'The Chimera' (1928) and 'Cuckoo Oats' (1929), and a handbook on acting, 'One Hundred Practical Hints for the Amateur' (n.d. [1930]). Lady Benson outlived her husband by six years and died on 19 January 1946. 


@@@@@


doc= 51640


Combridge, John Theodore (1897-1986), mathematician and university administrator, was born on 28 August 1897 at 5 Leopold Road, Brighton, the son of Daniel Thomas Combridge, a retired butcher, and his wife, Rhoda Rebecca Gardner. Educated at Brighton College (1912-17), he served in France as a lieutenant in the Royal Field Artillery before entering St John's College, Cambridge, in 1919. He gained a mathematics wranglership in 1921 and entered King's College, London, in 1922, gaining the MSc with distinction in 1924. By this time he had also started as a demonstrator in mathematics (1923-6) at the City Guilds Engineering College, Kensington. His lecturing career continued at King's College, London, where he served as assistant lecturer (1926-9) and lecturer (1929-37). On 30 December 1926 he married Norah Elizabeth Charlwood, a schoolteacher. They had three children in a happy marriage which was terminated by her sudden death in 1966. 
Combridge's early scholarly interest in general relativity was stimulated by contact with Arthur Eddington at Cambridge and the link continued through correspondence until 1936. His own scholarly work in mathematics was largely confined to wide-ranging and meticulous bibliography. His card index, with annotation, of some 1700 papers in general relativity, was eventually published by King's College under the title 'Bibliography of Relativity and Gravitation Theory, 1921-1937' (1965). 
In 1937 Combridge's career took a different direction when he accepted the post of assistant secretary at King's College. He played a leading part in managing the college's wartime precautions, including the evacuation to Bristol (1939-43). In 1947 he was appointed registrar -- a new position -- alongside a new secretary. This division of labour, and his administrative skill, helped him also to pursue with vigour and growing influence his wider interests in the post-war development of mathematics education. 
In 1930 Combridge had joined the Mathematical Association, an influential organization involving secondary school and university teachers. He was soon active in the association's committee work and major report production, becoming chairman of its teaching committee (1950-56). During his chairmanship the association published authoritative reports on the teaching of trigonometry (1950), calculus (1951), and higher geometry (1953), for which he acted as a writer. He later played a major part in the production of a report on the teaching of mechanics (1965). He served on the association's council, acted as a trustee, and became president (1961-2) in the year of his retirement from King's College. 
During his early 'retirement' Combridge continued to work tirelessly for both the association and the advancement of British mathematics education. He was an energetic chairman of the schools and industry committee (1963-72), which, with sponsorship from industry, organized industrial placements for mathematics teachers, and promoted the development of 'numeracy' in a broad sense, notably through a publication edited by Combridge, 'Count me in: Numeracy in Education' (1968). He also played a significant part in the establishment of both the Joint Mathematical Council of the United Kingdom (1962) and the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications (1963). 
Through his work for the Mathematical Association Combridge met his second wife, another schoolteacher, Winifred Adelaide Cooke. They both contributed strongly to the work for the association's centenary in 1971; he became the unofficial historian and archivist. They married on 22 April 1972 and shared their retirement in St Albans until Winifred's death in 1986. 
Combridge was widely respected both at King's College and in the Mathematical Association, not only for his administrative skill but also for his unswerving loyalty, integrity, inspiring leadership, and sympathetic support for all sectors of the teaching profession. His very sharp but kind sense of humour helped to enliven many committee meetings and social gatherings. He died of old age, two months after his wife, on 10 December 1986 at 18 Alexandra Road, Watford, and was buried on 17 December at St Peter's Church, St Albans. 


@@@@@


doc= 51647


Forder, Henry George (1889-1981), mathematician, was born on 27 September 1889 at Shotesham All Saints, Norfolk, the eldest of the four sons and two daughters of Henry Forder and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Chilvers. Both his parents had been born in the same village, where his paternal grandfather was the blacksmith. Henry Forder senior left school at eleven and was trained as a craftsman, as joiner, blacksmith, farrier, and wheelwright; by 1900 he was working at Worstead, where he had bought the blacksmith shop, and neighbouring villages. At Worstead village school the schoolmaster noticed the young Forder's gifts, and gave him special tuition; when, in 1902, county scholarships were introduced, Forder was among the first to benefit, attending Paston School, a grammar school founded in 1604, in North Walsham. There he became a leading figure, according to his youngest brother, the Ven. Archdeacon Charles R. Forder, who wrote the history of Paston School. In 1907 Forder founded, with another boy, the school debating society. In the same year he went up to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, as a sizar, with a Norfolk county council scholarship of $65 per annum, another $20 per annum from the governors of Paston School, and, after he had passed the Cambridge 'Little-go', a further $27 per annum from the college. In 1908 he was awarded a college scholarship after gaining a first class in part one of the mathematical tripos; in 1910 he was one of the twenty-three wranglers in the tripos part two. 
Forder then embarked on a career as mathematics master, at Hulme grammar school in Oldham, Lancashire, until 1913, then at Cardiff high school, St Olave's School in London, and finally at Hymer's College in Hull, Yorkshire. He was, by all accounts, a successful and highly regarded teacher. His brother Charles wrote: 'When I was vicar in Hull, 1947-57, I met many of his former pupils from Hymer's College, and all remembered him with affection' (private information). In 1921, during his time in Hull, he married his cousin Dorothy Whincup (died 1970) of Bingham, Nottinghamshire; they had no children. 
In 1933 Forder was invited to apply for the professorship of mathematics at the University College of Auckland (later the University of Auckland), one of the six constituent colleges of the University of New Zealand; he took up the appointment in 1934, and remained in Auckland for the rest of his life. His main works were several books on geometry: 'The Foundations of Euclidean Geometry' (1927), 'A School Geometry' (1930), 'Higher Course Geometry' (1931), 'The Calculus of Extension' (1941), 'Geometry' (1950), and 'Co-ordinates in Geometry' (1953). Most of these were reprinted, several went to a second edition, and some were translated into Romanian and Turkish. Most of his original research was published in thirty-six fairly short notes in the 'Mathematical Gazette', though he also published in a number of other journals. Forder was an inspiring teacher for gifted students. In Auckland he was greatly appreciated as a man of learning, as well as a brilliant conversationalist and wit. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand in 1947 and awarded its Hector medal in 1946. The University of Auckland conferred on him the honorary degree of DSc in 1959, and a Festschrift for his eightieth birthday. 'A Spectrum of Mathematics' (published by the Auckland University Press) and special issues of New Zealand mathematical journals marked his eightieth and his ninetieth birthdays. When the New Zealand Mathematical Society, founded in 1974, held its first annual general meeting, Forder was elected an honorary member. He died at his home, Lichfield, Selwyn Village, Port Chevalier, Auckland, on 21 September 1981. 
Forder donated his extensive mathematical library to the University of Auckland, and a substantial sum of money to the London Mathematical Society, of which he was a member for sixty years; this now supports an H. G. Forder lectureship that biennially sends a prominent British mathematician on a lecture tour of New Zealand. 


@@@@@


doc= 51649


Wilton, John (1820-1881), music-hall proprietor, was born in Bath Abbey, Bath, on 19 November 1820, and had a brother, Thomas. After arriving in London about 1850, he speculated in the music-hall business at the same time that other enterprising men, most notably Charles Morton, proprietor of The Canterbury, built the first of a series of great music-halls and thereby ushered in an important era in Britain's entertainment history. Wilton founded Wilton's Music Hall (known affectionately as the Old Mahogany Bar) at Grace's Alley, Wellclose Square, in the East End of London in 1850. Once a public house, it was converted into a music room in the late 1830s, known as the Prince of Denmark, the reputation of which was said to have been low because it was then 'frequented by a very rough, stormy class of seafaring customer' (Honri, 23). But during Wilton's tenure at the house, in the 1850s and 1860s, he transformed its clientele, which became less stormy and more respectable as it came to see the 'unbuttoned but orderly family entertainment' consisting of acrobatics, song, and comedy (Bratton, 93). Indeed, one contemporary grudgingly complimented the hall by saying, 'each Jack Tar may be seen sitting with his pipe and pot witnessing the dramatic performances not very artistic but really, on the score of morality, not so objectionable as what I have seen applauded by an Adelphi audience or patronized by the upper classes at her Majesty's theatre' (Ritchie, 83). 
In the period that Wilton consolidated the success of his music hall, he bought Dr Johnson's Hotel, Supper and Concert Room off Fleet Street. He also renovated Wilton's Music Hall and reopened it on 28 March 1859, at a cost of $20,000, in order 'to accommodate the great influx of visitors who nightly were in the habit of congregating at his well-conducted concerts' (Cheshire, 24-5). In its renovated state, it had the capacity to hold 1500 spectators. He rebuilt his theatre with the idea that 'the poor [ought to be treated] the same as the rich' and therefore have the same right to rational recreation (Honri, 33). His increased investment was accompanied by a desire to defend not only his own capital interest but that belonging to other music-hall proprietors as well. Thus he founded the London Music Hall Protection Society in the early 1860s. This was a body designed to counter attacks made against the halls by theatre managers, who viewed music-halls as a threat to the theatre business, by agents who charged unreasonable rates of commission, and by the temperance lobby. 
Although Wilton retired from the management of his hall in October 1868 after an eighteen-year tenure, his entrepreneurial days were not over. Perhaps a reflection of the fluidity with which investors and their money moved in mid-Victorian London, he went from the music-hall to the restaurant business. The leap was not so great, however, considering that at both his concert venues customers ate and drank. He established a successful restaurant at 20 Coventry Street, Piccadilly. The restaurant, he wrote, 'besides dining rooms, etc.... carries a wine and spirit licence... and will purvey first class confectionery too... since I have engaged a number of pastry cooks' (Honri, 76), a description suggestive of a new era of eating out in London. 
Had his wife, Ellen, not prompted him to write a diary of his experiences in the music-hall business, many of the details of Wilton's professional life would be unknown. He died at his residence, 18 Nottinghill Terrace, London, on 25 August 1881 of 'diabetes exhaustion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51656


Littlewood, Dudley Ernest (1903-1979), mathematician, was born on 7 September 1903 at 289 Kennington Road, London, the only child of Harry Bramley Littlewood, a solicitor's clerk, and his wife, Ada Piper. He was educated at Tottenham county school, Middlesex, and Trinity College, Cambridge, supported by a state scholarship and a major open entrance scholarship. He was in the first class in part one, and graduated in 1925 as a wrangler with distinction, having earlier been awarded college prizes and a share of the Yeats prize. After one unproductive year of research in Cambridge working in analysis, he was forced, mainly for financial reasons, to seek employment. After a number of temporary positions as a schoolteacher he was appointed in 1928 as a temporary part-time lecturer at University College, Swansea. Except for a short period as an assistant at University College, Dundee, he remained at Swansea until 1947, first as assistant lecturer (from 1930) and as lecturer from 1934. He was then appointed university lecturer at Cambridge, but after a short period returned to Wales, in 1948, to the chair of mathematics at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, where he remained until his retirement in 1970. In 1930 he married Muriel Doris Dyson (1901-1989); their only son was born in 1935. 
At Swansea Littlewood found that Archibald Read Richardson (1881-1954), the professor of mathematics, who had a considerable reputation as an algebraist, was 'bursting with problems' (Barker and Brown); he immediately set to work on these, producing a series of papers, but this early work did not truly fire his imagination -- indeed, it had little long term impact. In the meantime, again at the instigation of Richardson, Littlewood studied the work of the leading German algebraists Ferdinand Georg Frobenius (1849-1917) and Issai Schur (1875-1941). This resulted in his joint paper with Richardson, 'Group characters and algebras' ('PTRS', 233A, 1934, 99-141), which laid the foundation for his life's work. In it they introduced the 'immanant' of a matrix (a generalization of the determinant and permanent) and its relationship with a class of symmetric functions, which they christened S-functions (or Schur functions). Above all, this paper is renowned for its statement of a rule for multiplying S-functions, now universally called the Littlewood-Richardson rule (this had to wait a further thirty-five years for a rigorous proof). There followed in quick succession a number of papers in which Littlewood developed these ideas and discovered a number of fascinating combinatorial formulae involving S-functions. This led to his monograph, 'The Theory of Group Characters and Matrix Representations of Groups' (1940). He continued to be a prolific author, applying S-functions skilfully to classical invariant theory. As a by-product he obtained a new purely combinatorial definition of S-functions in terms of tableaux and introduced his new multiplication of S-functions which he called 'plethysm'. His many original ideas had to wait for almost half a century before they were taken up in the modern area of algebraic combinatorics. 
There were other major contributions; for example, Littlewood introduced some of the basic combinatorial ideas on the modular representations of the symmetric groups. His last major acknowledged contribution was a generalization of his beloved S-functions, now called the Hall-Littlewood functions (named after him and Phillip Hall, his Trinity contemporary). His elegant combinatorial definition of these laid the foundation for a new area of research with applications on a broad front. 
Littlewood also had a passionate interest in the fundamental problems of theoretical physics with a belief that S-functions could be used profitably in this context. In the early sixties he was left bitter and despondent when his proposed unified field theory was rejected by the Royal Society. His Trinity tutor J. E. Littlewood's comment that 'his has always been an unusual type of mind' (private information) was truly perceptive and could explain the lack of recognition during his lifetime. His style was reminiscent of an earlier generation but in some respects he could be regarded as a man before his time. 
Littlewood did not appreciate mathematical rigour -- he had a strong intuitive grasp of formal mathematics -- and when he felt a result to be true he could be perfunctory about its proof. He had little direct contact with his contemporaries, felt isolated, and later became quite depressed by the absence of interest in his work. Towards the end of his life he was gratified with the growing interest in his ideas; he would have been overwhelmed by their impact later -- he has come to be regarded as a master of the usable formula. 
Littlewood also had a profound interest in philosophy and religion, which he regarded as 'subjects far more worthy of investigation than mathematics' (private information). On his retirement in 1970 he wrote up his ideas in an unpublished manuscript, 'In search of wisdom'. He was an avid reader of science fiction, shy and retiring by nature, always with a friendly smile; kind, caring, and supportive in an unobtrusive way. Littlewood died suddenly at his home, Melrose, Queens Road, Llandudno, on 6 October 1979, a few weeks after breaking a leg. He was buried in Llan-rhos, Llandudno. 


@@@@@


doc= 51661


Robinson, Abraham (1918-1974), mathematician, was born in Waldenburg, Lower Silesia, on 6 October 1918, the second, and posthumous, son of Abraham Robinsohn (1878-1918) and his wife, Hedwig Charlotte 
(Lotte; 1888-1947)
, daughter of Jakob Bahr. His father, a noted Zionist, writer, and secretary to David Wolfsohn, had died of a heart attack a few months earlier in Berlin, where he was working for the Jewish National Fund. His mother, formerly a schoolteacher, raised her two sons with the help of her father, in Breslau where the two were educated in a private school headed by the rabbi Max Simonson. 
In April 1933, as the National Socialists came to power in Germany, Lotte Robinsohn fled with her sons to Palestine where they settled as illegal immigrants. After completing his high school education in Jerusalem, Robinsohn entered the Hebrew University in 1936, where he studied mathematics with Abraham Fraenkel. Robinsohn was also active in the Haganah, the illegal Jewish organization in Palestine during the British mandate. While still an undergraduate, he published his first contribution to symbolic logic, an article 'On the independence of the axioms of definiteness' (1939). 
In 1939 Robinson was awarded a special scholarship by the French government for study in Paris at the Sorbonne, but within six months, as the Germans invaded France, he narrowly escaped via Bordeaux to Britain, where he enlisted as a member of de Gaulle's free French forces, and soon Anglicized his name to Robinson. Almost immediately his mathematical talent came to the attention of the Royal Air Force, for which he worked at the Ministry of Aircraft Production at the Royal Aircraft Establishment in Farnborough for the duration of the war. There he contributed primarily to the study of shock waves and material stress failures in aerofoils, as well as to the aeronautics of supersonic aircraft design. 
In 1943 Robinson met Renee Rebecca Kopel, an actress from Vienna who was working as a dress designer in London; they were married on 30 January 1944 at Temple Fortune in Golders Green. After the war, Robinson joined the staff of the newly founded Royal College of Aeronautics in Cranfield as a senior lecturer. He not only taught courses on basic applied mathematics, but emphasized numerical and statistical methods as well, making use of the college's new computer facilities. He was interested in both theoretical and practical aspects of supersonic aeronautics, and devoted considerable amounts of his time to wind-tunnel experiments. Among his major contributions to wing theory (research he later continued at the University of Toronto in Canada) was the book he co-authored with his former student from Cranfield, John Laurmann. 'Wing Theory' (1956) included both subsonic and supersonic aerofoil design, considered under conditions of both steady and unsteady flow, and included Robinson's own pioneering studies of the aerodynamics of delta wings. Meanwhile Robinson returned to his earlier study of pure mathematics, and enrolled in Birkbeck College where he studied with Richard Cooke and the Hungarian Paul Dienes, and wrote his dissertation, 'On the metamathematics of algebra'. This was devoted to 'the analysis and development of algebra by the methods of symbolic logic', and earned him his PhD in 1949 (he was awarded the DSc in 1957). 
In 1951 Robinson accepted an offer from the University of Toronto to join its department of applied mathematics, teaching mainly differential equations, fluid mechanics, and aerodynamics. His first graduate students worked on aspects of mathematical physics, from the mathematics of quantum mechanics to supersonic aerofoil theory. Robinson maintained his interest in theoretical mathematics; his 'Theorie metamathematique des ideaux' (1955) extended his earlier work on the 'metamathematics' of algebra, namely aspects of model theory. In other articles he dealt with aspects of ordered fields and definite functions. Robinson's research interests became increasingly devoted to mathematical logic and model theory. His 'Complete Theories' (1956) -- which used the idea of model completeness to determine the decidability of formal systems -- was judged 'a milestone in the development of model theoretic algebra' ('Selected Papers', 1.vi). Applying his ideas to algebraically closed fields, Robinson succeeded in establishing an abstract version of Hilbert's 'Nullstellensatz'. Using his 'prime model test', he also established the completeness of different groups and fields. 
From 1957 to 1962 Robinson was back in Jerusalem, having accepted the mathematics chair at the Hebrew University, formerly held by Abraham Fraenkel. In addition to serving as chairman of the department, he also published a significant paper on differential closed fields, a subject he may be said to have invented. In 1960, while on sabbatical leave at Princeton University, he made his best-known discovery, nonstandard analysis, which succeeds in rigorously defining infinitesimals in mathematics through an ingenious application of mathematical logic and model theory. This enabled him to enlarge the system of real numbers to include infinitely large as well as infinitely small elements. Back in Israel, he finished a revision of his earlier book, 'On the Metamathematics of Algebra' (1951), which he retitled 'Introduction to Model Theory and to the Metamathematics of Algebra' (1963). The last chapter, devoted to 'selected topics', included a brief introduction to nonstandard analysis. 
In 1962 Robinson moved on to the University of California at Los Angeles, where until 1967 he held a joint appointment in mathematics and philosophy. There his most impressive result was achieved and published with his graduate student, Alan Bernstein, when they succeeded in proving an invariant subspace theorem for Hilbert space, a result that 'instantly rocked the mathematical world' (Dauben, 'Odyssey', 327). In 1965 Robinson published a general, undergraduate introduction to algebra, 'Numbers and Ideals', which he hoped would illustrate the power of abstract algebra and such concepts as groups, rings, primes, and ideals, all with an eye to showing the 'beauty of the subject' ('Numbers and Ideals', 62-3). The following year he also published another major work, 'Nonstandard Analysis' (1966). Meanwhile he was becoming increasingly dissatisfied with the unmanageable size of the University of California system and the deteriorating academic climate, with continuing campus turmoil over political, social, economic, and academic issues; in 1967 he accepted an offer to join the prestigious department of mathematics at Yale University. 
While at Yale, Robinson served as president of the Association for Symbolic Logic (1968-70), and actively sought to promote symbolic logic abroad, notably in Japan and Latin America. He also began to extend his interests in model theory and applications of nonstandard analysis to a variety of different subjects, including economics and quantum physics. Perhaps most promising of all was nonstandard number theory, on which he co-authored an important paper with Peter Roquette devoted to Diophantine equations and the Siegel-Mahler finiteness theorem. Robinson also pioneered a method of forcing in model theory (a variant of Paul Cohen's method of forcing in set theory). The generic models Robinson constructed using this method are closely related to his earlier results on model-completions, and served to create 'new interest in model-completeness and suggested many questions in particular areas of algebra' ('Selected Papers', 1.431-2). 
Meanwhile interest in Robinson's nonstandard analysis was growing and he participated in the first meeting on the subject held at the Mathematical Research Institute in Oberwolfach, Germany, in 1970. The following year he was named Sterling professor at Yale University. In 1973 he was invited to the Institute for Advanced Study by Kurt Godel, who hoped that Robinson would eventually succeed him, and in the same year he was awarded the prestigious Brouwer medal by the Dutch Society of Mathematicians. However, in November he was diagnosed with cancer of the pancreas, of which he died at the Yale University Hospital in New Haven on 11 April 1974; he was buried in Jerusalem, on Givat Shaul, overlooking the hills of Judea. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51673


Brenchley, Winifred Elsie (1883-1953), agricultural botanist, was born on 10 August 1883 in London, the only child of William Brenchley, a Camberwell schoolmaster who was once mayor of the borough, and Elizabeth Beckett. She was educated at James Allen's Girls' School in Dulwich, at Swanley Horticultural College, and at University College, London, studying under Francis Oliver (1864-1951), who became a lifelong friend. In 1906, she went to Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, as holder of the Gilchrist studentship for university women; in the following year she joined the permanent staff there as head of the botanical section (later botany department). She was the first woman scientist to be appointed at any agricultural institute in this country, and her arrival apparently caused some consternation among the Rothamsted establishment. Many years later it was reported that the widow of one of the founders (Sir Henry Gilbert) had declared, 'that woman had better not take tea with all those men -- she will have her tea with me' (private information). However, Brenchley did take tea with the men and before long her abilities put her on level terms with the best of them. She was awarded her DSc in 1911 and was made a fellow of University College in 1914. 
In her early years at Rothamsted, Brenchley improved the technique for growing plants in water culture to a stage where it became a useful scientific tool. With this technique, she came very close to discovering the essential role of copper and zinc in plant nutrition, as her book 'Inorganic Plant Poisons and Stimulants' (1914, revised 1927) shows. However, careful scientist as she was, in those days it was just not possible to reduce copper and zinc concentrations in water culture to levels low enough to restrict plant growth. 
Brenchley's book 'Weeds of Farmland' (1920) was the first comprehensive scientific study of weeds in this country, relating weed distribution to soil type. She showed that the seeds of certain arable weeds could retain their viability in soil for upwards of fifty years; her studies of rates of change in weed seed populations make her Britain's first quantitative weed ecologist. The last edition of her book with H. C. Long, 'Suppression of Weeds by Fertilizers and Chemicals' (1949), was published just as the new selective organic weedkillers were being taken up by farmers, replacing inorganic horrors like sodium arsenite; no one was more aware of the need for less toxic and more selective herbicides than Brenchley. Another book, 'Manuring of Grass Land for Hay' (1924), contains her published work on how lime and fertilizers affect the botanical composition of grasslands -- still a lively topic with ecologists. A bound copy of her collected papers (fifty-two in all) is in Rothamsted Library; her meticulously kept notebooks and a photograph of her at work are in the Rothamsted archives. 
Brenchley was appointed OBE in 1948, the year of her retirement. She was a fellow of the Linnean Society and the Royal Entomological Society. 
Aunt Winnie -- as she was known behind her back -- could be great fun at the right time, but once at work, with her hearing aid switched off (childhood measles had left her partially deaf), even directors hesitated to disturb her. Just and fair, she insisted that credit should go to whoever did the research, however junior or senior. Her principal hobby was gardening, as befits a botanist, but she also collected stamps, harvesting them from her many friends around the world. She was interested in insects and learned much about them from her good friend Augustus Imms (1880-1949), an entomologist of distinction then working at Rothamsted. She never married. 
With retirement, Brenchley returned to her garden and allotment with unrestrained vigour. She started to bring together the mountain of unpublished observations in her research notebooks but not long afterwards suffered a devastating stroke, from which she never recovered. She died at her home, 10 Clarence Road, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, on 27 October 1953. Talented botanist as she was, she is best remembered as the first woman in this country to break into the all male preserves of agricultural science. 


@@@@@


doc= 51675


Emily Mary Kate Saker (1847-1912) was the daughter of John O'Brien, a printer, and became a comedian who could hold an 'irresistible sway over the gods and the elite' ('The Era', 10 Feb 1912). After appearing in pantomime at the Theatre Royal, Hull, making her London debut at the Court Theatre, and playing in May 1871 in H. J. Byron's 'Daisy Farm' at the Olympic Theatre, she had joined Saker's Liverpool stock company in 1872. The pair appeared at the Alexandra for the first time after their marriage in Thomas Morton's farce 'A Roland for an Oliver' on 2 March 1874. The couple, who 'had the entry to the best social circles in Liverpool' ('Daily Post', 31 March 1883), had four sons and a daughter and were able to maintain a household staff of five, including a governess. A freemason and one of the founders of the Liverpool Dramatic Lodge, Saker otherwise preferred home life to any more 'promiscuous social intercourse' ('Liverpool Review', 7 April 1883). 


@@@@@


doc= 51677


Low, George Carmichael (1872-1952), physician and specialist in tropical diseases, was born on 14 October 1872, the third son of Samuel Millar Low, an engineer, at Monifieth in Forfarshire. He was educated at Madras College, St Andrews, St Andrews University, and Edinburgh University, where he graduated with a first-class MB degree in 1897. His first post was at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, though he was soon lured by the exciting opportunities opening up in tropical medicine to work with Patrick Manson in London. After fieldwork in the early 1900s Low demonstrated that it was possible to have a successful and prosperous career in tropical medicine in the metropolis, based on teaching, research, consultancy, and a clinical practice serving travellers and returning colonial personnel. However, like most of his contemporaries he spent the early part of his career overseas on a variety of short-term contracts and projects. 
Low's first overseas venture at Manson's prompting was to visit Heidelberg and Vienna, where he learned new methods of taking cross-sections of insects for microscopical observation. With this technique Low disproved Manson's notion that filarial parasites were carried in the water supply, finding instead that they were transmitted in mosquito saliva during biting. In 1900 he achieved some public fame when, again at Manson's behest, he was a human guinea-pig, with Louis Sambon and Signor Terzi, in an experiment in the marshes around Rome to show the effectiveness of anti-mosquito measures in preventing malaria. The three men spent the daylight hours in ordinary work, but at nightfall, when the mosquitoes emerged, they retired to huts that were screened with mosquito-proof netting. They maintained their strict regimen throughout the late summer and none caught the disease. This not only confirmed the malaria-mosquito theory but also showed the effectiveness of individual precautions. Low was next sent to the West Indies, as a Cragg's scholar, to investigate filarial parasites. In 1903 he was appointed to the Royal Society's commission sent to Uganda to investigate the epidemic of sleeping sickness. Manson wanted his colleague in the team as he suspected a filarial worm was the cause. The commission was dogged with problems and it was left to a second commission, led by David Bruce, to show that the specific cause was a trypanosome parasite borne by the tsetse fly. 
On his return from Uganda, Low accepted the position of superintendent of the London School of Tropical Medicine; he continued to serve there until 1937, apart from a period of four years as pathologist to the West London Hospital. Having begun as pathologist and lecturer he eventually concentrated on clinical work, becoming director of the department of clinical tropical medicine. He also served as physician to the Albert Dock Hospital and as senior physician at the new Hospital for Tropical Diseases that opened after the First World War. During the war Low was an officer in the Indian Medical Service (IMS), treating troops returning home from tropical theatres. He was a founding member of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene in 1907 and played a leading role in its affairs throughout his life, especially in securing its long-term solvency. On Manson's death Low assumed a leading role in tropical medicine in London. His main contributions to the literature were in textbooks, most notably his collaboration with Sir Neil Hamilton Fairley on the tropical section of F. W. Price's 'Textbook of the Practice of Medicine' (1941). Low was awarded the Straits Settlements gold medal by the University of Edinburgh in 1912 and the Mary Kingsley medal in 1929. He was renowned as a methodical observer and recorder, with an encyclopaedic knowledge of tropical diseases. 
Low was admired by his colleagues, being noted for his kindliness, dry Scottish humour, and clear teaching style. He was prone to use Spooneresque aphorisms and always greeted people with a friendly 'How's yoursel?'. However, he often presented a gruff exterior, being known as a disciplinarian, and was circumspect about taking up new ideas. On 1 December 1906 in Bexhill, Sussex, he married Edith, daughter of Joseph Nash; there were no children. When not at work Low was an enthusiastic ornithologist and showed his organizational skills as secretary and treasurer of the British Ornithological Club. He pioneered bird-watching at the new reservoirs in Staines, Middlesex, and in London became official bird-watcher in Kensington Gardens and published on birds with the Zoological Society. He died at his home at 7 Kent House, Kensington Court, London, on 31 July 1952, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51678


Macdonald, George (1903-1967), malariologist, was born at 7 Summerfield, Ecclesall, Bierlow, Sheffield, on 22 June 1903, the son of John Smyth Macdonald (1867-1941), professor of physiology at Sheffield University and later at Liverpool, and his wife, Katherine Mary Stewart of Stornoway, Isle of Lewis. He was educated at the King Edward VII School in Sheffield, and, after the family moved to Liverpool in 1914, at the Liverpool Institute and the University of Liverpool, where he graduated MB ChB in 1924; in the same year he took the diploma of tropical medicine at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. 
In 1925 Macdonald was appointed research assistant at the Sir Alfred Jones Research Laboratory at Freetown, Sierra Leone, the Liverpool school's field station. He was there for four years, during which he carried out important research into the epidemiology of malaria in children, noticing that parasitaemia in African children was mathematically related to the number of infective bites in the population. He then went to India and, after two years as a malaria research officer with the Malaria Survey of India, was appointed medical officer for the Mariani Medical Association in Assam in 1932. It was also in 1932 that he obtained the degree of MD from Liverpool and the diploma in public health from London. On 27 July that year he married Mary ('b'. 1906/7), daughter of Sir Roger Gaskell Hetherington (1876-1952), chief engineering inspector at the Ministry of Health; they had one son and two daughters. 
In 1937 Sir Malcolm Watson offered Macdonald the post of assistant director at the Ross Institute for Tropical Hygiene. As a result, Macdonald spent eighteen months in Ceylon as malariologist to the Ross Institute's malaria control scheme for tea and rubber estates. Soon after his return to Britain in 1939 war broke out and he joined the Royal Army Medical Corps, where he soon was promoted to the rank of brigadier. In 1940 the War Office appointed him to form and command successively nos. 1, 2, and 3 malaria field laboratories in the Middle East and central Mediterranean, and it was claimed that the low incidence of malaria among the British troops was the result of his influence. In 1943 he was mentioned in dispatches. He returned to the Ross Institute as director in 1945. 
Macdonald was next appointed to the chair of tropical hygiene in the University of London, in 1946. He became MRCP in 1948 and was appointed a member of the expert panel on malaria of the World Health Organization (WHO). In 1952 he led the WHO mission to Korea and in 1954 he was awarded the Darling foundation medal and prize by the World Health Assembly for his work on the epidemiology of malaria. Macdonald had been appointed CMG in 1953 and he was elected FRCP two years later. His classic work, 'The Epidemiology and Control of Malaria', was published in 1957. However, though he worked extensively in the field of malaria control, Macdonald's methods were not compatible with that of some of the other malariologists at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. His epidemiological approach was based on mathematical work to establish biological models which could be understood by non-mathematicians. Professor P. C. C. Garnham, professor of protozoology at the school, differed from Macdonald, concentrating on the parasitology of malaria. This led to an unfortunate diversification of effort within the school and a considerable amount of ill feeling, as both men could be scathing in their comments. 
In 1964 Macdonald transferred his attention to schistosomiasis, applying his mathematical analysis to its epidemiology, so that work according to his models run on a computer showed a striking similarity to that done in the field. Macdonald was elected president of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene in 1965, a position that he held until shortly before his death. He was diagnosed with lung cancer in late 1966 and died in University College Hospital, London, on 10 December 1967. Until a few weeks before his death he was working on the application of mathematical models to the epidemiology of insect-borne diseases. His funeral at St Michael's Church, Highgate, London, on 12 December, was followed by cremation. 
George Macdonald's work on the epidemiology of malaria expanded the initial work of Sir Ronald Ross and provided a basis from which subsequent developments have stemmed. Despite his acerbic tongue and intolerance of sub-standard work, he was helpful and kind to those who turned to him for assistance. The 'Times' obituary of 15 December stated, 'he was not apt to display himself as a great man. But he had the qualities of greatness, and his friends miss him' ('The Times'). 


@@@@@


doc= 51684


Daly, Ivan de Burgh (1893-1974), physiologist, was born on 14 April 1893 at Pyrmont, 43 Brinswood Avenue, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, the second son and third of the five children of James Thomas Daly (1853-1928), seaman and engineer, and his second wife, Amy Pritchard. He was educated at Beech Lawn preparatory school, Leamington Spa (1903-5), and at Rossall School, Lancashire (1906-11), where he developed an interest in science and engineering and, encouraged by his father, considered becoming an engineer. Two serious illnesses, and acquaintance with an uncle in the medical profession, however, turned his thoughts towards a career in medicine. When he went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1911 he read physiology, chemistry, and anatomy for the natural history tripos. He passed part one with first-class honours and gained an exhibition in 1914. 
In the First World War Daly joined the Royal Army Medical Corps as a stretcher bearer, then worked for nine months at St Bartholomew's Hospital as a clinical clerk and surgical dresser. In 1915 he was commissioned as a flight lieutenant in the Royal Naval Air Service, and trained at Eastchurch, Kent, as a fighter pilot. He saw a brief period of active service in Belgium before being wounded, and returned to Eastchurch as a gunnery officer. He resigned his commission in February 1917 and completed his medical course at St Bartholomew's and graduated MB BCh (Cambridge) in August 1918. Assigned to the medical branch of the RAF he completed his three months as a house physician, during which time he worked under Dr John Drysdale and gained experience in electrocardiography. 
Eager to pursue this line of research, Daly secured an appointment as assistant to Professor Ernest Henry Starling at University College, London, where he was principally engaged on cardiovascular researches. He was awarded a Beit memorial research fellowship for research in which the Fleming diode was used to investigate electrical changes in living tissue; his use of the thermionic valve to record the frog electrocardiogram was the first such application in England. The results were published by Daly and K. E. Shellshear in 1920. On 1 September of that year Daly married Beatrice Mary 
(Molly; 'b'. 1897/8)
, daughter of Alfred Leetham of Shelley, Yorkshire. Their elder son, Michael de Burgh Daly ('b'. 1922), followed his father into a similar branch of the medical profession; the younger, Peter de Burgh Daly (1926-1959), pursued a military career until his death in a helicopter accident. 
Daly graduated MD in 1922. The Beit fellowship was extended in 1923 when he moved to the National School of Medicine at Cardiff. His success in the field of heart-lung preparations led to his appointment in 1927 to the chair of physiology at Birmingham University, where he enlarged the department to include animal physiology. He was also involved in planning the new medical school (which opened in 1938) during which time he went to look at medical schools in the United States. He moved to Edinburgh in 1933, taking over the chair in succession to the retiring incumbent, the eminent professor Sir Edward Sharpey-Schafer. Daly's main interest was now the pulmonary and bronchial circulations which he had developed in his latter years at Birmingham. As the importance of his work gained recognition Daly received the degree of MD from Birmingham in 1928, was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1934, Harvey and Hannah lecturer in the United States in 1936, and fellow of the Royal Society in 1943. 
During the Second World War, Daly collaborated with the RAF in experiments on the physiology of high-altitude flying and on poison gases. In 1942 he was seconded to direct the Medical Research Council physiological laboratory attached to the gunnery wing of the Armoured Fighting Vehicle Training School in Dorset, looking into the problems of gun fume poisoning. He returned to Edinburgh in 1945. 
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC), deliberating on the best way forward in the post-war years, decided to establish an institute to undertake fundamental research on the physiology of the larger farm animals. Daly was offered the directorship in 1947, his first task being to find a site. His choice fell on the 450 acre Babraham Hall estate, near Cambridge. It was purchased by the ARC in 1948 and named the Institute of Animal Physiology, with the various necessary laboratories, animal accommodation, and housing being built up in successive years as the number of staff rose to 160 by 1956. Daly controlled the institute firmly, knowing precisely what he wanted it to achieve (in this he was not always in agreement with the ARC). However, having chosen his scientific staff with care he let them get on with their chosen work unhindered and was supportive, rather than directive. He meanwhile continued his own pulmonary and bronchial investigations, latterly assisted by his son. His success with heart-lung preparations, in which the greater and lesser circulations were separately maintained and controlled by two blood pumps, undoubtedly stimulated and influenced the later development of open heart surgery. 
Daly was appointed CBE on his retirement in 1958, and in 1959 he was awarded the Baly medal of the Royal College of Physicians. He secured funding to continue his research in the physiology laboratory of the University of Oxford until 1965, after which he continued at his home, 25 High Street, Long Crendon, Aylesbury. He was on the editorial board of the 'Quarterly Journal of Experimental Physiology' from 1935 to 1968, and with Catherine Hebb wrote 'Bronchial and Pulmonary Vascular Systems' (1966). He died suddenly while writing at his desk on 8 February 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 51690


Mendelssohn, Kurt Alfred Georg (1906-1980), physicist, was born on 7 January 1906 in Berlin, Germany, the only child of Ernst Moritz Mendelssohn, a clothing agent with distinguished Jewish ancestors, and his wife, Elizabeth Ruprecht. His father aroused his scientific interests, which he pursued from 1912 to 1925 at the Goethe School, Berlin. In 1925 he entered the University of Berlin where he graduated in physical sciences in 1927. He then began research on low temperature physics at the Physikalisch Chemische Institut, Berlin, under his cousin, Franz Simon, who was twelve years his senior and a leading expert on attaining very low temperatures through new techniques for the liquefaction of helium. Completing his doctorate in 1930, Mendelssohn became chief assistant to Simon and, when Simon moved in April 1931 to a chair at the Breslau Technische Hochschule, Mendelssohn followed him in June as a research associate. 
While at Berlin, Mendelssohn had demonstrated a hydrogen liquifier to Lindemann, professor of physics at Oxford, who wished to develop low temperature physics in the Clarendon Laboratory there. Lindemann soon had a hydrogen liquifier working at Oxford and in spring 1932 turned again to Mendelssohn, who was in charge of the Breslau laboratory while Simon was on leave abroad, for a helium liquifier which gave even lower temperatures than the hydrogen one. Keen to secure the services of Mendelssohn, who had spent several years under Simon designing and making various types of miniature helium liquifiers, Lindemann invited him to Oxford to install one. Mendelssohn went to Oxford in the Christmas vacation 1932-3 and in early January 1933 became the first in Britain to produce liquid helium. He returned to Breslau but in April 1933 sought sanctuary from Nazi violence in Oxford where Lindemann soon secured funding for him from Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI). Impressed by Mendelssohn's achievement, Lindemann quickly brought to Oxford, with Mendelssohn's help, two of his Breslau colleagues (Simon and N. Kurti) to develop cryogenics. 
Having married Jutta Lina Charlotte Zarniko in 1932, Mendelssohn had a family and subsequently his parents to support in Oxford. Until the war he existed on grants provided by ICI and Sir Robert Mond. Although Mendelssohn had successfully launched cryogenics at Oxford and was the first of the Breslau cohort to settle there, he soon found himself number two to Simon. Inclined to be awkward and paranoiac, he became jealously resentful of Simon. To avoid conflict between them it was agreed that Mendelssohn's research group should concentrate on superconductivity (the mysterious disappearance of electrical resistance at very low temperatures). His most spectacular discovery (1938) was that any surface in contact with liquid helium develops a frictionless and flowing thin film which is analogous to superconductivity. 
Having become a naturalized British subject in March 1939, Mendelssohn's instrumental ingenuity was fruitfully deployed during the war in medical physics. At the request of Professor Macintosh he joined the department of anaesthetics, Oxford, where he took a leading role in devising an ether vaporizer which was widely used, but it led to a priority dispute with Macintosh, who ejected Mendelssohn in 1942. He then worked mainly in the Clarendon Laboratory on devices concerned with the medical effect of burns and on a semi-automatic recorder of blood pressure. Having subsisted during the war on grants from the university's higher studies fund and the Medical Research Council, he later resumed research on cryogenics supported by an ICI fellowship. Only in 1947 did he gain financial security when he became a university demonstrator. Elected FRS in 1951, he became reader in physics at Oxford in 1955 and a founding fellow of Wolfson College, Oxford, in 1966. His prowess as a researcher and as a driving supervisor of successful doctoral candidates (forty-nine all told) led to his election as a vice-president of the Physical Society (1957-60) and the awards of the Hughes medal of the Royal Society of London (1967) and the Simon medal of the Institute of Physics (1968). 
In the 1960s Mendelssohn extended his interests. He promoted cryogenic engineering by founding, in 1960, and editing a new journal, 'Cryogenics', by editing 'Progress in Cryogenics' (1959-64), and by establishing, in 1969, and chairing the international cryogenic committee. Though he was a consultant to the Atomic Energy Research Establishment, Harwell, from 1962, he rejoiced more in visiting and advising scientists in China, India, Japan, and Ghana. From 1943 to about 1960 he learned how to popularize science as a teacher in adult education. His vivid fluency led to broadcast talks, much journalism, and several books. After 'What is Atomic Energy?' (1946) there was a lull until 'Cryophysics' (1960) and 'The Quest for Absolute Zero' (1966) which was translated into thirteen languages. He took an optimistic view of the cultural revolution in his 'In China now' (1969). 'The World of Walter Nernst' (1973) delineated the rise and fall of German science. 'The Riddle of the Pyramids' (1974) advanced novel ideas about their construction and uses. 'Science and Western Domination' (1976) explained why Europe developed modern science and technology. 
Mendelssohn was a dedicated and hard worker: he left his own wedding celebrations after lunch to finish an experiment before leaving later for his honeymoon. He was a gifted if prickly researcher who was determined to outwit nature and his competitors. Though he helped to make the Clarendon Laboratory internationally famous for low temperature physics, he was not always happy there and on several occasions between 1935 and 1958 tried to leave. He loved travel, oriental art, and photography. Happily married and proud of his four daughters and a son, Mendelssohn retired in 1973 only to be afflicted about 1976 by Parkinson's disease, from which he died on 18 September 1980 in Oxford, where he was buried on 24 September 1980. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51692


Spence, Robert (1905-1976), chemist, was born on 7 October 1905 in South Shields, co. Durham, the only child of Robert Spence, a marine engineer, and his wife, Rebecca Robertson. He was educated at the Stanhope Road elementary school (1911-17) and the Westoe secondary grammar school (1917-22) at South Shields, before going in 1922 to Armstrong College (then part of the University of Durham) in Newcastle upon Tyne. He obtained a first-class BSc in chemistry in 1926, and was awarded a Department of Scientific and Industrial Research grant (1926-8) to work with G. R. Clemo in research on the production and constitution of some polynuclear compounds derived from naphthalene. 
In 1928 Spence became a Commonwealth Fund fellow at Princeton University, USA, for three years. He studied the vapour phase oxidation of ethylene (ethene) and acetylene (ethyne) in collaboration with Hugh Stott Taylor and G. B. Kistiakowsky, taking his PhD in 1930. He received an excellent physico-chemical training there, and found that the American ideals of self-help and respect for hard work influenced his personal outlook on life. 
In 1931 Spence was appointed as a lecturer in physical chemistry at the University of Leeds. There he investigated a number of thermal and photo-oxidations and the photodecomposition of gaseous acetone (propanone), showing that the production of an acetyl radical is an essential step in the decomposition process. On 25 July 1936 he married Kate Lockwood, one of his students, with whom he shared a close and happy partnership. They had three children: Alan, Catherine, and James. 
During the Second World War Spence, who had joined the Territorial Army in 1936, was seconded to the RAF and sent to Egypt, in July 1942, as a scientific adviser (chemical warfare). He developed a new method of dispersing dense clouds of smoke from aircraft, and showed that, contrary to contemporary opinion, mustard gas attacks in hot climates presented a serious vapour hazard. The following year, in Italy, he pioneered anti-malaria spray techniques, and after returning to Britain in November 1944 he worked on fuels for jet engines. 
After the war Spence worked for two years in the Anglo-Canadian Atomic Energy Laboratories, at Montreal and Chalk River, on the development of a continuous process for the large-scale recovery of plutonium from irradiated uranium; before a plant could be designed, every detail of the chemistry had to be known. This complicated engineering task (laboratory methods had to be scaled up by a factor of many millions to produce the kilogram quantities needed) proved so successful that separation began on the planned date (February 1952) and proceeded quickly: the plutonium required for the first British atomic bomb was delivered six months later. In recognition of his contribution to Britain's early atomic development Spence was appointed CB in 1953. 
While in Canada Spence was responsible for recruiting staff for the research that would later be carried out in England in the radiochemical laboratory constructed to his design at Harwell, Berkshire. In 1946 he became head of the chemistry division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell. He was later chief chemist (1950-60), deputy director (1960-64), and director (1964-8). There he was responsible for the chemical aspects of nuclear power, including the production of fuel elements and special reactor materials, waste disposal, processing of irradiated materials, and coolants. His successes lay in conceiving and organizing major industrial processes, but he maintained a personal interest in problems of an experimental nature, particularly the extraction of uranium from sea water. 
Spence served on a number of technical committees at Harwell, together with terms on the councils of the Chemical Society, the Faraday Society, and the Royal Institute of Chemistry. He was elected FRS in 1959 and participated in the Royal Society's government grant board and its scientific research in schools committee. Most of his published work (over fifty papers, 1928-72) appeared in British science journals. 
Spence was quiet and unassuming, devoted to his family and his profession. He was unfailingly courteous, but determined and always well prepared. His friendliness, foresight, example, and enthusiasm were an inspiring influence on junior colleagues. A tall man, he enjoyed outdoor pursuits such as rowing, walking, and canoeing. In 1968 Spence left Harwell, where economic and political pressures had made his job increasingly uncongenial, and became master of Keynes College and professor of applied chemistry in the University of Kent at Canterbury. His main interest focused on the college and its students: he implanted an attitude of tolerance and mutual forbearance into a young institution composed of disparate elements. He played a vital role in the creation of an honours degree in chemistry with control engineering, and supervised experimental projects. At his retirement in 1973 Spence returned to Ranger Cottage, 5 Jennings Lane, his home in Harwell village, where he died of lung cancer on 10 March 1976. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51695


Knight, Bert Cyril James Gabriel (1904-1981), microbiologist, was born on 4 February 1904 at Glebe Cottage, Chart Lane, Reigate, Surrey, the son of Cyril Fennel Knight (1877-1944), furniture merchant, and his wife, Kate Gabriel (1872/3-1954). Educated at Reigate grammar school and University College, London, he took a BSc (1925) and MSc (1927) in chemistry. Originally biased towards physical chemistry he was appointed a demonstrator in University College's biochemistry department, where he first became interested in microbes. In 1929, the year in which, on 17 August, he married Doris Kemp, he joined the bacteriology team working under Paul Fildes at the London Hospital, moving with them in 1934 to the Middlesex Hospital. 
Realizing that little could be learned about the biochemistry of microbes when they were grown in the ill-defined broths then customary, Knight set about devising culture media containing only known chemicals. He showed that some bacteria would multiply in such media only if trace amounts of vitamins or amino acids were made available. In a 1936 review of the topic he proposed that all bacteria need such essential metabolites, but that some had lost the ability to manufacture their own supplies. This concept underpinned much of later chemical microbiology, for example, the microbiological assay of such metabolites, the elucidation of their pathways of biosynthesis, and the design of anti-bacterial drugs which act by interfering with their metabolism. Knight became an international authority on bacterial nutrition, research for which he received the degree of DSc (London) in 1938. 
During the Second World War Knight worked at the Lister Institute and the Wellcome laboratories principally on the chemical nature and action of toxins formed by Clostridia, specialized bacteria which often infect war wounds. He also became interested in a then neglected group of tiny bacteria known as Mycoplasmas (later Mollicutes), which cause diseases in plants and cattle. In 1944 Knight and Kemp divorced and on 27 December in that year he married Frideswide Stewart ['see below'], a political activist and writer. They had three sons (one died in infancy) and two daughters. 
By the end of the war Knight was very conscious that, though microbiology was a distinctive discipline, no learned society nor any educational centre dedicated to it existed. He joined several like-minded biologists to found the Society for General Microbiology in 1945, served on its original committee, and, when post-war paper shortages eased, became the first and longest-serving editor of its 'Journal of General Microbiology'. As editor he revealed a deep concern for clarity of language and brevity of expression, and the 'Journal' rapidly gained an international reputation for carefully written papers of the highest scientific quality. Much laborious editing, not always welcomed by authors, was required to sustain that quality, but the society, and the international reputation of British microbiology, benefited enormously. In 1951 Knight became professor in charge of Britain's first ever department of microbiology, at the University of Reading. There he remained until his retirement in 1969, teaching, building up his department, and developing his research on Mollicutes. 
Knight loved France and French literature. He visited France often and, initially pseudonymously as Jonathan Kemp, published translations of French classics; he was a noted authority on the works of Stendhal. He was a left-wing socialist; brought up to the Church of England he abandoned Christianity about 1931 in favour of Marxism. He was a man of imposing appearance, often gruff and forthright in manner, and intolerant of affectation and humbug. Yet he was humorous, kind, and at times unexpectedly diffident. He inspired great affection among his friends and colleagues. On retirement he moved to Cambridge, where he died on 29 October 1981. He was cremated at Cambridge on 9 November. 
Knight's second wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 51696


Schofield, Herbert (1882-1963), educationist, was born at Halifax, Yorkshire, on 8 December 1882, the elder son of James and Alice Schofield. On leaving the Trinity higher grade school, Halifax, at fourteen, he joined his father's small mechanical engineering firm to serve a seven-year apprenticeship. He also attended classes in engineering at Halifax Municipal Technical College winning a Carnegie engineering scholarship to the Royal College of Science in South Kensington, where he obtained a BSc honours degree in physics from the University of London. He subsequently took up a post as physics master at Dover county school and director of further education in charge of a small technical institute. It was from this post that, in September 1915, Schofield came to Loughborough as principal of the Technical Institute which had been established only six years earlier. 
Schofield's long-term aim was to transform Loughborough College, as the institute soon became known, into a high-level engineering college. His own experience in industry was very probably a motivating factor and he also had a lifelong admiration for American industrial methods which he sought to emulate to a degree in the practical slant he gave his training methods in his college. The first major stage in the college's growth began in January 1916 when Schofield introduced short training courses for women munitions workers, a development that was to expand enormously during the next few years and for which he was made MBE in August 1917. He based his courses on the principle for which he was to become famous, 'training on production', whereby workers were trained under conditions as similar as possible to those in industry. He was later to apply this philosophy to the courses for his students in the post-war college. In September 1918 he introduced a five-year full-time diploma course in mechanical engineering for former officers; the diploma of Loughborough College grew rapidly in the next few years and extended into other branches of engineering and commerce. 
Meanwhile, in 1918, Schofield married Clara Johns ('b'. 1890); they had a daughter and adopted a son. His wife died in 1928 and he never remarried. He was awarded a London doctorate of philosophy in 1923 for research into the thermal combustion and mechanical efficiency of high-speed multi-cylinder internal combustion engines. In the college, major developments in the inter-war period included the setting-up of a department for training handicraft teachers in 1930; the establishment of the annual summer school in August 1931, offering courses mainly in physical education and arts and crafts; the creation of an aeronautical engineering department in 1935; and the gradual extension of the college's work in physical education. During these years, Schofield was busily acquiring property for use as student hostels, while at the same time there was a gradual shift in the centre of gravity of the college from its original buildings in the centre of the town to another more spacious site on the western edge of Loughborough, later the campus of Loughborough University. Throughout this period, the work of the original Technical Institute in offering part-time lower-level courses continued. Thus, by the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, Schofield, with the aid of his able lieutenants, had built up a remarkable institution of international repute, considerable diversity, and with a wide range of residential and sporting facilities. 
During the war, Schofield endeavoured to keep the normal diploma and teacher-training courses going, albeit in shortened forms and with fewer students. In addition, the college made a direct contribution to the war effort by providing a wide range of technical courses for personnel of all three services, and by housing the RAF medical rehabilitation unit. The immediate post-war period brought a substantial increase in student numbers as former servicemen flocked into the college. Schofield, always eager to start something new, added another string to his bow, with the introduction of a full-time course in librarianship in January 1947. Nationally and regionally, he continued to be very active. He was chairman of the Council of the Institution of Production Engineers in 1946 and its president from 1948 to 1950; he was appointed vice-chairman of the National Advisory Council on Education for Industry and Commerce; and he was a lay canon of Leicester Cathedral, an honour of which he was very proud. For his contribution to technological education, Schoey, or the Doctor, as he had become known by this time, was made CBE in 1947. However, he was now well into his sixties and finally retired in December 1950 at the age of sixty-eight, after thirty-five years as principal of Loughborough College. After his retirement, Schofield remained in Loughborough and, in addition to becoming a local town councillor, continued to be active in the Rotary movement in which he had been a leading figure for many years, having been president of Rotary International of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in 1931-2. 
The empire which Schofield created during his lifetime did not survive very long after his retirement and broke up into four separate institutions: the College of Technology which in 1966 was to become Loughborough University; Loughborough College of Education, which in 1977 amalgamated with the university; Loughborough College of Art and Design, which merged with the university in 1998; and Loughborough Technical College, now renamed simply Loughborough College. 
Schofield was an educational entrepreneur, ever ready to grasp an opportunity, and his courage and foresight were exemplified by the extraordinary growth of his college, especially during the harsh economic climate of the inter-war years. His major contribution to technological education was his policy of 'training on production', considered by some to be the precursor of the modern sandwich course. Though not physically large, Schofield had a masterful presence and, the possessor of enormous energy, he drove himself and his staff very hard. A determined and in many ways an autocratic man, he put his life's work into Loughborough College, a unique institution in its time, one which was essentially his creation and which he dominated for so long. He died in a nursing home at Radmoor Road, Loughborough, on 18 September 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 51698


Hill, Thomas George (1876-1954), botanist, was born on 13 February 1876 at 32 Colls Road, Peckham, London, the son of Henry William Hill, a paper maker's clerk, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Sands. He was educated in London at St Olave's Grammar School and the Royal College of Science before becoming demonstrator in biology at St Thomas's Hospital. He subsequently held various lectureships in botany and biology in the University of London before being appointed in 1912 to a readership in vegetable physiology at University College, London (UCL). 
This appointment signalled Hill's establishment in the then rapidly evolving botanical profession. Before the 1870s the principal concerns of British botanists had been taxonomical, expanding with the empire from descriptions of native species to surveys of flora throughout the world. Continental European botanists, especially those working in Germany, had specialized to a greater extent on the internal workings of the plant and by 1900 the importance of their work was increasingly recognized. Hill was one of the first generation of British botanists to incorporate this expanding knowledge of plant physiology into their teaching and research, and a little later he was closely involved with the beginnings of another challenge to traditional botany: the study of plant ecology. 
Hill's early work was devoted to the anatomy of plants: with Ethel De Fraine, a London University colleague, he published a series of articles in 'Annals of Botany' and 'New Phytologist' on seedling structure. Even here it was apparent that by the end of the series in 1913 he had moved towards a physiological explanation for variations in the structure of seedlings. F. W. Oliver, the head of the department at UCL, was one of the British pioneers of ecological studies, and Hill took part in the expeditions that Oliver led to Blakeney Point in Norfolk and to France, subsequently publishing papers on the water content of shingle beaches and the osmotic properties of the root hairs of salt marsh plants. When the first meeting of the British Ecological Society was held at UCL in 1913 Hill was a member of its council. At the same time he was also writing about microscopic and biochemical techniques. In 1913 he collaborated with P. Haas on 'An Introduction to the Chemistry of Plant Products', later editions of which (the last was published in 1928) included a second volume which covered physiological topics. By this time his research interests also included the metabolism of marine algae. Earlier, in 1915, he had published 'Essentials of Illustration', a short guide based on his interest in book illustration and his experience of botanical publishing. 
Hill succeeded Oliver as head of the department of botany at UCL in 1929, becoming at the same time professor of plant physiology. Familiarly known to his contemporaries as TG, he was said to hide his essential kindliness under an exterior which was variously described as breezy, awe-inspiring, and gruff; when chairing committees he could be short with those who were verbose. His lectures were remembered as logically constructed and vivid, and those who worked under him found him an effective head of department, in which role he continued until the end of the Second World War, when he was nearly seventy. He lived at Hambledon in Surrey, where he painted, cultivated his garden, and, for many years, helped to run the cricket club. There he was known as Major Hill, a rank to which he was promoted when adjutant to the University of London Officers' Training Corps during the First World War. He remained unmarried and died at St Thomas's Hospital, Hambledon, following an operation, on 25 June 1954. He was buried in Hambledon on 29 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 51701


Seligman, Gerald Abraham (1886-1973), glaciologist, was born on 26 March 1886 at Clapham Park, London, the seventh and youngest child of Isaac Seligman (1834-1928), merchant banker, and his wife, Lina Messel (1851-1925), of Darmstadt, Germany. Both his parents were of German-Jewish origin. From 1900 to 1903, he was educated at Harrow School, whence he entered the South-eastern Agricultural College. In 1905 he went up to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, graduating in 1908 with second-class honours in natural sciences, with strength in chemistry and geology. 
On holidays in the Alps and in Norway, Seligman had shown ability as a skier and, in 1907, he became an early member of the Ski Club of Great Britain. His skiing enthusiasm was to set the course of his later career but on first leaving Cambridge, he joined his brother Richard's new company, Aluminium Plant and Vessel (APV), manufacturing specialized process plant and containers. On 5 June 1915 he married Ursula Goode (1891-1982). The couple later had one daughter. 
A scientist by inclination, Seligman was not satisfied with the life of a businessman. Although he remained a director of APV until 1959, in 1931 he ceased working full-time, thenceforth devoting himself to the study of snow and ice. He had valuable contacts in this field for, since 1921, he had edited and contributed extensively to 'Ski Notes and Queries', the journal of the Ski Club of Great Britain. He remained editor until 1935 and was president of the club from 1927 to 1929. 
Seligman's early research centred on the structure of snow, with an examination of falling snow and avalanches. Following research in Cambridge, he published his classic work 'Snow Structure and Ski Fields' (1936; repr., 1962). He moved on to consider the metamorphosis of snow into glacier ice and for this purpose organized expeditions to the Jungfraujoch, Switzerland, in 1937 and 1938. His personality and standing drew leading chemists and physicists into his parties. As a result of the work, many seminal papers in glaciology were published, presaging a new style in such research. 
In 1936, Seligman was invited to form a British group reporting to the International Commission of Snow and Ice (ICSI). He responded by forming the Association for the Study of Snow and Ice. After war service with the Meteorological Office, he transformed his association into the British Glaciological Society, at the same time launching the 'Journal of Glaciology'. He served as president of the society (later the International Glaciological Society) until 1963, and was co-editor of the journal until 1968. He was president of the ICSI from 1951 to 1954. 
Following the dissolution of his first marriage in 1951, Seligman married (Pamela) Loris Arnould ('b'. 1917) on 21 August 1952, and they settled at Biddenden, Kent, where many glaciologists enjoyed the warm hospitality of their Tudor house. From here Seligman edited his journal, with an acute eye for style, content, and accuracy, assisted by equally rigorous academic colleagues. In 1968, his health forced a move to Folkestone, where he died, at his home, 46 New Metropole, from bronchopneumonia on 21 February 1973. He was cremated at Charing. 
Seligman's work had been recognized by the award in 1933 of the Pery medal from the Ski Club of Great Britain for distinguished services to skiing, of the Back grant in 1940 and the Victoria medal in 1959 from the Royal Geographical Society for glaciological research, of an honorary doctorate in 1965 from the University of Innsbruck, and by the first award of the Seligman crystal in 1965 from his society. More importantly, he left an active and flourishing society with over a thousand members in thirty-three countries. 


@@@@@


doc= 51703


Hart, Thomas John (1907-1970), marine biologist, was born on 17 September 1907 at Cintra Lodge, Little Shelford, near Cambridge, the eldest of the four sons of John Henry Arthur Hart (1876-1952), theological lecturer and librarian of St John's College, Cambridge, and later a clergyman, and his wife, Katherine Mary Gwatkin (1873-1961), who was an occasional schoolteacher in biology. The family had wide-ranging interests, especially in natural history and the sea, and spent holidays on their converted coal barge beached on Blakeney Point, Norfolk. Hart was educated at Lady Manners School, Bakewell, and Leeds University, where he graduated with first-class honours in zoology in 1929. Subsequently he was awarded the degrees of MSc in 1934 and DSc in 1935. On 17 June 1931 he married Edith Angood (1907-1989), also a graduate in zoology from Leeds University. They later had three sons. 
Immediately after graduating in 1929 Hart had joined the 'Discovery' investigations, established by the Colonial Office for marine research around the Falkland Islands. He served on Royal Research Ship (RRS) 'Discovery II' in the Southern Ocean on her first, third, and fifth commissions (1929-31, 1933-5, and 1937-9). He also served on RRS 'William Scoresby' in 1936-7 and 1950. During the Second World War he was commissioned for a short time as lieutenant RNVR but was invalided out and continued his 'Discovery' investigations work at Plymouth in the laboratories of the Marine Biological Association. In 1949 'Discovery' investigations were transferred to the newly established National Institute of Oceanography and Hart remained a member of its staff at Wormley until his death. 
Hart's task on joining 'Discovery' investigations was to continue work begun by A. C. Hardy on the phytoplankton of the Southern Ocean. His two major 'Discovery' reports, 'On the phytoplankton of the south-west Atlantic and the Bellingshausen Sea, 1929-31' (1934) and 'Phytoplankton periodicity in Antarctic surface waters' (1941), provided the foundations for subsequent investigations of phytoplankton ecology in Antarctic seas. In his later work he used the newly developed technique of colorimetric estimation of chlorophyll as a measure of total phytoplankton. The importance of his observation that dense phytoplankton growth followed the stabilization of the water column by melting of ice was fully recognized four decades later. 
Hart distinguished different types of water by their diatom floras and described how a particular species could be used to trace water movements. A report 'On the diatoms of the skin film of whales' (1935) showed that whales accumulate these films only in Antarctic waters and that their density is an index of the condition of the animal. Another 'Discovery' report by Hart, on behalf of his late colleague E. R. Gunther, dealt with trawling surveys on the Patagonian continental shelf. A later paper, 'Some observations on the relative abundance of marine phytoplankton populations in nature' published in 'Some Contemporary Studies in Marine Science' (1966) summarized much information from his previous studies, together with that from ships' meteorological logbooks. In all Hart published some twenty-two scientific papers. In 1930 Hart and H. E. Marshall were the first people to land on Thule Island in the South Sandwich group. During the war Hart pressed for the continuation of work in the Antarctic and his efforts helped result in the establishment of the Falkland Islands dependencies survey. His last major work at sea was as scientist in charge of a whale-marking expedition in RRS 'William Scoresby' in 1950, but he had to leave the ship early because of ill health. 
Hart was a quiet, retiring man with a dry sense of humour, whose wide knowledge of marine science and Antarctic affairs was always available to others. Outside his work he enjoyed rowing, football, cricket, sailing, choir singing, chess, and woodwork. He was awarded the polar medal in 1940 and Hart Rock, off Laurie Island, South Orkneys, was named after him. He died of heart failure at his home, Sherborne, Petworth Road, Witley, Surrey, after returning from work on 4 May 1970. His ashes were consigned to the north Atlantic from RRS 'Discovery'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51705


Baldwin, Ernest Hubert Francis (1909-1969), biochemist, was born on 29 March 1909 at 167 Tredworth Road, Gloucester, the eldest son of Hubert Charles Baldwin, organist and music teacher, and of his wife, Nellie Victoria Baldwin, 'nee' Hailes. He was educated at the Crypt Grammar School, Gloucester, and St John's College, Cambridge (1928-30), where he was a prize and open exhibitioner. He obtained a first in both parts of the natural sciences tripos, including part two in biochemistry. After this he obtained various scholarships, including being a senior student of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 (1933-5), which enabled him to remain in the Cambridge department of biochemistry. In 1933 he married Pauline Mary Edwards, daughter of Walter Bushby Edwards, with whom he had one daughter, Nicola, and one son, Nigel St John. Baldwin was a fellow of St John's (1936-41). From 1936 to 1943 he was university demonstrator and subsequently he became lecturer in biochemistry (1943-50). 
During his time in Cambridge Baldwin was influenced by Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins's wide approach to biochemistry and applied himself to the comparative aspects of the subject, in particular, to the study of nitrogen metabolism and the phosphagens. He collaborated with such eminent biochemists as Joseph Needham and Dorothy Needham, and published a number of papers jointly with them. In 1937 he published a small book, 'Comparative Biochemistry', which became a classic introduction to the subject and went into four editions. During his time at Cambridge he acquired wide recognition as a gifted teacher; he had a sense of the modern and was a stimulating lecturer. During the Second World War much of the burden of the teaching of biochemistry in Cambridge fell on him. One result was the publication in 1947 of his 'Dynamic Aspects of Biochemistry', which in many respects was the first textbook of modern biochemistry. It gave a new and lucid interpretation of the metabolic interactions within the body and helped to take biochemistry from the thrall of natural-product chemistry on the one hand and physiological chemistry on the other, giving it a status of its own. The book received worldwide acclaim and over the years was translated into many languages and ran into five editions. The second edition (1952) was awarded the Cortina Ulisse prize. 
In 1950 Baldwin was appointed to the chair of biochemistry at University College, London, where he developed the new first-degree course in biochemistry, an innovation for the University of London, and helped to oversee the move of his department into new, purpose-built accommodation. Baldwin continued his work on comparative biochemistry and, with collaborators, added much to our knowledge of nitrogen metabolism and the relation between ureotelic metabolism and water shortage. In this work he was as much or more regarded abroad than at home, as witnessed by his appointment as visiting professor at the University of California (1956-7), and as Rose Morgan professor in the University of Kansas (1965). In 1962 he published a slim volume, 'The Nature of Biochemistry', intended to give senior-school pupils a feel for biochemistry. It went into two editions and was translated into a number of languages. His memoir of Gowland Hopkins was published in the same year. During his time in Cambridge and London Baldwin also published numerous scientific papers, most of them on aspects of comparative biochemistry. 
Baldwin was a tall, slightly stooped figure, bearded, and with a quizzical expression. He was an accomplished pianist and, with his family, an able presenter of theatrical puppets. Always amiable, he was fond of giving sherry parties for his staff and students alike. He suffered from the genetic condition myotonic muscular dystrophy and his later years were dogged by frequent bouts of illness. He died suddenly of congestive heart failure at his home, 8 Crofters Road, Moor Park, Northwood, Middlesex, on 7 December 1969; his body was cremated at the Breakspear crematorium, Rickmansworth. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51709


Small, James (bap. 1740, d. 1793), agriculturist and plough maker, was born at Upsettlington in the parish of Ladykirk, Berwickshire, and baptized in Ladykirk on 28 March 1740; he was the son of John Small, a farmer, and Elspeth Robeson. He served an apprenticeship with a carpenter and plough maker at Hutton, Berwickshire. About 1758 he went to Yorkshire to work for a Mr Robertson, maker of wagons and carriages at Doncaster. He returned to Scotland in 1763 and settled on a farm at Blackadder Mount, Berwickshire, where he also had a blacksmith's shop. Here he started to experiment with ploughs to establish which worked with the least draught. On 30 December 1766 he married Janet Smith at Chirnside, Berwickshire. 
There is much speculation about how much Small based his work on his knowledge of developments in England, especially the design of the Rotherham plough introduced during the 1730s. This plough, with a breast covered with iron plate and iron coulter and share, introduced some elements of standardized design and construction. By the time Small was working in Yorkshire, ploughs of the Rotherham type were becoming well known and examples were to be found in the Scottish lowlands. However, he conducted his experiments using the local ploughs of Berwickshire, known as the 'old Scotch' type. They were heavy, needing, it was said, at least a pair of horses and a pair of oxen to draw them with several labourers to control plough and animals. The Berwickshire landowner James Renton of Lammermuir became his patron, financing the establishment of Small's smithy and carpenter's shop, and also advancing the working capital. After years of trials he constructed his first improved plough in 1779-80. It had a mouldboard of iron, cast at the Carron foundry. The reduced friction through the soil of this mouldboard meant that Small's ploughs normally required only a pair of horses and one ploughman. Trials by the Dalkeith Farming Society showed Small's plough requiring only 9-10 cwt of force in ploughing up old pasture compared with 16 cwt needed by the old Scotch type. Small subsequently extended the use of cast iron to other parts hitherto made of wood, including the sheath and head. Small's plough was not suitable for all types of soil and so was not universally popular (the ploughmen in, for example, Lanarkshire being quite against it). There remained room for debate as to the precise design of mouldboards and the mathematics involved. However, Small had established the principles which all subsequent designers followed. In introducing more cast-iron parts he was also opening up a path leading to the establishment of large plough works and agricultural engineering firms. 
Small enjoyed patronage from several leaders of Scottish society. Henry Home, Lord Kames, encouraged him in the publication of his treatise. Sir John Sinclair, a leader of progressive agricultural opinion in Scotland, was another champion of Small and his work. Small did not forget his first investor, Renton, who in 1784 became the dedicatee of his 'Treatise of Ploughs and Wheel-Carriages'. This book made Small the first to set out the scientific principles of plough design in print, building upon and clarifying the work of previous thinkers on the subject as well as expressing his own theories. The treatise was the standard text on plough design for fifty years. 
Small's works employed a number of hands in the manufacture of ploughs, wagons, and carts. He moved in the early 1780s to Rosebank, Ford, Edinburghshire. Here he enjoyed the patronage of Henry Scott, third duke of Buccleuch. His sons, John and Alexander, began to take a more active role in the implement-making business, which continued after his death as Alexander Small & Co. James Small died in 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 51710


Watts, William Whitehead (1860-1947), geologist and educationist, was born on 7 June 1860 at Broseley, Shropshire, the eldest son of Isaac Watts, music teacher, and his wife, Maria, 'nee' Whitehead. After early education at a dame-school he attended Bitterley grammar school (1869-70), where he developed an interest in chemistry and ventured into firework making, Shifnal grammar school (1871-3), and Denstone College, near Uttoxeter, Staffordshire (1873-8). In 1878 he won an exhibition (converted to a scholarship) to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. He gained first-class honours in the natural science tripos in 1881, and graduated BA in 1882. His MA was awarded in 1885 and his ScD in 1909. 
From 1882 to 1891 Watts was a university extension lecturer for Cambridge; in 1888 he was deputy professor of geology at Oxford. In 1891 he became petrographer to the British Geological Survey, working in Ireland and in London, characteristically undertaking much more fieldwork than was necessary in order to ascertain geological facts to his own satisfaction and high standards. He also had responsibility for the survey's geological specimen collections in Dublin Museum and with A. McHenry wrote 'Guide to the Collection of Rocks... Belonging to the Geological Survey of Ireland' (1895). 
Watts returned to teaching in 1897 and was appointed deputy professor under Charles Lapworth at Mason College, Birmingham. The following year, Watts published his very successful 'Geology for Beginners', which ran to six editions, the last in 1937. In 1906 he became professor and head of the geology department of the Royal School of Mines (RSM) in London. Watts enlivened the department and developed a new postgraduate and research programme, encouraging both staff and students to attend Geological Society meetings and to read the latest literature. He built up the departmental library (later named the Watts Library) and developed the specimen collections. He always insisted on teaching the part one students, believing that it was both his job and his right to make and mould young geologists. Students and staff revered him for his intellectual abilities, his warmth, humour, and witty remarks, dubbed 'Watticisms' (Williams, 16; Boswell, 'Presentation', 6). Indeed, Watts believed teaching was paramount, saying in response to a critic of his relatively small research output: 'I felt it was more profitable to produce tools than goods, and thus by producing researchers, one was putting one's talent out at compound interest' (Williams, 48). 
Watts introduced courses in engineering geology in 1910 and qualifications in oil technology (1913) and mining geology (1918), to the RSM, by then a constituent college of Imperial College. These subjects were innovative, timely, and important additions to geological training in Britain. Watts was a far-sighted man with an interest in geology as a fieldworker and as a teacher. Though most of his career was spent as a lecturer, his fieldwork -- particularly on Charnwood Forest, Leicestershire -- is recognized as an outstanding contribution to the geological understanding of Britain. His 'Studies of the Ancient Forests of Charnwood' was published in 1947. Watts retired from the RSM in 1930 and in appreciation of his work the geology department founded the Watts medal, for the best postgraduate student annually, and arranged for his portrait to be painted by Sir William Rothenstein. He was made emeritus professor of Imperial College and then of London University. 
Married twice, coincidentally into the same old family, Watts had two daughters. First he married Louisa Adelaide Atchison (died 1891) in 1889. She was descended by the female line through the Turnour (Winterton) and Richardson families from Robert the Bruce. There was one daughter from this marriage, Beatrix Mary Adelaide, who married the geologist William George Fearnsides. Second, in 1894 Watts married Rachel Atchison, widow of Arthur Turnour Atchison (secretary of the British Association and a civil engineer), daughter of Ebenezer Rogers, a mining engineer and geologist in Monmouthshire. The couple later had one daughter. 
Watts was a gregarious man, enjoying learned society meetings and dinners; this and his interest in progress led him to be an active member of various organizations and committees related to geology and to university teaching, working tirelessly as a committee member, secretary, or president. Among these was the chairmanship of Sutton Coldfield higher education sub-committee (1904-6) during which he succeeded in building and opening a technical school. Elected FRS in 1904, he held a record for periods as a councillor (1913-14, 1917-19, 1929-31). He was president of the Geological Society of London between 1910 and 1912, and was awarded their Wollaston fund in 1895, the Murchison medal in 1915, and the Wollaston medal in 1927. Watts was twice president of section C of the British Association, in 1903 and 1924, and president of the British Academy in 1935. His 1924 address summed up his attitude to the science of geology; it was entitled 'Geology in the service of man'. He received many awards throughout his distinguished career in public service as a civil servant and lecturer, including honorary LLDs from St Andrews and Edinburgh universities; fellowship of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1888 and honorary fellowship in 1910; and fellowship of Imperial College, London, in 1945. Watts died on 30 July 1947 at the Kingslea Nursing Home, Mulgrave Road, Sutton, Surrey. After cremation at Church Stretton, Shropshire, his ashes were buried in Cambridge. It was said of him that 'No man... has exercised more influence on the development of British Geology during his lifetime than Professor W. W. Watts' (Williams, 8). 


@@@@@


doc= 51714


Swinnerton, Henry Hurd (1875-1966), zoologist and geologist, was born at Bungay, Suffolk, on 17 September 1875, the son of the Revd George Frederick Swinnerton, a Wesleyan Methodist minister, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Smith). The family moved about Britain because of the father's ministry, and Swinnerton acquired a good knowledge of the countryside. He matriculated in 1894, after attending Woodhouse Grove School, Airedale, Yorkshire, and Kingswood School, Bath. 
Swinnerton became an assistant master at a boarding-school in Trowbridge ('c'.1894) but continued his studies through the university correspondence course and by regular visits to the Bristol City Museum. Encouraged by the curator, Edward Wilson, and by his course tutor, Dr Morley Davies, he was awarded a studentship at the Royal College of Science, University of London (1897). He graduated in zoology (1898) and then served as personal assistant to Professor G. B. Howes working on the New Zealand tuatara lizard 'Sphenodon'. With typical ingenuity, he placed a dozen eggs in damp sand beneath the heating pipes of the laboratory and hatched the first 'Sphenodon' in Europe. In 1902 Swinnerton was awarded a DSc following the completion of research on the cranium of the stickleback, which he had carried out while serving as a master at his old school in Bath. He married Florence Daisy Bennett, daughter of Joseph Bennett, postmaster, on 6 September 1906, and they had three daughters. 
In 1901-2 Swinnerton was appointed lecturer in natural sciences at University College, Nottingham. During his subsequent forty-four years in the college he established the departments of natural science (1902) and geology and geography (1912), as well as laying the foundation for a department of archaeology. His interpretation of fossils as living organisms contributed to a better understanding of palaeoecology and evolution. He had enormous ability as a lecturer, was noted for his enthusiasm for field studies and also for his broad, philosophical attitude to science (Hawkins, 43), and was responsible for the introduction of visual aids into the lecture room (Marren, 265), but his real pleasure was to be 'out in the field with his hammer... discovering the meaning of all things natural' (Evans, 1968, 344). 
In 1942 Swinnerton was presented with the Murchison medal by the Geological Society in recognition of his extensive output in a wide range of zoological and geological subjects. He served as president of the Lincolnshire Naturalists' Union in 1936-7, of section C of the British Association in 1938, and of the Geological Society in 1939-40. In 1950 he was made a CBE for his services to university education. In addition to his professional and civic services in connection with young people, Swinnerton was an active member of the Methodist church. He retired as professor emeritus in 1946 and then briefly served as curator of the Margidinum collection of Roman antiquities before moving to Hertfordshire. He died at his residence, the headmaster's house, Haberdashers' Aske's School, Elstree, on 6 November 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 51718


Watkins, Francis (bap. 1723, d. 1791), optician, the fourth son of Jeremiah Watkins and his first wife, Mary ('nee' Whitney), was baptized in the parish of Newchurch, Radnorshire, on 25 April 1723. At the age of fourteen he was taken to London and apprenticed to the instrument maker Nathaniel Adams at the Golden Spectacles, Charing Cross. Following his master's untimely death, Watkins completed his training under Edward Scarlett senior and Henry Walder at the Archimedes, Globe and Sun in Soho, where he remained until he was sworn free of the Spectaclemakers' Company in March 1746. In the following year he returned to his original master's premises at Charing Cross to trade on his own account under the sign of Sir Isaac Newton's Head. 
Watkins developed his early trade among those wealthy gentlemen who, largely for reasons of 'polite learning', wished to partake in experimental philosophy. He began by arranging shilling demonstrations in electrical experiments to promote his own electrical machine, which he sold with an accompanying tract ('A Particular Account of the Electrical Experiments Hitherto Made Publick', 1747). As time progressed, he became keen on optics, particularly the quality of images which, at this time, were not free of coloured effects. Following some experiments in late 1751, he criticized the teacher Richard Jacks who, together with another famous maker, George Adams senior, had designed an improved refracting telescope. Later Watkins designed and developed a microscope which he accompanied with a tract in French ('L'exercise du microscope', 1754). He was assisted by two able apprentices: Addison Smith and Henry Pyefinch, who had joined him in 1750 and 1753 respectively. 
Watkins's growing reputation caused John Dollond (1706-1761), holder of a patent for achromatic lenses, to approach him with a view to financial partnership in a venture to market refracting telescopes with these object glasses, and a binding agreement was made, dated 29 May 1758. However, this monopoly was not viewed kindly by those makers who already sold achromatic telescopes. Realizing this, after John Dollond's death Watkins began to sell his own telescopes without declaring these sales to Dollond's son, Peter. The latter then paid Watkins $200 to cease manufacture, thereby becoming sole patentee. Watkins continued manufacturing, and was sued. Peter Dollond's case was upheld: this alleged injustice motivated the Spectaclemakers' Company to petition the king in June 1764 to have Dollond's patent annulled on the grounds that Chester Moor Hall was the true inventor of the achromatic lens. Watkins was master of the company at this time, and the first signatory on the petition was his former apprentice and current partner in business, Addison Smith. Much acrimony ensued but the court upheld Dollond's right to the patent, since the original inventor had not shown any financial interest in his invention. Later, when Dollond became master of the Spectaclemakers' Company, Watkins adamantly refused to pay his dues. 
In 1748 or 1749, soon after setting up at Sir Isaac Newton's Head, Watkins married the widow Clarinda Walder; they had two daughters, Frances ('b'. 1749) and Clarinda ('b'. 1753), but no male heirs. To ensure the continuity of his business, he invited his nephews, Jeremiah and Walter, to join him. These were the sons of his elder brother's marriage to Elizabeth, 'nee' Mines, of Hereford. After some thirty-seven years of trading, Watkins retired to Richmond, though he retained an interest in both the business and his various properties at Charing Cross. He died in Richmond, Surrey, on 17 November 1791, and his nephews inherited the business. After Walter's death in 1798 the business was continued by Jeremiah until his death in 1810. It was then run on behalf of Jeremiah's widow, Charlotte, by William Hill, a reliable employee, until Jeremiah's son, another Francis, came of age in 1818. The partnership between Hill and the younger Francis Watkins lasted twenty-nine years until 1847, when both partners died. The Watkins business was exceptional in having traded for over a century, but in 1856 it was acquired from the family by the brothers C. A. and F. H. Elliott, the sons of William Elliott, a mathematical instrument maker. 


@@@@@


doc= 51726


Blacker, Sir George Francis (1865-1948), obstetrician, was born in Dublin on 23 October 1865, the fourth child of Commissary-Major-General Latham William Blacker (1829-1916), who came from a military and landed family in co. Tyrone, and his wife, Harriette de Maine (died 1908), daughter of Captain John Bagot-Smith. Little is known about Blacker's childhood except that between the ages of thirteen and seventeen he was educated in England, at Cheltenham College. He retained a lifelong affection for his school, and later in life held office as president of the Old Cheltonian Society. 
After matriculation Blacker became a student at University College, London, attending first the faculty of arts (1883-5) and then the faculty of medicine (1885-6 and 1891-2), where he proved to be a gifted scholar. He won an exhibition and gold medals in his intermediate examinations in July 1888 and achieved a first-class pass in the London MB examinations in 1891, when he was also awarded a gold medal; he went on to win a further two gold medals in the MD examination in 1893. Obstetrics and gynaecology became Blacker's speciality and although at the time obstetricians were classed as physicians (he was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1902), Blacker continued to pursue the surgical side of his specialism. In 1890 he was elected Atkinson-Morley surgical scholar at University College Hospital, and in 1891 he took his surgical fellowship (FRCS). 
Except for the period of the First World War, when he served as a captain with the Royal Army Medical Corps (he was mentioned twice in dispatches), Blacker devoted his working life to his own teaching hospital. His first appointments at University College Hospital were very junior but they marked the beginning of a distinguished career; by 1893 he was elected assistant obstetric physician, he was appointed obstetric physician in 1900, and physician in 1927. However, his foremost interest was in medical education and it was in this sphere that Blacker made his greatest contribution. During his first tenure as dean of the medical school, from 1912 to 1915, he supported the report of the 1913 royal commission on university education in London, and advocated the creation of full-time medical professorships. His second term as dean, from 1917 to 1926, proved most eventful for University College Hospital was one of the medical schools to respond to a government initiative by reforming its system of teaching. Not only was Blacker responsible for developing the new clinical unit system but when the Rockefeller Foundation donated gifts to the hospital, in excess of $1 million in support of this and other projects, he gained wide recognition for his invaluable administrative services. 
During the early 1920s Blacker became involved in the professional debate concerning the reform of obstetric teaching. This had been initiated by T. Watts Eden at the Royal Society of Medicine while Blacker was president of its obstetrics and gynaecology section (1917-18). For his part Blacker upheld proposals which advocated the extension of midwifery teaching facilities to all medical students in London, and the establishment of four or more new centres where tuition and practical experience could be gained in all aspects of midwifery, gynaecology, and maternal and child welfare. 
In addition to his teaching and practice, at various times Blacker acted as an examiner in midwifery to the universities of London, Liverpool, and New Zealand. He was also a keen committee man, and during his membership of the Obstetrical Society of London (1893-1907) and of the obstetrics and gynaecology section of the Royal Society of Medicine (1907-48) he sat on a great number of them. These activities left him little time for writing but he did make occasional contributions to medical journals and was noted for editing the seventh edition of Galabin's renowned text, 'Practice of Midwifery', published in 1910. He also took a keen interest in the use of radium in gynaecology and, in 1929, was president of the Radium Institute at Mount Vernon Hospital. 
Blacker was appointed CBE in 1920, and was knighted in 1923. He married Shirley Elvina ('b'. 1879/80), second daughter of Canon Thomas James Bowen, at St Mary's Church, Tormarton, Gloucestershire, on 8 November 1904; their only child, George Patrick Demaine (1906-1974), was born two years later. Blacker was apparently an energetic and cheerful man, whose leisure activities included fishing and, on retirement, working with the British Red Cross Society. In all other respects he led a quiet and modest life, retiring first to Shedfield in Hampshire in the early 1930s before finally settling at Frensham in Surrey in 1940. He died, of a heart attack, at his home, Oak Hill Cottage, Frensham, on 21 May 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 51730


Miller, Hugh Crichton- (1877-1959), psychotherapist, was born on 5 February 1877 in Genoa, Italy, the first of four children born to Donald Miller ('b'. 1838), the Presbyterian chaplain there, and his second wife, Mary Wotherspoon. In 1889 Crichton-Miller was sent to Fettes College in Edinburgh. He then entered Edinburgh University in 1893, graduating MA in 1898 and MD in 1901. In 1903, following an eight-year engagement, he married Eleanore Jean (1876-1954), daughter of Sheriff Lorimer QC of Edinburgh; they had six children, including Donald Crichton-Miller, who became headmaster of Fettes and Stowe School. 
Following a brief period as resident house surgeon and house physician at Edinburgh's Royal Infirmary (1900-01), Crichton-Miller entered general practice and combined his love of Scotland and Italy by working in the summers in Aviemore and in the winters in San Remo. Studying the many hypochondriacs led to his reputation as a specialist in nervous disorders. Since there were then no treatments for functional nervous disorders, he gave up general practice and as an advocate of the new psychology settled in London in 1911, established a consulting practice, and opened Bowden House, a private nursing home at Harrow specializing in treating neuroses. He published 'Hypnotism and Disease' (1912). During the First World War, Crichton-Miller served in Alexandria, where he was in charge of functional nervous disorders, and later at the 4th London General Hospital, as consultant in shell-shock. The large numbers of shell-shocked troops provided a valuable spur to the medical deployment of psychotherapeutic techniques in the immediate post-war period. It was within this context that Crichton-Miller gained backing for a clinic specializing in nervous disorders, the Tavistock Clinic, which he founded in 1920. In 1926 he established the first child guidance training team. Effective in delegating, he was a careful mentor and inspiring lecturer, and synthesized a variety of approaches. 
Over the next thirteen years Crichton-Miller published a range of texts exploring the social and medical aspects of the new psychology: 'The New Psychology and the Teacher' (1921), 'The New Psychology and the Parent' (1922), 'The New Psychology and the Preacher' (1924), 'Insomnia: an Outline for the Practitioner' (1930), 'Marriage, Freedom and Education' (1931), 'Psychoanalysis and its Derivatives' (1933). Formal recognition of his expertise came with his election as president of the psychiatric section of the Royal Society of Medicine (1938), president of the International Society for Psychotherapy (1938), and fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatry (1939). Unfortunately illness caused him to curtail his professional activities during the 1940s. He resigned his posts at the Tavistock and the Stanborough Hospital (1941); in 1945, two years after the death of his son, he relinquished his London practice, and he retired as medical director of Bowden House in 1952. He died of Parkinson's disease on 1 January 1959 at Bowden House. 


@@@@@


doc= 51731


Gross, William Mayer- (1889-1961), psychiatrist, was born on 15 January 1889 in Bingen am Rhein, Germany, the son of Max Mayer, trader, and Mathilde Gross; his forename at birth was Willy. He was educated at a local preparatory school, then at the 'Gymnasium' in Worms, and studied medicine at Heidelberg, Kiel, and Munich. He qualified in medicine at Heidelberg University in 1912 and presented his doctoral thesis in the following year, having become an assistant in the Heidelberg Psychiatric Clinic. In 1914, he was called up and served for a year on the western front during the First World War before being transferred to a base hospital for psychiatric casualties at Heidelberg. 
Mayer-Gross married in 1919 and had one son. After the war, he was one of a group of younger psychiatrists who studied the phenomenology of mental illness by observation and interview, leading to improvement in clinical methods, the delimitation of syndromes, and better understanding of the interaction between personality and the pathological process. This 'Heidelberg school' became influential, but also controversial, since it departed from the previous emphasis of trying to discover the causes of psychosis by physical investigation. Mayer-Gross was co-founder of the journal 'Nervenarzt' in 1928 and was appointed professor 'extraordinarius' in 1929. He also contributed an extensive and important section on clinical aspects of schizophrenia to Oswald Bumke's 'Lehrbuch der Geisteskrankheiten' (1924). This presentation of the symptoms, cause, and diagnosis of the disorder has been described as 'a triumph of knowledge and sustained effort' (Lewis). 
After the Nazi seizure of power Mayer-Gross was able to come to England in 1933, with the help of the Commonwealth Fund, which provided a clinical fellowship at the Maudsley Hospital, London. This was continued by the Rockefeller Foundation, who also brought over Eric Guttman and Alfred Meyer. These immigrants contributed greatly to the academic, clinical, and research activities of the Maudsley, which was then the only university postgraduate psychiatric centre in England. They showed how rigorous methods could be applied to clinical research, and they provided a conceptual framework more suitable for research than anything which could be derived from Meyerian psychobiology, which had strongly influenced the institution up to then. In 1939 Mayer-Gross was appointed director of research at Crichton Royal Hospital, Dumfries; he requalified in medicine at the Scottish royal colleges and became a naturalized British subject, changing his first name to William. Although without any university affiliation, the hospital was well endowed and its facilities were of an exceptionally high standard. Mayer-Gross pursued an active programme of research, which had been fragmentary up to then, and his work had a stimulating effect on psychiatry throughout Scotland. He also wrote the first modern British postgraduate textbook of psychiatry, together with Eliot Slater and Martin Roth; 'Clinical Psychiatry' was published in 1954. 
Mayer-Gross retired as a consultant in 1955 and became senior fellow in a new department of experimental psychiatry in Birmingham, which up to then had had no academic or research activities in psychiatry. Not long afterwards the head of the department moved to the United States and Mayer-Gross took over its direction. He also headed research at the Uffculme Clinic, which he had helped to found; this was one of the first units in Britain focused on psychotherapeutic treatment. For two periods, he represented the World Health Organization in India, where he helped to establish a teaching and research centre at Bangalore. He was also guest professor at Munich and Hamburg. Mayer-Gross was elected FRCP in 1951 and president of the section of psychiatry of the Royal Society of Medicine in 1954. His nature was generous and direct and entirely free from rancour. He had both immense energies for remarkable productivity and unflagging interest, enthusiasm, and industry. Without ever having held a university teaching post in Britain, he was more influential on younger psychiatrists than any other teacher of his time. Mayer-Gross died in Dudley Road Hospital, Birmingham, on 15 February 1961, shortly after Heidelberg University had invited him to return and direct a new psychopharmacological laboratory. 


@@@@@


doc= 51732


Scott, Sir (Henry) Harold (1874-1956), pathologist and historian of tropical medicine, was born on 3 August 1874 at Spalding, Lincolnshire, the son of the Revd Dr Douglas Lee Scott (1846-1914), headmaster of the Mercers' School from 1876 to 1914, and Mary Anne Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edward Rogers, of Cambridge. He was educated in London at the Mercers' and City of London schools, and afterwards at University College, London, and St Bartholomew's and St Thomas's hospitals, qualifying MRCS, LRCP, in 1897; he then became house physician at the latter hospital. In 1899 he married Harriette (died 1933), daughter of the Revd d'Arcy Harrington Preston of Attleborough, Norfolk; they had one son, who died in 1922. In 1934 he married, secondly, Eileen Anne, daughter of the Revd R. P. Prichard, vicar of Wilburton, Isle of Ely. 
Scott joined the Royal Army Medical Corps (RAMC) in 1900 and served with the rank of captain in the South African field force until 1902 (while there he discovered corynebacteria in veld sores); he received the queen's medal with five clasps. During his time in South Africa he contracted enteric fever. Then followed private practice at Ludlow, Shropshire, until in 1910, three years after becoming MD (London), he was appointed government pathologist in Jamaica. There he developed his lifelong interest in tropical medicine, and rightly attributed the local 'vomiting-sickness' to the ingestion of unripe ackee fruit ('Blighia sapida'), and a 'central neuritis' (later known as the Strachan-Scott syndrome) to a diet of sugar cane. During the First World War he returned to England, and again served with the RAMC as pathologist to the Cambridge Hospital, Aldershot. Following that he took a Milner research fellowship in comparative pathology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and while there he elucidated (under the direction of R. T. Leiper) the life cycle of the small tapeworm 'Hymenolepis nana'. 
In 1922 Scott was appointed pathologist and bacteriologist at Hong Kong (his major research interest here lay in pulmonary tuberculosis); however, after a relatively short spell he developed acute tropical sprue and was invalided home. After his recovery he was appointed pathologist at the Zoological Society of London (where he continued his study of tuberculosis in animals). In 1928 he became secretary of the colonial medical research committee and wrote 'Memorandum on medical research in the colonies (protectorates and mandated territories), 1928-30'. In 1930 he was appointed assistant director of the Bureau of Hygiene and Tropical Diseases, and in 1935 he succeeded Sir Arthur Bagshawe as director; he edited the 'Tropical Diseases Bulletin', the 'Bulletin of Hygiene', and (for two years) the 'Bulletin of War Medicine' for the Medical Research Council. After his retirement he continued to contribute to bureau publications. 
Scott was a great medical and scientific writer; his works included 'Post-Graduate Clinical Studies: for the General Practitioner' (1907); 'Health Problems of the Empire' (with Andrew Balfour, 1924); 'Some Notable Epidemics' (1934); and, what is generally regarded as his greatest work, 'A History of Tropical Medicine' (2 vols., 1939); this was based on his two Fitzpatrick lectures to the Royal College of Physicians in 1937-8. He also wrote, jointly with D. T. Richardson, the 'British Red Cross Manual of Tropical Hygiene' (1946). 
Scott was additionally a lecturer on tropical disease at Westminster Hospital medical school, London, and was an examiner for the conjoint and Liverpool diplomas in tropical medicine and hygiene, and tropical hygiene, respectively. He was elected vice-president (1937-9) and president (1943-5) of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene; his presidential address was entitled 'The influence of the slave-trade in the spread of tropical disease'. He also served as a member of the tropical subcommittee of the Royal Society, and chairman of the Anglo-Soviet Medical Committee. He had been elected FRSE (1917) and FRCP (1925), and was later appointed CMG (1936) and KCMG (1941). 
Scott was of slight stature, a good-looking man, always immaculately dressed, who was conservative in outlook and deeply religious, being a devout member of the Church of England. He was above all a classical scholar. He had a keen sense of humour, but could not be described as a clubbable man. He was never pompous. His major relaxation was to be found in books (he read novels, biographies, histories, and travel books, and had a particular fascination with famous trials), though he was also fond of music; he took little exercise and did not play any sport. He read Greek and Latin, and studied Dutch in his seventh decade. 
Scott retired from the Bureau of Hygiene and Tropical Diseases in 1942 and lived quietly thereafter at Braintree, Essex, where he died at his home, Fox Meadows, Courtauld Road, after a long illness, on 6 August 1956. 


@@@@@


doc= 51735


Heaf, Frederick Rowland George (1894-1973), physician, was born on 21 June 1894 at Desborough, Northamptonshire, the son of Julius Rudolf Hief (1860-1941), watchmaker and maker of scientific instruments, who had emigrated to England from Germany in 1881, and married Alice (died 1896), a schoolteacher, daughter of Thomas Beavon, ironmaster. Heaf was baptized Fritz Rudolf Georg Hief, but changed his name by deed poll in 1916. 
Hief was educated from 1907 at Laxton grammar school and from 1911 at Oundle School, and won a foundation scholarship in 1913 to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he gained second-class honours in chemistry, physics, and geology. As a conscientious objector he was exempted from military service in 1915, and joined the Friends' Ambulance Unit; however, he was allowed to return to Cambridge to continue a medical education, with clinical studies at St Thomas's Hospital, and qualified in 1918. A short period of service in the Royal Army Medical Corps took him to north Russia and China. Demobilized in April 1919 he obtained resident appointments at the Brompton Hospital and its sanatorium at Frimley. On 25 October 1920 he married Madeleine (died 1966), daughter of John Denison of Ilkley, Yorkshire. They had two sons and a daughter. 
In October 1920 Heaf was appointed senior assistant medical officer to the London county council's Colindale Hospital for tuberculosis, and in September 1922 he moved as medical superintendent to the 200 bed King Edward VII Memorial Sanatorium at Warwick. He returned to the service of the London county council in 1930 as medical superintendent at Colindale. His appointment was part of the comprehensive anti-tuberculosis service, which local authorities were required to provide; and in 1937, he moved to central London as medical officer in charge of the service for London. 
At this time the control of tuberculosis depended upon early diagnosis, isolation of infective patients, and public education on the avoidance of infection. Treatment involved long periods of rest in specialized institutions followed by rehabilitation and social support for those who responded well. Increasingly, however, active procedures calling for surgical facilities were being used in selected cases. The task of planning and co-ordinating the activities of tuberculosis dispensaries, hospitals, and sanatoria for the entire metropolitan area in this changing situation, with contributions from the voluntary sector, was challenging; in meeting this challenge, Heaf was greatly helped by his clinical knowledge and experience combined with his friendly, unassuming, and quietly authoritative manner; his administrative ability also became evident. This led to his becoming recognized as an expert in every aspect of tuberculosis. He was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1946. 
Heaf's concern with the problems of ex-servicemen with tuberculosis led to his becoming honorary medical director of the Preston Hall village settlement in 1944. He was active in the affairs of the Tuberculosis Association, of which he was president (1945-9). He was appointed adviser in tuberculosis to the Ministry of Health in 1948 and to the Colonial Office in 1949. In respect of this he was involved in visits to colonies over the next twenty years, and was created CMG in 1956. 
In 1949 Heaf was appointed David Davis professor of tuberculosis in the University of Wales at Cardiff. Here a postgraduate course attracted many graduates from overseas. Heaf devised and validated a skin test for tuberculin sensitivity which gave a quantitative result from a single procedure; this procedure was widely used and bore his name. He was active in the scientific and technical committees of the International Union against Tuberculosis. He retired in 1961, but continued until 1966 to work as chest physician in the Caerphilly area. Heaf was co-author with J. B. McDougal of 'Rehabilitation of the Tuberculous' (1945) and with J. L. Rusby of 'Recent Advances in Tuberculosis' (1949), and he edited 'Symposium of Tuberculosis' (1958). 
After the death of his wife in 1966, Heaf moved to Freeland, Oxfordshire, where he indulged his lifelong interest in geology and archaeology. He died in Oxford from a heart attack on 4 February 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 51736


Atkins, Sir Hedley John Barnard (1905-1983), surgeon and medical administrator, was born on 30 December 1905 at 59 Addison Gardens, Hammersmith, London, the son of Colonel Sir John Atkins, general practitioner, and his wife, Elizabeth May Smith. He had a privileged upbringing in the family of an outstanding general practitioner and he used well the opportunities which this gave. He was educated at Rugby School and Trinity College, Oxford, and then, like his father, at Guy's Hospital, London, where he remained for the rest of his professional life apart from war service. He was academically outstanding, gaining a first-class degree in physiology, an entrance scholarship to Guy's, and the treasurer's gold medal in surgery when he graduated in 1932. He had become FRCS by 1934 and MCh by 1935 and was appointed surgeon to Guy's Hospital in 1936. He married Gladys Gwendoline ('b'. 1907/8), the daughter of Frank Harding Jones, civil engineer, on 7 December 1933. They had two sons, David and Christopher. They lived in Chester Terrace, London, before moving in 1953 to Down House at Downe, Kent, where in the late 1950s Atkins was curator of the Darwin Museum. 
Guy's Hospital was at the heart of the London blitz during the Second World War, and at one point Atkins had to direct its evacuation. Later he served with the Royal Army Medical Corps in north Africa and Italy and was mentioned in dispatches. When he returned to Guy's he wanted to study breast diseases, and he introduced new surgical procedures -- for example, for mammary fistula. He was often visited by surgeons from abroad who were invited to take rounds. Atkins saw a great need for clinical research to provide objective evidence of the relative value of different treatments. He was also interested in the basic biology of disease and studied the importance of hormonal influences on breast disease. He edited three volumes entitled 'Tools of Biological Research' (1959-61), based on lectures delivered to the Surgical Research Society. Atkins also understood clearly the importance of statistical considerations in the design and analysis of clinical studies. He was appointed to the clinical research board of the Medical Research Council in 1959. 
In a pioneering study Atkins set up a clinical trial in patients with cancer of the breast to compare how well they did if the tumour was removed locally (lumpectomy) or radically, including the whole breast and other tissues beside. This required clear and original thinking since it seemed obvious and was generally believed at the time that it would be more effective to remove as much tissue as possible. He also planned for the study to be large enough and meticulous so that the results would be conclusive, and he had the personality to persuade, enthuse, and carry it through. However, Atkins also took great care over the ethical side of the trial, thinking more of the welfare of the patient than the success of the trial. It was successfully concluded and published but in the end the problem was too complex to be solved by a single study, however careful. The results depended on the exact type and stage of tumour treated, and showed that even in favourable cases there could be recurrences if the tumour was removed locally. Thus other treatments were added to improve the outcome: Atkins used irradiation, but chemotherapy and more specific drugs like tamoxifen were later developed. Clinical trials of a range of treatments and combinations are now run by centres around the world, and step by step the treatment of breast cancer continues to improve. However, the 'Oxford Textbook of Surgery' (1994) in laying out the evidence (p. 822) still starts the exposition with the 'Guy's trials', the first of which was the one organized by Atkins; he was also the editor of 'The Treatment of Breast Cancer' (1974). 
Atkins was known as a kindly and clear teacher and a good colleague at Guy's Hospital, where he overcame innate conservatism to be appointed the first professor of surgery. His teaching was lively, spiced with humour and memorable anecdotes. He would say frankly at times that he did not know something and it often turned out that nobody else knew either! Later a specialist breast unit at New Cross Hospital in London was named after him. 
Atkins served the Royal College of Surgeons on the court of examiners and council, and he was vice-president and then president between 1966 and 1969. He enjoyed this role and also his presidency of the Surgical Research Society in 1960. In addition he served on the Medical Research Council and on many committees and working groups. He was knighted in 1967 and became an honorary fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, in 1968. Atkins was a very competent and warm-hearted chairman of the Medical Research Council committee charged with overseeing research on the remarkable little group of inhabitants of Tristan da Cunha driven by the volcano from their island. Work was organized so that they could be given security, privacy, and good medical care while records and specimens were collected by their doctors and a few others. The data provided material for scores of scientists, who made original and important observations by their study. 
Atkins lectured at many surgical centres around the world and at one time served as the Arthur Sims Commonwealth travelling professor. He gave many eponymous formal lectures, some of which were published. These all indicate the breadth of his interests and learning. They include 'Surgical Research -- a New Look', which appeared in the 'Transactions of the Medical Society of London' (vol. 79, 1962-3), and 'A small library', published in the 'Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons' (vol. 49, 1971). Two books arose from his time in north Africa, and he also wrote a book of memoirs published in 1977. The Royal College of Surgeons acquired Down House, the residence for many years of Charles Darwin and his family. The lower floor was kept as a museum and Atkins lived above as curator for some years and published 'Down, the Home of the Darwins' (1974). He immersed himself in the life story of Darwin and his remarkably talented family and contemporaries. He lectured and wrote on their history, and on the manifestations of genius in general, in a scholarly but readable way. 
Atkins was a big man physically, with a fresh outdoor complexion and a lively demeanour. He was a keen rugby player and followed the hospital team closely. He also enjoyed sailing with his family, and gardening after he retired. His intellect was also well developed. He studied classics at school and acquired an interest and facility in the use of words, and he had a lifelong habit of reading. He was also a clear and fluent speaker who rarely used notes. He insisted that he was neither a bibliophile nor a book collector but that his library was composed of volumes that he read and reread. They ranged from poetry and English literature to his favourites, astronomy and mathematics, and he also had a collection on surgical topics. He described an occasion when he sat with his tutor C. N. Hinshelwood by the fire at Oxford, playing a game in which they each quoted to the other 'the most arresting piece of prose and the most enchanting piece of poetry' they could think of. He wrote that he wished he could have been a scientist, especially an astronomer or mathematician. Those who knew him best thought that this would have been a loss, because medicine would then have been deprived of his many contributions to the improvement of surgery through clinical science -- which he made while remaining a truly caring individual, aware of the riches of literature and the humanities. He died at Down House of cancer on 26 November 1983, survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51737


Buttle, Gladwin Albert Hurst (1899-1983), physician and pharmacologist, was born on 11 April 1899 at Park View, Godstone, Surrey, the son of William Buttle, a solicitor, and his wife, Mary Wilby, daughter of William Henry Ward, a builder. He attended Miss Brown's school in Warlingham and went on to the Whitgift Grammar School in Croydon. In 1917 he enlisted in the regular army, trained at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers in 1918. A year later he left the army to study medicine at St John's College, Cambridge. His teachers included the physiologists John Newport Langley and Joseph Barcroft, the neurophysiologist Edgar Douglas Adrian, and the biochemist Frederick Gowland Hopkins. In later life he admitted missing lectures in his subjects in order to attend lectures on physics by Ernest Rutherford and on English literature by Arthur Quiller Couch. After graduating BA he entered University College Hospital, London, in 1922, and qualified MB, MRCS, LRCP in 1924. He was awarded the MA in 1927, MD (Louvain) in 1945, and BCh in 1967, and was elected FRCP in 1970. 
In 1925, at the suggestion of John Henry Gaddum, a fellow student at Cambridge, Buttle joined the staff of the Wellcome Physiological Laboratories. He was appointed assistant pharmacologist to John William Trevan, with whom he studied the effects of bacterial toxins, the pharmacology of digitalis, and the action of local anaesthetics. He developed a test for scarlet fever anti-serum, then coming into production, and this work led him to the study of the control of streptococcal infection using anti-sera and drugs. In 1935 his attention was drawn to a paper by Gerhard Domagk of the research laboratories of IG Farbenindustrie which showed that the diazo dye known as Prontosil protected mice against virulent strains of streptococci. Buttle experimented with a sample of Prontosil supplied by Domagk but was unable to confirm the observations using the strain of streptococci available to him. After being informed by Dr Leonard Colebrook of Queen Charlotte's Hospital of difficulties in treating puerperal fever in women with streptococcal infection and of the very high mortality rate of the disease he obtained a sample of the virulent strain from the hospital and with this succeeded in reproducing Domagk's results. After December 1935, when workers at the Institut Pasteur in Paris showed that sulphanilamide was the active moiety of the Prontosil molecule, Buttle and his co-workers began research on the chemotherapy of sulphanilamide and its derivatives. They showed that sulphanilamide protected mice against meningococci and gonococci, and revealed the potential of some derivatives in the treatment of pneumococcal and staphylococcal infections. 
In 1939 Buttle went to New York to lecture on the research into sulphonamide drugs but had to return to Britain on the outbreak of war as a member of the regular army reserve. He was transferred from the Royal Engineers to the Royal Army Medical Corps, and was appointed to the blood transfusion service, becoming an adviser on blood transfusion to the army. He left the service with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. Early in the war, when serving with the base transfusion unit in Cairo, he recognized that whole blood was essential if battle casualties with excessive blood loss were to benefit from early surgery under anaesthesia. Blood plasma was being sent out from Britain, but not the equipment necessary to collect and store whole blood, and it was necessary to manufacture the apparatus from materials available locally. It was largely due to Buttle's engineering skills that the unit was able to overcome the practical difficulties arising from necessary improvisation. His team of transfusion officers transformed the surgery of the battlefield from El Alamein onwards. He was appointed OBE (military division) in 1942 for his contribution to war medicine. 
In 1943 Buttle was sent as an expert in the therapeutic use of sulphonamide drugs to Carthage to assist Lord Moran in treating Winston Churchill for a bronchial infection. On this occasion the prime minister questioned Buttle closely on the new antibiotic penicillin and its potential use in forthcoming military operations. 
After the war Buttle and his family settled in London. On 8 November 1936 he had married Eva Karolina Korella ('b'. 1904/5), a talented painter, the daughter of Friedrich Wilhelm Saloman Korella, a retired professor of botany at Danzig University. They had one son, Richard. In 1946 Buttle became the first Wellcome professor of pharmacology at the school of pharmacy, University of London, and held the post to 1966. He was professor of pharmacology at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, from 1948 to 1966. During this time he researched the chemotherapy of bacterial diseases and cancer. He served on the Medical Research Council's drugs safety committee, the Colonial Office leprosy committee, and the Ministry of Agriculture food additives committee. He was a medical consultant to the Ministry of Defence and president of the therapeutics and experimental medicine section of the Royal Society of Medicine. After his retirement in 1966 he held research posts in Mexico City, 1967-9, Addis Ababa, 1972-4, and Riyadh, 1974-8. On his return to the United Kingdom he became a consultant to the Wellcome laboratories. 
Buttle was a short, sturdy, robust man with an original mind that did not run on conventional lines. This latter characteristic was shared by his brother Frank, an Anglican clergyman who combined personal poverty with an interest in the stock market. With the money he made the two brothers set up the Buttle Trust devoted to the education and welfare of deprived children, with Gladwin Buttle acting as chairman of the trust from 1953 to 1974. He died on 3 May 1983 at Charing Cross Hospital (Fulham), London, and a memorial service was held at the church of Christ the King, London. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51739


Slater, Eliot Trevor Oakeshott (1904-1983), psychiatrist, second son of Gilbert Slater (1864-1938), economic historian and principal of Ruskin College, Oxford, and Violet Oakeshott, was born on 28 August 1904 at 84 Eglinton Road, Plumstead, London. His mother being a Quaker he went to Leighton Park School, Reading, from where he won an exhibition to St John's College, Cambridge, to study natural sciences. From 1925 he continued his medical education at St George's Hospital, London, qualifying as a doctor in 1928. He then spent two years in medical posts in general practice, at St George's, and at the West End Hospital for Nervous Diseases, passing the membership examination of the Royal College of Physicians in 1930. In his 'Autobiographical sketch' (1971) he described his next post, assistant medical officer at Derby County Mental Hospital, as stultifying and was therefore overjoyed to be appointed medical officer at the Maudsley Hospital, London (1931), where, with the encouragement of Aubrey Lewis and Edward Mapother, and the assistance of R. A. Fisher, he developed his interest in the application of statistical methods to the empirical study of mental illness. 
In 1934 Slater went to the Research Institute for Psychiatry in Munich, studying psychiatric genetics under Bruno Schulz. He met and, on 24 December 1935, married his first wife, Lydia Pasternak ['see 'Slater, Lydia Elisabeth Leonidovna Pasternak (1902-1989)], a research chemist in the institute in Munich. She was daughter of Leonid Pasternak, and sister of the poet and novelist Boris Pasternak. Their four children (two daughters and two sons) became respectively an English don, a psychiatrist, a mathematician, and a haematologist. 
Slater returned to the Maudsley in 1935, continuing his research on the inheritance of mental disorders, but when war broke out in 1939 psychiatric services at the Maudsley were dispersed and he became clinical director of the Sutton Emergency Hospital, where he was responsible for the treatment of some twenty thousand psychiatric casualties. This experience led to the influential book 'Physical Methods of Treatment in Psychiatry' (with William Sargant, 1944). From 1946 he was physician in psychological medicine at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases, Queen Square, London, but he resigned in 1964 in protest at the hospital's rejection of the offer of a benefaction to establish a chair in psychiatry there. After the dissolution of his marriage he married, in 1946, Jean Fyfe Foster. 
As senior lecturer at the Institute of Psychiatry (1950-59) Slater continued to work, notably on the prevalence of psychiatric disorders in twins, assisted by James Shields. In 1959 Slater formed the Medical Research Council Psychiatric Genetics Unit at the Maudsley, which he directed until 1969. This work culminated in 'The Genetics of Mental Disorders' (with Valerie Cowie, 1971). 
Slater published about 150 books and papers, of which 'Clinical Psychiatry' (with Willi Mayer-Gross and Martin Roth, 1954) was long the leading textbook of psychiatry in English. He gave the Litchfield (1959), Galton (1960), and Mapother (1960) lectures, and in the Maudsley lecture (1961) and elsewhere attacked the concept of hysteria as a valid syndrome: in an influential follow-up study of patients diagnosed as suffering from hysteria he showed that serious underlying physical illness emerged later in many of them and that this could in itself account for their allegedly psychological symptoms. As editor of the 'British Journal of Psychiatry' from 1961 to 1972 Slater transformed it into a leading European journal. Colleagues noted the hard work and willingness to assist the efforts of others which characterized his editorship. In 1966 he was appointed CBE. He held honorary fellowships of several British and American medical and psychiatric societies, and was fellow and vice-president (1963-6) of the Eugenics Society. 
Slater's interests were wide: in 1964 he was a member of the royal commission on capital punishment, and after retirement he joined the Euthanasia Society. He was agnostic, and found himself at times more at home with ideas than with people. He published a statistical investigation of chess openings, pathographic studies of composers, and a book of poetry. An exhibition of his paintings was held in 1977. He remained active long after retirement, being awarded the degree of PhD (London) at the age of seventy-seven for a statistical word study of 'Edward III' which provided evidence that the play was written by Shakespeare. 
Slater died at his home, the Coach House, 128A Castelnau, Barnes, London on 15 May 1983 of a heart attack. He was survived by his wife and the four children of his first marriage. Although his advocacy of the theory that schizophrenia is inherited by a single partially dominant gene was, and remains, controversial, he had achieved international recognition for his work on psychiatric genetics and the nature of neurosis. By his concern for the systematic collection and critical analysis of data he helped to establish psychiatry as a scientific discipline capable of rigorous empirical study. 


@@@@@


doc= 51740


Bryan, George Hartley (1864-1928), applied mathematician, was born on 1 March 1864 at 12 Trumpington Street, Cambridge, the only child of Robert Purdie Bryan, fellow-commoner of Clare College, and his wife, Fanny, daughter of George Martell, a surgeon. His father died in 1865 at the age of twenty-five while a student of law and Bryan's subsequent upbringing and education were undertaken by his mother and grandparents. 
An only child and in delicate health, Bryan had an indulgent childhood, the family spending much of its time abroad in France, Italy, and Germany, especially the warmer climes of the Italian and French rivieras. This unusual upbringing gave him an excellent knowledge of languages and a lifelong fascination with the natural world, particularly of the rivieras, but it also led to a rather noticeable personal eccentricity. He was never allowed to go to school, and even when he became an undergraduate at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1883 he still lived at home. Having graduated as fifth wrangler in the mathematical tripos of 1886, in the next year Bryan was placed in the first division of the first class in part two of the tripos and in due course was second Smith's prizeman. He was elected a fellow of Peterhouse in 1889, his fellowship terminating automatically in 1895. In 1896 he was appointed professor of pure and applied mathematics at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, a position he held, with a special period of leave for research in 1917-20, until his retirement in 1926. His eccentric and absent-minded behaviour gave rise to numerous anecdotes among the Bangor students of the time. Bryan was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1895 and honorary fellow of Peterhouse in 1915. On 17 July 1906 he married Mabel Williams (1870-1958), headmistress of the Bangor kindergarten school. Their only daughter, Margaret, was born in 1909. 
Bryan's unique and lasting contribution to mathematics was the formulation of the theory of aircraft stability. As early as 1896 he recognized the importance of stability and control when addressing the Royal Artillery Institution on progress in manned flight. In June 1903, even before the first powered flight by the Wright brothers, he and his former student W. E. Williams communicated an epoch-making paper to the Royal Society on the longitudinal stability of gliders. Once certain characteristic quantities related to an aircraft were known, it became possible to study mathematically its stability -- though only (at this stage) in the direction of its flight. Early aviators constructed their machines empirically and Bryan's work had little impact. However, persevering in his efforts, he published 'Stability in Aviation' in 1911, completing the mathematical treatment of aircraft stability in all dimensions. Soon, using wind tunnels, the necessary characteristics of an aircraft could be experimentally evaluated and Bryan's theory became an integral part of all aircraft design. In 1914 his work was recognized by the award of the gold medal of the Royal Aeronautical Society. He was also elected president of the Institution of Aeronautical Engineers. 
Stability was a recurring theme in Bryan's work. His first papers in 1888 were on the stability of elastic systems and the stability of a rotating cylinder of liquid, but he spread his very considerable and highly productive talents in applied mathematics widely. In 1891 and 1894 he produced important reports for the British Association on thermodynamics (the study of the general laws governing heat and energy), becoming a world authority on the subject. The article on thermodynamics published in the 'Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wissenschaften' (1898-1934) is his. His 1900 paper on the mathematical theory of the action of bilge keels in extinguishing the oscillations of a ship led, in 1901, to the award of the gold medal of the Institution of Naval Architects. 
Bryan was committed to raising the standards and status of mathematical education in Britain, and produced, mainly with W. Briggs, over a dozen student textbooks, such as the 'Elementary Text Book of Mechanics' of 1894. In 1907, while president of the Mathematical Association, he introduced local branches by setting up the first in north Wales. 
Bryan was an accomplished naturalist, contributing many articles on botany, entomology, and microscopy to such journals as 'Science-Gossip' and the 'International Journal of Microscopy and Natural Science'. He served as president of the Cambridge Entomological Society and the Postal Microscopical Society. A man with very wide interests, his great love of music led him to experiments with pneumatic piano-players on which he published a paper in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Institution' (21, 1915, 397-406). On retirement in 1926 Bryan moved to his beloved Italian riviera. He died, after a short illness, at his villa, Le Lucciole, in Bordighera on 13 October 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 51741


Carslaw, Horatio Scott (1870-1954), mathematician, was born on 12 February 1870 at Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire, Scotland, the fifth son of William Henderson Carslaw, a Free Church minister, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Lockhead. After an early education at Glasgow Academy he attended Glasgow University where he studied under Professor William Jack, gaining his MA in 1891. He went on to study mathematics at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and was fourth wrangler in 1894. His first academic appointment was as assistant to Jack at Glasgow in 1896. In 1897 he made study visits to Rome, Palermo, and Gottingen. He was made a Cambridge MA in 1898 and subsequently took doctorates at both Glasgow (1899) and Cambridge (1905). 
Carslaw's visit to Gottingen was the principal influence shaping his future research. During his stay the theoretical physicist Arnold Sommerfield introduced him to continental advances, then poorly known in the English-speaking world, and to modern notions of mathematical exactitude, especially the rigorous attention to detail in the application of mathematics. Carslaw worked intensively to apply advanced complex variable analysis to problems of heat and diffraction. In 1903 he took up an appointment to the chair of pure and applied mathematics at the University of Sydney. Aquiline, keen-eyed, bespectacled, already balding, he was by office the leading mathematician in New South Wales, indeed in Australia as a whole. This context drew his attention to matters of mathematical education. He once described himself as a teacher who enjoyed teaching; others saw him as something of a showman in the lecture room. He was active in both the administrative and the expository aspects of school and undergraduate mathematics, and wrote texts on calculus, trigonometry, and non-Euclidean geometry. His many students included E. M. Wellish (later his deputy) and J. C. Jaeger, his subsequent collaborator. 
More than a textbook, and incorporating then recent results, was Carslaw's 'Introduction to the theory of Fourier's series and integrals and the mathematical theory of the conduction of heat' (1906). Work on Fourier (trigonometric) series and their applications was a lifelong preoccupation, and this text was several times revised and reissued. 
Carslaw married a widow, Ethel Maude Cruickshank, 'nee' Clarke, on 12 February 1907. She died on 3 June of the same year, and he never remarried. Not surprisingly, these events correspond to a hiatus in Carslaw's mathematical output; he published nothing during 1907-8. However his research work in time resumed and he contributed many papers, both innovative and expository, some seventy in all. Honours came to him, including doctorates of science (Adelaide, 1926) and laws (Glasgow, 1928). He was a fellow of the royal societies of Edinburgh and of New South Wales. He retired in 1935. 
Carslaw's most enduring mathematical legacy, 'Operational Methods in Applied Mathematics' (1941; 2nd edn, 1948; co-authored with Jaeger), is a product of his retirement. This book introduced into undergraduate curricula the 'Laplace transform', a front-line research topic which became in record time standard fare, displacing the earlier, unsatisfactory 'operational calculus'. 
Carslaw continued to work after his retirement, despite failing eyesight. Ever humanely left-leaning, he devoted his later years to another long-standing interest, the pursuit of equitable income tax schemes. He died at his home, Thule, Osborne Road, Burradoo, New South Wales, Australia, on 11 November 1954 and was buried the next day in the Anglican section of Bowral cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51743


Baldwin, Emily (1807-1880), headmistress, was born on 18 September 1807 at 47 Paternoster Row, London, one of seven children of Robert Baldwin (1780-1858), publisher, and his wife, Maria, daughter of Henry Baldwin, a leading City publisher and printer. Both her parents were members of the large Baldwin family, whose activities in publishing dated back to the seventeenth century. Her father started the 'London Magazine' in 1820, and her uncle Charles Baldwin was founder of 'The Standard', a conservative newspaper. Her home background was cultured and literary and she benefited from a scholarly mother. But nothing is known of Emily Baldwin's education or indeed what led her into a career in teaching. She is known to have run a school at Leamington, and for fourteen years, immediately prior to her appointment at Howell's School, she was head of a highly successful school at Notting Hill. 
Emily Baldwin was already fifty-three years of age and an experienced headmistress when she was appointed as 'chief matron' of Howell's School, Llandaff, an Anglican school closely associated with the cathedral. Her own religious sympathies were high-church Anglican. The school was a new foundation, one of two boarding-schools for the education of female orphans erected in Wales, the other being at Denbigh, by the Drapers' Company of the City of London. Thomas Howell, a Monmouthshire draper, who died in 1540, had left a sum of money in his will to provide dowries for female orphans. By the nineteenth century, when the legacy was providing an income of some $2000 per annum, a long legal wrangle had arisen over the Drapers' administration of the charity and, following rulings by the court of chancery and an act of parliament (1852), the schools, the first endowed schools for girls in Wales, were built. Emily Baldwin was appointed by the court of chancery in London. 
A small, well-built woman with a strong nose and determined chin, wearing her hair in out-dated ringlets and attired in the beribboned cap and voluminous petticoats of an earlier decade, Miss Baldwin made her mark on the school at Llandaff. She brought diplomacy, cheerfulness, and perseverance, as well as a commitment to high standards of academic achievement, to her role as headmistress. She was to need all these qualities in dealing with the all-male board of governors, including the influential Alfred Ollivant, bishop of Llandaff, and the Drapers' Company, which controlled the expenditure of the school. 
Emily Baldwin's achievement during the years of her headship (1860-72) was to transform the image of the school at Llandaff from a charity foundation into a highly regarded girls' school. From the outset the school took paying boarders, and within a few years also took day girls, as well as orphans. The first intakes of girls, both orphans and paying pupils, were drawn from the class of small traders, clerks, and farmers, but by the early 1870s the school catered largely for the middle class, attracting the daughters of professional men, the clergy, and army officers. While most girls' charity residential schools provided only a basic elementary education, the curriculum at Llandaff covered 'the principles of the Christian Religion, Reading, Writing, Arithmetic, English Grammar, Geography, Biography, History, the Elements of Astronomy, Garden Botany, Music, French, Drawing and such subjects as the Governors may direct' (Letter books 1859-64). In the course of the 1860s it was further expanded to include geometry, Italian, and Latin. Miss Baldwin made constant demands on the Drapers' Company to buy books, lists of which she drew up herself, and to provide well-qualified teachers. While her academic aspirations for her pupils are clear, the traditional female accomplishments, such as music and drawing, were also taught, and the original scheme for the school had laid down that all girls should be taught needlework. 
Emily Baldwin ran the school efficiently and with authority. Her regime, however, unlike that of many of her contemporaries, was characterized by kindliness and common sense. She ensured that the food was appetizing, that there were novels and story books in the library as well as academic texts, and that the younger girls had shuttlecocks and hoops. She taught the children herself, gave rewards for achievement, and encouraged pupils with problems to come to her personally. Under Miss Baldwin there was no corporal punishment at Llandaff, and as one member of staff recorded: 'I never saw Miss Baldwin strike a child' (McCann, 93). Her obituary in the 'Western Mail' (6 December 1880) singled out not only her ability and assiduity but her 'affection for the pupils which characterized her administration and won for her, not only the esteem of the governors but the affectionate regard of all those who were under her charge'. 
There is no evidence that Emily Baldwin had any connection with the feminist movement in education. The historian of the school, Jean McCann, noting that Miss Buss had founded North London Collegiate School in 1850 and Miss Beale had become headmistress of Cheltenham Ladies' College in 1857, states, 'it would appear not a ripple reached Llandaff'. Ill health forced Emily to retire, aged sixty-five, in 1872 on a meagre pension from the Drapers' Company, the insolvency of her father's publishing business having left the family in straitened circumstances. She returned to London, living at times with her spinster sisters and at times alone in a series of lodgings. Emily Baldwin died on 2 December 1880 at 34 Coleherne Road, South Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 51744


Smith, Mary Bentinck (1864-1921), headmistress, was born on 2 November 1864 at Hamburg, the daughter of James Smith (1822-1906), a Congregational minister of great learning, and his wife, Countess (Wilhelmina) Augusta Friederike Bentinck (1834-1922), daughter of Willem, second Count Bentinck in the nobility of the Holy Roman Empire (a great-grandson of Hans Willem, first earl of Portland), and his second wife, Sara Geddes. She had a younger brother, William Frederick Bentinck Smith ('b'. 1872), who became professor of philosophy at Tulane University, New Orleans. Mary was educated privately in England and France, and at the public girls' school at Wiesbaden. In 1890 she won a scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge, gaining a starred first in the medieval and modern languages tripos in 1893, and a second class in English in 1894, later gaining the degrees of MA (1904) and DLitt from Trinity College, Dublin. In the same year she wrote to the University of Edinburgh to ask whether women might be considered for lectureships recently advertised, but the court 'did not contemplate the appointment of women'. She went on to build the first part of her career in the women's colleges. 
From 1894 to 1897 Miss Bentinck Smith was lecturer in modern languages at Victoria College, Belfast, and during the next two years in German and philology at Royal Holloway College. She returned to Girton in 1899 as lecturer in medieval and modern languages and became director of studies in 1901. She established an international reputation as a Chaucer scholar. She published an edition of his 'Prologue' and 'Knight's Tale' (1908), translated 'The Language and Metre of Chaucer' from the German of B. Ten Brink (1901), made valuable contributions to the 'English Dialect Dictionary' and to the 'Cambridge History of English Literature', and translated O. L. Jiriczek's 'Northern Hero Legends' (1902). So far her career was a paradigm of a successful new academic woman. 
In 1906 Miss Bentinck Smith was appointed principal of Avery Hill Training College, founded by the London county council in the opulent mansion of a self-made City man, the first and most prestigious of the colleges the new local education authority was empowered to provide under the 'Education Act' of 1902. The principal was to be responsible not only for college 'instruction', but also for the 'board, recreation and social life of the students in residence', with a salary of $500 and residence, calculated at $100. Within two months of taking up the appointment, she was taken ill and 'never returned to her desk' (Shorney, 53). In this short time she had made her mark on the college, insisting on high academic standards while paying close attention to the students' welfare. Forty years later she was still remembered with affection, one of a small number of women who began to transform training colleges from oppressive and restrictive sectarian seminaries into stimulating places of professional education. 
In 1907 Mary Bentinck Smith became headmistress of St Leonards School, St Andrews, founded by a Girton pioneer and already flourishing, with high academic standards. Although lacking previous school experience she quickly identified herself with St Leonards. Her staff and pupils appreciated her magnetic personality, her genius for friendship, and her sense of humour. She herself was an original and stimulating teacher. A woman of deep faith, her scripture lessons were especially memorable, and in all her teaching girls remembered that there was 'no spoon feeding'. Pupils were encouraged to read up a subject for themselves, to draw their own conclusions, and form their own judgements. 
The whole curriculum was kept under constant review. Since 1902 the school had been recognized as teaching for the first MB of the University of London. Under Miss Bentinck Smith, one of the pioneers of science teaching for girls, two new laboratories and a lecture theatre were built, and opened in 1908 by Sir Ernest Shackleton. An additional mistress was appointed for science, and it became a separate department under its own head. Vocational education was provided in Spanish and typewriting for those who desired it. Aural culture was added to the music course, already very wide and part of the main curriculum, while art was seriously taught. A special domestic science department was created for girls over seventeen, who continued their general education and were examined for the certificates of the Edinburgh School of Cookery. Above all the academic standards of the school were maintained, and indeed raised to meet the increasing competition for places at the Oxford, Cambridge, and London colleges and the needs of the new Higher Certificate. Help and encouragement were given to girls in relation to higher education and their choice of careers. 
Miss Bentinck Smith was one of the first women JPs for the county of Fife. She helped to found the Girls' Club and the Women Citizens' Association in St Andrews. She also served her former college, and in 1916 was elected by the Girton College Roll to the college council. In spite of the long journey from Scotland she seldom failed to attend its meetings, though the war years were a great strain upon her health. Mary Bentinck Smith died at St Leonards School, St Andrews, on 20 December 1921. Her academic record was one of high distinction and Girton, Avery Hill, and St Leonards had all benefited from her clear-sighted policy and optimistic outlook, which helped her to overcome obstacles to progress in women's education. Girton acknowledged her contribution by erecting wrought-iron entrance gates as a memorial. 'Ad vitam: Papers of a Headmistress', a volume of her school sermons and addresses, was published posthumously. It included papers on the educational ideals of H. G. Wells, the education of girls intending to enter the medical profession, and the need to provide support for women wishing to carry out academic research. Her account 'The girls' school in literature and life', reviewing the history of girls' education as depicted in fiction, concluded that there was 'no just reason for excluding [girls] from the practice of any profession worthy of a human being's interest and devotion' (Smith, 108). 


@@@@@


doc= 51745


Gurney, Mary (1836-1917), educationist, was born at Denmark Hill, London, the elder daughter of Joseph Gurney (1804-1879), parliamentary shorthand writer, and his first wife, Emma (died 1842), daughter of E. Rawlings. In addition to her brother, William, and younger sister, Amelia, she had an unknown number of half-sisters, the daughters of her father's second marriage, to Harriet Tritton. Her upbringing following her mother's early death was presumably supervised by her father, a self-taught biblical scholar whose thirst for knowledge she certainly inherited. As a girl she taught herself Latin, Greek, and Italian, subjects unlikely to have been on offer at the school, Wincobank Hall, near Rotherham, Yorkshire, which she is said to have attended for 'a short period' (Magnus, 'Mary Gurney', 13); later, like her father, she used time spent on bus journeys to learn German, and later still acquired a working knowledge of Spanish. At home she took on, evidently with great verve, the early education of her half-sisters; many years later one of them, Catherine Gurney, recalled 'weeping miserably' when governesses came to take her place. Still living at home, she turned to voluntary work, becoming secretary of Wandsworth British Girls' School, an elementary school run by the British and Foreign School Society. 
It cannot have been accidental that a school was the object of Mary Gurney's first endeavours: 'an educational enthusiasm', she declared not many years later, 'has always been part of myself' (Ridley, 123). In 1871 she made contact with fellow enthusiasts whose efforts were directed towards providing an affirmative answer to the question she asked in a paper delivered to the Social Science Congress at Leeds in September of that year: 'Are we to have education for our middle-class girls?' (reprinted in 'The Education Papers: Women's Quest for Equality in Britain, 1850-1912', ed. D. Spender, 1987). By 'middle-class' she meant 'the mass of girls between 'the young ladies' whose parents pay $80 to $100, or even $200 or $300 per annum for instruction principally in so-called accomplishments, and girls trained in elementary schools on payment of 1d or 2d weekly'. In November, with encouragement from Frances Mary Buss, she joined the newly launched National Union for the Improvement of the Education of Women of All Classes, the brainchild of Maria Grey. She was promptly elected to its organizing committee and a year later to the council appointed to carry out the union's most urgent and most enduring project, the establishment of 'good and cheap day schools for girls'; these were to be financially self-supporting, although the initial capital would come from interest-bearing shares purchased by well-wishers. This scheme was put into practice through the formation of the Girls' Public Day School Company Ltd (GPDSC), launched in June 1872; the first school opened in Chelsea (it later migrated to Kensington) the following January. 
Mary Gurney served on the council of the GPDSC (or GPDST as it became after reconstitution in 1905 as a trust) from 1872 until her death in 1917, and was an influential member of its small but powerful education committee, of which she was chair from 1897 to 1913. While her father was still alive she continued to live at home, which from about 1872 was Tyndale Lodge, near Wimbledon Common. But after his death in 1879, and apparently under no necessity to earn her own living, she set up house with her sister Amelia (neither of them married) in Kensington, within easy reach of the company's office in central London and a convenient starting point for countless journeys on the company's business. Having done much to promote the rapid proliferation of GPDSC high schools in London and its outskirts, but also countrywide -- at one point in the mid-1890s there were more than thirty, divided almost equally between London and the provinces -- she still contrived to devote personal attention to each, while keeping in view the interests and objectives of the operation as a whole. Recognizing the greater good, she did not vote against the closure of schools which proved unviable, but for sentimental reasons could never be persuaded to vote in favour. She fully supported the council's policy of maintaining a tight control over the schools and saw to it that weaknesses revealed by inspection reports, examination results, and returns of pupil numbers received immediate attention. In 1894, in tandem with the chairman of the GPDSC, W. H. Stone, she gave evidence to the royal commission on secondary education chaired by James Bryce, and in 1899 contributed to a volume of short essays, 'What is Secondary Education?', edited by Robert Pickett Scott. 
Mary Gurney acted as mentor to a long succession of GPDSC headmistresses, in whose appointment she played a decisive part. Beneficiaries of her wisdom and sympathy, they usually accepted her occasional criticism in the professional spirit with which it was offered; she could, indeed, have been one of their number. She also served on the councils of the Maria Grey Training College, the Teachers' Training and Registration Society, and the London Society for the Extension of University Teaching; she was a governor of Cheltenham Ladies' College and of Princess Helena College. She was interested in the Froebel movement, joined the committee of the Froebel Society, and under the title 'Kindergarten Practice' (1877) published her translation of a work by one of his followers, A. Koehler; she also translated scholarly articles from French, German, Spanish, and Italian, which appeared in journals such as 'The Antiquary'. She signed the 1885 petition to the House of Lords in favour of the enfranchisement of women householders. In lending her support to the movement for the higher education of women she rejected the notion of a 'women's university' and in 1894 became a member of the governing body of Girton College, Cambridge, her cousin once removed, Russell Gurney, having been a supporter of Emily Davies, the founder of the college. With her sister, Amelia, she gave $1000 for extensions to the chemical laboratory, and their combined bequests to the college eventually amounted to almost $30,000. Privately, she gave financial help to promising scholars, whether at Girton or in the high schools; some doubtless fell into both categories. 
Strong-minded, with a countenance to match, Mary Gurney was also tender-hearted and given to hospitality. She was an outstanding example of the cultivated single woman, continually developing her appreciation of music, painting, and architecture through travel and wide reading. She applied herself with equal diligence and success to the multiplication of seriously intentioned schools for girls at a time when few models were at hand and 'experience had often to be dearly bought' ('Memorial leaflet', 1917, GPDST Archives). Her posthumous recognition as one of the four founders of the GPDST, the others being Maria Grey, Emily Shirreff, and Lady Stanley of Alderley, was no more than she deserved. Mary Gurney died at her home, 69 Ennismore Gardens, Kensington, on 8 October 1917 and was buried in Putney Vale cemetery. She bequeathed $500 to the GPDST to found a leaving scholarship. 


@@@@@


doc= 51746


Procter, Jane (1810-1882), headmistress and temperance campaigner, was born on 2 November 1810 in Worsell in the parish of Kirklevington in Yorkshire, the first of the four children of James Procter (1766-1816), merchant, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Thurnam of Osbaldwick in the North Riding of Yorkshire and his wife, Elizabeth. Both her parents were members of the Religious Society of Friends and on her father's side she could trace her Quaker ancestry back to the last quarter of the seventeenth century. 
As a child, Jane lived initially in the Yorkshire town of Yarm, near Stockton-on-Tees, before her family moved to Blackburn in Lancashire. After her father's death in 1816, her mother took her and her three younger sisters back to Yorkshire where they went to live with her father's cousins in the small town of Selby. Here she enjoyed a relatively comfortable existence and in 1821 was sent to Ackworth School, a co-educational boarding-school near Pontefract in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which had been founded in 1779 on the initiative of the Quaker physician, John Fothergill. 
Jane Procter could have stayed on at Ackworth to train as a teacher, but after four years she decided to go and work in a private Quaker school in Doncaster. She returned to Selby after the death of her mother in 1828. Although only eighteen at the time, she automatically assumed responsibility for the welfare of her sisters but was apparently given considerable assistance by the Quaker meeting in Selby which arranged for a couple to live with the girls until Jane was able to prove her competence in running a household. She decided to establish a girls' school of her own and with her sisters' help set up a modest institution under the shadow of the abbey. This proved a successful venture which lasted for twenty years. But as the prosperity of Selby declined with the collapse of the cottage linen industry, Jane and her two unmarried sisters, Barbara and Elizabeth, eventually decided to move to the expanding town of Darlington in co. Durham to set up a new school. A property was duly purchased in July 1848 and a new boarding-school was opened shortly afterwards at 11 Houndgate under the name of Selby House. 
At Selby House, Jane Procter offered the daughters of the more prosperous Quaker families a 'liberal and useful education' which emphasized the 'practical utility of literary and scientific pursuits' and thus included such varied subjects as astronomy, botany, Latin, and Greek. Despite the rather daring nature of the venture, the school proved a success and after six years was moved to larger premises on a nearby estate where it became known as Polam Hall. As a headmistress, she showed herself to be a woman of commanding presence who, although not physically imposing, was able to inspire great respect and devotion from her pupils. An enthusiastic and skilful teacher, she had the capacity to make learning enjoyable and, despite her own rather austere lifestyle, was renowned for her kindness and generosity. Indeed, it was said of her that she possessed the rare quality of commanding respect without severity and of influencing and guiding her pupils to aspire to the highest ideals without apparent effort on her part. 
As a member of the governing committee of the British and Foreign School Society's Training College for Mistresses in Darlington, Jane Procter helped to promote teaching as a profession among working-class women in the north of England following the introduction of compulsory elementary education under the 'Education Act' of 1870. But Polam Hall nevertheless remained the focus of her existence and under her direction it became a thriving educational institution, as well as a meeting place for the local Friends' Essay Society. It also became a centre for temperance activity: Jane and her sister Elizabeth had established the Darlington Women's Temperance Association in 1850 and over the years the school played host to a series of fund-raising activities, while its pupils were entertained by a steady stream of visiting temperance lecturers who came to enjoy the sisters' hospitality. 
Jane Procter remained headmistress of Polam Hall for thirty-four years, running the school with the help of her sister Elizabeth following the death of Barbara Procter in 1859. Although a strong, independent-minded woman, she relied heavily on Elizabeth for support and was greatly shocked by her sudden death during a holiday in Frankfurt in 1881. Jane Procter herself died suddenly while on a visit to Rome, on 5 January 1882, less than five months after the loss of her sister. She was buried in the city's protestant cemetery, where a group of her former pupils had a marble monument erected to mark her grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 51747


Jourdain, Philip Edward Bertrand (1879-1919), historian of mathematics and logic, was born on 16 October 1879 at Ashbourne vicarage, Derbyshire, one of the large family of Francis Jourdain, vicar of Ashbourne, and his wife, Emily, formerly Clay. Among his siblings, an elder sister, Eleanor Frances Jourdain, was a principal witness of the alleged vision in 1901 of Marie Antoinette and members of her court at Versailles; she was later principal of St Hugh's Hall (as it was then called) in Oxford. Another sister, (Emily) Margaret Jourdain (1876-1951), was a well-known authority on furniture, and a brother, Francis Charles Robert Jourdain (1865-1940), on birds. 
After education at Cheltenham College, Jourdain studied mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, and took a course in mathematical logic -- the first of its kind in a British university -- given by Bertrand Russell. Thereafter he specialized in set theory and logic, and their histories. His research work was indifferent, in that he persisted in trying to prove the 'axiom of choice', a controversial assumption made in set theory introduced in 1904 but fairly soon accepted by everybody else as unavoidable. However, his historical work was not only very scholarly but also important both in its erudition and in publishing the views of major figures which he obtained by correspondence. One of these was the German mathematician Georg Cantor (1845-1918), the main creator of set theory; Jourdain published English translations of two main papers in 1915. He also translated and studied the logician Gottlob Frege (1848-1925), then not widely known. He published in 1916 a new edition of George Boole's 'The Laws of Thought' (1854), but did not live to prepare an edition of Boole's other logical writings. 
These editions were put out by the Open Court Publishing Company, an American house devoted to the furthering of science and philosophy, especially of German origin. Jourdain became its English editor in 1912, and was active in executing or arranging translations of works by major figures (above all of the physicist Ernst Mach), commissioning articles for its principal journal 'The Monist' (from T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound, among others), and writing and reviewing himself there frequently. He also published there and elsewhere on various aspects of the history of mathematical analysis, mechanics, and mathematical physics, and (with less significance) on aspects of the philosophy of mathematics and science, but a plan for a 'national edition' of the works of Newton did not advance. 
Two of Jourdain's best known products were short books, not placed with Open Court. 'The Nature of Mathematics' (editions of 1912 and 1919) gave a heuristic treatment of some aspects of the subject strongly informed by history. 'The Philosophy of Mr. B*rtr*nd R*ss*ll' (1918) may seem to be light relief, but in fact many sharp observations are made about issues addressed by Russell, Frege, and other philosophers and logicians of that time; a few of the contributions are by Russell himself. In an appendix Jourdain revealed many fine anticipations of these issues by Lewis Carroll, especially in the 'Alice' books. He also published some satire and verse. 
On 26 June 1915 Jourdain married Laura Cross, daughter of the deceased Revd Walter Horace Insull of Girton. She helped him as a secretary; they had no children. After the death of Paul Carus, editor of 'The Monist', in 1919, Jourdain succeeded him, but he died at Basingbourne Road, Crookham, Hampshire, on 1 October, from a creeping paralysis called Friedreich's ataxia. This illness had prevented him from taking the part two tripos at Cambridge and thus hoping for an orthodox academic career, so he had always worked freelance. 
While not a major figure, Jourdain made lone but durable contributions to the history of mathematics and logic. He also brought several noteworthy titles to the Open Court list, some of which (his translation of Cantor, for example) were kept in print for many years. His own main historical writings on logic and set theory were reprinted in 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 51748


Cooper, Alice Jane (1846-1917), headmistress, was born in Cartwright Street, Doncaster, Yorkshire, on 4 August 1846, the eldest of the four daughters of the Revd John Thomas Cooper (died 1877), a Unitarian minister, and his wife, Anne, formerly Barrow (died 1892). Like many Unitarians she was deeply involved in education. Having succeeded in the new Cambridge higher local examination, she was second mistress from 1875 to 1876 at Notting Hill High School for Girls, one of the first two schools established by the Girls' Public Day School Company in 1873. From 1876 until 1895 she was the first headmistress of Edgbaston High School for Girls, an early example of a proprietary high school for girls and the first to offer public secondary schooling to girls in Birmingham. 
Alice Cooper entered fully into the objectives of the nonconformist 'industrial squirearchy' of Birmingham that had established this non-sectarian school for girls to provide the best education available. Concerned with every aspect of school life, she refused to copy any narrowing contemporary educational practices. Establishing a broad curriculum, she discouraged cram and rote learning and disapproved of external examinations before the age of sixteen or seventeen. She did much to promote the very successful teaching of science at Edgbaston, although, as she pointed out in the 1894 'Journal of Education', elsewhere girls particularly often suffered badly from the lack of scientific equipment. 
Miss Cooper was also a pioneering headmistress in her encouragement of cricket and other games, callisthenics, gymnastics, Ling exercises, sensible clothing, and drama -- in 1889, for example, her correspondent Lewis Carroll saw a performance of 'Alice in Wonderland' at the school. She stimulated a variety of other extra-curricular activities, including a school magazine, 'Laurel Leaves', and founded The Link for old girls. She thus laid the foundations of a very successful, rapidly growing high school for the wealthier middle class, from which many girls left to join the increasing band of women university students. 
The innovative attitudes of both headmistress and council of the school were shown in 1882 when Miss Cooper was sent to the USA to report upon educational methods there. In her detailed report on the large and varied number of educational institutions she visited, while not converted to common state primary schools, she extolled the schools' better equipment, separate classrooms, and specialized facilities, approved of the encouragement of questioning attitudes in pupils, and displayed a cautious preference for co-education. 
Miss Cooper, like other women reformers, did much to promote the professional training of teachers for secondary education as her fellowship of the College of Preceptors and membership of the 1874 Association of Headmistresses illustrated (the latter met at Edgbaston High in 1889). She attended Edward Thring's conference of headmistresses at Uppingham in 1887. On the board of managers of the Birmingham Day Training College, established in 1890, she supported this method of training elementary teachers and, approving of greater links between elementary and secondary schooling, made the novel suggestion that high school girls could use such colleges and thence teach in the higher grade elementary schools. She wished to extend such training to secondary teachers, wanting all women teachers, public or private, to gain a university qualification. This would be followed by teacher training based on university departments and schools together, with public financial support if necessary. She also supported travelling scholarships for teachers, secretarial and commercial classes for women, and co-education in higher education. She argued strongly and often for the better payment of schoolmistresses and was one of the headmistresses who gave evidence to the Bryce commission on secondary education in 1894-5. There she argued strongly for more equal funding for girls' schools, better science facilities, properly thought-out technical education for girls, and, above all, a good general, liberal education for girls of all classes, because girls gained less education than boys from their 'career in life'. She also argued for local councils of education in large towns. 
In 1895, to widen her educational activities, Alice Cooper resigned as headmistress. From 1891 to 1915 she was a member of the council of Somerville College, one of the earliest colleges for women in Oxford, and non-denominational. In 1897 she became tutor to women students taking the training course for teachers in secondary schools run by the Oxford University delegacy of local examinations, and was the first woman to be employed by an Oxford delegacy in an academic role. She was on the committee of the Association for Promoting the Education of Women in Oxford and by 1910 was assistant lecturer in education. Teacher training in Oxford took time to gain support, but Miss Cooper's teaching was reported to be 'highly appreciated by her students, men as well as women' (Delegacy for the Training of Secondary Teachers, 'Memorandum for the Information of Members of Convocation', 1912, 7). At her death Edgbaston High School endowed a bursary at Somerville for a former Edgbaston student intending to teach. 
Miss Cooper's writings include 'On the training of the memory', a paper for the 1881 'Kindergarten Papers' of the Froebel Society (of which she was a member), in which she characteristically stressed the importance of a scientific basis for teaching and of questioning in learning. With E. A. Sonnenschein she wrote 'Part II Analysis and Syntax of an English Grammar for Schools', highly praised in the USA and in Germany. In 1890 a course book, 'English Examples and Exercises', was added, to which Miss Cooper contributed 'Part II analysis'. She was one of only three women among the impressive array of authors in this 'Parallel Grammar Series'. 
In 'Technical education for girls', published in the Board of Education's 'Special Reports on Educational Subjects', 1896-7, Miss Cooper examined how to make girls' technical subjects in higher grade schools 'organic parts of a well-ordered whole', a favourite subject of hers. She wanted homecrafts, including nursing, to be taught scientifically and interrelated with general subjects in order to produce skilled, self-reliant, resourceful craftswomen who would be able to make their adult leisure and home duties more interesting. She also wanted to introduce the teaching of citizenship as she had at Edgbaston. Although in some respects keeping to a gendered curriculum, therefore, Miss Cooper wanted all females to be prepared for the fuller life, duties, and occupations formerly reserved for men. 
In appearance 'dowdy and grey', with rather square features, Miss Cooper had an invigorating personality, a gift for speaking, and a lively zest for knowledge and travel. She died suddenly at her home, Cestria, Ledborough Lane, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, on 17 June 1917. 


@@@@@


doc= 51749


Jones, Harriet Morant (1833-1917), headmistress, was born in Guernsey on 2 January 1833. On her mother's side she was of French Huguenot descent. Nothing is known about her education. When she was appointed first headmistress of the Notting Hill high school, which opened in September 1873, she was forty years old. Emily Shirreff described her as 'a lady of great experience and ability' (Sayers, 17): she had run her own school in Guernsey, and she was apparently invited to take the headship of the second of the Girls' Public Day School Company's schools (the first had opened in Chelsea in January). She was to become one of the foremost headmistresses of her day. At first, in the one large schoolroom in Norland Square, Holland Park, she taught the top class all subjects except arithmetic. As there were only ten pupils when the school opened, she had just the one assistant, her sister, 'Miss Anna'. By the end of the first school year there were some eighty children and Miss Jones set out to appoint her staff. She had the two essential qualities of a successful head: a genius for selecting promising teachers and keeping them happy, and a personality which won the respect of both parents and pupils. Although no real academic herself, she believed passionately in the education of women and in women working. Before the end of 1874 she had formed the ambitious idea of sending six of the pupils in for the Cambridge senior local examinations. She was against introducing non-academic subjects, such as needlework, into the curriculum. The school soon had a high academic reputation. 
Living close to Miss Jones in Norland Square were her sister and her brother-in-law, the Revd Charles Du Port, chief inspector of schools. His daughter, Winifred, and another of Miss Jones's nieces, Edith Jones (alias de Grave), were to attend the high school. Winifred went up to Girton College, Cambridge, for two terms and then returned to teach the lower forms. Edith spent a year at Somerville College, Oxford, and did the Oxford examination for women. 
Opinions vary as to Miss Jones's success as a teacher. Her specialist subjects were French and German. By the 1880s and 1890s, however, she was teaching scripture and history, and the schoolgirls of this era were decidedly less impressed than their predecessors, regarding the lessons as 'something of jokes' and 'old-fashioned even by the standards of the day' (Sayers, 19). She stuck rigidly to her notes, which she went over again and again. In any case, her strength was by now reflected in the strength of her staff. By this date old girls of the school who had been at the women's colleges were being pressed by the head to return and take up appointments. One such, Mary Adamson, recorded how she was invited back to teach science, a subject Miss Jones was 'indifferent to, or even disliked' (ibid., 104). Miss Adamson was the teacher of Dame Harriette Chick. The teaching was at this time of a very high quality in all subjects. Before the end of Miss Jones's headmistress-ship, an inspector reported that 'every teacher of competence is only too glad, if she can, to obtain a post at Notting Hill' (ibid., 99). Many headmistresses were recruited from this source. 
The physical features and the personality of Miss Jones have been described by many of the pupils, generations of whom knew her as Jonah. To look at she was imposing. She was tall, handsome, and impressive. She wore silk underskirts which rustled, and was often dressed in regal purple velvet, edged with fur, her black plaits forming a coronet on top of her head. She had a deep sonorous voice, and a 'stimulating and cheering personality' which 'inspired all who worked under her'. Miss Jones 'always saw before her the Golden Age in which the Victorians believed': in which not only were women to be properly educated, and to receive the Parliamentary vote, but the slums were to be cleared, unemployment to cease, and all abuses be reformed, and in all these things 'Notting Hillites would bear their worthy part' (Sayers, 18). 
In 1887 she was co-signatory (with Frances Buss and Fanny Metcalfe) to a memorial to the University of Cambridge asking for the admission of women to degrees. In 1894 she gave evidence on behalf of the Association of Head Mistresses of Endowed and Proprietary Schools before the Bryce commission (on secondary education), and in 1897 and 1898 she served as third president of the association, following Miss Buss and Miss Beale. She had been a member of the council of the Maria Grey Training College from its early days in Bishopsgate and had an interest in the National Union of Women Workers. She retired in 1900. Harriet Morant Jones died at her home, 41 Norland Square, Holland Park, London, on 20 October 1917 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51750


Sharpe, Matilda (1830-1916), headmistress, was born at 38 Canonbury Place, London, on 4 April 1830, the second of six children of Samuel Sharpe (1799-1881), the banker and Egyptologist, and his wife, Sarah Sharpe (1796-1851), Samuel's cousin and an artist of some talent. From her strongly Unitarian, wealthy home in Highgate, Middlesex, Matilda gained a passion for educational and social concerns and a conviction that education was the key to freedom. She was educated at home by her parents in a stimulating milieu with constant visits from eminent scholars and scientists. 'Much drawing' with her mother, and classics, biblical Unitarianism, and Egyptology with her father, inspired Matilda with a love of these for life. Astronomy, botany, and electricity were pastimes and Matilda taught herself to sing with a tuning fork. She and her elder sister, Emily (1828-1914), the only surviving members of the family after 1881, were scholars to the end, travelling to Italy when over seventy to improve their accents. 
Matilda Sharpe was a gifted painter who exhibited at the Royal Academy (two of her many portraits are in the National Portrait Gallery), but she devoted much of her life to teaching. Beginning at Newington Green Chapel Sunday school she went on to teach painting, Latin, and French to working-class students in night schools and at Harp Alley, Blackfriars, Islington, and Kentish Town day schools, the last three being attached to Unitarian chapels. From the early 1870s until the advent of free schooling she took over the management and expenses of these four day schools so that Latin and French could be taught in them, deeply believing that all children should have access to the best in education both for their own benefit and for that of the nation. She developed methods of teaching Latin by rote in large classes of eighty, including the kindergarten. In 1915 W. A. Holman, attorney-general and premier of New South Wales, Australia, attributed his rise in life and his love of learning to her lessons. Sure that God was known through the good and beautiful, she wanted every child to have the best of books, pictures, music, and drama. 
In 1881 Matilda Sharpe was much influenced by the Revd Robert Spears to establish a boarding-school for the daughters of Unitarian ministers and other Unitarians that would provide the best education possible at the lowest possible cost, enabling its pupils to go on to university or any of the professions open to women if they wished. With Spears's help she opened Channing House School on Highgate Hill in January 1885 (and also founded Highgate Unitarian Chapel near the school). Unusual for being designated Unitarian, the school had unsectarian religious teaching, except for special instruction for boarders, and was open to all. Day scholars were also admitted and a kindergarten was later established for boys and girls under eight. The school soon attracted about sixty pupils a year, many of them from other countries, especially Hungary and Ireland. The broad education included all forms of science (astronomy as well) and appropriate domestic subjects, scientifically taught; art was encouraged and shorthand and typing available. Pupils were prepared for the matriculation, intermediate examinations, and external degrees of London University. A good academic standard was quickly established with visiting masters used in the higher classes until there were sufficient qualified women. As in many of the new public high schools for girls, games such as cricket and hockey were fostered and tight-lacing and female frailty discouraged, this helped by the fact that Highgate was one of the healthiest spots in London. In other ways Miss Sharpe was less radical, fearing any contact between her girls and boys or young men, even disliking the amount of 'love' in tennis (in which she also forbade the use of the term 'deuce'). 
Miss Sharpe lavished her money and time on the school and soon took sole responsibility for its management, retaining a deep interest in it even after 1899, when the school was incorporated, and 1903, when it was first inspected by the Board of Education inspectorate. Eccentric, enthusiastic, encouraging, very humorous and kind, she developed a school noted for its homely atmosphere, yet able to become a highly rated, non-sectarian, independent day school which gave middle-class girls every chance to take advantage of new opportunities. 
Miss Sharpe published an anthology of poetry, 'Old Favourites from the Elder Poets', in 1881 and 1912, in which she included nine women poets, particularly the Unitarian Anna Laetitia Barbauld. She also wrote four idiosyncratic books of proverbs, moral maxims, and poetical comments on modern times, emphasizing her love of learning and travel, her dislike of smoking, alcohol, and fripperies, and her ardent support for education for all, 'unselfish' free trade, Liberalism, Asquith's 'Great Reform' of 1911, and any government which would 'treble tax the rich'. Her favourite, 'Never Forget' (1915), dedicated to Channing girls and running to thirty-two editions, she gave away to any stranger she thought might appreciate it. Somewhat sentimental in her views on motherhood, nevertheless she wanted greater opportunities for women, including preaching, but there is no mention of the suffrage in her writings, although many pupils became suffragists. Small and entirely indifferent to fashion, she was always 'brimming over with some new invention for reforming the world, the parlour grate, or the British army' (Sharpe, 20). She satisfied a hankering after colour, music, gaiety, and crowds by much travel both abroad and around London, revelling in the use of the public omnibus for her constant visiting of art galleries and refreshment rooms. Matilda Sharpe died peacefully at her home, 32 Highbury Place, London, on 30 April 1916. 


@@@@@


doc= 51751


Robertson, Margaret Ethel (1861-1943), headmistress and educationist, was born on 7 February 1861 at Dawlish, Devon, the third daughter of George Samuel Robertson (1825-1874). She was privately educated before attending Newnham College, Cambridge, where in 1889 she achieved a class one in the medieval and modern languages tripos. She attended the training department of the Ladies' College, Cheltenham, and in 1890 obtained the Cambridge teachers' certificate. She received an excellent apprenticeship as an assistant mistress at Bedford high school from 1890 to 1893, when she was appointed headmistress of Christ's Hospital Girls' School, Hertford. 
The 'audacious moves to modernise and expand' (Angus, 23) initiated by Miss Robertson during her twenty-eight years as headmistress of Christ's Hospital Girls' School resulted in extended buildings, including a new chapel consecrated in 1906, increased numbers of pupils, outstanding academic achievements, and changes in the curriculum. When she took office the subjects taught included needlework and cookery, but did not include mathematics, science, or foreign languages other than French. Most girls left between the ages of fourteen and sixteen. She expanded both the staff and the curriculum, and soon achieved examination successes. Pupils began to go on to Cambridge and other universities. She believed that academic subjects in themselves were insufficient for girl's development, and she ensured that the school acquired a games field, a gymnasium, and a swimming bath, though she did not make games compulsory. Pupils' need for free time was respected and she believed in allowing them to develop a sense of responsibility. In order to reinforce respect due to senior pupils, she introduced different uniforms for them and junior pupils, but she abolished curtseying by pupils to staff. Her essay 'Resident schools and boarding houses', published in 'Public Schools for Girls' (1911), edited by Sara Burstall and Mary Douglas, set out her views and current practice on matters relating to pupils' health and welfare in boarding-schools. Although committed to equal educational opportunities for girls, she still upheld conventionally feminine notions of self-denial and service, believing that the boarding-school should cultivate 'the habit of thinking and working for the community and not merely for the self' (ibid., 228). 
When Miss Robertson retired in 1921 Christ's Hospital was recognized as one of the leading girls' schools. From 1913 to 1915 she was president of the Association of Head Mistresses, and during Trinity term 1924 was acting principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford, following the death of Miss Jourdain. She died at her home, 29 Leckford Road, Oxford, on 24 January 1943. 


@@@@@


doc= 51753


Wildy, (Norman) Peter Leete (1920-1987), virologist, was born on 31 March 1920 at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, the only child of Eric Lawrence Wildy (1890-1973), electrical engineer, and Gwendolen Leete (1890-1982). He was educated at Eastbourne College and then went on to study medicine at Cambridge University and St Thomas's Hospital medical school in London. He qualified MRCS, LRCP (1944) and MB, BChir (1948). In 1945 he married Joan Audrey Kenion, daughter of Geoffrey Cadwalladwr Kenion (1881-1945), tea planter, and Beatrice Aitcheson Pyper (1884-1973); they had a son and two daughters. 
From 1945 to 1947 Wildy served in the Royal Army Medical Corps in India, Egypt, and west Africa, before returning to a fellowship at St Thomas's Hospital medical school. Appointed to a lectureship there in bacteriology in 1952, he soon became interested in the rapidly growing field of virology and went to study with Sir MacFarlane Burnet at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute in Melbourne, at that time one of the great centres for virology. It was there that he started work on herpes, which was to be his major research interest for the remainder of his career. He continued this work on returning to St Thomas's and was appointed senior lecturer in bacteriology in 1957. Next he went to Cambridge, and then to Glasgow, where with Michael Stoker as director he created the Medical Research Council's new Experimental Virus Research Unit. Wildy was assistant director of the unit from 1959 to 1963. 
However, it was in the short stay in Cambridge that Wildy established his name among virologists worldwide. With Sydney Brenner and Bob Horne, at that time the doyen of electron microscopists, he applied the technique of negative staining to the study of viruses. For the first time some of the structural details, and not just their outlines, could be seen. The interest created by this work led Wildy into virus classification, and his paper 'What's in a virus name?' ('Nature', 29 Jan 1966, 450-54), with Adrian Gibbs, Bryan Harrison, and Douglas Watson, set out a logical scheme for classifying viruses. This led in turn to the formation of the International Committee for Virus Nomenclature (later the International Committee for the Taxonomy of Viruses), of which Wildy was the first chairman. This unified virus classification and led to the publication, updated every three years, of the 'Classification and Nomenclature of Viruses'. 
In 1963, after five years in Glasgow, during which the unit he and Stoker had created became an internationally recognized centre of virology, Wildy became professor of virology and bacteriology at the University of Birmingham, where he put together an excellent herpes virology team. Clearly the housekeeping chores of a university department occupied a lot of his time, but he still had the vision to introduce an MSc course in virology which was copied by several other universities. At this time too he started with Colin Kaplan a new journal, 'The Journal of General Virology', which from its humble beginnings in 1967 became a well-established and well-regarded addition to the virology scene. As though that was not enough, together with Joseph Melnick of the USA he initiated the International Congresses of Virology. As with the 'Journal of General Virology', from the first meeting in Helsinki in 1968 these congresses became major events in the international virology calendar. Wildy also founded, with Bernie Roizman of the USA, the annual Herpes Virus Workshop. 
In 1975 Wildy moved to the chair of pathology at Cambridge, and became a fellow of Gonville and Caius College. He had clear ideas about how the department should move forward and he was making arrangements at the time of his death to secure the study of parasitology within both the university and the Molteno Institute. 
Because of his many contributions to microbiology Wildy had been elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1962; he was also president of the Society for General Microbiology from 1978 to 1981 and became an honorary member in 1986. He served on the board of the Public Health Laboratory Service, as well as being an adviser to the World Health Organization and a member of several governing bodies of research council institutes. His wide knowledge and equable personality led to his chairing many (perhaps too many) committees involved in rationalizing British microbiology. Clearly this diverted him from his own research activities far too much, but his breadth of knowledge and vision shone through in what was to be his last grant application to the Medical Research Council for funds to support his research. 
Wildy was a countryman at heart and usually found a house in or near a village in which to spend a very full family life, surrounded by plants and animals. He was a large man physically, but this did not give him an overpowering presence. On the contrary, his manner was friendly and kind and it was this manner, together with his generous spirit, which made him the father figure of British virology during his later years. He was also a man of many parts, able to turn his hand to many activities. Aside from his skill on the flute and piccolo, he became involved in the spinning and dying of wool (he actually made a spinning-wheel), reroofed a barn, rebuilt several of the rooms in his house in Abberley in his Birmingham days, and looked after the church clock next to his home when he lived at Hinxton near Cambridge. On top of all these activities, he had a wonderful sense of humour, which enabled him to defuse many difficult professional situations. He was a mimic with quite professional skills and an excellent after-dinner speaker. 
Wildy died from lung cancer in Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, on 10 March 1987 and was buried at Hinxton. He was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51755


Nimmo, Margaret Jane (1850-1938), headmistress, was born on 20 October 1850 at 9 Ash Grove, South Hackney, Middlesex, the daughter of David Nimmo, an Independent minister, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Hutton). Until 1865 she was educated at home, but thereafter she took advantage of the new educational opportunities opening up for women. From 1865 to 1869 she attended Bedford College, London, one of the only two colleges then open to women in England, extending her studies both there and in France and Germany between 1869 and 1873. Having taken the University of London general examination for women in 1870, she became in 1875 a teacher at the fledgeling Notting Hill High School for Girls, one of the first Girls' Public Day School Company (GPDSC) schools and almost a training school for future headmistresses. After the University of London amended its charter to allow women to take degrees in 1878, she left Notting Hill and enrolled herself at University College, London, gaining her BA in 1881. 
When the Blackheath GPDSC High School for Girls opened in 1880, Miss Nimmo became its second mistress and its first graduate teacher. Here she established high standards in mathematics and classics and taught 'interesting and instructive' experimental chemistry despite little support as yet for science. She transplanted the new disciplined ethos of girls' public secondary education when appointed first headmistress of King Edward VI Grammar School for Girls, Birmingham, in 1883. This school was a prime example of the post-1869 extension of educational endowments to girls; it was founded in 1880 at the insistence of the charity commissioners for girls up to the age of seventeen. One half of the scholarships were held by girls who had attended public elementary schools. Paid a professional salary, Miss Nimmo created a working atmosphere in a school which ran like clockwork. She put considerable stress upon information, rote learning, and competition, and developed high academic standards with increasing numbers going on to university, although, until 1910, subjects like science and gymnastics suffered from a lack of facilities. 
Remembered for her severe, Savonarola-like features and black, rustling silk gowns, Miss Nimmo was regarded as an all-seeing, authoritative figure. She took great care to keep her girls segregated from boys. A teacher was on one occasion reprimanded for playing tennis without a hat on. Yet Miss Nimmo was also affectionately recalled as sympathetic and always concerned for the welfare of the girls. She oversaw the grammar school's move from Aston to Handsworth in 1911 and amalgamations which, by 1915, increased the pupils under her to about 460, some 300 more than when the school opened in 1883. Although not a radical, Miss Nimmo therefore did much to extend educational opportunities for girls in Birmingham. She retired in 1915 but frequently attended school functions and, in fact, used the speech day of 1920 to lead a successful protest against the local authority taking over the King Edward schools. 
Known as a 'puritan liberal' who doubted whether a Conservative could be honest, and a determined upholder of free trade, Miss Nimmo suited well the dominant Birmingham nonconformist bourgeoisie. Although not supportive of militant suffragism on her staff, she was said to have mellowed in later years. She retired to Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire, where she died at her niece's house at Hethersett North Park on 7 April 1938; she was buried at Brookwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51756


Moberly, Mary (1853-1940), headmistress, was born at Rugby, Warwickshire, daughter of the Revd Charles Edward Moberly (1821?-1893), clergyman, schoolmaster, and author, and Catherine Temple ('b'. 1812), elder sister of Frederick Temple, headmaster of Rugby School and archbishop of Canterbury. Most of her early life was spent in Rugby, where her father was assistant master at the school, and it is likely that she was educated at home. She passed five Cambridge higher local examinations before entering Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1878, where she had a distinguished career and was made Drapers' scholar in 1879. A pupil of Professor Sidgwick, she gained distinctions in logic and political economy, and a first class in the moral sciences tripos in 1881. She was an associate of Newnham from 1893 to 1903. 
From Newnham Moberly followed many of her peers in becoming a teacher in one of the new girls' academic high schools. Her career began in 1882 as assistant mistress at Notting Hill high school, London, which had developed into a 'de facto' training institution for future headmistresses. After only a year she was appointed by the Girls' Public Day School Company to open their new school at Tunbridge Wells as its first headmistress. Under her leadership the school grew from twenty-two pupils to a full range of years from kindergarten to sixth form. In 1891 she was transferred to Gateshead high school. There she had a particularly difficult task, facing falling rolls as a result of the economic situation at Gateshead and competition from other local schools. The company's response to the latter was to upgrade the Gateshead school's preparatory department in nearby Newcastle upon Tyne to a full high school, and within three years Moberly was entrusted with the headship of the new Central Newcastle high school, which opened in January 1895. When Gateshead was finally merged with the Newcastle school in 1907 she was appointed head of the new school, and remained there until her retirement. 
In building up the Central Newcastle school Moberly gathered round her a number of excellent teachers, some of whom had been with her at Gateshead. She kept up good relations with her old school, and it was thanks to her statesmanship that the merger was implemented with so little friction. The new school lacked facilities and there was much making do in the early years. Despite the difficulty of having no laboratories science was on the curriculum from the beginning. The school developed as an all-round institution, with a concentration on games and drama; it was described as having an overall light-heartedness. Moberly was no autocrat but a strong supporter of self-government who believed in training the girls to be self-reliant for themselves and for the school. One of her main innovations, soon after the school's foundation, was the introduction of a prefect system, followed some years later by elected form captains. She stated that she wished to make the school more like a civic organization and genuinely alive. Her successor said that she had built into the school 'some share of her own integrity, tolerance and generosity' (Carter, 35). 
Moberly was tall and slim, with a long narrow face and high forehead; she wore spectacles and was impeccably dressed. It was said of her that she was made up of 'the academic, the episcopal and the Liberal' (Carter, 33). She was a deep-thinking scholar, with a fine mind and a precision in her conversation that some found daunting. In many ways she seemed more suited to the libraries of Cambridge than to a girls' school in the north of England -- yet she had a strong feeling for the north east, and after her retirement stayed in Newcastle for the rest of her life. She was a devoted churchwoman, with a genuine and profound Christian belief that permeated everything she did. Unlike many of her contemporaries she does not appear to have played any public role in education. A mix of many elements, she roused different emotions in those who knew her. To some she was austere and difficult to get to know or understand, a solemn woman who rarely smiled; to others she was a remarkable woman of vivid personality, warm-hearted, understanding, and gentle, inspiring love and gratitude in former pupils and staff. Her generosity to those in need was unstinted, and many girls were thus given chances that they would otherwise have lacked. She was broad-minded but at the same time had very high mental and moral standards. (These did not extend to remedying her own chronic lack of punctuality.) 
Moberly retired in 1911, aged fifty-eight. She became totally blind and was cared for by her companion and former school secretary, Blanche Edith Dixon. She died of heart failure and a stroke at her home, 28 Lansdowne Gardens, Jesmond, Newcastle, on 4 August 1940; she was buried in St Andrew's cemetery, Newcastle, on 7 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 51757


Kingdon, Emmeline Maria (1817-1890), headmistress, was probably born at Bridgerule, Devon, the youngest daughter of the Revd Thomas Hockin Kingdon (1775-1853), rector of Pyworthy and vicar of Bridgerule, and his wife, Caroline, eldest daughter of Samuel Nicholson of Ham Common, Surrey. The couple also had three sons, two of whom, Samuel Nicholson and George Thomas, became clerics, eventually succeeding their father at Bridgerule and Pyworthy respectively. The youngest son, Paul Augustine, became a barrister. 
Following her mother's death Kingdon kept house for her father, assisted him with his business affairs and with parish duties, and devoted considerable time to the village school. After her father's death in 1853 Kingdon made a number of visits to friends and relatives. As did many unmarried females of her time and class, she provided support to the households in which she stayed when required, though it is not known whether she pursued her educational interests during this time. 
In the autumn of 1864 Kingdon answered an advertisement for the post of lady superintendent for a new school to be opened in Bath in the following year. The Royal School for Daughters of Officers of the Army was the brainchild of the philanthropist Alfred Douglas Hamilton, who knew of an existing institution of a similar nature, the Royal Female Naval School at Richmond, established in 1840. The advertisement attracted a total of seventy-six applications; according to an obituary notice in the 'Bath Chronicle', Kingdon's success in securing the post was in part due to a testimonial from Florence Nightingale, whom she appears to have met at some point during her travels following the death of her father. 
The Royal School occupied an imposing, and domestically inconvenient, neo-Gothic building on Lansdown, Bath, and much time during Kingdon's early months as lady superintendent was spent overseeing its conversion into accommodation suitable for girls and governesses. The school officially opened on 24 August 1865. It had thirty pupils, over half of whom, from needy families, had been 'elected' at reduced fees, and three governesses, though the number of pupils expanded rapidly both during and after Kingdon's time. Discipline in the new school was strict; Kingdon imposed a rigorous routine on her charges. 
The Royal School's educational aims were twofold: to imbue its pupils with the habits and attitudes of 'gentlewomen', while also giving them, as the school's founding committee expressed it, 'sound and useful knowledge together with such accomplishments and such practice in domestic economy as might qualify them for a useful situation in life' (Osborne and Manisty, 26). The curriculum, devised by Kingdon, included vocational subjects such as English, arithmetic, and French, as well as 'aesthetic subjects' such as music, drawing, and deportment, and was thus typical of the curricula to be found in girls' schools by the 1870s. It reflected wider contemporary debates about the education of middle-class girls and women which attempted to reconcile the conflicting demands of the philosophy of a liberal education and the need for increasing numbers of middle-class women to earn a livelihood with Victorian conceptions of femininity. 
Kingdon remained as lady superintendent until her retirement in July 1874. She returned only a year later, however, after the school had encountered problems with Miss Rosa Adams, her replacement. Kingdon remained with the school in her resumed post for a further six years, until ill health -- a stroke, resulting in paralysis -- led to permanent retirement in July 1882. During this time she continued to consolidate the school's academic credentials, with considerable success: in 1876 pupils from the Royal School were entered for the Cambridge University local examinations. 
In appearance Kingdon was 'a dear little stately lady in a lace cap' (Osborne and Manisty, 31); one photograph suggests a likeness to the school's patron, Queen Victoria. Like her more famous contemporary, Miss Buss, Kingdon was described as possessing a maternal and sympathetic nature. Past pupils recalled her kindness, self-control, and 'an indescribable air of distinction' (ibid.). The emphasis of these testimonies on their subject's womanly qualities is typical, but Kingdon's formidable administrative and managerial skills -- which drew praise from the educationist Joshua Fitch whom the committee invited to inspect the school in 1875 -- and her role in attaining a high reputation for the school should also be noted. Emmeline Maria Kingdon, who was unmarried, died at her home, 1 Dynham Road, West Hampstead, London, on 25 March 1890, and was buried on 29 March at Paddington cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51758


Binyon, Basil (1885-1977), electrical engineer, was born on 23 April 1885, at 5 Henley Road, Ipswich, Suffolk, the third of four children of Brightwen Binyon (1852-1905) and his wife, Rachel Mary (1853-1949), daughter of William Cudworth and his wife, Mary. His father, an architect and an accomplished painter in watercolours, had a number of important commissions, including the design of Ipswich corn exchange, Aldermaston Manor, and Sunderland town hall. Basil's childhood was spent between Ipswich and Yorkshire where he had a number of relatives. After education at Leighton Park School, Reading, from 'c'.1898 to 1903, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read natural sciences and obtained a good degree. 
For his practical training Binyon went to the Cambridge Scientific Instrument Company where he was introduced to commercial engineering manufacture. In 1909 he worked with Marconi on the first transatlantic Morse code radio transmissions from Poldhu, Cornwall, to Newfoundland. He continued to work with Marconi until the First World War, when he joined the Royal Naval Air Service, then in its infancy. Working with Royal Flying Corps personnel at Cranwell, in Lincolnshire, he produced some of the first airborne radio equipment for Morse telegraphy. Later the equipment was improved to make radio telephony possible between aircraft in flight and a ground station. Binyon's work was recognized with his appointment as OBE. He married, on 20 September 1913, Gladys Elise Rosa (1885-1960), daughter of John Howard Keep. They had three children, Roger Basil, who was killed in the Arnhem landing in 1944, Margaret Howard, and Hugh Douglas, who both survived them. 
Binyon used his wartime experience to set up the Radio Communication Co. Ltd which developed into a worldwide long wave communications network in the 1920s and early 1930s. The company produced equipment and operators for many merchant and naval ships of the period. He also founded a company to make domestic radio sets and components under the trade mark Polar and his interest in this field led to his appointment in 1922 as one of the directors of the original British Broadcasting Company, the remaining directors under Lord Gainforth's chairmanship being representatives of other firms manufacturing home radio receivers. Binyon played his part in establishing the technical standards which, developed over the years, established the BBC's high reputation. 
Binyon's strong position in the radio field led to his being appointed chairman of the Institution of Electrical Engineers' wireless section for 1925-6. His chairman's address, presented to the institution in November 1925, was a comprehensive review of marine wireless equipment at the time. Towards the end of the 1920s a rationalization took place in the commercial radio industry, one of the results of which was that Binyon's Radio Communication Company merged with Marconi to form a strong international marine radio communication organization which supplied equipment and personnel to the merchant navies of several countries. Initially Binyon thought that this merger would mark the end of his association with the company he had built up, but he was invited to join the Marconi board and until 1935 he contributed actively to its work. In 1936 he accepted an invitation to become a director of the Buenos Aires Water Company, which position he held until 1938. This involved regular trips to supervise the company's operations on site. 
During the Second World War Binyon had a distinguished career with the Royal Observer Corps, for which he devised ingenious predictors based upon alarm clock mechanisms. These played an important part in the air defences of London in 1940-41 before radar was widely available. The south-eastern sector of the Royal Observer Corps, of which Binyon was commandant, was in the front line of these defences. 
Throughout his adult life Binyon had a great interest in making things, and had a well-equipped workshop with a lathe in the basement of his house. There he made a number of ingenious devices for time-lapse photography which he used to produce accelerated motion cine films of clouds and of flowers opening, which were a novelty at the time. After the war he built working model steam locomotives with which he entertained his grandchildren and many others. His first wife died in 1960, and on 28 April 1962 Binyon married Violet Mary (1900-1989), daughter of John Walter Hibbert. 
In retirement he divided his time between his large house, Hawthornedene in Hayes, Kent, and his seaside home at Thatchways, West Wittering, Sussex, where he regularly played host to large parties of family and friends who enjoyed sea bathing and sailing at the nearby Itchenor sailing club. After his second marriage he moved from Hayes to 14 The Glen, Farnborough Park, Kent. Throughout his life Binyon was keen on winter sports and served a term as president of the Ski Club of Great Britain. Binyon died on 4 April 1977 at Farnborough Hospital, Kent, of heart failure. He was buried at Hayes parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 51759


Rigg, Caroline Edith (1852-1929), headmistress, the eldest of three children, was born on 26 August 1852 in Guernsey, where her father, Dr James Harrison Rigg (1821-1909), was Wesleyan minister. Her mother, Caroline (died 1889), was daughter of John Smith, alderman of Worcester. James McMullen Rigg was her younger brother. Caroline was educated at private schools until her father moved to London in 1867, when she attended the City of London College for Ladies in Finsbury Circus. This was modelled on Queen's College, Harley Street, and, as that drew on the staff of King's College, this City 'branch' utilized the staff of the City of London Boys' School, the model secondary school of the Taunton commissioners. In 1868 Dr Rigg became principal of Westminster Training College, and in 1872 continued his daughter's careful preparation 'for the instruction of others' by arranging for her to attend the sister college, Southlands, then in Battersea, as an out-student for one year's training, which she passed in division 1. Caroline was a born teacher, and she was born into teaching. 
From 1873 Caroline Rigg was head of a board school in Hammersmith, until in 1877 she was appointed headmistress of the new Mary Datchelor Girls' School. This was the first use of an obsolete City parochial charity for girls' education of the new kind. The endowment in the parish of St Andrew Undershaft had increased dramatically by the sale of a coffee house in Threadneedle Street, and the charity commissioners appointed parochial trustees to administer the funds for a girls' school. Camberwell in south London, with a growing middle-class population, was selected as the location, and land and buildings acquired in Grove Lane. Of this enterprise Miss Rigg was appointed headmistress at the age of twenty-five. Her salary was $100 with capitation fees, which brought a total then considered generous for a woman. 
One pupil remembered her mother's words on the opening day, 'I hope Clara won't be in her class -- the little fair lady with curls; she looks far too young'. 'Little did she realise', her daughter added, 'the greatness of her personality and her many gifts' (Pearse, 27). In her application Miss Rigg said: 'Teaching with me is a passion and a pleasure' (ibid., 26). Many pupils testified to this. 'She had immense dignity and authority. Her absolute integrity, the unconscious influence of a dedicated personality, made it impossible to take an interview with her lightly' (ibid., 58). Her scripture and literature lessons were especially memorable, and many spoke of her beautiful voice. As the governors provided her with a secretary, she was able to teach an unusually full timetable, including Latin with the matriculation class. 
Success depended on sheer persistent hard work and dedication. To Miss Rigg the school was her life. As well as her teaching, the organization and administration were formidable. The school opened with thirty pupils, aged eight to sixteen. Five months later there were 100, and by its fourth year 324, and no room for more. New buildings were required. The governors, to whom Miss Rigg reported monthly, were supportive. She had all the qualities of a pioneer, but the youthful headmistress was not quite of the pioneering generation. Experience of the new kind of girls' school was accumulating and these schools were using the system Miss Rigg designed for Datchelor. This was a broad academic curriculum, including science, leading to public examinations, with thorough attention to music and art, non-sectarian religious education, proper physical education, and training in social responsibility (there was a much-loved Dorcas Society). Girls were encouraged to aim at higher education and careers. Miss Rigg was always in the forefront of experiment, but her successor spoke of her 'power of remaining unchanged through change' (Dr Brock's memorial address, 'Datchelor School Magazine', 44, 1929, 9-10). 
It was in her attitude to her staff that Miss Rigg can be classed not so much with the pioneering as with the professional generation of women educationists. As headmistress of a secondary school she was unusual, even unique, in that she had both professional training in, and experience of, elementary school teaching. Although academically qualified members of staff, even graduates, became available, Miss Rigg wanted professional training for her staff as well. Encouraged by the inspector, she began from 1879 to select pupils to train herself, perhaps using the model of the pupil teachers of the elementary system. Several so trained became members of staff, and as the demand grew senior girls were awarded 'student-teacherships', and then passed on to Maria Grey College, the only one then available for this purpose. In 1888 Miss Rigg persuaded the trustees to open a training department at Datchelor, with herself as principal. A mistress of method was appointed and a lecturer in educational science. Students were admitted from other schools. Recognition by the Cambridge training syndicate was granted in 1899; in 1902 the college was inspected and recognized by the Board of Education, and from 1908 became eligible for its grants. In 1905 Miss Rigg and her vice-principal were recognized as teachers in pedagogy in the University of London, and the students became its internal students. 
The Clothworkers' Company replaced the parochial trustees as governors of Datchelor in 1894-5, and proved generous guardians. In 1909 a new scheme enabled the London county council (since 1903 the local education authority) to be represented on the governing body. School board scholars had already been admitted, and from 1909 Datchelor accepted the county council's eleven-year-old scholarship holders. By 1914 these outnumbered the fee payers by 267 to 207. Throughout her long tenure Miss Rigg kept her vision of a less socially divided school system. She herself manifested the non-sectarian nature of girls' secondary schooling, for she was a Wesleyan headmistress of a school using old endowments from an Anglican parish. An inspection of 1915 reported that Datchelor 'maintains the well-deserved reputation for earnest, high-minded work which it has gained, above all, through the long unwearying services of the Head Mistress, who shows no trace of declining energy and enthusiasm, and who continues to have the support of a loyal and most capable staff. (Pearse, 70)' Miss Rigg served for ten years on the executive of the Association of Head Mistresses, which she represented on the board of examiners for education handwork (for she gave great importance to practical subjects). 
Miss Rigg resigned in 1917, having over forty years built up Datchelor into one of the leading secondary schools, not only in London but in the country. She died at her home, 79 Brixton Hill, Brixton, London, on 16 December 1929. While her father was at Westminster, Miss Rigg attended the Horseferry Road Wesleyan church. When he moved to Brixton they went to the Brixton Hill church, where her memorial service was held. In the parish of St Mark, Camberwell, where Datchelor girls had been encouraged to give active social service, they proposed to place a memorial of her 'in the All Saints Corner of our Church'. In her will Miss Rigg left bequests to the Wesleyan Methodist Missionary Society, and to the Clothworkers' Company to provide scholarships to help girls who 'desire to proceed to a University' ('Datchelor School Magazine', 44, 1929, 3). 


@@@@@


doc= 51760


Creak, Edith Elizabeth Maria (1855-1919), headmistress, was born on 26 July 1855 at 118 Lansdowne Place, Hove, Sussex, daughter of Albert Creak, an early graduate of London University, nonconformist minister and successful proprietor of a boys' school in Hove. Her mother was Bertha Creak (formerly Shelly). After a thorough education in her father's school, Edith Creak took the Cambridge higher local examination, set up in 1869 for women intending to teach. Having won a scholarship established by John Stuart Mill and Helen Taylor she was enabled, at only sixteen, to register in 1871 as one of the first five students at what became Newnham College, Cambridge. Although taking a second-class honours in classics and a third in mathematics in 1875, as a woman she was not eligible for a Cambridge degree. In 1878, 1879, and 1880 respectively, she took honours in the London University general examination for women, gained a first class in the intermediate examination, and was in the first batch of women admitted to the London degree. 
In teaching, Edith Creak was equally a pioneer. Having been an assistant mistress at Plymouth high school from 1875 to 1876, she was appointed, at the age of only twenty, headmistress of the new Brighton High School for Girls, the tenth school founded by the Girls' Public Day School Company. She appointed the staff and organized the school, which opened in June 1876. Gifted, plump, and jolly, she apparently inspired 'lively enthusiasm and sound scholarship', as she did at King Edward VI's High School for Girls in Birmingham, of which she became the first headmistress in 1883. She grew very proud of this ancient educational foundation which had broken new ground in 1880 by establishing an endowed high school for girls. Her highly praised role in the design and organization of new premises for the girls' high school illustrated her authority over her governors, her perception of the educational needs of her pupils, and her attention to their health. She secured cookery facilities despite the governors' misgivings over teaching domestic subjects in a high school, excellent science facilities, and all-in-one desks which could be adjusted so that the girls need neither stoop nor be uncomfortable. 
Miss Creak admired Edward Thring, headmaster of Uppingham, whose conference of headmistresses she had attended in 1887, and emulated him in achieving discipline through pupils' self-respect and the internalization of the school ethos rather than by proliferating formal rules. Her school was known for its serene, quiet order: she was strict, but highly respected. She gave the senior girls in particular much responsibility for their own learning. Like Thring she stressed attention to all pupils whatever their abilities and, accordingly, catered for the development of practical skills, as her 'beautiful pendant', made and designed in 1910 by girls working in the jewellery section (the only girls' school to have one), illustrated. Keenly interested in all subjects, she stimulated a broad, liberal education. 
A Congregationalist and deeply religious, Miss Creak was a pioneer in religious education, but it was in science that King Edward's was outstanding. She appointed excellent science teachers, ensured the requisite facilities, and used the local expertise of Dr Crosskey and Mason College. In sport she was less adventurous, allowing gymnastics and tennis but not hockey. Rejecting the athleticism of boys' schools, she paid more attention to the principles of sound bodily health, including proper ventilation, heating, lighting, and sanitary arrangements. She also wanted annual medical inspections. Her dread of pupils overworking led her to issue timetables for homework and wish for an eight-hour bill for both them and staff. She was one of the first headteachers to stop examinations lower than matriculation, yet the school's academic standing steadily rose, and from the early days came a stream of academic distinctions at school and later university, particularly at Newnham and London, and especially in science. She was an associate of Newnham from 1893 to 1900 and she founded the Newnham College Club in Birmingham. 
Miss Creak's generous gifts to the library and system of free hours there for the older girls, like her encouragement of art, music, drama, and debates, were a model of high school education for girls. She was, indeed, among a new breed of headmistresses who developed girls' secondary schools with classical ideals of academic excellence and self-realization through public service. In many ways she exemplified the new professionalism of women graduate teachers in her relationships with staff, governors, and parents and in her membership of the Headmistresses Association. She was one of the headmistresses interviewed for the Bryce commission in 1894. In her written submission to this she voiced her particular concerns for the registration and proper training of secondary teachers, for keeping elementary education and secondary education strictly apart, and for closing higher-grade elementary schools. 
In some respects, indeed, Miss Creak was quite conservative. Pleased personally with the new areas opening for women's energy and enterprise, she remained, none the less, sure that women's best sphere was in the home. In 1885 she had supported the 'Women's Suffrage Bill', but by the 1900s she was adamant in her opposition to both women's suffrage and the educational ladder which could take the poor to secondary education and university. Her patriotism in the South African War was strident, and her character, once humorous, sympathetic, and full of 'joie de vivre', became irritable, dictatorial, and abrupt as her health deteriorated. This and her lack of adaptability eventually led to her resignation in 1910. Nevertheless, at her best she was clear-sighted, courageous, patient, and innovative, and wielded natural authority. She had wide and keen interests including classics, botany, mountaineering, art, needlework, lace-making, and collecting alpine flowers, which she grew in her beloved garden at Barnt. Edith Creak died at her home, 55 Hagley Road, Edgbaston, Birmingham, on 20 May 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 51761


Franklin, Mary (1800-1867), schoolmistress, was born, probably in Coventry, on 5 August 1800, the eldest child and first daughter of Francis Franklin (1772-1852), Baptist minister, and his wife, Rebecca, 'nee' Dyer. Her father had been pastor of the Cow Lane Chapel, Coventry, since 1799, with a stipend of $40 p.a. on which he and his wife worked hard to bring up ten children, three of whom died in infancy. Like so many of her female contemporaries in similar situations, Mary looked to school-keeping for her own support. After attendance then work as an assistant at a school in Bocking in Essex, she began to take pupils in her parents' parlour, at first little boys, including the young Charles Bray, the future ribbon manufacturer, as well as little girls. Soon she combined forces with her sister Rebecca ['see below'] and they rented a house in Hertford Street, Coventry, allowing them to take older girls as boarders, as well as day girls. 
The enterprise flourished and they moved several times more within Coventry, to a house called Nant Glyn in Warwick Row, then to Hertford House, and finally to Little Park Street. Mary supplied the motherly warmth and the organizing ability, Rebecca the cultivated style and dramatic presence. Pupils came from as far away as India and the USA, but also from London and the surrounding countryside. These included Mary Anne Evans, the future novelist George Eliot, who boarded with them from 1832 to 1835. 
The curriculum was the conventional female one: English, arithmetic, history, and drawing, with French, German, and music as extras. The last three were taught by visiting masters of a high standard, and all the teaching was marked by an exemplary rigour. Mary's niece, Rebecca Franklin Hine, recalled that her aunts' 'system of training was undoubtedly that of the strictly rigid, somewhat despotic regime -- repression of evil rather than eliciting the good.... Their teaching on all subjects was the very reverse of the present style of veneer -- thorough to the lowest foundations, from Holy Scripture to the correct Parisian accent (Supplement, 'Coventry Herald', 5)' although she confirmed that Aunt Mary's mathematics stopped short of algebra and geometry. 
Both Mary and Rebecca were committed supporters of their father's chapel, to which their pupils were taken on Sundays. The physical description of the character Rufus Lyon and his surroundings in George Eliot's novel 'Felix Holt' is acknowledged to be a vivid picture of the Revd Francis Franklin and the courtyard of the Cow Lane Chapel. The Franklins were General rather than Particular Baptists. The essential Calvinism of their creed was buttressed by extensive good works and the support of the Baptist Missionary Society, of which Mrs Franklin's brother, John Dyer, was secretary, and for which another sister, and a brother who died in training, set out to work. Such charitable work provided a pattern and some occupation for George Eliot in the first years after she left school. The sisters retired to live at 13 White Street, Coventry, where Mary Franklin died on 4 December 1867 of dropsy following bronchitis. 


The affection between teacher and pupil was real and enduring: contact was maintained after George Eliot left school and she condoled with Rebecca on her periodic bouts of ill health. Rebecca in turn was deeply distressed by George Eliot's loss of faith. She endeavoured to find a minister of appropriate stature and learning to debate with her; in 1842 she joined those pleading with Robert Evans to behave more humanely in face of his daughter's intellectual and emotional turmoil. Sadly Rebecca Franklin's mind gave way in her last years and she died on 29 May 1873 at 13 White Street, Coventry. 


@@@@@


doc= 51762


Rebecca Franklin (1803-1873), schoolmistress, was born in Coventry on 30 November 1803, the third daughter of Francis and Rebecca Franklin. With her cousin Eliza Dyer she attended a school in Paris for a year and on her return began to take pupils in one of the Sunday school rooms at Cow Lane. Soon she combined forces with Mary and they moved to Hertford Street. Rebecca considered all things literary and the deportment and cultivation appropriate to ladies her especial provinces. The girls were encouraged to read widely among the English poets and were not forbidden novels. She laid stress on speaking in harmonious tones and in finished, even studied, sentences. Indeed, her niece recalled that a 'sort of intangible, diffusive, and yet exquisite elaboration of diction clothed all her ideas, clothed them in fact in such multiform circumlocution, and yet precision of detail, as made it a perfect puzzle to catch her real meaning' (Supplement, 'Coventry Herald', 5). Rebecca encouraged George Eliot to eliminate her midland accent, to pitch her voice low and evenly, and to strive always to speak in well-formed sentences. 


@@@@@


doc= 51763


Byerley, Maria (1787-1843), schoolmistress, was the second daughter and fifth child of Thomas Byerley (1748-1810), nephew, agent, and partner in the pottery works of Josiah Wedgwood, and his wife, Frances, 'nee' Bruckfield (1761-1838). Katherine Thomson, the writer, was her younger sister. For the first twenty years of Maria's life the family home was in London, first in Greek Street and then in Sloane Street. Tom and Frances Byerley, who had thirteen children altogether, were not good managers. While Tom's uncle Josiah was alive, he kept a tight grip on the finances of both the family and the firm; after his death in 1795 the fortunes of the Byerleys and of Wedgwood began to go downhill. In 1809 it was agreed that Maria and her elder sister, Frances ['see below'], should try to support themselves by opening a school. A house was rented in Warwick High Street and the school opened its doors to five boarders and two day girls at the end of January 1810. 
Despite leasing a second house the Warwick site was cramped and thought to be unhealthy. In 1817 the school moved to Barford House, 3 miles outside Warwick. In 1824 there was a final move to a house called Avonbank, 3 miles outside Stratford. There the school remained until the retirement of Maria and her sister Jane in 1841. It was taken on by the Misses Ainsworth and was still going strong in 1850. 
Throughout all this, and the departure through marriage of four of her sisters, Maria was the anchorwoman, the constant presence. She was absent only for two spells of severe illness in 1813 and 1814. She managed the finances not only of the school but also of the family. Initial capital for the school had been raised against the security of legacies to the sisters under the wills of Josiah and Thomas Wedgwood. But pupils did not pay in advance, and until the move from Warwick there was a ceiling on expansion. Josiah Wedgwood the younger helped with loans and an allowance to Mrs Byerley. Maria wrote to him with quiet pride on 12 February 1823, 'I find after making a calculation of our profits this half-year that we are able to send the amount of our debt, I am sorry to say of so long standing, to you. I shall therefore feel very much obliged to you if you will permit your book-keeper to send me an account of all that is owing including interest, so that we may at length feel quite free' (Hicks, 70). She and her brother Samuel also took over the payment of an allowance to their mother. 
On paper the school's curriculum was a conventional female one: 'Instruction in English Reading, Spelling, Grammar and Composition, in Geography... and in Ancient and Modern History' (Hicks, 14), with French, Italian, music, dancing, drawing, writing, and arithmetic as extras. However, it appears to have been taught to a standard sufficient to attract those enthusiasts for female education, the Unitarians. Although the Misses Byerley were Anglican, their pupils included Harriet Martineau's niece, Joseph Priestley's granddaughters Marianne and Sarah, sent over from America, Julia Leigh Smith, and from 1821 to 1826 Elizabeth Stevenson, the future novelist Mrs Gaskell. 
Maria Byerley died of pneumonia at her sister Katherine's house, 30 Welbeck Street, London, on 2 April 1843. She bequeathed her property to her sisters 'for their separate use & benefit independently & exclusively of any present or future husband & without being in any wise subject to his debts, control or management' (Hicks, 116). The character Maria Bouverie, the vicar's spinster sister in Katherine Thomson's novel 'Constance' (1833), set in Warwick, is thought to be a portrait of her sister Maria. 




@@@@@


doc= 51764


Frances Parkes (1786-1842), writer, was the first daughter and fourth child of Thomas and Frances Byerley. She opened the school in Warwick with Maria in 1810. On 21 June 1811 she married the Unitarian textile manufacturer William Parkes (1788-1840). However his uncle's bankruptcy in 1817 brought William down too. They moved from Warwick first to Bloxham and then to Solihull. In 1825 Fanny published 'Domestic duties, or, Instructions to young married ladies on the regulation of their conduct in the various relations and duties of married life', which has generally been taken as reflecting the ethos of the Byerleys' school. It was a considerable success, going into five editions in fifteen years. In the later 1820s they moved to London, where William built up a solicitor's practice. Fanny died at Kilburn Priory, London, of heart disease on 13 September 1842. Two of her six children worked with Florence Nightingale in the Crimea, Maria as a nurse and Edmund Alexander Parkes as a doctor. 


@@@@@


doc= 51766


Cowling, Thomas George (1906-1990), mathematician and astrophysicist, was born on 17 June 1906 at 3 Harrogate Road, South Hackney, London, the second of the four sons of George Cowling, Post Office engineer, and Edith Eliza Cowling, 'nee' Nicholls. Cowling was educated at Sir George Monoux Grammar School, Walthamstow, from where in 1924 he went on an open scholarship in mathematics to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he won the university junior mathematical exhibition in 1925 and the scholarship in 1926. With a first-class degree, he took a diploma in education, followed by a three-year post-graduate scholarship at Brasenose. His research supervisor was Edward A. Milne, the first incumbent of the Rouse Ball chair of mathematics. 
Cowling's acumen was quickly recognized. After gaining his DPhil he was invited to join Sydney Chapman at Imperial College as demonstrator. Their collaboration converted Chapman's 'skeleton' of a book into a standard text, 'The Mathematical Theory of non-Uniform Gases' (1939), which treats kinetic theory by a systematic attack on the classical Boltzmann equation. Cowling was subsequently assistant lecturer in mathematics at Swansea (1933-7), and lecturer at Dundee (1937-8) and at Manchester (1938-45). In 1945-8 he was professor of mathematics at Bangor, moving then to his last post, as professor of applied mathematics at Leeds, becoming emeritus professor in 1970. 
Over the three decades from 1928 to 1958 Cowling made outstanding contributions to knowledge about stellar structure and developments in cosmical electrodynamics, kinetic theory, and plasma physics. His achievements were recognized by many honours and awards: the Johnson memorial prize at Oxford (1935), election to the Royal Society (1947), the gold medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1956) and its presidency (1965-7), honorary fellowship of Brasenose (1966), the Bruce medal of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific (1985), and the Hughes medal of the Royal Society (1990). Cowling married Doris Marjorie Moffatt on 24 August 1935. They had three children: Margaret Ann Morrison, Elizabeth Mary Offord (died 1994), and Michael John Cowling, and six grandchildren. 
A few years before Cowling began working on stellar structure, Sir Arthur Eddington had published his celebrated 'Internal Constitution of the Stars', in which he pictured a homogeneous star as a self-gravitating gaseous sphere in radiative equilibrium, with its luminosity fixed by its mass and chemical composition. From comparison of his 'standard model' with the masses and radii of observed 'main-sequence' stars, Eddington inferred that the as yet unknown stellar energy sources must be highly temperature-sensitive. Cowling's careful analysis strengthened Eddington's case -- against the criticisms of Sir James Jeans -- by showing that the models would nevertheless almost certainly be vibrationally stable. In parallel with Ludwig Biermann, he also showed that stars would normally have turbulent domains with very efficient convective energy transport. 
The 'Cowling model', with its convective core and radiative envelope, is a physically more realistic replacement of Eddington's standard model, effectively removing the confusion surrounding Eddington's 'mass-luminosity' relation. Cowling's analysis of vibrational stability was done in the mid-1930s. Subsequent developments in nuclear physics by Hans Bethe and C.-F. von Weizsacker showed the Cowling model to be a paradigm for stars somewhat more massive than the sun, for which energy release by fusion of hydrogen into helium takes place through a highly temperature-sensitive catalytic cycle involving carbon and nitrogen, so yielding a convective core. 
In low-mass stars like the sun, hydrogen fusion occurs through a direct and less temperature-sensitive path. The energy-generating core is now radiative, but because of the low surface temperature there is a deep convective envelope, extending from just beneath the surface and driven by the latent heat associated with the ionization of hydrogen and helium. Cowling pointed out that the condition of radiative transport through the surface layers must still be satisfied. The profundity of this comment showed up many years later in studies of evolved, inhomogeneous red giant stars by Fred Hoyle and Martin Schwarzschild and of contracting pre-main sequence stars by Chushiro Hayashi. Earlier, Milne had argued that the luminosity of a star should be sensitive to conditions in the surface, rather than depending essentially on radiative transfer through the bulk of the star, as in Eddington's theory. Cowling's work vindicated Eddington's approach for main-sequence stars, while implicitly allowing for such sensitivity in stars with extensive sub-surface convective zones. 
Cowling's other contributions to stellar structure include an important paper on binary stars and two pioneering papers on non-radial stellar oscillations, foreshadowing later work in 'helioseismology'. Simultaneously he published a series of studies on cosmical magnetism and on plasma physics, culminating in his superbly succinct monograph 'Magnetohydrodynamics' (1959, 1976). His famous 'anti-dynamo theorem' for axisymmetric magnetic fields is implicit in virtually all subsequent studies of cosmical dynamos. His 'fossil' fields remain relevant to the observed strongly magnetic stars. A lively correspondence with Biermann brought out the requirements of a theory of both the structure and the origin of sunspots. While recognizing the seminal contributions of Hannes Alfven (1908-1995) to magnetohydrodynamics, he applied his critical faculties to Alfven's theory of the sunspot cycle, and defended the Chapman-Ferraro theory of geomagnetic storms against what he regarded as unjust attacks. Together with Biermann, Arnulf Schluter, and Lyman Spitzer jun., he did much to clarify the concept of 'conductivity' for both fully and partially ionized gases. 
Surprisingly, Cowling spent most of the years of the Second World War just teaching at Manchester University and doing service as an air-raid warden. Although initially involved by invitation in some defence-orientated work, he was later puzzled to find himself excluded. After the war he learned that he was considered a security risk on what now seem the flimsy grounds that he had 'undesirable associates', to wit the communist physicist Janossy and a pacifist church minister. 
In his autobiographical essay 'Astronomer by accident' (1985) Cowling remarks that he and his brothers inherited the 'Puritan work ethic' from their nonconformist parents. He remained an active, non-fundamentalist Baptist, though in his later years he confessed to doubts, speaking of 'getting closer to mysticism rather than to a religion of set creeds'. His puritanism perhaps showed itself in his very high academic standards, which he applied as much to his own work as to that of others, and earned him the nickname Doubting Thomas. Everyone knew him by sight -- his red hair and his great height made him conspicuous -- and also looked up to him metaphorically, because of his combination of kindliness and intellectual power. Though he never had the opportunity to build up a school (his one outstanding PhD student was Eric Priest, later professor at St Andrews), many younger workers, including Nigel Weiss at Cambridge and Roger Tayler and Leon Mestel at Sussex, remembered with warmth his generous encouragement. 
Cowling's research activity in his later decades was severely hampered by recurring bouts of ill health, beginning with a duodenal ulcer in 1954. He died in Newton Green Hospital, Leeds, on 16 June 1990, and his remains were cremated in Lawnswood cemetery, Leeds, on the 22nd. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51767


Porter, Annie (1880-1963), zoologist, was born on 20 February 1880 at Lewes Road Farm, Preston, Sussex, the elder daughter of Samuel Porter, poulterer, and his wife, Mary Elizabeth Redwood. The family moved to Brighton soon after her birth. Annie was educated in Brighton before studying at University College, London, from 1902 to 1905, when she graduated BSc in botany. Her particular interest was mycology, and after graduation she undertook zoological research in parasitology at University College. For her doctorate, awarded by London University in 1910, she presented six published papers on parasites found in sheep, mice, and water bugs. She was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1911. 
Annie Porter collaborated with Harold Benjamin Fantham (1875/6-1937) in writing 'Some Minute Animal Parasites, or, Unseen Foes in the Animal World' (1914). The book was intended for both scientists and the general public and has fifty-six illustrations of protozoa drawn by the authors. Porter and Fantham 'suspected that smallpox, trachoma, hydrophobia and measles, the causal agents of which are little understood, are due to the agency of Protozoa as yet incompletely determined' (p. 302). 
H. B. Fantham was an assistant to the Quick professor of biology at Cambridge University. By 1914 he was a lecturer in parasitology at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. In September 1913 Annie Porter was appointed for a year as helminthologist at the Quick Laboratory, to deal with the accumulation of material. Her post was funded from the Tropical Diseases Research Fund. From October 1914 to 1916 she held a Beit memorial research fellowship, at the Quick Laboratory. On 24 November 1915 she married Fantham, the son of Benjamin Fantham. They published numerous joint papers, but Annie continued to use her maiden name for all her published work. 
In 1917 Annie's husband was appointed professor of zoology at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg. Annie Porter came to hold several appointments in South Africa, some concurrently. From 1917 she was head of the department of parasitology at the South African Institute for Medical Research in Johannesburg; from 1921 she was also senior lecturer in parasitology at the University of the Witwatersrand. She was an examiner in parasitology both at this university and at the University of South Africa. When the medical school at the University of the Witwatersrand was founded in 1916 Annie Porter became their first lecturer in parasitology. She was said to have had the reputation of running the zoology department through her husband, who was said to be rather a difficult person; a member of the Eugenics Society, he was against the mixing of races. In South Africa Annie Porter did a considerable amount of research, producing a detailed report (published in 1938) on larval 'Trematoda' found in certain South African 'Mollusca'. This was particularly important in relation to understanding the disease bilharzia. 
Annie Porter was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of South Africa; she served a term as vice-president, and was a council member. In 1927 she was a South Africa medallist. Annie was president of Section D (zoology) of the South African Association for the Advancement of Science in 1922, and in 1924 she became president of the South African Geographical Society. She was clearly a leader among South African parasitologists and was working in a field of research in which little had been done in South Africa. However, her publications were very diverse and she never really seemed to settle on a clearly defined area of study. 
In 1933 H. B. Fantham was appointed as Strathcona professor of zoology at McGill University, Montreal, and Annie held a post there as a research associate. Their arrival was noted in the Montreal papers, and 'The Star' for 3 January 1933 reported that 'Mrs. Fantham showed every bit as much interest in her new surroundings as her husband and was not at all embarrassed when conversation took a scientific turn for she is a scientist in her own right'. While at McGill, Porter worked with the medical staff at the Royal Victoria Hospital on parasites collected from 139 patients. She found fourteen different species of human parasite and proved that amoebic dysentery was endemic in Montreal. Porter's husband died in October 1937, and she returned to England soon afterwards. 
Annie Porter was a fellow of the Zoological Society, and Sir Julian Huxley, then secretary, asked her to be honorary parasitologist for the Zoological Society of London at Regent's Park. She held the position from 1938 until a few months before she died. She submitted an annual report on the parasites she had found in the animals, which was published in the 'Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London'. She continued to work through the collections of parasites she and her husband had made in South Africa and Canada and published numerous papers, usually citing her late husband's name first. 
Annie Porter was also interested in the education of children with cerebral palsy. Once a year she arranged for some of the animals from London Zoo to be taken to the children on a visit. During the war she used her knowledge of mycology to hunt out edible fungi for the benefit of the staff. She propagated the fungi by spreading the spores in suitable places in Regent's Park. 
Annie Porter died in St Pancras Hospital, London, on 9 May 1963, from bronchopneumonia. Among her bequests were: $10,000 to Christ's College, Cambridge (her husband's college), to endow a fellowship in parasitology; $5000 each to University College, London, the University of the Witwatersrand, and the Zoological Society of London (and also a microscope) for research; and $1000 to McGill University. The research scholarship administered by the University of the Witwatersrand could be held in any university in the British empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 51768


Mackinnon, Doris Livingstone (1883-1956), protozoologist, was born on 30 September 1883 at 4 Forest Road, Aberdeen, the eldest of five children of Lachlan Mackinnon (1855-1948), advocate and consular agent for France and Belgium, and his wife, Theodora Thompson of London. Her interest in science was stimulated by her father (an amateur ornithologist, botanist, and astronomer) and by her acquaintance with the geologist Maria Ogilvie Gordon, who encouraged her to study science seriously. Mackinnon graduated BSc from Aberdeen University in 1906, at a time when few women were studying science. She gained a special distinction in botany and geology, and submitted her thesis 'Studies on protozoa' for the degree of DSc in 1914. She was awarded an honorary LLD by the university in 1943. 
After graduation Mackinnon received a Carnegie scholarship and spent a year in the laboratory of Richard Hertwig in Munich. She also spent a few months at the biological station at Roscoff in Brittany (where she worked on protozoological research with M. F. Vles) and at the Quick Laboratory in Cambridge -- under the supervision of Professor G. H. F. Nuttall. In 1908 Mackinnon returned to Aberdeen as personal assistant to Professor J. Arthur Thomson at the university; she collaborated with him on several papers. In 1909 she moved to Dundee as assistant to Professor W. D'Arcy Thompson; she was promoted to lecturer in 1916. It was at University College, Dundee, that Mackinnon gained her reputation as a brilliant lecturer and protozoologist specializing in the parasites of insects. 
In 1916 Mackinnon was introduced to the study of amoebic dysentery by Clifford Dobell. From then, until 1918, she took a leave of absence to do war work as a protozoologist in military hospitals, including the 1st Western General Hospital, Liverpool, and University War Hospital, Southampton. During this period she published several papers and reports with colleagues concerning 'Entamoeba histolytica' (the bacteria responsible for amoebic dysentery in humans). She returned to Dundee in 1918, where, for some months, she ran the zoology department single-handedly, D'Arcy Thompson having accepted a position at St Andrews. In 1919 she was appointed lecturer in zoology at King's College, University of London, later being promoted to reader (1921) and professor (1927). Mackinnon remained at King's until her retirement in 1949, at which time she was elected an emeritus professor and an honorary research associate of University College, London. 
Doris Mackinnon was the author of about forty scientific papers, chiefly on parasitic protozoa. A talented writer and artist, with a good knowledge of German and music, she brought a wide perspective to her writing and teaching. While in Dundee she often lectured for a popular audience, as well as publishing a series of articles about children and childhood memories in periodicals and in the 'Manchester Guardian'. Later she gave a course of broadcast talks for schools which formed the basis of her book 'The Animal's World' (1936), a revised and expanded edition of which was published in 1950. Her early training in German enabled her to produce in 1926 a translation of Jacob von Uexkull's 'Theoretische Biologie' and, three years later, of Paul Mies's 'Die Bedeutung der Skizzen Beethovens zur Erkenntnis seines Stiles' (as 'Beethoven's Sketches: an Analysis of his Style, Based on his Sketchbook'). Her artistic ability is suggested by her illustrations of specimens. Doris Mackinnon was remembered as an outstanding lecturer who never repeated a lecture in thirty years of teaching. Her colleague Ben Dawes wrote that she was 'an inspiring teacher, rapid but always lucid in exposition, she had a natural dignity and touch of the grand manner which at all times commanded respect and attention and which could, on occasions, give devastating force to a well deserved reprimand. ('The Times')' Doris Mackinnon corresponded with many of her students after graduation, offering them advice and guidance in their careers. During the Second World War she sent news and gifts of books to those who were serving abroad. Following her retirement she began work on a textbook for undergraduates. Frequently interrupted by illness, in the spring of 1956 she invited R. S. J. Hawes of University College, London, to collaborate with her. In that June, however, she suffered a severe stroke, and died at her Chelsea home, 44 St Leonard's Terrace, three months later, on 10 September 1956. 'An Introduction to the Study of Protozoa', which was edited and completed by Hawes, was published in 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 51769


Maurice, Mary Atkinson (1797-1858), educationist, was born at Kirby Cane, Norfolk, the second daughter of the Revd Michael Maurice, a Unitarian minister and schoolmaster, and his wife, Priscilla Maurice ('nee' Hurry). She was educated by her father along with some of her sisters and neighbours, showing a particular gift for languages and literature, and as she grew older, she helped to teach her numerous younger sisters. She was the most practical and businesslike member of the family. 
In 1825 Mary Maurice moved with the family to Southampton, and when they ran into financial difficulties, she opened her own school, assisted by her younger sister Priscilla. She had become interested in the ideas of Pestalozzi, and spent some time with the Revd Charles Mayo and his sister Elizabeth Mayo at their school in Cheam, studying the Pestalozzian methods adopted there. She and some of her sisters and her brother had abandoned the Unitarian views of their father, causing great hurt in the family; under the influence of Mayo and others, she now became an Anglican, and opened her school as a church school. In 1829 she published anonymously 'Aids to Development', suggesting methods of instruction by which mothers might educate their own children. Her school prospered, and the need for larger premises led her to move to Reading, where she ran a school for nearly ten years with the help of another sister, Esther. When Esther married Julius Hare in 1844, Mary gave up the school and moved to London. 
Mary Maurice was already a subscriber to the Governesses' Benevolent Institution (GBI), which was attempting to alleviate and improve the lives and work of governesses. It was the experiences and persuasion of Mary and her younger sisters which led their brother, (John) Frederick Denison Maurice, to join the institution's committee. When Mary Maurice moved to Hanover Terrace, London, she took a more active role in the institution's work, in the belief that governesses needed more than financial aid, necessary as that was; they needed education, and recognized qualifications, which would in turn lead to their being given greater respect. In 'Mothers and Governesses' (1847) she wrote of the task of education as 'an honourable and dignified calling, next only to the sacred ministry of the Gospel' (p. 148). And in 'Governess Life: its Trials, Duties and Encouragements' (1849) she encouraged governesses to set and maintain certain standards (which she described in some detail), both for their own sakes and for those of their employers. Drawing on her own experience, she urged them to make use of educational opportunities, which in her view were best found under instruction from men. Thus she was one of the promoters of Queen's College, Harley Street, opened in 1848 under the auspices of the GBI, with her brother F. D. Maurice as principal. Mary Maurice was a very generous subscriber to the new college, and served as one of the early 'lady visitors'. In addition, she served on the committee of, and raised a large amount of money for, the Asylum for Aged Governesses, which the GBI also opened in Harley Street. 
Mary Maurice spent the last two years of her life with her sister and brother-in-law, Lucilla and William Powell, in Kensington, finally returning to the county of her birth, where she died of peritonitis, in Apsley Terrace, Great Yarmouth, on 4 October 1858. She was buried there, in St Nicholas's Church, among her Hurry ancestors. In her memory an additional aisle was added to St John's Church in Great Yarmouth, for the building of which she had raised and personally contributed much money. 


