@@@@@


doc= 51770


Robertson, Muriel (1883-1973), protozoologist and bacteriologist, was born on 8 April 1883 in Glasgow, the seventh child and fourth daughter of Robert Andrew Robertson (1842-1899), a distinguished engineer, and his wife, Elizabeth Ritter ('b'. 1851), originally from Limavady, co. Londonderry. Her early education at home, with tutors and governesses, stimulated a lively interest in languages, literature, philosophy, and travel, which she maintained throughout her life. Her formal education started in 1901 at the University of Glasgow, where she studied for an arts degree. However, it was the preliminary science course which introduced her to the pleasures of research. While she was still an undergraduate Graham Kerr, the professor of zoology, gave her a bench in the laboratory to work on protozoa. In 1905 she was awarded her MA and published her first scientific paper. 
Robertson continued her researches at Glasgow until 1909, visiting Ceylon in the summer of 1907 to study the trypanosomes (protozoan parasites) of reptiles. In 1909 she joined Professor E. A. Minchin at the Lister Institute in London and, although officially retired in 1948, continued to work there until 1962. In 1911 she took up a temporary appointment as protozoologist to the protectorate of Uganda, working with Lyndhurst Duke on the trypanosomes causing sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis). She succeeded in elucidating the life cycle of 'T. gambiense', both in blood and in its insect vector, the tsetse fly. This work resulted in several papers, the most important of which appeared in 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' (203, 1913, 161-84). In the papers the soundness of her scientific observations was matched by the elegance of her illustrations. 
In the 1930s Robertson started a collaboration with W. R. Kerr of the Veterinary Research Laboratories in Belfast, investigating infertility and abortion in cattle resulting from infection by 'Trichomonas foetus'. Once a year Kerr spent a week at the Lister Institute and once a year Robertson spent a week in Belfast; in between they maintained contact by exchanging weekly protocols. During both world wars she was asked to work on pathogenic bacteria infecting war wounds and made major contributions to the identification of 'Cl. welchii', 'Cl. septique', and 'Cl. oedematiens', the causative agents of gas gangrene. Her name is remembered by many bacteriologists by 'Robertson's cooked meat medium' which she developed for growing anaerobic bacteria. 
Those who knew Robertson described her as a patrician intellectual, and commented that throughout her life she maintained the bearing and outlook of an Edwardian gentlewoman. Although her manners were impeccable she could be ruthless in scientific discussion and did not suffer fools gladly. Autocratic in the laboratory, she insisted on a high standard of work from students and co-workers but nevertheless inspired admiration and affection from younger colleagues. During her seventies and eighties her slight, grey-haired figure still continued to be seen at scientific meetings. In all, her career continued for over fifty years. A member of many scientific societies, she was elected to the Royal Society in 1947, and on her eightieth birthday she gave the Marjory Stephenson memorial lecture of the Society for General Microbiology. In the late 1950s her health began to fail, and she moved from London to Cambridge. In the 1960s she returned to Limavady, where she lived with her sister Dorothy in the old family home. She died, unmarried, on 14 June 1973 at Altnagelvin Hospital, Londonderry. 


@@@@@


doc= 51771


Butlin, Kenneth Rupert (1897-1965), microbiologist, was born on 3 November 1897 in Kettering, Northamptonshire, the son of Walter Isaac Butlin (died 'c'.1933), footwear manufacturer and later insurance agent, and his second wife, Sarah Jane. He was educated at nearby Oundle School and, after serving with the special brigade Royal Engineers in the First World War, he took first-class honours in chemistry (in 1921) from Trinity College, Cambridge. After five years in Argentina working on the fermentation of sugar for manufacturing rum he spent three years studying vinegar fermentation for a Birmingham company. While at Birmingham, Butlin married, on 27 July 1928, Helen Mary, daughter of Benjamin John Fletcher, principal of Birmingham Art College, and his wife, Mary Joan, 'nee' Reynolds. They later had one son, Martin. 
In 1929 Butlin joined a research group at the Royal Navy cordite factory at Holton Heath, where he worked under A. C. Thaysen studying practical microbiological problems. In 1933 the group moved to the Chemical Research Laboratory, Teddington. Butlin's earliest research papers concerned the acetic acid bacteria, agents of vinegar formation; his 1936 review of these organisms remained definitive into the 1960s. During the Second World War, together with the rest of the Teddington group, he turned his attention to ways of producing 'Candida utilis', an edible yeast, thus converting waste molasses into food protein. The project gave him valuable experience of the large-scale production of microbes and involved an early use of continuous culture. When the war ended Thaysen and some of the staff took the food yeast project to the West Indies for development, and the microbiological research effort at Teddington was left to Butlin with two experimental officers, now investigating the corrosion of iron and steel by bacteria. This common and economically costly process is largely due to sulphate-reducing bacteria, and Butlin's small team rapidly established itself as a leading authority in this area. 
About 1948 the director of the Chemical Research Laboratory, Patrick Linstead, perceiving the broader potential of chemical microbiology, initiated an expansion of Butlin's microbiology section. Basic research on sulphate-reducing bacteria was strengthened, new topics were introduced into the research programme, and, in 1950, Butlin was authorized to accept responsibility for a few hundred bacterial cultures of industrial importance which the medically orientated National Collection of Type Cultures proposed to discard, so founding the National Collection of Industrial Bacteria. 
In the early 1950s Butlin's team became an independent microbiology group within the laboratory, dedicated to the study of bacteria of industrial and economic importance. The group remit was to tackle such strictly practical topics as the control of water pollution in waterlogged clay and gravel pits, leaching of metal ores by bacteria, bacterial spoilage of petroleum, and the feasibility of producing sulphur on an industrial scale with the aid of sulphur bacteria (the latter project, which involved a newsworthy trip to some north African sulphur lakes to seek appropriate bacteria, received immense publicity at its outset because Britain's post-war industrial recovery was being delayed by a world shortage of native sulphur). It also conducted more fundamental research, though still with a practical background, including the mechanisms of microbial oxidation of phenols, the mechanism of the methane fermentation, the continuous culture of anaerobic bacteria, and the basic biochemistry of sulphate-reducing bacteria. 
By 1958 Butlin's group had become the major British research unit in economic microbiology, and it led the world in fundamental knowledge of sulphate-reducing bacteria. Yet late that year the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, the laboratory's funding body, decided to disband Butlin's group. The reasons were multiple, including administrative economy, a sense that the laboratory was an inappropriate home for such research, poor economic prospects for the sulphur production project, and, arguably, elements of professional jealousy. Despite protests from microbiologists and industrial scientists in Britain and abroad, disbandment went ahead in 1959 and Butlin was compulsorily retired from the scientific civil service. He subsequently undertook consultancy work and continued to attend scientific meetings; the Society for General Microbiology paid him the rare compliment of making him an honorary member. 
Butlin was a pioneer of what later came to be called biotechnology: his conviction that the diverse chemical proclivities of microbes made them extremely important to society, not only for industrial production but also for society's civic infrastructure, conditioned his research outlook and informed his writings. 
Butlin was a friendly, cultured man who enjoyed opera, travel, good food, wine, and companionship. Colleagues and friends often remarked on his infectious capacity to enjoy life: even quite solemn occasions would take on the character of a party or convivial gathering in his company. Because of his pronounced stammer (which disappeared when he sang) others gave oral presentations such as seminars or lectures on his behalf. He deplored poor scientific writing, and the literary standard of his papers and, perforce, those of his research group, was high. Butlin died of kidney failure at his home, 44D Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex, on 1 October 1965, and was cremated at Feltham crematorium; his ashes were interred at Sapperton, Gloucestershire. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51772


Bunker, Henry James (1897-1975), microbiologist, was born in London on 27 April 1897, younger son and third child of Charles James Garibaldi Bunker (1864-1916), a pharmacist, and his wife, Kate Waterfield (1862-1944). He was educated at St Olave's Grammar School, London, from 1906. His schooling completed in 1915, he served in the First World War as an NCO and later a commissioned officer of the South Wales Borderers. Following demobilization in 1919 he went up to St Catharine's College, Cambridge, and took a degree in natural sciences with botany as his principal subject. 
On 29 July 1922 Bunker married Pauline Rosemary (Pearl) Delahunty (died 1950); they later had two sons and two daughters. It was also in 1922 that Bunker became assistant bacteriologist in a microbiology research group led by A. C. Thaysen at the Royal Naval cordite factory at Holton Heath, where he studied such practical problems as the fermentation of vegetable matter to produce fuel alcohol, and the microbial degradation of textiles and rope. Together with Thaysen he published a standard work on microbes. When the tomb of Tutankhamen at Karnak was opened by Howard Carter in 1924 Bunker was sent samples of the mummy's wrappings and other materials from the tomb, and he showed that, as far as current techniques could detect, no microbes survived. 
In 1933 Thaysen's research group was transferred to the Chemical Research Laboratory, Teddington; its research interests had expanded. Bunker had now become interested in damage to materials caused by sulphur bacteria, especially the sulphate reducing bacteria. His 1936 review of these organisms was a seminal contribution to subsequent research. Nevertheless, he regularly attended to 'ad hoc' problems involving microbes, such as the blackening of paint by fungi, taint in fish caused by bacteria, and microbial degradation of stored ropes. During the blitzkrieg of 1940-41 damage to wet fire hoses became a serious problem; Bunker showed that it was caused by sulphur bacteria forming acid from sulphur, a vulcanizing agent in the rubber, and was able to prescribe remedies. But during the Second World War the group's major project, to make edible yeast from waste molasses as a protein rich food supplement, largely displaced other research themes. It kindled in Bunker a long-lasting interest in yeast and food microbiology. At the end of the war he was one of many British scientists sent to defeated Germany to assess the state of its science and technology. 
In 1944 Bunker left the Teddington group to set up and direct a research department for a London brewer, Barclay-Perkins. He found the practical microbiological problems of the industry, ranging from the fermentation process itself to washing-up glassware in public houses, of absorbing interest, and he published widely. However, in 1956 Barclay-Perkins was taken over by a larger firm and Bunker's laboratory was closed. Although of an age at which many might have retired, he used his wide professional experience to embark upon a new and highly successful career as a freelance consultant on microbiological problems in industry. 
Bunker was one of the first British experts on microbial activities in non-medical contexts. Although he himself was mainly concerned with practical problems, he was a firm believer in the need for fundamental research. He played an important role in bringing about the recognition of microbiology as a distinctive discipline within biology. He became an influential figure in learned organizations concerned with both basic and applied microbiology; in 1945 he helped found the Society for General Microbiology; he became its first treasurer and was its president during 1952-5; he was also president of the Society for Applied Bacteriology, 1946-9. He represented microbiology at the inception of the Institute of Biology in 1950, was elected a fellow, and was president, 1967-9; he was also a fellow of the Institute of Food Science and Technology. He held forty-eight distinguished and honorific positions; he was especially pleased by a DTech conferred upon him in 1969 by Brunel University, and a DSc conferred by the Bath University of Technology in 1970. In all his offices he was notable for his tact, friendliness, and self-deprecating humour, yet as a chairman would display a firm and businesslike grasp of the discussion. 
A popular after-dinner speaker who could draw upon a fund of comic anecdotes, Bunker was an outgoing and engaging man who enjoyed good food, drink, sociability, and travel. His cheerful personality sustained him through a persistent nephritis which, over the last thirty years of his life, resulted in his needing a number of quite serious kidney operations. On 21 April 1970, twenty years after the death of his first wife, Bunker married his companion, secretary, and friend, Marie Travers 
('nee' Currivan; died 1992)
. He continued his consultancy work until his death from pancreatic cancer on 8 August 1975 at Teddington Memorial Hospital. He was cremated at south-west Middlesex crematorium on 13 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 51773


Appleton, Elizabeth (c.1790-1849), educationist and author, was the fourth, but third living, child of a large, impecunious family. Her mother, the eldest daughter of a respectable Warwick family, married her father in Worcester in 1785 or 1788 and lived in Warwick. They moved to Castle Street, Bristol, where Elizabeth was born. Her father was interested in little but the arts, primarily music, and quickly went through his wife's fortune and his own property. His dedication to Elizabeth's eldest brother, whom he believed was a musical genius, caused him to move the family to London, where, unfortunately, the boy died before fulfilling his father's dreams. Her father, who was employed in some capacity at the Kidbrook Park estate, Sussex, died about 1802. The family's fluctuating financial situation resulted in a peripatetic existence and perpetual instability. For Elizabeth, this was reflected in the vagaries of her education, which ranged from being schooled at home by her mother, through being a charity student in a school run by a distant relative, to being a day student at a large and fashionable London school. At the age of fourteen she accompanied her former governess, Miss Shepherd, to France when the teacher attempted to move her school there in the interlude between the revolutionary wars. 
Elizabeth Appleton's quick intelligence and love of reading were recognized and encouraged by her family, who believed that her future independence lay in teaching. Her unhappiness as a charity student sensitized her to the needs of timid and socially insecure students, while her appreciation of the failings of contemporary educational practice persuaded her of the merits of systematic, cumulative learning based on carefully directed, personal tutorial teaching. As an adolescent she spent weekends and holidays with affluent relatives in the West End of London, where she was introduced to elevated and cosmopolitan society. About 1811, after an argument with her mother, these relatives supplied her with the means to accompany her closest friend and her family to the continent for a trip that was ultimately to last three years. She left England without telling her mother and, years later, after her own conversion, this disobedience would prey upon her and be reinterpreted as a fundamental sin. The fact that her mother had become staunchly evangelical by the time that she returned to England seems likely to have been influential. 
Once in England again, Elizabeth Appleton became a governess. She was employed to teach the daughters of a number of noble families, including those of the countess of Leven and Melville, to whom she dedicated the publication of 'Private Education, or, A Practical Plan for the Studies of Young Ladies: with an address to parents, private governesses, and young ladies' (1815; 2nd edn, 1816), the book that was to establish her reputation as an educationist. Her ideas about women's education drew upon those of reforming educationists such as Mrs Trimmer. Young ladies' education should be thorough and balanced, she maintained, including serious subjects such as geography, arithmetic, and astronomy. In particular, it should aim to inculcate morality and religion. What made her publications popular was her ability to translate these ideas into specific details and practical systems. She gave governesses and parents models to follow, recommending subjects, texts, and methodologies for students of different ages and abilities. She also laid particular importance on the part played by the teacher or 'preceptress' as an example of knowledge and morality. While only women who could meet these high standards should be encouraged to teach, she argued, the best deserved better pay, more appreciation, and either an annuity or a pension to allow them to retire comfortably. 
The success of 'Private Education' encouraged Elizabeth Appleton to continue writing, and a number of other publications ensued. These included 'Early Education, or, The Management of Children Considered with a View to their Future Character' (2nd edn, 1821) and 'The Youth's Guide to the French Language' (1824). By 1825, according to the editor of her last publications, she was earning $4000 p.a. from the school she had established for young ladies in Portland Place, London. She had been consulted about the education of Princess Charlotte and purportedly even asked to be the governess of Princess Victoria. Even with allowance for exaggeration, however, she was undoubtedly doing well by the time she married a poor curate, the Revd John Lachlan, in 1825. She immediately sought to improve his situation by purchasing him an advowson. Unfortunately, her finances became entangled with those of her uncle who was managing the purchase of the living of West Moulsey, Surrey. When he went bankrupt before the deal was finalized, she and her husband were financially ruined. 
This marked the beginning of a depressing decline in Elizabeth's fortunes. Writing under her married name, as Mrs Elizabeth Lachlan, she published 'Leonora, or, The Presentation at Court: being the first of a series of narratives called young ladies' tales' (2 vols., 1829); however, her family situation steadily deteriorated, and by 1832 her husband had fled to Dunkirk to escape his debts. Although she continued to seek ecclesiastical preferment for him, and also made numerous attempts to re-establish her school in less expensive venues, she remained unsuccessful. This was due, in part, to the fact that her reputation as an educationist had been irreparably damaged after her religious conversion about 1830. Her excessive -- and increasing -- evangelicalism had led contemporaries to denounce her as a fanatic. The last years of her life were given over to proselytization and writing and disseminating religious tracts. She died of cholera at Rathbone Place, London, on 8 September 1849. Her last works, 'Magdalena's Voyages and Travels through the Kingdom of this World into the Kingdom of Grace' (1850) and 'Jehovah Jireh' (1850), the latter collected and edited by an unnamed physician, were published shortly after her death. Grimly moralistic and, especially in the case of the brief autobiographical sketch included in 'Jehovah Jireh', unremittingly self-critical and arguably even unbalanced, these books are a far cry from her earlier educational texts. 


@@@@@


doc= 51774


Sturge, Emily (1847-1892), campaigner for women's education and suffrage, was born on 20 April 1847 at Highbury Villa, Cotham New Road, Cotham, Bristol, the eldest of the eleven children of William Sturge (1820-1905) and his wife, Charlotte Allen Sturge (1817-1891). Four of her sisters were also involved to a greater and lesser extent in the movement for women's education. The Sturge family were prominent members of the Society of Friends and were linked by marriage and descent to a number of Quaker families. Emily was a great-niece of the Quaker Ann(e) Knight who had campaigned for women's right to vote in the 1840s, and in the memoir of Emily (1892) Charlotte Sturge wrote that Ann Knight 'would have rejoiced to see how far her desires have been fulfilled and will probably be yet further carried out' (Goodbody, 50). 
William Sturge was a partner in the family business of surveying which prospered in the nineteenth century. In 1864 the family moved into Chilliswood (later part of the University of Bristol) in Cotham, and the third daughter, Elizabeth, lived there until her death in 1944 at the age of ninety-four. The house was a centre for visiting lecturers and for drawing-room meetings during the suffrage campaigns of the 1870s. Emily was described by her Aunt Matilda as 'shy and sensitive in infancy' (E. Sturge, 79), and this developed into a deep reserve which gave the impression of aloofness. She was also 'a woman of considerable personal attractions, a little above the middle height, with good features, a fine bearing, and magnificent hair, which gave a certain distinction to her appearance' (ibid., 84). In early life she broke away from the evangelicalism of her upbringing, and experienced periods of religious doubt, though she continued to attend Friends' meetings all her life. Her sister Elizabeth said that 'we -- her sisters -- hardly knew how much strong feeling her rather cold and distant manner covered until, after her death, her private memoranda revealed it' (ibid., 79). In one of these memoranda Emily wonders 'how it is that I come to be where I am -- how it has come about that I am absorbed in the practical work of life. If the line of least resistance had not lain in this direction I could have lived the student's life. (Goodbody, 44)' After attending schools at Weston-super-Mare and then Frenchay, near Bristol, Emily's own education was cut short at the age of about fourteen, and thereafter she was largely self-taught. In contemplating the life of a student Emily may have been envying her younger sisters Mary Charlotte, known as Carta (1852-1929), and Caroline (1861-1922), who attended the University College which opened at Bristol in 1876. Carta went on to study at Newnham College, Cambridge, gaining the moral science tripos in 1887, and Caroline qualified as a doctor at London University. One of Emily's brothers, William Allen Sturge (1850-1919), was also medically qualified and married to Dr Emily Bovell, one of the seven female medical students expelled from Edinburgh University during the Sophie Jex-Blake struggle for women's access to medical training in the early 1870s. 
The 'practical work' of Emily Sturge's brief life was almost wholly concerned with promoting women's suffrage and women's education. From 1878 until her death she was honorary secretary of the west of England branch of the National Society for Women's Suffrage. The West of England Suffrage Society had been formed in Bristol in 1868 at the home of Matthew Davenport Hill, whose daughter Florence was a founding member. Emily Sturge was a member by 1872-3, and from the 1870s until about 1885 she was involved in travelling to public meetings, giving public speeches, and campaigning through the Liberal Party to obtain women's franchise by electoral reform. She was a member of the Bristol Women's Liberal Association, formed about 1880 alongside similar branches formed in other Quaker strongholds, whereby parliamentary and municipal candidates were asked to state their views of women's suffrage. Women were not enfranchised by Gladstone's 1884-5 reforms and Emily Sturge moved across to support the Liberal Unionists in the home rule split. She was a member of the committee of the West Bristol Temperance Society. 
Emily Sturge was elected as a Liberal to the Bristol school board in January 1880. School boards were the first form of elected body open to women, and Emily succeeded Helena Richardson as the second woman member, having come second in the poll at the age of thirty-two. She had experience of teaching in a Friends' Sunday school, and took an interest in an elementary school for girls run by the British and Foreign School Society. During her membership of the board she campaigned for free school meals, established as 'penny dinners' in 1884; was involved in the setting up of evening schools, chairing the evening school committee from 1886; and was concerned to ensure equal access for women and girls to technical instruction and to promote the training and status of women teachers. 
Emily Sturge achieved the latter aim through the new University College, founded in 1876. The college was a direct result of the Clifton Association for Promoting Higher Education for Women, formed in Bristol in 1868. The association founded the 'Lectures for Ladies' in the 1860s, which were attended by the Sturge sisters and are described by Elizabeth Sturge in her 'Reminiscences' (1928). The new University College, to become the University of Bristol in 1909, was open to both men and women, except for the medical school. In its early years money was a problem and Emily Sturge organized a successful fund-raising campaign in the late 1880s. She helped to establish a day training school for women teachers at the University College, which opened in October 1892: Marion Pease, a graduate of the new University College and a member of another key Bristol Quaker family, the Frys, was appointed the first mistress of method. 
Emily Sturge was also involved in setting up at Bristol a school of cookery to train domestic science teachers, using moneys set aside by the technical instruction committee of the town council, and derived from the 'Technical Instruction Act' of 1889 and the 'Local Taxation (Customs and Excise) Act' of 1890. Unlike the school boards, town councils were still restricted to men, and following receipt of a memorial from 'certain ladies' in October 1891, Emily Sturge, who wanted grants for technical education to benefit girls as well as boys, was invited to assist with the formation of the school of cookery. It was to open in September 1893. Emily Sturge was re-elected to the Bristol school board in January 1892 shortly before her death at her home, Chilliswood, Tyndall's Park, Cotham, Bristol, on 3 June 1892, from injuries sustained after being thrown from her horse. She was buried in the Quaker burial-ground at Friars Meeting-House, Rosemary Street, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 51775


Dendy, Mary (1855-1933), promoter of residential schools for mentally handicapped people, was born on 28 January 1855 at Bryncelyn, Mold, Flintshire, the second child of John Dendy (1828-1894), Unitarian minister, and his wife, Sarah Beard (1831-1922), eldest daughter of John Relly Beard. Her siblings included Helen Bosanquet, who worked for many years for the Charity Organization Society, and Arthur Dendy (1865-1925), a biologist. Mary was educated at home in Patricroft, near Manchester, and at Bedford College, London. In 1882, having taught in the Sunday school at Monton for several years, she became a companion to Miss Sarah Ann Cawston, the adopted daughter of Samuel Courtauld, in High Garrett, near Braintree, Essex. In 1891, following Miss Cawston's death (1889), she returned to Manchester where she lived and worked until her appointment to the Board of Control in 1913. 
Mary Dendy first became aware of what she referred to as 'the problem of the feeble-minded' while working in the Collyhurst Recreation Rooms, founded in Manchester by her uncle James Rait Beard. After her election to the Manchester school board in 1896 she began a detailed mental and physical assessment of nearly 40,000 schoolchildren in Manchester. Her subsequent report, prepared with the help of Dr Henry Ashby, convinced the board to establish special classes and schools for mentally handicapped children in Manchester. 
During her work for the school board (later the Manchester education committee) Mary Dendy became convinced that mentally handicapped young adults continued to pose a threat to the community after they left school. She therefore began to advocate lifelong institutional care for the mentally handicapped. In 1898 she established the Lancashire and Cheshire Society for the Permanent Care of the Feeble-Minded, to which she was secretary for many years. Utilizing the support of influential Unitarian friends and relatives, she campaigned to raise money for the society, which, in 1902, opened the Sandlebridge Boarding-Schools and Colony near Alderley Edge in Cheshire. 
Miss Dendy travelled extensively throughout England, Scotland, and North America in order to raise public awareness of the social problems associated with the mentally handicapped and to secure financial support for Sandlebridge. Many of her public addresses were published as pamphlets or journal articles. In 'Feeble-Minded Children' (1898), 'The Importance of Permanence in the Care of the Feeble-Minded' (1901), 'Feebleness of Mind, Pauperism and Crime' (1901), and 'The Problem of the Feeble-Minded' (1910), and in articles in 'The Lancet' (1902) and the 'Medical Magazine' (1911), she argued that 'feeble-mindedness' was the cause of crime, poverty, and drunkenness, and that such 'evils' would be transmitted to subsequent generations unless immediate action were taken. In an address to the Manchester and Salford Sanitary Association (1911), in an appendix to Charles Paget Lapage's 'Feeblemindedness in Children of School-Age' (1911), and in the 'Journal of State Medicine' (1914), she outlined the nature of the work used to occupy and train residents at Sandlebridge. She also campaigned vigorously for legislation to compel education committees to provide special schools and to allow local authorities to detain the mentally handicapped beyond the age of sixteen, objectives that were realized with the passage of the 'Mental Deficiency Act' in 1913 and the 'Elementary Education Act' in 1914. 
Dendy's opinions did not pass unchallenged. Some contemporary commentators disagreed with her principle of permanent segregation, and feminists were concerned that women in particular would be treated harshly under the terms of the 'Mental Deficiency Act'. However, her work at Sandlebridge generally met with approval from prominent doctors, such as Alfred Tredgold, and from others working in the field, such as Ellen Pinsent. Her knowledge and expertise were acknowledged both in the report of the royal commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded, published in 1908, and in her appointment as a commissioner of the newly created Board of Control in 1913. 
Late Victorian and Edwardian schemes to institutionalize people classified as 'mentally deficient' have sometimes been dismissed entirely as the product of contemporary anxieties about degeneration and as manifestations of eugenic strategies to control the lower classes. While much of Mary Dendy's rhetoric was clearly influenced by eugenics, her contribution to the care of the mentally handicapped was more complex. Her writings and her work at Sandlebridge demonstrate her genuine commitment to improving the lives of children admitted to the Colony. In addition, by drawing attention to the problems associated with training people with what are now referred to as learning difficulties, she contributed to the development of the concept of 'special needs' in education. 
In 1910 Dendy was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Manchester in recognition of her contribution to the education of the mentally handicapped. However, her involvement in civic and philanthropic work was not restricted to the care of the mentally handicapped. During her years in Manchester she was also secretary of the South Manchester Women's Liberal Association, secretary to the Women Guardians Society, a governor of the Manchester High School for Girls, and served on the Manchester Distress Committee. Although she supported women's suffrage she was wary of militant suffragettes, and opposed the employment of married women as teachers on the grounds that the combination of home duties and work caused breakdowns in women. 
In addition to contributing to local and national newspapers, such as the 'Manchester Guardian', Dendy also published poems, stories, and novels, including 'Lesson Stories for the Little Ones' (1888) and 'Only a Business Man' (1910). She maintained close connections with Unitarianism throughout her life, speaking in chapels and regularly contributing to Unitarian publications, such as the 'Sunday School Helper' and 'The Inquirer'. 
Mary Dendy did not marry. A bequest from Miss Cawston allowed her sufficient financial independence not only to pursue her work with the mentally handicapped but also to indulge her broader interests, such as travel and the theatre. She retired from the Board of Control in 1921, when she returned to live at Greencote, close to Sandlebridge, at Alderley Edge, Cheshire. She continued to take an active part in the Boarding-Schools and Colony until her death. Mary Dendy died at her home on 9 May 1933 and was buried on 12 May at Alderley Edge cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51776


Burgwin, Elizabeth Miriam (1850-1940), educationist, was born on 3 September 1850 at Occold, Suffolk, the second child of Samuel Canham, an agricultural labourer, and his wife, Miriam. After moving to London she attended the Practising School attached to Whitelands Training College before taking up a five-year pupil-teaching apprenticeship at St Luke's Parochial Girls' School, Chelsea, in 1864. Soon after completing this she married a London butcher, Thomas William Burgwin (died in or before 1891), on 12 February 1870. Their only child, Thomas Lane, was born on 3 November in the same year. 
From January 1872 to December 1873 Elizabeth Burgwin taught in West Ham, gaining her teacher's certificate by external examination in December 1872. In January 1874 she took up a post as head of Union Street Girls' School, Southwark, a newly established temporary school under the London school board, and it was from there that she and her fellow teachers moved to the new Orange Street Girls' School, also in Southwark, in June 1874. This was located in one of the poorest districts in London, and the pupils were unkempt and malnourished. Soon Mrs Burgwin, as headmistress, began to provide simple midday meals of bread and a hot drink. That led to the establishment of a small local organization to raise funds to supply food to pupils during the winter months. Early in the 1880s the venture received a major boost when she persuaded the journalist and author, George R. Sims, to publicize it in the column he wrote for 'The Referee', a leading sporting newspaper. That was repeated in subsequent years, with Elizabeth Burgwin acting as the fund's treasurer, and by the beginning of the twentieth century the Referee Children's Free Breakfast and Dinner Fund had become the largest agency for supplying free meals to scholars in London. In 1895 and 1899 she gave evidence to special committees of the London school board concerning underfed children. She also gave evidence to the Cross commission on the 'Elementary Education Acts' on 26 November 1886, and to the inter-departmental committee on medical inspection and feeding of children on 23 May 1905, concerning her work to promote the welfare of her pupils. 
Elizabeth Burgwin remained at Orange Street until her appointment in October 1891 as the London school board's first superintendent of schools for special instruction. By this time she was a widow, and prior to taking up the post she visited various institutions catering for mentally handicapped people in Britain, France, Germany, and Denmark. She opened the capital's first special classes in the summer of 1892. By 1897, when seven school boards in the country were providing classes for the 'feeble-minded', over a thousand of the 1300 pupils under instruction were taught in one of London's twenty-seven centres or classes, under Mrs Burgwin's direction. In 1905 she was described as having 'probably more experience of Special Schools than anyone else in the world', and the education authorities in Bristol, Brighton, and Birmingham sent their special-school teachers to her for training. She became one of the seven members of the departmental committee on defective and epileptic children in 1896-8. In 1898 she was involved in the establishment of a special school for the physically handicapped, and the provision of facilities for disabled children soon became an important aspect of her work. On 30 June 1905 she gave evidence to the royal commission on the care and control of the feeble-minded. 
Elizabeth Burgwin was an enthusiastic supporter of the National Union of Elementary Teachers (or National Union of Teachers (NUT), as it became in 1889). In 1885 she was the first woman to be elected to its executive committee and remained a member of the executive until 1896. She was an enthusiastic and able supporter of the union's charitable activities and in 1878 was present at the inauguration of its Benevolent and Orphan Fund. She was a fund trustee from 1914 until 1936, and was closely involved in the work of the Boys' Orphanage. 
Perhaps surprisingly, in view of her determined character and her general breaking of gender moulds, Elizabeth Burgwin was a strong opponent of the cause and tactics of the female suffrage movement; she was a member of the executive committee of the National League for Opposing Woman Suffrage. In 1912 she was an outspoken critic of a motion at the NUT annual conference in favour of votes for women. She was also opposed to the provision of sex education for elementary pupils, arguing in evidence to a London county council sub-committee in 1914 that it was the responsibility of parents rather than teachers to bring up their offspring 'in a healthy manner'. 
Until her retirement in September 1916, Elizabeth Burgwin remained superintendent of London's special schools and as a sign of their regard, fellow teachers contributed a testimonial of $1000 to commemorate the occasion. She then took up a post with the Ministry of Labour, advising on the award of pensions to widows and children of officers killed in action during the First World War. For this she was made an OBE. 
Elizabeth Burgwin died on 1 February 1940 at 147 Brixton Road, London. In an obituary 'The Times' praised her as 'one of the outstanding authorities on the subject of the education of the mentally subnormal child and the technique of teaching which was developed was due in great measure to her initiative, her sympathy, and her understanding'. London's own pre-eminence in this field at the beginning of the twentieth century was a product of her hard work and commitment. 'The Times' also paid tribute to the wit and good humour which had characterized her long association with London education. 


@@@@@


doc= 51777


Doreck, Beata (1833-1875), educationist, was born on 5 February 1833 in Mannheim, in the grand duchy of Baden, Germany, daughter of Herr Doreck, a jeweller. Her father provided her with a good education but he was opposed to her wish to train as a teacher, having the financial resources to enable her to remain at home without the need for employment. Her determination in pursuing her chosen career is evidence of her early sense of vocation. Beata spent three years at the normal school of Riboville, Alsace, and then went to nearby Colmar where she was examined for her diploma in teaching. Although she was only nineteen, her performance in the examination was so impressive that she was declared competent to take charge of a school without a period of probation, but she had already decided to go to England to take up a post as governess in a private family. 
Beata Doreck arrived in England in 1857 and remained in this post for three years although it was not a happy period: 'It was her lot in this family to fall into the hands of employers who had neither the intelligence to appreciate nor the generosity to reward the remarkable talents which she devoted to her work. She often spoke, in after years, of the unworthy treatment she received while carrying out this engagement. (Payne, 157)' She spent the next few years as a daily governess before opening her own school in 1866 at 1 Kildare Terrace, Bayswater, London, moving to 63 Kensington Gardens Square, Bayswater, in 1869. 
During the 1850s England was a place of refuge for liberal Germans fleeing the repression of democratic activity following the failed uprising of 1848-9. Froebel's ideas had been adopted by this group and the first kindergartens, opened in London and Manchester, were German speaking. However as Froebel's ideas became more widely known so a demand grew for kindergartens for English children. A major problem was the lack of English teachers who understood Froebel's ideas. At this time none of Froebel's works had been translated and very few English commentaries existed. It was recognized that the kindergarten movement needed the involvement of English teachers if it was to develop fully, although Maria Grey, in her address to the Froebel Society, 5 December 1876, acknowledged that 'Miss Doreck had lived long enough in England to understand the national peculiarities of thought and feeling' (p. 1). 
The difficulties in finding suitable staff for the kindergarten she added to her existing school for girls and preparatory school for boys, led Beata Doreck to use her influence with her English and German colleagues to bring about the formation of the Froebel Society. The first meeting, chaired by her, was held at 63 Kensington Gardens Square on 4 November 1874, and she was subsequently elected president of the committee whose members included two of her close friends and colleagues, Frances Mary Buss and Joseph Payne. 'The Report of the Froebel Society for the Promotion of the Kindergarten System', June 1875, listed the methods by which the society hoped to achieve its aims, including lectures, public meetings, publications, specimen illustrations of kindergarten work, a register of kindergarten teachers, the establishment of a model kindergarten, and the formation of training classes. In addition, the members were to present papers at the monthly meetings and contact was maintained with Froebelian colleagues overseas. 
Beata Doreck had been elected to the council of the College of Preceptors in June 1871 at the suggestion of Frances Mary Buss, who once said, 'We shall not have thorough education till we have the Kindergarten' (Ridley, 275). Perhaps the most important collaboration between the two women, who shared a great interest in teacher training, was the proposal presented to the College of Preceptors in October 1872 to establish a 'training class of lectures and lessons for teachers'. The college subsequently established the professorship of the science and arts of education, to which Joseph Payne was appointed in January 1873. Payne commented that Beata Doreck was largely responsible for the details of the scheme. In September 1873 she and Frances Mary Buss were elected fellows of the college, the first two women to receive the honour. In April 1874 they both formed part of a deputation to the duke of Richmond, the minister responsible for education in Disraeli's administration, urging him to establish a training college for teachers, on a par with the College of Surgeons and the law institutions, under the auspices of the College of Preceptors. 
Beata Doreck was also an early supporter of the Girls' Public Day School Company, founded in 1872, and bought shares in it, although the company's plan to open a school at Notting Hill near to her own was a potential threat to her livelihood. She was also involved in the work of the Schoolmistresses' Association and served as president for a year (1873-4). She supported her own young teachers, mainly from the poorer middle class, by paying their college fees and before her death planned to take aspiring teachers into her home and to train them herself for a nominal fee. No written exposition of her ideas seems to have survived but a detailed account of her paper, 'The Kindergarten in Relation to the School', presented to the Froebel Society on 13 April 1875, is given in the society's minutes. The title refers to the Froebelian concept of harmony of development and the paper criticizes the abrupt break between kindergarten and school under the existing system. A preparatory transition class, incorporating the teaching of reading and writing, was desirable, and she argued that Froebel's principles were applicable to the teaching of 'all' school subjects. 
In the summer of 1875 Beata Doreck made a recuperative trip to Switzerland accompanied by her sister Anna Roth, Mme Dickerdorf, and Harriet Mann, a member of her staff. She fell ill with a fever at Interlaken and died at the Hotel Interlaken on 12 September 1875. ''Overwork' was the emphatic comment on her case pronounced by the physician who attended her dying bed' (Payne, 157). 


@@@@@


doc= 51778


Ravenhill, Alice (1859-1954), educationist and promoter of the household science movement, was born on 31 March 1859 in Snaresbrook, Essex, the fourth of the seven children of John Ravenhill (1824-1894), naval architect and marine engineer, and his wife, Fanny Pocock ('c'.1831-1903), daughter of Thomas Pike Pocock and Martha Pike. 
Like many women of the nineteenth century Ravenhill was thwarted in her intellectual ambitions by middle-class conventions which stressed 'accomplishments' rather than academic achievement. She was educated privately and at residential schools in Richmond and St John's Wood, but her father prohibited her from following her first ambitions to train as a nurse or attend the National Training School for Cookery. A holiday in Weymouth, however, sparked her interest in geology, and she later taught herself biology and physiology, surreptitiously dissecting snails, worms, and even an ox's eye in her bedroom. It was only after her father's financial collapse while Ravenhill was in her late twenties that she was able to pursue her interests in science and social welfare -- interests which stemmed from an 'unquenchable search for knowledge and childhood yearning to help my fellow man to a happier and less-troubled existence' (Ravenhill, 45). Opting for the more respectable preventative health work, she enrolled in the National Health Society's year-long training course for county council hygiene lecturers -- at the time the only such course open to women intending to work in public health. Two fellow students, Lucy Deane and Rose Squire, later became the first women sanitary inspectors and subsequently two of the first women factory inspectors. Ravenhill was also invited to interview for a sanitary inspection post upon finishing in 1892, but declined the offer, and instead found scope for her interests in researching and preparing reports on various health-related subjects. The first was an unofficial report about women in the fish-curing industry in conjunction with the royal commission on labour, written at the behest of her friend Edith Temple Orme. Ravenhill's developing career in public health was also aided by her friendship with Prince Leopold, whose estate in Wiltshire bordered that of her father, and Princess Christian, who introduced her to many leading social reformers and other public figures of the period. It was through this friendship that Ravenhill served, from 1894 to 1897, as secretary to the Royal British Nurses Association, one of Princess Christian's causes. 
Ravenhill resigned this position in 1897 to work as a lecturer in public health law for the Co-operative Society and the Women's Co-operative Guild, beginning a long career in health education. In her first year she gave a series of over forty lectures in various manufacturing areas, after which she took a post under the West Riding county council (1899-1904), teaching a course which she had devised herself for teachers on the correlation of hygiene and health education with ordinary school subjects, and serving as an inspector of hygiene and domestic economy at various technical institutes and evening schools. In 1899 she was secretary of the school hygiene section at the Royal Sanitary Institute's congress at Southampton. The same year she represented the National Health Society at the International Congress of Women at Westminster, where she first met Michael Sadler, head of the special report department of the Board of Education, with whom she maintained a lifelong friendship. 
It was while attending the congress of the Royal Sanitary Institute in Paris in 1900 that Ravenhill first became interested in American home economics education. The topic had been prominent in the Paris Exhibition of that year, although she noted that the idea of applying science to household matters, and offering the subject at university level, was regarded with great suspicion there. Ravenhill, however, was enthusiastic about the new discipline. She approached Michael Sadler about the need for a report on the American experience; Robert Morant, president of the Board of Education, gave her the commission. Ravenhill approached the Royal Sanitary Institute and the West Riding county council to help fund her trip, agreeing to submit separate reports on school sanitation and on home economics courses in American schools. Her research trip in the summer of 1901 ignited her enthusiasm for establishing a university home economics course in Britain. Arranged by Ellen H. Richards, one of the founders of the American Home Economics Association, Ravenhill's tour took her across the American north-east and midwest and into Canada, bringing her into contact with many prominent social reformers. In New York she attended the Third Lake Placid Conference (1901) of home economics educators, the forerunner of the American Home Economics Association. Ravenhill was so impressed with the American movement that she strongly considered returning to train there herself so that she could be a stronger advocate for the idea in Britain; Sadler dissuaded her, arguing that she could accomplish more by staying in England. 
Ravenhill's reports for the Royal Sanitary Institute (1902), which elected her as its first woman fellow in 1904, and for the Board of Education (1905) received much press attention, and as a result Ravenhill was invited to join various committees relating to school hygiene and health. On some of these committees she was the only woman; other women were, as she noted, more involved in the suffrage movement at that time. Although not anti-suffrage by inclination, she had an aversion, in deference to her much admired elder sister Margaret, against being a 'platform woman'; and Ravenhill's commitment to promoting the scientific study of social problems outweighed any desire to become involved in suffrage organizations. Her membership on the school hygiene subcommittees of the Royal Sanitary Institute and the British Association had alerted her to the need for more attention to children's formative years and their nutritional requirements, and prompted her to undertake several research projects. Her investigations into the sleep requirements of elementary school children were presented before the International Congress on School Hygiene in London (1907) and published as 'Some Characteristics and Requirements of Childhood' (1908). In 1906-7 she visited physical training colleges for women in England, Scotland, Denmark, and Sweden, accompanied by the surgeon Dame Mary Scharlieb, after which Ravenhill was sent by the English board of education as a temporary inspector to visit women's training colleges and report on methods of physical exercise. She later declined an offer from Robert Morant to become the second woman inspector of schools. Other studies included an investigation into moral education in elementary schools for a private commission established in 1907 (presided over by Lord Bryce and Michael Sadler) and a report for the Child Study Society on the play interests of elementary school children (1910). She also wrote several school textbooks on domestic and personal hygiene, as well as an edited volume (with Catherine Schiff), 'Household Administration: its Place in the Higher Education of Women' (1911). 
It was in this context of public interest in social welfare issues that Ravenhill became involved in a movement to develop a university course in home economics in Britain, an idea which had gained currency in the aftermath of the report of the interdepartmental committee on physical deterioration (1904) and its recommendation that girls should be given better domestic science instruction. A university-level course in 'home science' was seen as a way to provide teachers qualified to develop scientifically based domestic courses for secondary school girls, give home-related subjects such as domestic hygiene and food preparation a higher social status, and provide an option for university women wanting to take up positions in social welfare work which were then being opened to women. The idea found fertile ground at King's College for Women, London, where Ravenhill was lecturing in hygiene, among a number of women and men who were interested in the reform of higher education in order to make it more relevant to modern life, including: Lilian M. Faithfull, vice-principal of King's College for Women (1894-1907); her successor, Hilda D. Oakeley; Halford Mackinder, principal of the London School of Economics; Herbert Jackson, professor of organic chemistry at King's College; Sir Arthur Rucker, principal of the University of London (1901-8); and his wife, Thereza, Lady Rucker. Inaugurated in 1908, household and social science was established as a London BSc course in 1920 and led to the founding of King's College of Household and Social Science in 1928. 
Ravenhill reluctantly agreed to her younger sister Edith's suggestion in 1910 that they accompany their brother Horace and his son to Canada, a decision which she took with 'great pain' as it meant giving up her work in England (Ravenhill, 170). The sojourn was intended to last only four years, but her return in 1914 was cancelled due to the outbreak of war in Europe, and she was never able to afford the return trip afterwards. Ravenhill at first threw her energies into the homestead at Shawnigan Lake on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, and into the local community, but was soon disillusioned by the lack of public-spirited women and the sharp demarcation between the sexes in terms of activities and occupations. Again she found scope for her interests in American home economics education. She held annual visiting lectureships at Oregon State College at Corvallis, and was appointed in 1917 by the Ellen H. Richards Memorial Fund as the first international lecturer in home economics, undertaking a two-month tour through Texas and various midwestern states. She also served as director of home economics at Utah State Agricultural College, Logan, from 1917 to 1919. This she considered in hindsight to be one of the 'greatest and costly mistakes' of her life as a result of her experiences with the Mormon social system and a severe case of Spanish influenza which forced her resignation and effectively ended her career as a lecturer (ibid., 197). None the less her early research on American home economics had earned her great appreciation among the American pioneers, and she was made an honorary doctor of home economics by the American Home Economics Association during their jubilee in 1950. 
Having moved to Victoria in 1919, Ravenhill became active in the Women's Institutes movement, and it was through a request to adapt native tribal designs onto hooked rugs that she began a three-year research project on the arts and crafts of native British Columbian tribes, culminating in the publication of 'The Native Tribes of British Columbia' (1938), a school textbook, and 'A Corner Stone of Canadian Culture' (1944), a handbook on native designs. For this work, as well as for her establishment of the Society for Native Columbian Indian Arts and Crafts in 1940 to help improve the self-esteem and economic independence of native Canadians, the University of British Columbia awarded her an honorary doctor of science degree in 1948. 
Ravenhill never married: an engagement in 1882 to a young doctor was broken off by her parents shortly before the wedding due to a dispute over the settlement. Her younger sister Edith became her lifelong companion and housekeeper. Of average build and slight of figure, Ravenhill had excelled at music and dancing in her youth, but was always of somewhat indifferent health, suffering from a number of serious illnesses throughout her life which required long periods of convalescence and prevented her from pursuing her interests with the vigour she desired. A period of recuperation in Bournemouth following an attack of rheumatic fever in 1887 brought her into the care of a doctor who challenged her religious faith, and, although she never rejected Christianity, she later valued the experience for enabling her to question religious dogma and to weigh carefully the arguments on both sides of a vital question. Despite her achievements and her lifelong desire for knowledge, she always felt keenly the lack of academic training, and ascribed her successes to perseverance, a quick intuition, and self-application. She died in Victoria, British Columbia, on 27 May 1954. 


@@@@@


doc= 51779


McKillop, Margaret (1864-1929), scientist and university teacher, was born on 22 January 1864 at 23 Church Street, Wigan, Lancashire, the daughter of James Seward, a schoolmaster at the Liverpool Institute, and his wife, Sarah Jane Woodgates. She was educated at Blackburne House school, Liverpool, and Somerville Hall, Oxford, where she held the Gilchrist exhibition and the Reinagle scholarship, jointly worth $80 a year, which enabled her to complete her studies. She lacked neither social confidence nor academic ability, and a Somerville contemporary, Frances Elizabeth Sheldon, remembered her as 'our calm, sensible but witty Miss Seward, the smartest girl in England' (Sheldon, letter to her mother, 2 Feb 1883). In October 1884 she became the first woman at Oxford entered for the honour school of mathematics, gaining a second class; and in 1885 she became the first to gain a first class in the final honour school of natural science (chemistry). As Oxford women were not yet permitted to graduate, she proceeded to her MA in 1905 at Trinity College, Dublin, which had admitted women to full membership in the previous year. 
By then Seward had been teaching for twenty years. After her final exams in 1885 she stayed on as a resident science tutor at Somerville. Her duties included chaperoning undergraduates, a convention taken very seriously in the early days of women at Oxford. Some male dons found the practice as unwelcome as did the chaperones themselves, and when the eminent Christ Church chemist A. G. Vernon Harcourt made known his strong objections, Seward carried out her own research elsewhere in his laboratory, while her charge, Miss Florence Rich, attended his class. In 1887 Seward took up the post of lecturer in chemistry at Royal Holloway College, where she remained until 1891, when her marriage to John McKillop, a civil engineer, entailed a move to Singapore. After three or four years they returned to England with their only child, Alasdair. She next taught at Bradford Girls' Grammar School and Roedean School before, in 1897, becoming lecturer in chemistry at the ladies' department of King's College, in the University of London (renamed the women's department in 1902, and becoming King's College for Women in 1908). She was made a fellow in February 1911 and remained at King's until 1915. 
In June 1899 McKillop represented theoretical science as a profession at the International Congress of Women, held in London. She recognized a natural tendency among the scientists present 'to exalt one's own 'ology as the very one for women' and also a 'general and hearty appreciation of the kindness received by women students from scientific men'. She nevertheless came away with a poor view of her subject 'as offering 'openings' for college women students' ('Somerville Students' Association Report', Nov 1899, 20). Her determination to change this was given full scope at King's, where she played an important part in the development of 'home and social science' as an academic discipline, modelled on the professional training given in medicine, agriculture, and engineering. The progress of 'domestic science' was given impetus by the Edwardian interest in reform of the home as a social institution, and by the increasing demand for women teachers, school and factory inspectors, and health visitors. In 1908 a three-year course in 'home and social science' was begun at King's, and in the following year McKillop contributed a short article on its progress to the Somerville Students' Association annual report, citing the demand from headmistresses for the 'new sort of domestic science teacher' ('Somerville Students' Association Report', Oct 1909, 48). McKillop defined this as someone who taught science applicable to the home, a 'practical-minded woman' who was also a good form teacher, but she accepted that headmistresses were 'a little inclined to expect a first class chemist combined with a first class cook, who can also take odd sciences and other subjects throughout the school!' (ibid., 48). The subject's growing academic standing was acknowledged in 1916 when the University of London instituted a diploma in household and social science; in 1920 the course was recognized with the degree of bachelor of science. 
With Mabel Atkinson, who taught economics and ethics at King's from 1908 to 1914, McKillop wrote 'Economics: Descriptive and Theoretical' (1911), an undergraduate textbook. She left King's in 1915 and in the following year published 'Food Values: what they are and how to Calculate them', a straightforward approach to the complex subject of nutrition intended for anyone involved in cookery, whether at a professional or a domestic level. In 1917 she undertook war work with the information and statistical department at the Ministry of Food. Through her son, Alasdair, like his father a civil engineer, she became interested in theories of industrial efficiency and scientific management reaching Britain from the United States. Together they wrote 'Efficiency Methods: an Introduction to Scientific Management' (1917), which welcomed a sea change in attitudes to industry brought about by the war, when 'to be inefficient has become a national crime'. The 'business man', they noted with approval, was at last being 'respectfully treated by the governing class' (p. 197). The change was timely since nobody associated with British industry could ignore the new work practices being pioneered in America, which were certain to be taken up by Britain's industrial competitors, notably Germany and Japan. 'Efficiency Methods' is in effect a manual showing British industry how to increase production and eliminate waste. Among the illustrations is a series of photographs showing the old and new methods for loading sixteen boxes onto a truck. Trade unionists were certain to be alarmed by this time and motion study, but the McKillops saw efficiency methods as a way of benefiting everyone: greater productivity, they reasoned, would result in improved welfare for the workers. 
After the war McKillop, who was created MBE in 1919, worked with the Fabian Society women's group to raise the status and public perception of domestic work. While at King's she had acted as assistant librarian, in 1914, and she ended her career as the librarian of the Sociological Society (1921-9). She died on 29 May 1929 at St Mary's Nursing Home, Burlington Lane, Chiswick, London, her husband having predeceased her; she was survived by her son. 


@@@@@


doc= 51780


Gardiner, Dorothy (1873-1957), writer, was born on 31 August 1873 at 197 Piccadilly, London, the eldest among the six children of Sir John Arrow Kempe (1846-1928), an official in the Treasury, and his wife, Mary Jane, 'nee' Edwards (died 1926). She was the niece of the mathematician Sir Alfred Bray Kempe (1849-1922). She was educated, as were her two younger sisters, at the Francis Holland Church of England School for Girls, London. She excelled in drama and music, and in November 1890 launched and edited a magazine entitled, at her father's suggestion, 'Chips and Sparks from Graham Street'. Her article 'A school of the past' anticipated her later interest in the history of education. She studied at Lady Margaret Hall (LMH), Oxford, from 1895 to 1896 and in 1898, taking a third class in English. She was temporary librarian of LMH from 1899 to 1900 and then travelled widely, visiting a brother in New Zealand. Her first notable publication was a scholarly pamphlet for the Early English Text Society entitled 'The Legend of the Holy Grail, its Sources, Character and Development' (1905). From 1906 to 1910 she was honorary secretary and editor of the LMH 'Brown Book' and editorial secretary to the committee of women's work of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel. Her interest in social work led her to teach at the LMH settlement in Lambeth, of which she was head from 1908 to spring 1911. Her report of 1909 expresses hopes for 'a Lambeth that is clean and wholesome and roomy, sober, thrifty and 'employed''. In 1911 she was a vice-president of the Workers' Educational Association and from 1912 to 1913 she was an assistant inspector in the south-west division of the National Insurance Council. In 1912 she published 'A Social History of Sussex'. 
On 30 December 1913 Dorothy Kempe married Thory Gage Gardiner (1857-1941), rector of Lambeth, who shared her social and educational interests. In 1917 he became a residential canon of Canterbury Cathedral and they moved from Lambeth rectory to 14 The Precincts, Canterbury. There were no children. The verse she had previously published in periodicals was collected under her maiden name in 'Mary in the Wood with other Lyric Poems' (1917). An editorial note states that 'In social work she finds the chief business of her life; in writing, and in Nature, its chief delight'. Dorothy Gardiner also published a number of distinctive guidebooks, including 'Canterbury' (1923) and 'Companion into Kent' (1934). Their vivid topographical description is secondary to their thorough account of historical and literary associations, presented in an engaging style. 
Gardiner's major work, ten years in preparation, was 'English Girlhood at School' (1929), a pioneering contribution to women's studies. An ambitious survey of girls' education in England over twelve centuries, Gardiner's study has enjoyed lasting significance for its unrivalled chronicling of the educational opportunities and experiences of girls before the reforms of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Acutely aware of how greatly she had benefited from the improvements in girls' education, Gardiner memorably compared 'the long struggle, the hope deferred' that characterized female education in previous centuries with 'the fairy-tale' of achieving access to higher education in her own day ('English Girlhood at School', 484). 'The Story of Lambeth Palace' (1930), written at the invitation of Archbishop Davidson, was also thoroughly researched. She then edited, with detailed annotation, 'The Oxinden Letters, 1607-1662' (1933) and 'The Oxinden and Peyton Letters, 1642-1667' (1937). 
In Canterbury Dorothy Gardiner was involved in voluntary work, and was a justice of the peace, chairman of the Canterbury Archaeological Society, a city councillor, and a member of the education committee. Her husband retired in 1937 and died in 1941. Dorothy Gardiner died at her home, Cogan House, 53 St Peter's Street, Canterbury, on 23 January 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 51782


Phipps, Emily Frost (1865-1943), feminist and headmistress, was born on 7 November 1865 at 9 South Hill Buildings, Stoke Damerel, Devonport, Devon, the daughter of Henry John Phipps, coppersmith at Devonport Dockyard, and his wife, Mary Ann, formerly Frost. She had a brother and a sister. On leaving elementary school she became a pupil teacher in an elementary infants' school and studied in the evenings to gain entrance to Homerton Training College, Cambridge. After a successful training she was appointed to the headship of the infants' school attached to the college. She subsequently returned to Devonport and worked at a larger infants' and then a new higher grade school, while studying for an external degree in Latin and Greek from London University. Having obtained a first class degree she was appointed headteacher of Swansea higher grade school, which she shortly succeeded in transforming into an excellent secondary school. Describing the school as one of the best in Wales, the Board of Education inspectors attributed this to the influence of Emily Phipps's strong character and personality, epitomized by thoroughness, enthusiasm, and hard work. 
Emily Phipps, with her lifelong friend, Clare Neal, joined the Women's Freedom League in 1908, outraged by Lloyd George's anti-suffrage behaviour at a meeting they had attended in Swansea. They established a branch in Swansea and carried out indoor and outdoor speaking for the suffrage. On census night in 1911 Emily Phipps participated in the suffrage boycott by sleeping overnight with friends in a cave on the Gower coast. Her feminism and sense of justice led her to join the feminist National Federation of Women Teachers (NFWT), which was then a pressure group inside the National Union of Teachers (NUT). Within the NUT she campaigned for the union to support the franchise for women, equal pay for women teachers, and equality of opportunity for girls' education. While president of the Swansea NUT she led deputations to Swansea education committee on equal pay. She stood for the national executive of the NUT and was successful in 1915. She advised members, however, not to vote for her on a subsequent occasion because her position on equal pay was at variance with the policy of the NUT executive, which she described as a 'monstrous injustice to women' ('Schoolmaster', 10 March 1917, 310). She campaigned successfully inside the federation for members to leave the NUT and to turn the federation into an autonomous feminist union. 
Emily Phipps was elected president of the NFWT for three successive years, between 1915 and 1917, and was a central council member from 1913 to 1937. With Agnes Dawson she was a joint trustee of the National Union of Women Teachers (NUWT) from 1918 to 1937. She became the first editor of the NUWT's journal, 'Woman Teacher', from 1919 to 1930 and was responsible for its lively, polemical, and contentious tone. As she stated in the first editorial, there would be no column for fashions or cookery: 'There will be too much propaganda for that' ('Woman Teacher', 26 Sept 1919, 1). In 1918 she was one of seventeen women parliamentary candidates in the first general election in which women could stand. In Chelsea she ran a whirlwind campaign as an independent candidate, with NFWT backing, against the Conservative Sir Samuel Hoare, obtaining 20.9 per cent of the vote and retaining her deposit. Although she was not satisfied with the performance of any political party as regards women, nevertheless, while she lived in Swansea she was an active member of the Swansea Women's Liberal Association. 
While still a headteacher Emily Phipps studied in the evenings to become a barrister and was admitted to the bar in 1925, when she was nearly sixty. She resigned her headship, moved to London, and became the standing counsel for the NUWT while continuing to edit the 'Woman Teacher' and to speak at public meetings and demonstrations throughout the country on equal rights. She wrote pamphlets for the NUWT on equality of opportunity and equal pay. In 1928 she wrote the first 'History of the NUWT'. She maintained her allegiance to feminism and the Women's Freedom League throughout her life despite increasing ill health during the 1930s. She died of complications from a heart condition at her brother's home, Cremyll Cottage, Hermitage, near Newbury, Berkshire, on 3 May 1943. Characteristically her doctor was a woman. 
Emily Phipps was renowned for her 'wonderful vitality' attributed to her multitude of interests ('Time and Tide', 19 Feb 1926, 175). As the NUWT obituary described it, 'There seemed to be nothing she could not do if she turned her attention to it' ('Woman Teacher', 1943). She had a working knowledge of French, German, Italian, and Welsh. A contralto, she enjoyed part-singing, embroidery, reading, and gardening. Known for her sparkling personality, wit, and sharp tongue she inspired a generation of women teachers. Her belief was 'If you make yourself a door-mat do not be surprised if people tread on you' and thus encouraged women to stand up for themselves with the NUWT motto 'Who would be free herself must strike the blow' ('Time and Tide', 19 Feb 1926, 175). She was steadfast in her opposition to injustice to people and animals and was a strict vegetarian. She had a close friendship with Clare Neal (herself a president of the NUWT) until the latter's death in 1938, after which she lived with Adelaide Jones, the treasurer of the NUWT. 
Emily Phipps was an important exponent of 'old feminism' in the post-war period and seen by her contemporaries as a fine example of what women could aspire to in their careers and in politics. After her death, NUWT members described her as the one among their pioneers who, above all others, inspired them to want to take responsibility for women and to develop their powers and possibilities to the full. 


@@@@@


doc= 51783


Wood, Mary Hay (1868-1934), educationist and college head, was born at 267 Camden Road, Holloway, London, on 17 April 1868, the fifth daughter of Arthur John Wood (1821-1896), barrister and secretary to the statute law revision commission, and his wife, Elizabeth Nisbet Nicolson. Educated at North London Collegiate School (1875-86) under Frances Buss, she was the ablest in a family of high achievers and later one of North London Collegiate's most distinguished old pupils. An 1886 Goldsmith's scholar at Girton College, where her elder sister, Emily Elizabeth Wood, had been a student, Mary Wood gained a lower second in the 1889 classical tripos and the Gibson prize in 1895. In 1905 she completed a London MA thesis, 'Plato's Psychology and its Bearing on the Development of the Will', published in New York in 1907, when she was also awarded a DLitt from Trinity College, Dublin. A love of classics remained paramount throughout her life, and in 1929 she was invited to address the Psychological Congress at Yale on Plato. 
Between 1890 and 1891 Mary Wood taught at Blair Lodge School for Boys, Stirlingshire, then returned to North London Collegiate as visiting classics mistress, also teaching part-time at the Clergy Orphans' School in St John's Wood. By 1892 she was at North London Collegiate full time, revered as an outstanding member of staff. In 1904 she became lecturer in pedagogy at St Mary's College, Paddington. Subsequently head of St Mary's training department and later vice-principal, she was an inspirational and charismatic teacher. 
In 1908 Mary Wood was appointed principal of the Cambridge Training College for Women, in Wollaston Road, which, although small and financially insecure, had acquired a high reputation since its foundation in 1885 as the first residential training college for women secondary teachers. She was a wise and patient negotiator, seeking to improve opportunities for women in the profession, campaigning for more graduate trainees, and highlighting the need for secondary teacher training. Faced with the continual problem of securing sufficient secondary school placements for teaching practice, Mary Wood defended the college's use of private preparatory schools as unavoidable. This followed criticisms in a 1928 report by HM inspectorate that staff in these establishments had poor academic qualifications. A highly successful administrator, she also found time to lecture and hold personal supervisions. Under her guidance the student intake steadily increased after the First World War. The term 'post-graduate' was added to the college title and its standing was consolidated and enhanced, bringing it into the front rank of teacher training institutions. 
Mary Wood retained a large circle of friends and associates. Deeply religious, she was renowned for her scholarship, good advice, and skilful management, her warmth, her unstinting praise for colleagues, and her tremendous capacity for enjoyment. She was an ideal model for prospective teachers to emulate, with no greater tribute to her success than the excellent relationship she enjoyed with her staff. She was a founder, and first chair in 1920, of the Hillcroft College for Working Women, remaining actively involved until her death. A manager of Harrow Road School (1905-8), she was also governor of the Frances Mary Buss and Church Education Corporation schools, and twice president of the Cambridge branch of the British Federation of University Women. She was much involved in the city's activities in Cambridge, particularly those concerning women. A small figure who cycled everywhere fast, physically she changed little over the years; her voice and laughter remained infectious and unmistakable, her handwriting impetuous. 
In June 1933 Mary Wood retired from Cambridge and planned to use her $120 retirement gift to travel to India, but in December 1933 discovered she had cancer. Characteristically, she donated the money to the college loan fund for needy students. Mary Wood died on 1 June 1934 at her home, 17 Oval Road, Regent's Park, London, and a memorial service was held at St Mary's, Lancaster Gate, in December. Subsequently the Wood memorial lectures were established in her honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 51784


Case, Janet Elizabeth (1863-1937), classics teacher and journalist, was born on 28 July 1863 at 117 Adelaide Road, Hampstead, London, the youngest of the six daughters of William Arthur Case (1818-1872), schoolmaster and fellow of University College, London, and his wife, Sarah Wolridge Stansfeld, sister of Sir James Stansfeld, the radical politician. She was educated at her parents' co-educational school, Heath Brow, Hampstead, which her mother continued after William Case's death. When she entered Girton College to read classics in 1881 she had more grounding in the subject than was usual for girls at that time. She went on to obtain a first in part two of the tripos (philosophy) in 1885. This she was able to convert to an MA in 1907 when Trinity College, Dublin, offered suitably qualified Oxbridge women 'quasi ad eundem' degrees. While she was at Girton she co-founded the college classical club in 1884 and was a member of Cambridge University Music Society, one of the few university societies open to women. She was remembered for her performances in Greek plays, taking the part of Electra in the college performance of 1883 and of Athena in Aeschylus' 'Eumenides', performed by the university in 1885. 
On leaving Cambridge, Janet Case returned to live at home and teach classics. From 1887 to 1896 she was visiting classical mistress at Maida Vale high school. In addition she gave private tuition. One of her pupils, the artist Henry Holliday, said that he would 'learn Greek if he could find a lady like 'Athena or Electra' and... was much surprised to find that she lived on the Heath, close by' (Margaret Llewelyn Davies to Helen McMorran, 23 July 1937, Girton College archives). Other pupils included Katherine Asquith, the widow of the Liberal prime minister's eldest son, Raymond, Lady Diana Cooper, and Virginia Woolf. Many pupils became lifelong friends, notably Virginia Woolf who, after an initial aversion to 'Case', came to regard her as not only an excellent teacher but also a valued critic, confidante, and support. She wrote Case's obituary notice in 'The Times'. 
Janet Case was a member of the Hellenic Society, and in 1905 published an edition, with notes, of Aeschylus' 'Prometheus Bound'. However, as Virginia Woolf recorded, her Greek was 'connected with many things', most of which concerned humanitarian reform. She was an active suffragist and was involved with the newly founded Women's Co-operative Guild (WCG), of which her friend and Girton contemporary, Margaret Llewelyn Davies, was general secretary. She lectured for the guild on moral hygiene and on improved maternity care, and instructed WCG speakers on divorce law reform. She published a pamphlet which summarized the recommendations of the royal commission on divorce in 1912 and advocated the radical WCG proposal of appointing women assessors to the divorce court. As she grew older her political sympathies moved steadily to the left. In addition to her work for the WCG she became an active supporter of home rule for Ireland, and was a member of the Peace Pledge Union, and a Labour voter in a staunchly Conservative constituency. 
In 1915, at the age of fifty-two, Janet Case's health broke down and she was forced to give up teaching and her active involvement in campaigning. During bouts of ill health she was cared for by her sister, with whom she shared a house in Hampstead. They were increasingly short of money, and Virginia and Leonard Woolf assisted them, the latter trying to find employment for Janet as a newspaper correspondent; however, her pacifist views found little sympathy in the post-war climate. In 1920 ill health and financial constraint forced the sisters to move to Surrey. Two years later an inheritance enabled them to build a small house at Lyndhurst in the New Forest. Here Janet Case lived very simply, devoting herself to her garden and the forest countryside. Her rural observations were published as weekly 'Country diaries', which she contributed to the 'Manchester Guardian' for the last twelve years of her life. 
Janet Case was described by contemporaries as tall, dignified, and classical looking, with an air of breeding and self-possession. Her friends valued her counsel as well as her lively sense of humour. Her scholarship was impeccable, but she was one of a group of Girtonians in the early 1880s for whom scholarship was not sufficient as an end in itself, and who went on to form a network of women closely involved in social reform. Janet Case died of cancer at her home, Hewers' Orchard, Minstead, Hampshire, on 15 July 1937. She did not adhere to any religious doctrine; Virginia Woolf described her as being too well educated to be a Christian, but she had devised her own funeral service with a text on gentleness and faith. She was instead, as her obituarist in the 'Girton Review' described her, 'a rare humanist'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51785


Latham, Jane Leeke (1867-1938), college head and missionary, was born on 3 August 1867 at Holbrooke Hall, Derbyshire, the home of the Revd William and Mrs Leeke, her mother's parents. She was the daughter of Edward Latham (died 1883) and his wife, Jane Leeke. Her father was for seventeen years housemaster of Repton School, where Jane spent the first eight years of her life until 1875, when he became vicar of Matlock Bath, Derbyshire. She was the third of ten children, one of whom later wrote: 'I always consider that our parents brought up the first three, and they brought up the rest' (Lloyd). Jane was educated at home until in 1880 she and an elder sister were sent to Cheltenham Ladies' College. When, on the death of her father in 1883, her mother moved to Blackheath Jane continued her education at the high school there, one of the most prestigious of the Girls' Public Day School Company schools. In 1886 she won a higher local scholarship to Girton College, Cambridge, and in 1889 took a good second in the mathematical tripos (graduating MA at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1907). From 1889 to 1897 she was mathematics mistress at Cheltenham, and thus came under the influence of Dorothea Beale as both pupil and colleague. In 1897 she was appointed lady warden of the Woodard school, St Anne's, at Abbots Bromley, responsible for the girls' spiritual and moral training, the headmistress being in charge of curriculum and discipline. She was largely instrumental in founding another Woodard school at Scarborough. In 1903 she became principal and head of the training department at St Mary's College, Paddington. Founded as an Anglican school in 1874, under the care of the Wantage Sisters, it had also undertaken the training of secondary schoolmistresses. Inadequate finances caused the sisters to offer it to the Woodard trustees, who were unable to accept it as the college had a conscience clause. The warden of the Woodard schools, however, was able to form a committee which secured a scheme from the charity commissioners, and Miss Latham was offered the principalship. 
The college now endowed, but still badly housed and precarious in finance, Miss Latham did 'much to raise the standard of work and to place the College on a sound financial basis' ('Girton Review'). It was inspected by the Board of Education and recognized as a training college for secondary teachers who could qualify for entry on the teachers' register, authorized by the 'Board of Education Act', 1899. In 1904 St Mary's was recognized as qualifying students to be registered as internal students of the University of London's department of pedagogy. Those who were qualified by degree or equivalent took the London University diploma, the rest the Cambridge teachers' certificate; Miss Latham superintended both college and school, lectured to the students, and conducted 'some criticism work'. She did not however approve of public criticism lessons, which were 'not profitable enough to repay the strain caused to the student' (Board of Education, 'The Training of Women Teachers'). There is strong testimony to the quality of Miss Latham as a teacher, and her achievement was keeping this precarious structure functioning at a time when women were in the forefront of the movement for the professional training of secondary teachers. Her methods of administration were unorthodox, handing a sheaf of letters to her secretary, it is said, with the instruction, 'Write nice answers, will you?' (Lloyd). 
Miss Latham was born into the world of Victorian educational reform and until this time had been actively involved within it throughout her life -- the reform of a boys' public school, two of the most influential new girls' schools (boarding and day, one Anglican, one non-sectarian), the oldest women's university college, the Woodard experiment in an Anglican 'mission to the middle classes', and the creation of a trained teaching profession. She regarded education as a vocation which gave her great spiritual satisfaction, but she had, from her childhood, been attracted to work in the mission field, and in 1908 she resigned from St Mary's. She was asked to pay a six months' visit to India to prepare a report on women's education for the Edinburgh conference of 1910. Her gradual call to the mission field was reaching its consummation. In 1910 she was appointed head of the women's work of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel mission at Ahmednagar in the Bombay diocese (from 1929 the diocese of Nasik). A second life of dedication had begun. 
For the next twenty years Miss Latham was in charge of all women's work, with more than twelve women missionaries under her. She lived from 1910 to 1915 at Miri and from there her influence spread in the villages around. She never became fluent in the native languages, but 'she had a marvellous gift for getting in touch with people' and 'immense patience and willingness to listen' (Lloyd). In 1915 she went to live at St Monica's House at Ahmednagar, giving her main attention to education. The normal school was already recognized by government as a training college for teachers, and Miss Latham's gift for organization provided it with buildings and developed its work. For a short time in 1918, with her bishop's permission, she went to work among the English soldiers in Bangalore, and for this and for her work in the famine in Ahmednagar she received in 1919 the kaisar-i-Hind medal of the second class. 
During these busy years Miss Latham's desire for greater simplicity of life grew, and in 1931 she resigned the headship of St Monica's and went to Malegaon in the Nasik district, where there was a derelict Church Missionary Society mission station which the bishop hoped to revitalize. With two Christian schoolmistresses she opened a small school for girls; she also began a medical relief association, and with the support of the Red Cross opened village dispensaries. While the bishop recognized that Miss Latham had brought Malegaon to life he considered the strain on her at the age of sixty-eight was too great, and before she went on furlough in 1935 he told her that on her return she must be content to lead a quiet life of prayer. 
Before her return Miss Latham made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and when she reached India again obediently went to live a contemplative life in a tent near Kalwan. In 1936 she went far from any white people to Tarhabad, among the poverty-stricken Bhills. When the monsoon failed they faced starvation and Miss Latham set to work to arouse 'the conscience of the whole community, Indian and English, official and private' (Lloyd). With a small band of workers she began to open schools, founded a society for redeeming villagers from debt to moneylenders, and secured some training in horticulture and chicken farming for them. She interviewed the prime minister and got promises of food until harvest time. 'It is the importunate widow who comes to mind when I think of Jane Latham', said a clerical colleague. 'She was loved and revered throughout the whole countryside' as the horrified bishop wrote when he returned from furlough and discovered that 'she had begun to do all the things she had promised me she would not do' (ibid.). 
For this work Miss Latham received the kaisar-i-Hind gold medal in 1936. In that year she became a tertiary of the Franciscan community Crista Prema Seva Sangha, whose mother house was at Poona, and to this she left all her property by will. 
When in July 1938 Miss Latham was attacked by dysentery she was brought to the Canada Hospital in Nasik, and there she died on 5 August 1938; she was buried in Nasik cemetery. Hers had been an 'heroic and costly way of life'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51791


Bhabha, Homi Jehangir (1909-1966), theoretical physicist, was born on 30 October 1909 at Bombay in an established Parsi family, the eldest son of Jehangir Hormusji Bhabha (1876-1942) and his wife, Meheran Pandey (died 1973). Bhabha's father was educated at Oxford and had studied law at Lincoln's Inn. For some years he was presidency magistrate in Bombay; later he joined Tata Sons and was associated with their scheme of hydroelectric power. Bhabha's mother came from the business family of Petit and was a granddaughter of Sir Dinshaw Maneckji Petit (1823-1901), the first Indian baronet and a philanthropist. Homi Bhabha's aunt Meherbai was married to Sir Dorab Tata. Bhabha had his early education in Bombay, first at John Cannon High School and then at Elphinstone College and the Royal Institute of Science, before studying engineering in 1927 at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where Sir Dorab Tata had earlier spent two years and to which he had donated $25,000 in 1920. Cambridge at that time was bursting with excitement over the quantum theory of elementary particles and radiation. Bhabha wrote to his father asking his permission to switch to physics from engineering, which was agreed to, subject to his obtaining a first class in the mechanical tripos, which he did in June 1930. He received the degree of PhD from Cambridge in 1934. 
Bhabha's main research at Cambridge concerned quantum electrodynamics. The process of electron-positron scattering, now called Bhabha scattering, was investigated by him in 1935 using Dirac's equation. This calculation provided evidence that negative energy electrons can indeed be identified with positrons. Bhabha and Heitler's cascade theory in 1937 explained the cosmic ray showers in terms of conversion of electron energy into quanta of radiation and their reconversion into secondary electron-positron pairs. Before their work it was suspected that quantum electrodynamics might fail to account for them. It was further known that the cosmic rays also had a penetrating component. Bhabha, in a brilliant phenomenological analysis of this component, suggested the existence of heavier electrons in 1937. These particles, muons, were discovered by Anderson and Neddermyer in 1938. Yukawa had proposed in 1935 that the nuclear force can be understood as arising through an exchange of heavy particles, now called mesons, between the nucleons. Bhabha was among the earliest workers on meson theory outside Yukawa's group in Japan. The word 'meson' was coined by Bhabha, Kemmer, and Pryce. Initially, the muons, postulated to explain the penetrating component of the cosmic rays, were thought to be the same particle as mesons. Bhabha worked on vector meson theory, with mesons obeying Proca's equation, in order to provide a better account of nuclear forces using both quantum perturbation theory and classical field theory. Bhabha was first to suggest that studying the variation of meson lifetime with velocity would provide a beautiful test of Einstein's time dilation formula. 
Bhabha was on vacation in India in 1939 when war began in Europe. The war conditions made a return to England impossible. He therefore joined the special cosmic ray research unit, created for him by the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust, at the Indian Institute of Science at Bangalore in 1940. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1941. At Bangalore he worked on classical relativistic spinning point particle theory (Bhabha-Corben equations). He also initiated balloon based cosmic ray experiments. During this period he began to feel more and more committed to India and decided to dedicate himself to bringing modern science and technology to the country. Bhabha wrote to J. R. D. Tata on 19 August 1943 regarding his ideas on building strong research groups in India. On being encouraged by him, he addressed, on 12 March 1944, to Sir Sorab Saklatvala, chairman of the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust, a formal letter containing a proposal to set up a new research institute which would be comparable to the best anywhere in the world. The proposed institute, named Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, was founded by the Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and the government of Bombay. It started functioning in June 1945 at Bangalore with Bhabha as its founder director. The institute soon shifted to Bombay and was formally inaugurated on 19 December 1945. At Bombay he worked on his theory of relativistic wave equations (Bhabha wave equation) for elementary particles. Bhabha had already visualized the possibility of the Tata Institute playing a role in the development of nuclear energy. In his original proposal he wrote, 'Moreover, when nuclear energy has been successfully applied for power production in say a couple of decades from now, India will not have to look abroad for its experts but will find them ready at hand' (Lala, 87-8). Bhabha's note to the prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, on the organization of atomic research in India, resulted in the setting up of the atomic energy commission of India in August 1948, with Bhabha as its chairman. An atomic energy establishment, later renamed the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, was created at Trombay in January 1954, its initial trained manpower drawn from the Tata Institute. A separate department of atomic energy was created in August 1954 with Bhabha as secretary. Asia's first nuclear reactor, Apsara, became critical on 4 August 1956; nuclear grade uranium was produced in 1959; a plutonium plant was commissioned in January 1965. A power projects engineering division was created for the production of nuclear power, later known as the Nuclear Power Corporation of India. Bhabha presided with distinction over the international conference on developing peaceful uses of atomic energy organized by the United Nations and held in Geneva in 1955. Bhabha died in an air crash on Mont Blanc on 24 January 1966 on his way to a meeting of the scientific advisory committee of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna. 
Bhabha was a renaissance man, equally at home in the world of science and of arts. Like his hero Leonardo da Vinci he never married. A number of his paintings were collected in a volume entitled 'Homi Bhabha as Artist' (1968); some are quite remarkable, for example his surrealist painting inspired by Mozart's aria 'Dove sono'. His many pencil sketches show a fine command of drawing. His deep interest in architecture and landscaping is reflected in the design and surroundings of the buildings of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research and those of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre at Trombay. 


@@@@@


doc= 51796


Collins, Sir William Job (1859-1946), ophthalmic surgeon and politician, was born on 9 May 1859 at 46 Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, London, the eldest of the four children of William Job Collins (1818-1884), surgeon and pharmacist, and his wife, Mary Anne Francisca Treacher (1824-1880), who belonged to the Huguenot family of Garnault. The family traced its descent directly from a Warwickshire branch which included Francis Collins, the lawyer who drafted, and was one of the witnesses to, Shakespeare's will. Suggestions of distant relationships with other Collins families are only speculative. Collins had a happy childhood. His father's strong character and involvement in public affairs in the St Pancras district and his consistent opposition to compulsory vaccination were both strong influences on his son. William and his brother Edward, his lifelong friend, were educated locally, at University College School, and William went to St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in 1876, gaining the Jeaffreson entrance exhibition. He was a scholar, fellow, and gold medallist in sanitary science and in obstetrics at the University of London. He qualified BSc in 1880 and MD in 1881, and gained the University of London's certificate in sanitary science in 1887. 
Collins seemed destined for a brilliant career on the surgical staff at St Bartholomew's, but his opposition to vaccination was said to have prevented his election. From 1885 onwards he specialized mainly in ophthalmology, becoming surgeon and later consulting surgeon to the Royal Eye Hospital and the Western Ophthalmic Hospital. He was also ophthalmic surgeon to the Hampstead and North West London Hospital and to the National Temperance Hospital. However, he published little on ophthalmology and his main interests lay increasingly elsewhere. His career, like that of his father, was in public life. This public career was an extraordinarily broad one. He was a senator of the University of London from 1893 to 1927. He strenuously opposed R. B. Haldane's scheme for its reconstitution, which he termed the Germanization of the university. He was vice-chancellor of the university twice, in 1907-9 and again in 1911-12. 
In 1892 Collins was elected as the Progressive member for West St Pancras to the London county council (LCC). He was re-elected in 1895, 1898, 1901, and 1904. The Progressive political programme included municipal provision of services and rate equalization, together with the unification of the City of London with the county. These aims were opposed by the Moderates and Collins was a leader in these struggles. For two years he was chairman of the public control committee, and of the general purposes committee. He was vice-chairman of the council in 1896-7 and chairman in 1897-8. When the 'London Education Act' transferred responsibility from the London school board to the county council in 1904, Collins was the first chairman of the education committee, which laid the foundation of the education service in London. He took an interest in the LCC hospitals and an inquiry he set up in 1895 led to the establishment of the Claybury Laboratory, with the eminent neuropathologist Sir Frederick Mott as superintendent. Collins was created a knight in 1902 and KCVO in 1913. 
Collins entered parliament in 1906 as the Liberal member for West St Pancras, after earlier unsuccessful contests in West St Pancras in 1895 and for the University of London in 1900. He seemed destined for high office, but these prospects were not fulfilled. Henry Campbell-Bannerman offered him the under-secretaryship at the Local Government Board, but John Burns, president of the board, intervened with a candidate of his own, and Collins withdrew. Later Collins's hopes of becoming deputy speaker were also disappointed. Collins consistently refused to 'play for his own hand' (MacNalty, 21). He was never a strict party man, and would speak against the party line in a debate if he felt strongly on an issue. He lost his seat in the 1910 general election, and was returned as Liberal MP for Derby in 1917 at a by-election. He then lost the seat in Lloyd George's 'coupon election' in 1918, and thereafter gave up political ambitions. As an MP he was successful in obtaining the establishment of a motor ambulance service for London, from 1915, after several years of campaigning. 
Collins was a member of the royal commission on vaccination (1889-96), where his opposition to vaccination led to his drafting a minority report. The commission unanimously conceded the right to refuse vaccination to those who believed it useless or dangerous, a right subsequently embodied in the 1898 'Vaccination Act'. Collins found satisfaction in the successful conclusion of a campaign in which his father had been a pioneer. In 1906 he was a member of the royal commission on vivisection, for which he jointly drafted the scientific section of the report and its moral and ethical sections. He and others also drafted a dissentient memorandum. 
Collins was actively involved in the discussion of an alcohol and drug control policy. He sat as the British government plenipotentiary at the three international opium conferences at The Hague in 1911-12, 1913, and 1914. The Hague Convention, the result of these meetings, was the foundation of all subsequent international narcotics control. Collins, in his writings, saw alcohol and drug addiction as diseases of the will rather than having any physical causation, and favoured restriction rather than prohibition so far as alcohol was concerned. His 'Ethics and Law of Drug and Alcohol Addiction' appeared in 1916. 
Collins was also involved in a large number of charitable and medico-political organizations. He was president of the Medico-Legal Society (1902-6), of the Society for the Study of Inebriety (1916-19), and of the Sanitary Inspectors' Association (1922-7), among many others. He was a member of the council of the King Edward's Hospital Fund for London, where he secured a more equitable pension provision for hospital administrative staff. His writings were wide-ranging and prolific, covering philosophy, law, and social reform. 
In the inter-war years, Collins's primary interests were in the field of district nursing in London, where he was chairman from 1914 to 1944 of the Central Council for District Nursing. He was chairman of the Chadwick Trust from 1924 to 1946. Despite the advent of bacteriology, Collins remained a believer in Edwin Chadwick's view of the importance of a sanitary environment and fresh air, and he published 'The Life and Doctrines of Sir Edwin Chadwick' in 1924. Collins was vice-lieutenant of the county of London from 1924 until 1945. 
On 2 August 1898 Collins had married Jane Stevenson Wilson ('b'. 1855/6), daughter of John Wilson, MP for Govan. Jane Collins was a sister at the National Temperance Hospital, and was already well known through her work in the League of Mercy. She died after a long illness in 1936. Thereafter Collins's 'zest and pleasure in life departed' (MacNalty, 33), though his mental faculties and involvement in public affairs remained undimmed until his death. 
Collins was of striking physical appearance with a massive head, firm set lips, and a penetrating gaze. His career did not quite fulfil its early promise. His qualities were judged to be those of the chairman rather than of the front bench, and he was seen as a 'chairman sent from heaven' ('BMJ', 967), firm, fair, and always urbane. He was also an individualist with a 'disdain for expediency at the expense of principle' (MacNalty, 34). He threw a copy of 'Ann Veronica' signed by H. G. Wells, who had been his patient, into the fire because he disapproved of its content. Collins's career was by no means a failure, for, in London especially, he achieved much in the field of citizenship. Collins died at 1 Albert Terrace, Regent's Park, where he had lived since the age of two, on 12 December 1946. A school in Somers Town was named after him until its name was changed to the South Camden community school. 


@@@@@


doc= 51797


Greenwood, Major (1880-1949), epidemiologist and medical statistician, was born in Shoreditch, east London, on 9 August 1880, the eldest son and only surviving child of Major Greenwood (1854-1917), general practitioner, and his wife, Annie (1858-1904), daughter of P. C. Burchell MB. Greenwood's two younger siblings both died of tuberculosis in infancy; his mother died of the same disease shortly after he had qualified in medicine. During Greenwood's childhood and youth, his father and grandfather, both of whom also bore the first name of Major, together ran the family general practice in Hackney. Greenwood himself was expected to qualify in medicine and eventually take over the practice; but at Merchant Taylors' School, which he attended from 1889 to 1896, he developed a strong interest in history and Latin, which never left him. His father, however, insisted on a medical education, and young Greenwood bowed to parental pressure. 
With an entrance scholarship to the London Hospital, Greenwood went on to qualify in 1904. He then struck out on his own, greatly influenced by two of the country's outstanding scientists at the turn of the century: Leonard Hill, in whose physiology department at the London Hospital medical college Greenwood became a demonstrator; and Karl Pearson, whose courses in the rapidly developing science of mathematical statistics he followed at University College, London. In Hill's laboratories Greenwood was schooled in the realities of a scientific approach to medical research, becoming at the same time an early medical convert to Pearson's biometry. Throughout his career, he unified and extended the intellectual legacy of his two mentors; he developed medical statistics and helped to make its methods acceptable to an initially reluctant medical profession, and he added good clinical judgement to the rigorous mathematics which characterized Pearson's work. In 1908 Greenwood married Rosa (1880-1945), daughter of Andreas Baur, in her home town of Baden, Germany. There were two sons of the marriage, one of whom became a professional statistician. 
In 1909 Greenwood brought his biometrical convictions to bear on the existing debate, between bacteriologists and clinicians, which surrounded Almroth Wright's research on the so-called 'opsonic index'. His criticism of Wright's data was based on a technical distinction between 'functional' errors of technique and 'mathematical' inferential errors. His arguments drew the attention of C. J. Martin, director of the Lister Institute, who then created for Greenwood a new post, the first of its kind in Britain, as resident statistician at the institute. Here Greenwood conducted statistical investigations into tuberculosis, infant mortality, and hospital fatality rates. At the same time he was involved in interpreting data from the institute's ongoing major epidemiological study of bubonic plague in India. From this start Greenwood never looked back; he had found his professional feet. 
During the First World War Greenwood served in the sanitary service of the Royal Army Medical Corps. In 1916 he was seconded to the health and welfare section of the Ministry of Munitions, for statistical work. When the new Ministry of Health was created in 1919, Greenwood moved there from the Lister Institute, becoming the ministry's first senior statistical officer, working closely with George Newman, its chief medical officer. Based at the Medical Research Council's National Institute for Medical Research in Hampstead, rather than in Whitehall, he was once again alongside his old 'chief', Leonard Hill, by then head of the MRC's division of applied physiology. 
Greenwood's statistical ideas had now evolved from the early insistence on the adaptation of Karl Pearson's rigorous mathematics and 'measurement as an end in itself' to a more humanely biological approach, reflecting the clinical influence of his medical training. During and after his term at the Lister Institute, it was the humanizing aspect of his pioneering work on large-scale trials, designed to evaluate prophylactic and therapeutic measures, which gradually began to break down the medical profession's resistance to statistical analysis. By then Greenwood's mind was increasingly focused on the application of statistics to experimental epidemiology, and in the early 1920s he became associated with W. W. C. Topley. Topley needed the co-operation of a statistician in the studies he had initiated in 'experimental epidemiology', using controlled populations of laboratory mice. For both men these studies centred on attempts to simplify experimental conditions by limiting the number of variable factors to manageable proportions and by magnifying the timescale of observations by using short-lived animals. 
Greenwood's studies were carried out under the auspices of the MRC and continued, with various co-workers, until the mid-1930s. By then Topley and Greenwood had been colleagues, since 1927, as professors of bacteriology and of epidemiology and vital statistics respectively, at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (created as successor to the London School of Tropical Medicine). There Greenwood built up a new department, where teaching was an important duty for himself and his staff, most of whom followed him from the MRC and continued in dual positions within the school and the MRC. In 1935 Greenwood's lectures were published in book form as 'Epidemics and Crowd Diseases'. His books and papers published in his lifetime on statistical, biometric, epidemiological, and historical subjects, numbered well over a hundred. 
Greenwood had a complex personality; he could appear remote, even cynical and censorious on occasion, but he never wavered in his intellectual integrity nor in his total loyalty to those admitted to his limited circle of friends. Millais Culpin, a former colleague of Greenwood, considered that some 'thought that he selected statistics as his life's work because this branch of medicine was most remote from the emotional. Perhaps they were right; he was a sensitive soul and often found refuge in doing sums, though the human meaning might still intrude. ('BMJ', 15 Oct 1949, 878)' Greenwood became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1919 and a fellow in 1924; in 1928 he was elected to fellowship of the Royal Society. He was a founder member, in 1930, of the Socialist Medical Association. He was also active in the Voluntary Euthanasia Society; a few weeks before his death he was chosen to put its case in a broadcast debate arranged by the BBC. He retired in 1945 and died in London, suddenly, during a meeting on cancer research, on 5 October 1949. 


@@@@@


doc= 51798


Kelynack, Theophilus Nicholas (1866-1944), physician, was born at High Street, Wells, Somerset, on 26 June 1866, the son of a Wesleyan minister, Nicholas Kelynack, and his wife, Anne Wesley Dore. Educated at University College School, London, he studied medicine at Manchester University, graduating MB ChB with distinction in 1889. Four years later he was awarded the gold medal for his MD thesis on the pathology of the vermiform appendix. He gained the MRCP in 1895. In Manchester he served as house physician, pathologist, and medical registrar at the Manchester Royal Infirmary, as well as demonstrator and assistant lecturer in pathology and assistant to the professor of pathology and medicine at the university. It was here that he launched his writing career with a book on renal growths in 1898 and the 'Pathologist's Handbook' in 1899. 
After returning to London, Kelynack was appointed honorary visiting physician to the Mount Vernon Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest. His active association lasted for many years, latterly as a governor. Through his work at Mount Vernon he became an acknowledged expert on tuberculosis. Kelynack was particularly interested in the welfare of children, and he became honorary medical adviser to the Shaftesbury Society (for socially handicapped children), the Ragged School Union, the National Association for the Feeble Minded, and the National Children's Home. He was also honorary visiting physician to the home's sanatorium at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, and the Infant Hospital, Westminster. On 27 April 1904 Kelynack married Clara Violet McLaren MB ChB (1875/6-1940), daughter of James Grieve McLaren, tea broker. She later became medical secretary of the Medical Women's Federation and also assisted Kelynack in his editorial work. They had a daughter. 
Kelynack's major contribution to medicine came through skilled editorship and an ability to collate current research and other useful information and make it publicly accessible. He edited the 'British Journal of Tuberculosis' (1907-34), the 'British Journal of Inebriety' (1903-41), and 'The Child' (1910-27). In 1907 he edited 'The Drink Problem of To-Day in its Medico-Sociological Aspects'; this went into a second edition in 1916 and became a classic on the subject. Among his edited volumes was 'Medical Examination of Schools and Scholars' (1910), a guide for school medical officers, educationists, and others involved in child welfare. From 1910 to 1914 he edited four 'National Health Manuals'. Covering infancy, childhood, school life, and youth, these presented social workers with governing principles in simple non-technical words. He did the same for those involved in tuberculosis work with his 'Tuberculosis Year Book and Sanatoria Annual' (1913). This comprised papers on current medical research and a guide to treatment centres and preventive organizations. 'The Yearbook of Open Air Schools and Children's Sanatoria' followed in 1914. In the same year he edited 'Human Derelicts', a collection of medico-sociological studies for teachers of religion and social workers. 
Kelynack's own contributions to his edited volumes were based on a thorough knowledge of the subject area, and always included extensive bibliographies. Not only was he widely read but he also made a point of visiting relevant centres before writing about them. He was especially interested in the social aspects of disease, and he possessed, as his obituary in the 'British Medical Journal' noted, a deep feeling of social responsibility. This was complemented by his warm, friendly, and sympathetic personality. While he believed that poverty was a predisposing factor in tuberculosis, he did not press for social or political reform. 
Kelynack was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine, a member of council of the Royal Institute of Public Health and Hygiene, and he was for a number of years secretary of the institute. For many years he was honorary secretary to the Society for the Study of Inebriety, and was appointed vice-president in 1941. As justice of the peace for the county of London from 1919 he carried out his duties with the thoroughness for which he was renowned. Kelynack died at his home, 9 Arden Grove, Harpenden, Hertfordshire, on 23 December 1944. He was survived by his daughter, Agnes, who was assistant secretary to the British Medical Association at the time of her father's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 51800


Lyttelton, Dame Edith Sophy (1865-1948), public servant and author, was born in St Petersburg, Russia, the elder of two daughters (there were also five sons) of Archibald Balfour, a prosperous merchant in Russia, and his wife, Sophia. She was educated privately and made her mark on London society in the 1880s as an intelligent, quick-witted, and attractive young woman, who moved in the aristocratic circle of friends known as the Souls, which included A. J. Balfour, George Curzon, Margot Tennant (later Asquith), and Alfred Lyttelton (1857-1913), her future husband. Lyttelton, a famous amateur athlete and cricketer, and a nephew of Gladstone, was the eighth son of the fourth Baron Lyttelton and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Glynne. He had first married, in 1885, Laura, 'nee' Tennant (the elder sister of Margot), who died in 1886. Edith Balfour became his second wife on 18 April 1892 when they were married at Bordighera on the Italian riviera, and together they had two surviving children, a daughter, Mary Frances, who married Sir George Lillie Craik, second baronet, and a son, Oliver Lyttelton (1893-1972), who became first Viscount Chandos and, like his father, colonial secretary. 
Alfred Lyttelton's first marriage to Laura Tennant had been extremely popular and her premature death, after having given birth to a baby son who survived her by only two years, was deeply mourned. His second marriage, though, was to prove no less popular, and Beatrice Webb, who met the Lytteltons in September 1892, thought them 'a charming pair... graceful, modest, intelligent and with the exquisite deference and ease which constitutes good breeding' ('Diary', 2.22). After Alfred Lyttelton became Liberal Unionist MP for Leamington in 1895 Edith, or D. D. as she was commonly known, played successfully the role of the political wife, entertaining at their home in Great College Street, Westminster. She also exercised a significant influence on her husband's career. He habitually looked to her for advice and it was their joint decision that he should concentrate on politics rather than the bar after their marriage. She afterwards assisted him at elections, on occasion even speaking on his behalf, and as a convinced supporter of women's suffrage she encouraged his grudging acceptance of the cause. When in 1900 he was appointed chairman of a government committee to investigate monopolies in the Transvaal, she accompanied him; the experience better equipped her to support him when, as colonial secretary from 1903 to 1905, he had to defend the controversial use of Chinese labour in the Rand. 
Their marriage was a genuine partnership, based upon strong mutual attraction and complementary ambitions, and after Alfred Lyttelton's sudden death on 5 July 1913 his wife published, in March 1917, a reverential biography. This was favourably reviewed in 'The Times' as an 'intimate portrait' of a universally beloved man ('The Times', 19 March 1917). It did not, though, meet with the approval of Virginia Woolf, to whom Edith Lyttelton had been held up in youth as an exemplar of 'charm and interest'. Woolf was appalled by the emotionalism of the biography and imagined that it was the author and not the subject who hungered for worldly success: 'Poor man! I suppose she drove him on to be a celebrity and a politician, which wasn't his line. However, all his sins are paid for by this sort of monument' ('Letters of Virginia Woolf', 2.153). Whatever the merits of this assessment, Edith Lyttelton had a range of activities and interests to match those of her husband, and it is ironic that he was continually urging her, before his own untimely death, to reduce her engagements in the interests of her health. 
One of Edith Lyttelton's chief interests, imperialism, was nurtured during her visit to South Africa in 1900. There she met, and developed a high regard for, Alfred, Viscount Milner, and discussed with him at length his political views. She returned to London determined to promote the imperial vision that they shared, and in Violet Markham and Violet Cecil, both of whom had also been to South Africa and had contact with Milner, she found like-minded partners. The three women were central figures behind the Victoria League, which was established in 1901 amid a wave of pro-imperial sentiment generated by the South African War. The league brought together high-ranking women from both sides of the political divide on the common ground of empire. It disseminated information, established an 'imperial library', raised funds for the relief of refugees and the tending of war graves, and provided hospitality for imperial visitors to England. Edith Lyttelton helped to found the movement and served as honorary secretary until she retired owing to ill health. She also supported the related cause of imperial preference, through the Women's Tariff Reform Association. 
Lyttelton's strong philanthropic instincts, which were shared by her husband, also found outlets nearer home. She was involved in particular in the Edwardian campaign against 'sweated' labour and this subject was the inspiration for two of her many plays. Her dramatic efforts were encouraged by her close friendship with George Bernard Shaw and Mrs Patrick Campbell, and the latter played the lead in 'Warp and Woof', Edith Lyttelton's first production, which opened at the Criterion in June 1904. The play dealt with the hardships experienced by women working in the London fashion industry and it was the subject matter, rather than the drama itself, that generated the most interest. Lyttelton's depiction of working women was dismissed by one society critic as unconvincing -- 'frank factory girls, speculating in broad cockney dialect as to what they would do if they were 'lydies'' ('The Times', 4 July 1904; Frances Balfour to the editor, 30 June 1904). But the accuracy of Lyttelton's portrayal of their exploitation could not be so easily dismissed, and was in fact vigorously defended in the correspondence columns of 'The Times'. 
Lyttelton returned to the theme in December 1912 with a study of the ''sweating' system' in 'The Thumbscrew', which had a single showing at the Little Theatre under the auspices of the Pioneer Players. In all she wrote seven plays, and a translation of Edmond Rostand's 'Les deux pierrots', but none ran for more than a few weeks and the last, an adaptation of Disraeli's 'Tancred', was condemned as 'unhappily tedious' by 'The Times' and 'intolerably tedious' by Virginia Woolf ('The Times', 17 July 1923; 'Diary of Virginia Woolf', 2.258). It closed after a short run at the Kingsway Theatre in July 1923, but Lyttelton's love for the theatre remained unabated. She also wrote a novel, 'The Sinclair Family' (1926), and 'Travelling Days' (1933), an account of her travels in the Far East and India. 
It is as a versatile public administrator, rather than an author, that Edith Lyttelton is to be remembered. She was particularly active in advancing the interests of working women and served on the first executive of the National Union of Women Workers, which was founded in 1895. She was also chairwoman of the Personal Service Association, established in London in 1908 to co-ordinate the efforts of well-to-do women who sought to alleviate distress arising from unemployment in the capital. At the outbreak of war Lyttelton was a founder of the war refugees committee, for which she was honoured with the medaille de la reine Elisabeth by the king of Belgium in June 1918. She was made deputy director of the women's branch of the Ministry of Agriculture in 1917, served on the central committee of women's employment from 1916 to 1925, and was vice-chairman of the Waste Reclamation Trade Board from 1924 to 1931. After the war she devoted herself to the League of Nations and was the British substitute delegate in Geneva (1923, 1926-8, and 1931), where her interests focused on the opium trade and the 'white slave' traffic. She was made a DBE in 1917 and a GBE in 1929 in recognition of her many public services. 
After the death of her husband Edith Lyttelton became increasingly interested in spiritualism and was a member of the council of the Society for Psychical Research, serving as president in 1933-4. She brought to this difficult subject an independent mind, and her calm reasoning convinced her of the existence of what she termed the 'superconscious' -- a spiritually elevated version of the subconscious, which she believed enabled the properly receptive mind to foretell events and realize communion with the dead. She lectured on the subject and wrote many books, including 'The Faculty of Communion' (1925), 'Our Superconscious Mind' (1931), and 'Some Cases of Prediction' (1937), and it also inspired her 1926 biography of her friend Florence Upton, the painter and creator of the 'golliwog' character, who turned to spiritualism towards the end of her life. 
Edith Lyttelton also devoted herself after 1918 to the foundation of a national theatre in London. This, she believed, should be 'a theatre where the prices of the seats should be within the reach of all; a true people's theatre dedicated to the highest expression of dramatic art' ('The Times', 20 May 1924, Chandos to the editor). She was an effective member on the executive committee of the Shakespeare Memorial National Theatre, and her efforts in this direction were consciously carried forward by her son, who was the first chairman of the National Theatre (1962-71). He remembered his mother as a woman 'catholic in her tastes and interests' (Chandos, xiv), and she combined the instincts of a Victorian imperialist and philanthropist with those of an Edwardian suffragist and social reformer, the imagination of a dramatist with the practical bent of a public administrator. She died at her home, 18 Great College Street, Westminster, London, on 2 September 1948. 


@@@@@


doc= 51801


Graham, William (1817-1885), collector and art patron, was born on 25 August 1817 in Glasgow, the eldest son of William Graham (1795/6-1855), a merchant of Burnshiels, Renfrewshire, and Catherine, daughter of J. Swanston. He was educated privately and at Glasgow University, and succeeded his father as senior partner in the family business, W. and J. Graham & Co., which imported dry goods from India and port from Portugal. He settled in London in 1866, living at 54 Lowndes Square and then at 44 (renumbered 36 in 1876) Grosvenor Place, and renting houses in Perthshire for the summer. 
In 1865 Graham was elected Liberal MP for the city of Glasgow. He spoke mainly on Scottish and religious questions (he was a devout Presbyterian) and advocated moderate parliamentary reform. He was a friend of Gladstone (who appointed him a trustee of the National Gallery in 1884), but was not active politically and stood down with some relief in 1874 because of illness. 
Graham was one of the most important art patrons and collectors of the 1860s and 1870s, playing a key role in the careers of Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones. His attitude to art was essentially emotional rather than intellectual: he was so taken with one painting by Burne-Jones that he kissed it; he was suspicious of connoisseurs. He may have been encouraged to begin collecting, in the 1860s, by his uncle, John Graham of Skelmorlie, whose fine collection included J. E. Millais's 'Sir Isumbras at the Ford' (1857; Tate collection). He bought his first Rossetti -- 'Morning Music' (1864; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) -- in 1866, and first met the artist in 1868. He soon became Rossetti's principal patron (rivalled only by F. R. Leyland) and a friend, taking care of the artist in Scotland following his suicide attempt in 1872. Graham preferred Rossetti's early work, owning both 'The Girlhood of Mary Virgin' (1849) and 'Ecce ancilla domini!' (1850) (both Tate collection), and expressed reservations about those later paintings inspired by Jane Morris, but would buy whatever the artist wanted to sell him. His principal commission was 'Dante's Dream at the Time of the Death of Beatrice' (1871; Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), which proved too large for its intended position at Grosvenor Place, and had to be replaced by the version now in Dundee Art Gallery. Delays in completing commissions and disagreements about money somewhat soured their friendship in Rossetti's final years, but in 1881 the artist could still call him 'a friend who has shown me such marks of brotherly attachment as deserve every consideration from me' (Rossetti to Graham, September 1881, 'Letters of Dante Gabriel Rossetti', no. 2552). 
Graham enjoyed a calmer and more fruitful relationship with Burne-Jones, who wrote, 'I used to think one could use no other word but genius for his perception and instinct for painting. It was infallible. He was never wrong' (Burne-Jones to Frances Horner, July 1892, FM Cam., Burne-Jones papers, xxvii, 13). Burne-Jones was particularly devoted to Graham's daughter Frances, one of eight children from his marriage to Jane Catherine Loundes (1819/20-1899) of Arthurlie, Renfrewshire, on 1 January 1845. Graham owned both the watercolour and oil versions of 'Laus Veneris' (watercolour, 1861; priv. coll.; oil, 1873-5, 1878; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle) and 'Chant d'amour' (watercolour, 1865; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; oil, 1868-73; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), favouring the warm Venetian colouring of the latter. In the 1880s Graham acted as Burne-Jones's agent, negotiating the sales of 'King Cophetua and the Beggar Maid' (1880-84; Tate collection) to Lord Wharncliffe and of the large 'Briar Rose' cycle (1874-90; Buscot Park, Oxfordshire) to Agnews. 
Graham owned major paintings by J. E. Millais, W. Holman Hunt, Lord Leighton, G. F. Watts, Fred Walker, and Arthur Hughes. He also bought old masters for smaller sums, but in even greater quantities. Encouraged by Rossetti and Burne-Jones, he concentrated on acquiring paintings produced in central and northern Italy during the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. They included Antonello's 'Virgin and Child', Dosso Dossi's 'Circe and her Lovers' (both National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC), Pesellino's 'Virgin and Child with St John' (Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio), and Piero di Cosimo's 'The Discovery of Vulcan' (Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford, Connecticut). 
From the late 1870s Graham collected less, because of ill health, financial constraints, and the tragic deaths of his two sons, Rutherford and Willy. Burne-Jones's chalk portrait of 1880 (priv. coll.) bleakly depicted the physical consequences of these events. According to Georgiana Burne-Jones, 'His face was that of a saint, and at times like one transfigured' (Burne-Jones, 1.296), and indeed he came to resemble Jacopo Bellini's 'San Bernardino of Siena' (priv. coll.), in his own collection. 
Graham died of stomach cancer on 16 July 1885, while staying with his daughter Agnes Jekyll ['see 'Jekyll, Dame Agnes] at Oakdene near Guildford in Surrey, and was buried in the necropolis of St Mungo's Cathedral, Glasgow, together with several small paintings by Burne-Jones. The bulk of his collection was sold at Christies in London on 2-3 and 8-10 April 1886, realizing $69,168. Today it is best represented in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 51804


Cowan, Sir Robert (1932-1993), businessman and public servant, was born on 27 July 1932 at Inverleith, Edinburgh, the youngest child and only son of John McQueen Cowan (1892-1960) and his wife, Adeline May, 'nee' Organe (died 1981). His father, a distinguished botanist on the staff of the Royal Botanic Garden, subsequently became curator of the National Trust for Scotland's famous garden at Inverewe in Wester Ross. His mother, also a keen botanist, described this remarkable garden in her book 'Inverewe: a Garden in the North-West Highlands' (1964). Cowan was educated at Edinburgh Academy and Edinburgh University, where he graduated in economics. In 1959 he married Margaret Morton, 'nee' Dewar ('b'. 1933), also an Edinburgh graduate and a Scot from Ayrshire. They were to have two daughters. The marriage was to be a great source of strength throughout his career, especially in the highlands, where Margaret supported his work and became involved herself in a range of public activities. 
After national service as a flying officer in the Royal Air Force, Cowan (known to his friends as Bob) worked for Fisons and for Wolsey before joining PA management consultants in 1965. He was with PA for seventeen years, first in Birmingham and later, from 1976, as head of the company's operation in Hong Kong. The experience he gained there of a wide range of industrial problems, and particularly the interest he developed in marketing, was to stand him in good stead for the rest of his career. 
In 1982 Cowan was appointed by the secretary of state for Scotland, George Younger, chairman of the Highlands and Islands Development Board (HIDB), the public body charged with the improvement of economic and social conditions in the vast, sparsely populated area comprising nearly half of Scotland's land mass and stretching from the Mull of Kintyre to the northern tip of Shetland. The post was executive and full-time; Cowan was the board's fifth chairman and, as it was to turn out, also its last, the HIDB being reformed into Highlands and Islands Enterprise, of which he became the first non-executive chairman in his last year. He was the only chairman of the HIDB to serve two five-year terms and, surprisingly, the first to come to the job from a career in business. 
Cowan's was a post with daunting requirements. It involved a major public role, and a strong commitment to the highlands and islands was essential. It required vision, ability to lead and manage a substantial organization, the confidence to back one's judgement in taking the risks that are essential to success, and a prudent concern for the use of public funds. But there were also special factors, and Cowan had the willingness to fight hard for the interests of the area in dealings with government, the private sector, and other organizations; and the ability to relate to the ordinary people of the area, whatever their background or occupation. 
Cowan took over the job at a difficult time. The recession of the early 1980s had hit the highlands hard, already causing the closure of the pulp mill at Fort William and the large aluminium smelter at Invergordon. It did not help him that, after his years in England and abroad, he was not known in the area. (For a time, he was known disparagingly as Bob Kow Wan.) However, it was not long before the people of the highlands warmed to his genial personality, the depth of his experience, his genuine concern, and his commitment. 
By its nature the bulk of the board's work was on small projects and it is therefore difficult to highlight those that were special achievements. But Cowan was associated particularly with the impetus he gave to marketing in the area; the developments in salmon farming and in skiing, especially at Aonach Mor near Fort William; the modernization of telecommunications, which put the highlands ahead of other rural areas, greatly to the benefit of local business; and his tireless campaign for the University of the Highlands and Islands, a project which, alas, he did not live to see come to fruition. His final task was to oversee the upheaval involved in the transition from the HIDB to the new and much more devolved structure of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, a change imposed by government and not one he would have chosen. That it was achieved successfully owed much to his leadership, his diplomacy, and the care he took to make the reorganization as smooth as possible. 
Cowan's genial personality, his strong sense of humour, and his natural authority combined with a refreshing informality, were immense assets to him in the post. He received a knighthood in 1989; and he was given honorary degrees by Aberdeen University, of which he was a member of court, and the University of Stirling. He was a member of the board of the Scottish Development Agency, of the Post Office Board for Scotland, and of the BBC Broadcasting Council for Scotland. He led the successful appeal to provide a scanner for Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, which proved a bitter irony when his last years were clouded by a long struggle against cancer. In this, too, he earned widespread respect for his courage and determination to carry on to the end. Indeed one of his best speeches was given to an international conference shortly before he retired, when the effects of his illness could no longer be disguised. He died at Raigmore Hospital, Inverness, on 7 January 1993, and was cremated five days later. He was survived by his wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 51805


Cowley, Sir John Guise (1905-1993), army officer, was born at Mussooree, in the foothills of the Himalayas, during an earthquake on 20 August 1905, the son of the Revd Henry Guise Beatson Cowley, army chaplain, and his wife, Ethel Florence ('nee' Prowse). When the family returned to England by ship John won a contest for the ugliest baby on board. His early years were spent in a Dorset village, where his father was the rector and Thomas Hardy was a neighbour. He recalled Hardy as a sad, wizened old man who spoke seldom but who occasionally, though an atheist, attended church services, at which he always asked Cowley's father to read the same passage from the 'Bible' -- Elijah's vision of the earthquake. 
Cowley was educated at Wellington College, Berkshire, and the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, before being commissioned into the Royal Engineers in 1925. His first posting was to Aldershot, where he recalled that on route marches the cooker was pulled by a horse while the cook walked behind trying to prepare a meal for the company when it halted; the cook always arrived black in the face from the smoke. In the general strike of 1926 Cowley was sent with a platoon to guard the waterworks at Luton. Before leaving he was warned by his very serious company commander, 'If you have to shoot, shoot to kill'. Instead Cowley arranged a football match between his men and the strikers, whom he found 'an extremely pleasant and reasonable lot of men' (personal knowledge). 
In 1932 Cowley was posted to the Madras sappers and miners, and later went on to Quetta, where he learned Urdu. In 1935 Quetta was devastated by an earthquake which killed 25,000 people and injured many more. The walls of the local civil hospital collapsed, bringing down the roof on the patients as they lay in their beds. Cowley arranged that the roof should be propped up enough to enable him to crawl under it and drag out the survivors, many of whom were suffering from contagious diseases to which he was fully exposed as he carried them in his arms, but his unflinching courage caused others to follow his example. The lepers were rescued by him personally. Cowley was awarded the Albert medal (in 1971 converted into the George Cross, the civilian equivalent of the VC). 
In 1936 Cowley returned to become an instructor at Woolwich; three years later he became a student at the Staff College, Camberley. Before he had completed the Camberley course in 1939 he was posted to the War Office, where he organized the dispatch of the cavalry division, with 2000 horses, to Palestine (it was mechanized soon afterwards). In 1940 he was posted to the western desert army, where he recalled having to wake up General Wavell in the middle of the night and tell him the Australians had captured Sidi Barrani. Wavell then wrote a personal note to Churchill, but though Cowley was sitting within 4 feet of Wavell for half an hour, Wavell did not utter a word to him, not even 'Thank you' or 'Good night'. Wavell was noted for his extreme taciturnity. In 1941 Cowley was trapped in Tobruk by one of Rommel's sweeping counter-attacks but was evacuated by sea and then put in charge of the docks at Alexandria. He remembered being visited by a confident military police officer who told him he had come to stop pilfering in the docks. Cowley warned him that stopping this ancient and traditional practice might prove difficult. Six days later the officer reappeared, saying he could continue no longer as all his own equipment and stores had been stolen. Cowley was next appointed to the staff of 7th armoured division, and then to 30th corps, where he was made responsible for planning and supply arrangements. On 16 December 1941 he married (Irene) Sybil, daughter of Percy Dreville Millen, of Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire; they had a son and three daughters. 
After the battle of El Alamein, Cowley was posted to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to lecture about the war. His next postings were to allied forces headquarters at Caserta, near Naples, and to Brussels on the staff of the twenty-first army group, where his task was to help refugees and the homeless in Belgium and the Netherlands. Then came a move to Minden with a brief to restore the German economy. The Volkswagen factory lay in the British zone, and he recalled that as it had never functioned in peacetime it was inspected by various motoring experts who said it was inefficient, had no future, and that neither the works nor the designs should be acquired for British industry. Cowley subsequently spent a year at the Imperial Defence College, had a stint on the defence research policy staff, and then became director of administrative planning at the War Office. From 1953 he was chief of staff, headquarters, eastern command, before returning to the War Office as vice-quartermaster-general in 1956, just in time for the Suez crisis. He thought Anthony Eden seemed exhausted and mentally ill: the army wanted to land at Alexandria but Eden insisted on Port Said, which proved a disaster. 
In 1957 Cowley became controller of munitions at the War Office. In this post he clashed with Duncan Sandys, the minister of supply, who thought that money should be spent on nuclear weapons rather than soldiers. Cowley pointed out that if nuclear weapons were ever used it would be the end of civilization. Sandys asked Macmillan to sack Cowley, but the prime minister refused. When the row died down Cowley was made master-general of the ordnance. He retired from the army in 1962 and on the day he left he was appointed a director of British Oxygen and Bowmaker. He soon joined other companies, but found time for the presidency of the New Forest Preservation Society and chairmanship of the governors of Wellington College and several other schools. 
As a young man Cowley had been an excellent games player, first-class at squash, and had a golf handicap of three. Later he became a skilful bridge and croquet player. He traced the history of snooker back to Woolwich, where the 'snookers' (as the junior cadets were called) were allowed to play with extra balls after their seniors had finished at billiards. Cowley was appointed OBE in 1943, CBE in 1946, CB in 1954, and KBE in 1958. He was mentioned in dispatches four times. He died of bronchopneumonia and ischaemic heart disease on 7 January 1993, at Woodpeckers, Sway Road, Brockenhurst, Hampshire. He was survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51806


Cox, Sir Anthony Wakefield (1915-1993), architect, was born on 18 July 1915 in Park Road, Peterborough, the elder of the two sons of William Edward Cox (1880-1960), civil servant, and from 1936 senior principal inspector of taxes at the Inland Revenue, and his wife, Elsie Gertrude, 'nee' Wakefield (1882-1977). His younger brother, Oliver ['see below'], also became an architect. Tony Cox was educated at Mill Hill School, north-west London, where he gained a reputation as an athlete and a poet. He entered the Architectural Association School in 1933, meeting a year group of former public school boys (and a few girls) who became close friends and, in several cases, his lifetime professional partners. In this talented group, Cox stood out for his clarity of thought and expression combined with left-wing political motivation. These attributes were tempered by a self-deprecating wit and a talent for writing light verses, impromptu clerihews, letters, and song lyrics for the school's celebrated pantomimes. Like students in several previous years, he made the thrilling discovery of Le Corbusier's words and architectural images, creating possibilities that few of the school's staff were then willing to consider. 
While Cox was a student the Architectural Association School went through unsettling transformations, beginning in 1935 with the appointment of E. A. A. Rouse as director. A follower of the town planner Patrick Geddes, Rouse encouraged students to see design in terms of 'action sequences' -- habitual daily actions from which the dimensions of spaces could be determined -- and promoted modern architecture not just as a technical and stylistic innovation but as a potential source of social change to be grounded in research. Rouse's 'unit system', predicating a new 'real life' approach to training, suited Cox, whose special ability was as a thinker and organizer. Thus, when the Architectural Association's council appointed a conservative director of education, H. S. Goodhart-Rendel, to apply the brakes, Cox and his colleagues engaged in an ultimately successful battle to retain group working. In 1938 Cox became joint editor of a new and influential student-led magazine, 'Focus' (1938-9), in which -- in the paper's first issue -- he published an open letter to Goodhart-Rendel in a special section printed on yellow paper. Cox's best-known and subsequently much quoted 'Focus' article, 'Highpoint Two, North Hill, Highgate', appeared in the magazine's second issue. This offered a sharp attack on Berthold Lubetkin's recently completed second Highpoint housing block (1938), which Cox criticized for its overly decorative entrance hall, accusing the architect of 'crimes' of formalism that went beyond 'legitimate limits' and risked setting 'certain formal values above use-values' (pp. 76-9). At the time Cox was also making his mark as a writer and reviewer beyond the Architectural Association and, as a result, eminent figures such as Walter Gropius and Ben Nicholson were keen to receive news of his activities. 
In June 1939, 'with no jobs of our own, no capital and almost no experience', eleven graduates of the school, Cox among them, formed Architects' Co-operative Partnership (ACP). The group's intention was to pursue the collaborative working practices they had acquired as students, though its members were immediately scattered by the war. Cox worked initially as an architect for ordnance factories and hostels under Sir Alexander Gibb and William Holford, and from 1943 to 1946 he served in the Royal Engineers in western Europe -- helping to restore water supplies to Brussels in 1944-and then in India. On 16 January 1943 at Edmonton register office, Middlesex, he married a former Architectural Association student, Susan Babington Smith (1917-2003), the ninth child of Sir Henry Babington Smith, civil servant, and Lady Elisabeth Mary Bruce. The couple had two daughters, Joanna ('b'. 1948) and Sarah ('b'. 1952). 
From 1946 ACP gradually reformed with seven of its original members, including Cox and his fellow 'Focus' editor Leo de Syllas. After demobilization Cox worked briefly with Charles Aslin and Sir Stirrat Johnson-Marshall as part of the famous Hertfordshire county council schools division. In 1946 ACP received an important commission to design a rubber manufacturing plant at Byrn-mawr, near Ebbw Vale, for a subsidiary of Enfield Cables Ltd, whose director James Grimston personally oversaw the invitation. The resulting Bryn-mawr Rubber Factory (1946-51, dem. 2001) proved a baptism of fire for ACP but was also a triumph of design, attracting international coverage and becoming the partnership's best-known building, listed grade 2* in 1986. Constructed in association with the engineer Ove Arup, the factory took the form of nine thin concrete domes enclosing a massive working space. Cox was responsible for some of the final design at Bryn-mawr, including the curved concrete roof of the entrance hall. However, a principle of strict anonymity was applied to all of the partners' work, and the office -- based from 1947 in Gordon Square, London -- sought as far as possible to operate a system of open meetings at which anyone could suggest improvements to a scheme at the design stage. In 1953 ACP moved to Charlotte Street, London, and revised its name to Architects' Co-Partnership -- an attempt at mild depoliticization in the face of anxieties from their public sector clients. 
Cox remained with ACP for the rest of his career, his qualities of sympathy and leadership serving to hold together the group's disparate talents. These were combined with displays of donnish eccentricity, such as keeping a bookmark in selected volumes at Foyles bookshop, Charing Cross, and reading a chapter every lunch hour. But despite his academic ability Cox resisted the intellectualization of architecture that appealed to a younger generation and he was known for his realism, analytical nature, and firm belief in the direct relationship between form and function. During the 1950s he worked on new primary and secondary schools, principally in the English midlands, and, in total, he was responsible for some sixty of ACP's commissions over a forty-year period. His larger personal projects -- which include the departments of chemistry at University College, London, and the University of Leicester (1957), the chemistry and biochemistry departments of Imperial College, London, the Greenwood Theatre at Guy's Hospital, London (1969), and the Maudsley Hospital's Institute of Psychiatry -- were well respected, though they deliberately lacked panache. In 1957 he designed a house for himself and his family on Bacons Lane, Highgate, north London, flanked by other architects' houses in a private cul-de-sac. From the outside an austere box, Cox's design proved spatially effective inside, where twin Isokon long chairs, a Ben Nicholson painting, and volumes by the Auden-generation poets evoked the 1930s. 
With Philip Groves, an ACP partner of the second generation, Cox wrote 'Design for Health Care' (1981), in which he drew on his experience of hospital design with the partnership; this was followed in 1990 by 'Hospitals and Health Care Facilities'. In the early 1980s he was responsible for an unexecuted scheme for rationalizing the Foreign and Commonwealth Office buildings in Whitehall after their preservation by listing. Cox was the only ACP partner to take on major roles in the profession's affairs, including the presidency of the Architectural Association (1962-3), where he also taught part-time, and membership of RIBA's council (1967-72) and board of education (1967-73). He also served on the royal fine art commission between 1970 and 1985, and he and Susan became involved in local conservation in Highgate. In 1972 he was appointed CBE and in 1983 he was knighted, in part for his role as the public face of the socially progressive and technically innovative partnership he had co-founded more than forty years earlier. Slightly built, friendly, and humorous, Cox produced highly original homemade Christmas cards that were eagerly awaited every year. He died from cancer on 5 January 1993 at his home, 5 Bacons Lane, Highgate. He was survived by his wife and daughters; his funeral was held on 16 January at St Michael's Church, Highgate, and he was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
Cox's brother, Oliver Jasper Cox (1920-2010), architect, was born on 20 April 1920 at 28 Gloucester Road, Teddington, London. He followed his brother to Mill Hill School and the Architectural Association School, where he shared a studio with Howard Cleminson, worked on a mass observation study of multi-occupied houses in Fulham, and contributed to his brother's magazine, 'Focus'. His studies were interrupted by the Second World War, during which he served with the Royal Engineers, including some time in India. Following demobilization he travelled with his friend Michael Ventris to Scandinavia, where they studied contemporary designs in architecture. After graduating he was recruited by David Medd (whom he had met during the war) at Hertfordshire county council's renowned architecture group, where he was principally involved in innovative uses of colour in the building of new primary schools. In 1950 he, together with A. W. Cleeve Barr and two others, left as a result of a dispute over pay and conditions, and all four joined the architects' department of London county council's housing division, working under H. J. Whitfield Lewis. His most important work of this period was at the Alton East estate at Roehampton, where he designed nine point-blocks with a view over Richmond Park, his design owing much to Scandinavian influences. He also designed Clarendon Crescent in Paddington, and in other works was particularly noted for his incorporation of murals and sculptures by up-and-coming artists, and his family-friendly designs, including play spaces and large communal areas. He was also leader of the unrealized project to create a new town at Hook, south-east of London. Meanwhile, on 14 November 1953 he married his colleague Jeanne Denise (Jean) Cooper (1923-2007), daughter of Dennis Cooper, civil servant. They had two daughters and one son. 
In 1960 Cox moved to the Ministry of Housing and Local Government as deputy chief architect and leader of the research and development group. There he was involved in the reports 'Homes for Today and Tomorrow' (1961) and 'Space in the Home' (1963), which were important in improving standards in public housing. In 1965 he joined his friend Graeme Shankland, with whom he had worked on the master plan for Hook New Town, to form Shankland Cox, of which he remained a partner until 1985, the year of Shankland's death. He then remained in practice with his wife, Jean, until her death. As well as housing projects in Bracknell, Lambeth, and Hillingdon, he collaborated with Shankland and with Jean on plans in France (at Cergy-Pontoise, Cap d'Agde, and old Pontoise) and in the Caribbean, most notably at Waterfront and Trench Town, in Kingston, Jamaica. In Montego Bay he made imaginative use of a small budget by dividing the land into plots, and providing a right-angle of walls on each plot, also laying on water and electricity, leaving the occupants to construct their own dwellings. The area soon developed into a thriving community, with many houses outgrowing the original envisaged size. He wrote a number of reports and short books, including, with Jean, a study of the naval hospital at Port Royal, Jamaica (1996), and (jointly) two books on Lauderdale House, in Highgate. He was appointed CBE in 1982. He died of septic shock at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, London, on 24 April 2010, and was survived by his three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51808


Cranston, Maurice William (1920-1993), political philosopher, was born on 8 May 1920 at 53 Harringay Road, Tottenham, Middlesex, the only child of William Cranston, theatrical agent, and his wife, Catherine, 'nee' Harris (died 'c'.1933). Although the family was of Scottish origin, Cranston himself was raised in Tunbridge Wells by two maiden aunts and a Quaker godmother, following the death of his mother when he was a boy and the emigration of his father to Canada 'to seek, unsuccessfully, his fortune' in the 1930s (Cranston, 254-5). He attended a succession of schools, including the Tunbridge Wells Technical Institute and School of Art and a Jesuit college in France. Besides preparing himself to become a journalist he acquired a facility with languages, especially French, which he used to advantage throughout his life. He had planned to attend King's College, London, in 1939, but was unable to do so as the Second World War intervened. 
During the war Cranston was a conscientious objector and served throughout with the London civil defence in firefighting and rescuing casualties of the bombing. He also worked with refugees at Bloomsbury House and recalled that one of those he assisted presented him with a copy of Spinoza's 'Tractatus theologico-politicus', which was influential in encouraging him to turn away from a career in journalism to study political philosophy. After the blitz he began taking evening courses in philosophy in the University of London, taught by the Spinoza specialist Ruth Saw. He also contributed to 'Peace News' and, while advocating non-violent resistance to the Nazis, he was well aware of the difficulties of this policy. In a pamphlet entitled 'Non-Violence and Germany', published in 1944, he wrote: 'Any encouragement the pacifist may draw from the narratives in the following pages [concerned with non-violent resistance to the Nazis and especially with the Copenhagen Strike of June 1944] must be tempered by the reflection that these incidents are but tiny glimpses of light in a swiftly darkening scene: violence, discredited by everyone twenty years ago, has come to be accepted by everyone, venerated almost by countless numbers. The memory of Mr. Chamberlain should be sufficient warning against too eager plucking of flowers out of nettles. (p. 3)' During this period Cranston attempted to break into publishing and journalism. He shared his ambitions with the writer and painter Denton Welch, whom he met in Tunbridge Wells in 1938, and they remained close friends. On 20 July 1940 he married Helga May ('b'. 1920/21), film editor, and daughter of Siegfried May, bookkeeper, but the marriage did not survive the war. Cranston's life at this time might be seen reflected in the characters of his two amusing and stylish detective novels published in 1946: 'Tomorrow We'll be Sober' and 'Philosopher's Hemlock'. He also published in 1949 a travel book, 'Introduction to Switzerland'. When, after the war, he attended St Catherine's College, Oxford (graduating with a second-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1948), he maintained his interest in writing and publishing, and joined Ludovic Kennedy in founding the Oxford University Writers' Club, where established authors such as Evelyn Waugh, Cyril Connolly, V. S. Pritchett, and John Betjeman were invited to dine with student members and respond to their questions. 
Cranston arrived in Oxford with a head full of Spinoza and seventeenth-century rationalism which he found difficult to integrate with the linguistic philosophy which had become fashionable at the time. His BLitt thesis (published in 1953 as 'Freedom: a New Analysis') attempted to use linguistic analysis without denying the reality and importance of traditional ethical, political, and metaphysical questions concerned with freedom, freedom of the will, and liberalism. Cranston was also unusual in reading contemporary continental philosophers, such as Sartre, Merlau-Ponty, Jean Wahl, and Jean Hippolyte, who contributed to his understanding of liberty. He wrote a number of works on Sartre (including 'Sartre', 1962, and 'The Quintessence of Sartrism', 1970), and on other aspects of contemporary French thought. 
During the 1950s Cranston combined a part-time lectureship in social philosophy in the University of London with an active life in journalism and publishing. By the mid-fifties he was involved in the Congress for Cultural Freedom and began to publish in 'Encounter', whose editorial board he eventually joined. In 1959 he became literary adviser to the publisher Methuen. He was also active in PEN, the association of poets, essayists, and novelists, and became a permanent delegate to PEN International. He spoke and wrote eloquently for the rights of writers who were oppressed and in prison. His book on human rights, 'Human Rights Today', first appeared in 1955 and was followed by a revised edition in 1962 and by 'What are Human Rights?' in 1973. He defended human rights at a time when in Britain and elsewhere the doctrine was rejected by many who wrote in the Marxist, utilitarian, and common law traditions. He adapted the Lockean doctrine of natural rights to human rights and presented strong arguments against the extension of rights to life, a fair trial, liberty, property, and so on to include social and economic rights, as had occurred in the UN declaration of universal rights of 1948. The rights Cranston defended were those which any government could secure, and did not depend on levels of economic and social development which such rights as the right to holidays with pay required. He was thus critical of governments that denied human rights, and justified this denial on the grounds of economic backwardness. He also saw a tension between an emphasis on economic progress (especially in the communist bloc) and a willingness to subordinate liberty to collective economic achievement. In this process he found the writer and intellectual especially vulnerable to oppression by governments of all kinds. In addressing a PEN congress in Dublin in 1971, he said: 'The conclusion seems to be that 'all' modern systems of economy are disadvantageous from the writer's point of view... I feel myself that the capitalist system is perhaps the least [disadvantageous]... But I do not think we writers can have real enthusiasm for any system of economic relationships, or any form of patronage of which we have so far had experience. ('The Changing Face of Literature', 32)' His approach to rights and the status of writers and others oppressed by governments reflected a strong belief in individual liberty and in a minimal state. He perhaps reasserted in a different context the earlier opposition to war and to the treatment by governments of refugees from Nazi oppression.In 1957 Cranston published 'John Locke: a Biography', which was widely praised for its scholarship and style, and was awarded the James Tait Black memorial prize. This major work followed eight years of research on Locke's papers, which had been recently acquired by the Bodleian Library. Michael Oakeshott was among the admirers of the book, and Cranston was invited in 1959 to join the government department at the London School of Economics (LSE), where he eventually succeeded Oakeshott as professor of political science in 1969. His first marriage having ended in divorce, in 1958 he married Baroness Maximiliana (Iliana) von und zu Fraunberg ('b'. 1925). This marriage was highly successful, and two sons, Nicholas and Stephen, were born in 1960 and 1962. 
As a university don Cranston was an imaginative and engaging lecturer, and he continued his lectures on French political thought even after his retirement. But his main interest was in supervising his PhD students, for many of whom he was not only a teacher but a good friend. His support and personal warmth were cherished by those fortunate enough to have been his students. Nevertheless, Cranston was not a typical political scientist. He seldom published in the learned journals, partly because he eschewed the pedantry he found there, and partly because he found that many political scientists were little more than apologists for political parties or ideologies, dressing up their theories as philosophy or science. In his inaugural lecture of 1971, published in 1972 and entitled 'Politics and Ethics', he saw the role of the political philosopher as one that resembled a drama critic in the theatre of politics, and he especially attacked the philosopher who abandoned this perspective and became a politician: 'He may grow fretful in the stalls and yearn to mount the stage himself, but just as critics are notoriously bad actors, so philosophers make wretched politicians. Think of Gentile becoming Mussolini's minister of education, or Heidegger joining the Nazi party, or Lukacs going to Moscow to support Stalin. Or perhaps we had better not think of them. (p. 24)' Cranston was also critical of a 'positivist' or 'behaviourist' political science displacing more traditional political philosophy. Without political philosophy, he said: 'politics might well go on as merrily as ever. But the trouble is that it would not be understood, it would be a practice without consciousness of the norms which inform its activity, ignorant even of its own identity or nature. If the day ever comes when political philosophy is dead, the triumph of information over knowledge will be complete. (p. 24)' Cranston's academic career flourished in Britain, continental Europe, and the United States. Besides his steady progress up the academic ladder, he was widely regarded as one of the few academics who could reach a general audience beyond the universities. For example, he wrote a series of eight highly imaginative political dialogues between various historical figures, from Savonarola and Machiavelli on the state to Voltaire and Hume on morality, which were originally broadcast on the BBC Third Programme, frequently repeated, and subsequently published in 1968. He often contributed to the BBC World Service and Radio Free Europe and made numerous other broadcasts in Britain, France, Canada, and Italy. In Britain he was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and an honorary fellow of St Catherine's College, Oxford (1984) and of the LSE (1991). He delivered the Carlyle lectures at Oxford in 1984 on the main figures of the French Enlightenment, subsequently published as 'Philosophers and Pamphleteers: Political Theorists of the French Enlightenment' (1986). He often visited North America, where he was a visiting professor at Harvard University (1965-6), Dartmouth College (1970-71), the University of British Columbia (1973-4), and the University of California at La Jolla (1986-93), and a fellow at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, DC (1982). He also visited France and wrote and broadcast in French. He visited the Ecole des Hautes Etudes in Paris in 1977, and served as president of the Institut International de Philosophie Politique (1976-9). He was vice-president of L'Alliance Francaise en Angleterre from 1964. In addition he was seconded as professor of political science to the European University Institute in Florence (1978-81). 
Cranston maintained his interest in the French Enlightenment in numerous essays, and made highly praised translations of Rousseau's 'Social Contract' (1968) and 'A Discourse on the Origins of Inequality' (1984), published as Penguin paperbacks and widely used throughout the world. In the 1970s he began research on a three-volume biography of Rousseau, utilizing the new edition of Rousseau's correspondence and much new scholarship, attempting to create a 'Lockean' biography -- one in which attention to detail, meticulously presented, would reveal the character and significance of this much misunderstood figure. The first volume, 'Jean-Jacques: the Early Life and Work of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1712-1754', appeared in 1983, followed by 'The Noble Savage: Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1754-1762' in 1991. To the suggestion, originally made by the philosopher Richard Peters, that Cranston's interest in Rousseau followed from a similar past, he made clear that temperamentally, philosophically, and politically, he was much closer to Locke than to Rousseau. The final volume, 'The Solitary Self: Jean-Jacques Rousseau in Exile and Adversity' (1997), was incomplete at the time of his death and was published posthumously with additions from his other writings on Rousseau, carefully edited and linked together by an American colleague, Sanford Lakoff. 
Cranston was a prolific writer who rose early and worked through the morning; then, following advice once given to him by Bertrand Russell, he took a siesta after lunch and returned to work in the late afternoon. Even when convenor of the government department at LSE, he maintained his regimen and would perform his administrative duties before most of his colleagues had stirred from their beds. He would then leave the school for a day's writing, often before they had arrived. Although he claimed to write slowly and with difficulty, his elegant style, displaying great wit and charm, made his writing appear effortless. 
Among academics Cranston was rare in being able to increase his income substantially through writing and broadcasting, but as the years passed he found this increasingly difficult. Television took its toll on the general reader, and, despite high acclaim from many reviewers, the financial return he sought from the biography of Rousseau did not meet his expectations. Radio no longer reached the same audiences as it did in the 1950s and 1960s, and Cranston seldom appeared on television. Furthermore, he was not inclined to become a political pundit. He belonged to no political party, and while he was often associated with anti-communist and libertarian conservatism, he was alert to the limitations of all political ideologies. To associate himself with Locke's political ideas, he occasionally referred to himself as a whig, and insisted that he was more at home in the seventeenth and eighteenth than in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. He was not only cosmopolitan but also a devoted citizen of the republic of letters who defended oppressed writers throughout the world. 
In appearance, Cranston was of medium height, slim and handsome. His shy exterior, once penetrated, revealed a man of great wit and warmth, much admired and loved by his friends to whom he was devoted, and with few enemies. Despite his frequent travels, he was most at home in London: in the libraries, in his flat in Kent Terrace overlooking Regent's Park, the LSE, the BBC, the publishing houses, and the Garrick Club. He died suddenly from a heart attack on 5 November 1993 following a broadcast in London for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation on Margaret Thatcher's memoirs. He was survived by his wife and two sons. A memorial service was held at St George's, Bloomsbury, London, on 2 February 1994. 
Cranston's academic legacy rests mainly on his biographies of Locke and Rousseau, his writings on liberty and human rights, and his translations of Rousseau. His postgraduate students went on to hold academic posts throughout the world, and often worked in fields Cranston originally made his own. But his writings for a wider audience had a special charm and appeal, and reflected the link between serious philosophical thought and the intelligent lay person which characterized post-war Britain as a civilized and liberal society in spite of economic decline and a diminution of its role in the world. 


@@@@@


doc= 51810


Crawley, Aidan Merivale (1908-1993), politician and television executive, was born on 10 April 1908 at the vicarage, Benenden, near Cranbrook, Kent, the third of the five children of Arthur Stafford Crawley, vicar of Benenden (later canon of Windsor), and his wife, Anstice Katharine, 'nee' Gibbs. His paternal grandfather was an entrepreneur, specializing in overseas railways; his mother's roots lay in west-country farming. Both families had a tradition of service in the Church of England. As a result his childhood was dominated by clergymen, especially Archbishop Cosmo Lang, of York, whom his father later served as chaplain and after whom his elder brother was named. 
Crawley began his education in London in the summer of 1917 in preparation for enrolment at Farnborough School, a boarding preparatory school, in September 1917. He entered Harrow School in 1920, completing his education there in the summer of 1926. At Harrow he shone academically -- winning the top history scholarship to Trinity College, Oxford, on his departure -- but above all on the cricket field. Tall, rugged, with a jutting chin and sharply-defined face, he was the stereotypical gifted schoolboy, an inter-war hero. In the Harrow XIs of 1924, 1925, and 1926 he missed out on the captaincy only because of his youth. The headmaster's son became captain in his stead. As an undergraduate studying history at Trinity College, Oxford (1926-30), he again shone, especially as a batsman, scoring 1137 runs in 1928 (including five centuries) against first-class opposition. He was also a leading member of Oxford's Bullingdon Club, becoming friends with Frank Pakenham (later Lord Longford). In later life he recalled that Evelyn Waugh's 'Brideshead Revisited' reflected much that he remembered about his time at university. In 1929 his college extended his scholarship and he graduated in 1930 with a second class degree. That summer his name was listed in an England XII against South Africa, but he was not chosen to play. He had some success as an amateur for Kent but left full-time cricket at the end of the year, though it remained his chief recreation. He was a co-founder of the national village cricket championship in 1971, and president of the MCC in 1973. 
In October 1930 Crawley began work as a cub reporter at the 'Daily Mail', entering the Commons lobby in 1931 or 1932. In the latter year he began a series of jobs at regional papers in the Harmsworth group, visiting the United States in 1933 to report on the 'new deal'. This was a sign of his growing tilt towards socialism, encouraged by his work in recession-hit south Wales. In 1936 he left the Harmsworth group, unable to stomach its fascist sympathies. He then began an involvement in factual film-making that lasted for the rest of his life. Early in 1937 he left for Palestine, to make films about life there; these were shown with limited success in 1938. On his return he joined the Auxiliary Air Force, though he cautioned against active British involvement in the Spanish Civil War, then a cause for many on the left, including his future wife, (Harriet) Virginia Spencer Cowles, a foreign correspondent and gifted writer whom he met in 1937. He joined the Labour Party late the same year. He wrote to Hugh Dalton and found himself in agreement with the latter's campaign for rearmament. Dalton helped him achieve selection as Labour candidate for the then Conservative seat of North Buckinghamshire. 
When the Second World War broke out Crawley was serving as an auxiliary with 601 squadron. In February 1940 he joined the Balkan intelligence service, based in Istanbul, with the aim of keeping Turkey neutral. Late in that year he moved to Sofia, fleeing in March 1941 as Germany attacked Bulgaria. As a result he returned to air force service, flying Hurricanes with 73 fighter squadron in the western desert, before being shot down and captured by a German truck convoy, flown to Greece, and held at a prisoner-of-war camp in Salonika. Anxious to hide his work in the Balkans, he registered with a false forename -- Stafford -- when formally taken prisoner and sent to Germany. He was held at a succession of camps, ending at Schubin in Poland. There he took part in an attempt to escape by tunnelling under the perimeter: on 5 March 1943 he broke out and, using false documents, headed for Switzerland. After a remarkable journey across the Reich he was recaptured by the Gestapo on the Swiss border. After interrogation he was returned to Schubin. He played a peripheral part in another escape, later described by Eric Williams in his book 'The Wooden Horse' (1949) and by Crawley in his 'Escape from Germany' (1956). In May 1945 the camp was liberated and he returned to England. 
On his return Crawley was almost immediately thrown into campaigning as Labour candidate for North Buckinghamshire. Unexpectedly he won with a majority of 3845 -- part of the Labour landslide of July 1945. He also resumed his relationship with Virginia Cowles. They were married by his father on 30 July 1945 at St George's, Hanover Square. She was the daughter of Edward Spencer Cowles, a physician. They had three children, Andrew, Reginald, and Harriet. Like his fellow new MPs Woodrow Wyatt and Christopher Mayhew, Crawley represented the technocratic face of the Labour Party, ensuring that it could claim to represent progressives of all classes. Looking back in his memoirs he recalled the spirit of the time: 'we were not only going to build a new world, but we could see no reason why we should not be in power for the next thirty years' (Crawley, 209). A gilded high flyer, he served as parliamentary private secretary to two colonial secretaries, George Hall and Arthur Creech-Jones. In February 1950 he was re-elected at the general election, with a reduced majority of 1500, and appointed under-secretary at the Air Ministry. He toured RAF bases in Asia before returning to fight the October 1951 general election, losing his seat by fifty-four votes. 
Crawley's response was to return to film-making. With three other former Labour ministers (Mayhew, Wyatt, and John Freeman) he became a star documentary maker with the BBC, travelling to India to make a series shown in 1953. His face became synonymous with the new medium, especially as a presenter on 'Viewfinder' in 1954. In this he was ahead of his political generation. In February 1955 he was named editor-in-chief of Independent Television News (ITN), due to come on air in September. In this role he insisted -- to the point of threatened resignation -- on freedom in selecting presenters, choosing Robin Day, Christopher Chataway, and Reginald Bosanquet, all to become famous. Day described his appointment in his memoir, 'Grand Inquisitor' (1989), making much of the makeshift facilities available to ITN and Crawley's inspiring role. The channel was launched successfully but ITN's budget and air time immediately came under fire. Crawley threatened to resign unless ITN retained at least 20 minutes of broadcasts a day. Air time was safeguarded but after failing to overturn budget cuts Crawley resigned as editor in January 1956. In leaving, he ensured that the honour for ITN's success went to others -- though Day paid ample tribute to him in his memoirs. The departure also marked the end of Crawley's heyday, his promise not quite fulfilled. 
By this stage Crawley was becoming disillusioned with socialism in the face of what he saw as trade-union obstructionism. He resigned from the Labour Party in 1957 and joined the Conservative Party late the same year. He later traced the roots of his disillusionment to his suggestion to Hugh Gaitskell in 1951 that the party drop clause 4 of its constitution. After resigning from ITN he returned to documentary-making and spent increasing amounts of time on his farm in Buckinghamshire, which he had bought in 1947. This was sold in 1962 after losses mounted. He also ranged across Africa, and was a member of the Monckton commission on the future of the Federation of the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, in 1960. 
Crawley's friendship with Conservative politician Iain Macleod led to his selection in 1962 as Conservative candidate for the vacant seat of West Derbyshire. He was chosen from a shortlist which included Norman St John-Stevas. He narrowly won the by-election with a majority of 1220 over the Liberals. The result was a relief not just to Crawley but to Macleod, who, controversially, had promoted his candidature. At the general election of 1964 he was re-elected with a larger majority. Nevertheless, in parliament for a second time Crawley made little impact, apparently content that his election was proof enough that his talents had not departed after the ITN debacle. He served on the public accounts committee and an ad hoc committee of the Conservative Party which aimed to reform trade unions, by this time his major political interest. 
By 1963 Crawley was considering applying for an independent television franchise and in 1966 he formed a consortium to apply for the London weekend franchise. This was awarded on 6 May 1967, and in October that year Crawley left parliament. London Weekend Television (LWT) went badly from the start; disagreement within the broad-based consortium, which included Rupert Murdoch, led to prolonged dispute. Crawley was forced out of the chairmanship in 1971, remaining as nominal president until 1973. In 1969 he published a well-reviewed biography, 'De Gaulle', following this with 'The Rise of Western Germany, 1945-72' in 1973. 
From 1974 Crawley lived mainly abroad, in France, Spain, and Italy. In 1983 his wife, Virginia, died in a car crash; in 1988 his two sons were killed in a mountain air crash, flying their own plane near Turin in Italy. He moved to live with his remaining daughter, Harriet, in Northamptonshire; she survived him when he died, at Horton General Hospital, Banbury, Oxfordshire, on 3 November 1993, following a stroke. A memorial service was held at St Michael's, Chester Square, London, on 10 February 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 51812


Creak, (Eleanor) Mildred (1898-1993), child psychiatrist, was born on 11 August 1898 in Swann Lane, Cheadle Hulme, Stockport, Cheshire, the elder daughter of Robert Brown Creak, mill engineer, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' McCrossan. She knew from an early age that she wanted to be a doctor and work with children. She entered the London School of Medicine for Women at the age of eighteen years but after a year transferred to University College Hospital (UCH), London, and qualified MB, BS (London) in 1923. While a medical student she developed an admiration for two psychiatrists on the staff at UCH, Bernard Hart and A. F. Tredgold. This led her to want to specialize in psychiatry. 
At the time that Creak qualified it was difficult for women doctors to obtain employment, and she made ninety applications before securing a post. While a medical student she had become a Quaker, and in 1924 she was appointed assistant physician to the Quaker mental hospital, The Retreat, in York. She remained there for four years and then in 1929 was appointed to the Maudsley Hospital, London. There she helped to lay the foundations for what became an internationally recognized centre for research into child and adolescent psychiatric disorders. In 1932 she was awarded a Rockefeller Fellowship for postgraduate training in the United States, where she spent most of her time at the Philadelphia Child Guidance Clinic. On her return she engaged in clinical and academic work with children, specializing in those whose problems had a biological basis. At this stage in her career she published articles on organic psychoses, chorea, tics, compulsive utterances, and hysteria in childhood. In the mid-1930s, she was involved in planning the first psychiatric in-patient unit for children in the country at the Maudsley Hospital, but war was declared when it had been open for just a month, and the patients were evacuated to Mill Hill Hospital. Creak herself joined the Women's Army Corps and rose to the rank of major. Much of her service was in India. 
At the end of the war Creak was offered a post at the Maudsley but declined, disliking what she felt was an over-emphasis there on statistical research, for which she felt she was not fitted. Instead in 1946 she took up the offer of a post at the Hospital for Sick Children, Great Ormond Street, London, where she established a thriving, clinically active department with a strong training role. From the time of her appointment to her retirement in 1963 she worked tirelessly to establish the credibility of the speciality of child psychiatry in the world of paediatrics, a world in which many of her paediatric colleagues questioned the importance of emotional factors in the lives and illnesses of their patients. Her success can be gauged by the fact that the department that she founded became one of the largest in the hospital. 
Perhaps Creak's best-known contribution was in autism. Many autistic children were referred to her, and she developed what was then the unfashionable concept that it stemmed not from parental inadequacy, as was commonly believed by her child psychiatric colleagues, but from constitutional or what were later called genetic factors. This view was based on studying 100 children with autism, many of whom turned out to have evidence of brain dysfunction. She chaired a working party to establish criteria for the diagnosis of autism, and her 'nine points' were for some time the agreed basis for this diagnosis. She was highly respected both by paediatricians and psychiatrists. She gave the Charles West lecture at the Royal College of Physicians in 1958 and had a number of child psychiatric units named after her during her lifetime. These included a unit in Perth, Western Australia, and the child psychiatric in-patient unit at Great Ormond Street. 
Creak's outstanding characteristic was her gentleness. Paradoxically she was both highly puritanical and exceptionally tolerant. When a psychotherapist in her department bought a comfortable couch for his child patients (and doubtless to rest on himself in exhausted moments), she caught sight of it and exclaimed 'you're turning this place into a brothel'. With her complete lack of make-up, her horn-rimmed spectacles, and her skirt length that made no concession at all to prevalent fashion it is difficult to imagine a person less likely to have any idea what a brothel was really like. Yet she was totally non-judgemental when it came to parents who behaved deplorably, and merely tried to do her best for their children. 
Creak had a wide circle of friends but few interests outside her work. She never married. She was a committed Christian and an active Quaker. After her retirement she went to live in Welwyn Garden City and attended Friends' meetings there regularly. She suffered from Alzheimer's disease for most of the last two decades of her life, and latterly from cancer, but she continued to attend meetings until her last months. She died, of breast cancer, at her home, Martins House, Jessop Road, Stevenage, Hertfordshire, on 27 August 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51813


Cripps, Sir John Stafford (1912-1993), journalist, was born at Fernacres Cottage, Fulmer, Burnham, Buckinghamshire, on 10 May 1912, the only son and eldest of the four children of Sir (Richard) Stafford Cripps (1889-1952), politician, and Dame Isobel Cripps, nee Swithinbank (1891-1979), overseas aid organizer. The family was long established in west Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire, and Cripps lived for all but the first few years of his life at Filkins, just inside Oxfordshire. Educated at Winchester College and at Balliol College, Oxford, he took a brilliant first in modern Greats, chaired the university Labour Club, and was secretary of the Oxford Union. In the general election of 1935 he was unsuccessful for Labour at Exeter. With friends such as the future Labour leader Michael Foot (whom he claimed to have helped convert from Liberalism), he seemed set for a political career on the left. But in 1938, determined on a course distinct from his father's, he was led by his concern for countryside communities to take a post on the advertising staff of 'The Countryman', then edited by J. W. Robertson Scott at Idbury, near Filkins. During the war this was perforce a part-time job; as a conscientious objector Cripps was required to work some days a week as a market gardener on the family's 500 acre farm at Filkins. Cripps's pacifism reflected his Quakerism and during the war he helped to revive the Burford Friends' meeting, of which he remained a member (noted more for silence than speech) for the rest of his life. He was editor of 'The Countryman' from 1947 to 1971. In 1946 he began his forty-one years on Filkins parish council and was elected to the Witney rural district council; he was still a member at its demise in 1974. On 29 December 1936 he married Ursula Davy; they had four sons and two daughters. They were divorced in 1971 and Cripps married Ann Elizabeth Farwell, a journalist, on 14 August 1971. 
Cripps made 'The Countryman' an authoritative and influential voice for the countryside, as much concerned for employment, schools, shops, and transport as for conservation; the quarterly's circulation peaked at 88,895 in 1954. Backed by a talented and devoted staff, he found time to pursue the magazine's objectives through his work in local government. He chaired his district council from 1959 to 1962 and the Rural District Councils' Association from 1967 to 1970; he was appointed CBE for his services to local government in 1968, and was deeply involved in the campaign to 'keep local government local' before the changes of 1974. 
From 1970 to 1977 Cripps chaired the Countryside Commission, then at the height of its influence. With sympathies in both camps, he sought to reconcile farmers and conservationists. He persuaded ministers and civil servants, whom the demands of farming had dominated since 1945, to take countryside conservation more seriously. Under his chairmanship the commission offered a first tentative challenge to the prevailing orthodoxy that efficient farming is necessarily beautiful farming. In close alliance with the commission's forceful director, Reg Hookway, he achieved the settlement of national park administration in 1974. This compromise angered conservationists because it left the parks ultimately under local-authority control; but it proved a long-term success because it gave them their own staff and considerable autonomy. He was knighted in 1978. 
Cripps left his mark on many aspects of rural life and amenities. He served on the government-appointed committee in 1968 which ruled against rationalization of the public-path network; he was a notably awkward member of the defence lands committee in the early 1970s, refusing to join the majority in favour of military training on beautiful landscapes, and he produced the radical report on accommodation for gypsies for the government in 1976. Despite his early abandonment of party politics he remained a socialist and a believer in public ownership of land. In the 1980s this took practical form when he used the sale of a farmhouse on his Filkins property to finance the development of a redundant farmyard and buildings for light industrial and retail units. He served on many Oxfordshire bodies concerned with rural life, education, and voluntary work; and on such national organizations as the Council for the Preservation of Rural England and the Nature Conservancy. 
Despite his years in journalism and public life Cripps was neither an orator nor a flashing wordsmith. He spoke in an austere but compelling Quaker style and wrote similarly, often with difficulty but striving always for clarity and honesty of expression. He was a socialist active in rural affairs, in which leaders and opinion formers during his lifetime were overwhelmingly Conservative. He died of leukaemia on 9 August 1993 at his home, Fox House, Filkins, and is buried in Filkins cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51815


Cross, Joan Annie (1900-1993), singer and teacher, was born in London on 7 September 1900, and was adopted by an aunt and uncle. She was educated from 1913 at St Paul's Girls' School (where Gustav Holst was among her music teachers, and where she played in the first performance of Holst's 'St Paul's Suite') and Trinity College of Music, where, after studying the violin, she was taught singing by Dawson Freer, whose ability to establish firm vocal foundations she continued to praise to the end of her life. In 1923 she joined the chorus of Lilian Baylis's Old Vic, and by 1924 had graduated to principal status with, where Miss Baylis was concerned, a not untypically haphazard selection of leading roles, including Cherubino, Second Lady in 'The Magic Flute', Elisabeth in 'Tannhauser' (later alternating with Venus), Lola in 'Cavalleria Rusticana', both Mercedes and Frasquita in 'Carmen', and Alisa in 'Lucia di Lammermoor'. The title role in 'Aida' (alternating with the Priestess) preceded her biggest success to date in the role of Elsa in 'Lohengrin' (1928), learned as an emergency replacement in the space of ten days. Evidence of her ability to soar above the chorus in the finale of 'Lohengrin''s act I and, in the act II scene with Ortrud, to project tone as well as conveying the ecstatic side of Elsa's character, was captured in recordings made at a performance in October 1933 and published in a retrospective album entitled 'The Old Vic and Sadler's Wells'. 'Does the Wells public know its luck in having so rare a soprano?' wrote Richard Capell in the 'Daily Telegraph' that year. 
By the end of the 1920s Cross had added what became the basis of her repertory as a leading lyric soprano: Pamina, Donna Elvira, Mimi, Desdemona, Tatyana, Marguerite, Micaela, and Violetta, the last named after a full year of study. Capell wrote: 'Verdi's 'Traviata' was given last night at the Old Vic... with such a singer in the title role as must have amazed any casual visitor... who might happen not to be aware that the Old Vic has the luck to claim the services of one of the best lyric sopranos of the day.' In 1930 came Leonora in 'La forza del destino', of which role Francis Toye wrote in the 'Morning Post': 'Joan Cross, at her best, reached heights of vocal beauty and expressiveness that entitle her to rank among some of the best exponents of the art.' According to her erstwhile colleague Clive Carey (writing twenty-three years later in the magazine 'Opera'), in this role she 'matured from a promising singer to an operatic artist of first-rate potentialities'. 
The opportunity to realize those potentials came after the opening in 1931 of the Sadler's Wells Theatre, where the Old Vic's chief conductor, Charles Corri, was soon succeeded by Lawrance Collingwood, whose standards were high and who would influence much of the remainder of Joan Cross's life. Butterfly, Dido, and Antonia and Giulietta in a new production of 'The Tales of Hoffmann' soon followed, and in September 1931, after singing Pamina at a matinee at Sadler's Wells, she made an impromptu debut at Covent Garden as Mimi. 'The Times' wrote: 'She showed herself a credible Mimi, sympathetic but not too pathetic, who maintained in the bigger theatre the purity of line and subtle inflexions of tone which she employs on the smaller stage of the Old Vic and Sadler's Wells.' Her pre-war activities at Covent Garden were to be sporadic: Mimi, Elsa, Micaela (with Conchita Supervia as Carmen), and a single Desdemona opposite Lauritz Melchior in 1934 ('Better forgotten', she later said; 'We met for the first time on stage when I addressed him as 'Mio superbo guerrier'!'). At Sadler's Wells she created Arthur Benjamin's 'The Devil Take her!' (under Beecham) and sang Collingwood's 'Macbeth', missing the premiere because of illness; figured in revivals of Stanford's 'Travelling Companion' and Vaughan Williams's 'Hugh the Drover'; sang in the first British performances of Rimsky-Korsakov's 'Snow Maiden' and 'Tsar Saltan'; and added to her repertory Marenka in 'The Bartered Bride', Amelia in 'A Masked Ball', Donna Anna, Fiordiligi, and Rosalinda, and, less probably, Gilda and Nanetta. In the seasons immediately preceding the war she registered what were to date possibly her two greatest successes, whose nature suggested a future which was never realized. In December 1937, only days after the sudden death of Lilian Baylis, came the first performance of 'The Valkyrie', in which Joan Cross sang Sieglinde to great critical acclaim, and in March 1939 there followed 'Der Rosenkavalier' with her as the Marschallin. 'This and Sieglinde were her finest and most mature achievements', Clive Carey later wrote; and these roles pointed the direction for an international career which surely beckoned but which the advent of war in 1939 effectively prevented. 
Sadler's Wells was bombed during the blitz on London, and autumn 1940 saw a skeleton company embarking on a programme of touring, at first with productions so small that they could be fitted into a lorry, and in towns often hit by bombing, but later, as civilian life stabilized, of a more ambitious nature. Joan Cross was seen as the obvious successor to Lilian Baylis, and soon after the start of wartime touring, Tyrone Guthrie, director of the Old Vic and Sadler's Wells, appointed her manager of the opera company. Seasons alternated between the New Theatre in London's St Martin's Lane and provincial theatres all over the country (in sixty-nine different towns in five years), and by 1943 the company had grown sufficiently to undertake a highly successful revival of 'The Bartered Bride', followed by 'Cosi fan tutte' with Joan Cross as Fiordiligi. Her management was skilled enough to ensure that the company emerged from the war years in a solvent condition, something of a triumph for a manager singing roles in 'Dido and Aeneas' and 'The Beggar's Opera', as well as giving regular performances of Butterfly, Violetta, the Countess, and Mimi. 
The post-war years brought disappointments as well as triumphs for Joan Cross, and Sadler's Wells Theatre reopened with a mixture of the two. The premiere of Benjamin Britten's 'Peter Grimes' in June 1945 had Peter Pears in the title role and Joan Cross in the female lead of Ellen Orford, a role conceived by the composer specially for her. He drew on the compassion of a mature Violetta, harnessed the fire of Sieglinde, and reinvented the grand statement of the Marschallin in one great role to form the apogee of her career and the herald of the start of its last phase. Her choice, as manager, of 'Peter Grimes' can with hindsight be perceived not only as the beginning of a new era for British opera but also as a triumph for the Sadler's Wells ensemble itself, but in fact it disrupted the company, who felt the choice as baffling as the music. Within a year Peter Pears, Reginald Goodall (who conducted the new opera), Eric Crozier (who directed it), Anna Pollak, and Joan Cross herself had left the company. She was henceforth to sing on stage very little opera apart from new works by Benjamin Britten, all tailored to her particular talents. 
Glyndebourne, where Cross had rather surprisingly never sung before the war, was the scene of Britten's next two operas, 'The Rape of Lucretia' (1946) and 'Albert Herring' (1947), and the formation by Britten of the English Opera Group, which Cross joined. She sang respectively the Female Chorus and Lady Billows, the former a compassionate commentator on the brutal events of the story, the latter a comic representation of one side of her own character, a 'grande dame' of considerable splendour and panache. In 1947 she produced for the newly formed Covent Garden Opera 'Der Rosenkavalier' (but was sadly not asked to sing even a handful of performances of the Marschallin, her favourite role, which she had sung only seven times), and the same year sang Ellen Orford in a new production of 'Peter Grimes', a role which she had sung in Zurich in 1946 and was to repeat at Covent Garden in two more seasons. A late climax to her career came with Britten's coronation opera, 'Gloriana' (1953), whose premiere in front of the young Queen Elizabeth was not without controversy, but whose title role, like that of Ellen Orford in 'Peter Grimes', was composed with Joan Cross's qualities very much in mind. It was written in an easy soprano tessitura, but its demands on a singer's expressive resources ran the gamut from the domineering monarch in public to the sensitivity of a woman of experience in the scenes with Essex, taking in the humility of a ruler praying for guidance, the serenity of a queen confident in her subjects' affections, and the agony of a woman confronting a decision which will eliminate danger but with it her last emotional prop. These demands she met, fortified perhaps for the extensive dialogue of the last scene by her Mary Stuart a few years earlier in Tyrone Guthrie's radio production of Schiller's play. 
In 1954 Cross sang the last of her five Britten premieres when she was Mrs Grose in 'The Turn of the Screw', an important role but secondary none the less. She took the hint and the following year bade farewell to the stage, initially with the Countess in 'The Marriage of Figaro' at Covent Garden, a late backward glance at past Mozartian glories. 'Joan Cross's Countess... is a wonderful example of a character created 'through' the music', wrote Andrew Porter in 'Opera' magazine in July 1955; 'One cannot pretend that she sang her first aria well but thereafter schooling told; in many an ensemble passage, and particularly in 'Dove sono', the voice was beautifully placed, the tone often lovely. By handling Mozart's phrases as if they were precious objects, beautifully arranged, which the audience was to share in enjoying, she went to the heart of the music and the drama.' After her last Mrs Grose at London's Scala Theatre in September 1955, Desmond Shawe-Taylor wrote regretfully in 'Opera' (November 1955): 'the long narrative in the first act, in some ways the core of the whole work, was handled with such skill and subtlety, she was moreover in such fine voice.' 
Cross continued to work in the service of opera, but now as director, more often abroad (in the Netherlands, Scandinavia, and Canada) than in England, and as principal of the new Opera Studio, which she and Anne Wood had founded in 1948. About her work as a teacher, to which a large number of successful singers paid tribute, she said: 'I like to suggest... I've no patience or time unless there's talent... I do love talent! You can't teach people how to act; it must be in them. You can teach only the mechanics -- how to move, how to stand still.' Her time with the Opera Studio and its successor ended when she and Anne Wood resigned in 1964 after a dispute with the board, which may have accounted for her appointment as CBE in 1951 never being followed up by the damehood which much of the operatic world, though never that nebulous entity known as the establishment, believed she deserved. 
Joan Cross was a singer noted for subtle inflection of music and text rather than bold vocal assault, and for purity of singing line more than overwhelming vocal plenitude, and as an actress, for constant care for the development of character, in the manner of a stage play, rather than reliance on sheer physique, in the manner of film. She placed great emphasis as both performer and teacher on operatic craft, the matching of music and words, voice and movement, and, as well as a singer of real importance, she became an actress of consummate skill, in comedy as well as tragedy. Her place in English operatic history is substantiated not only by records -- although she was not a natural denizen of the studio -- but by more than a dozen premieres and British first performances in a career lasting over forty years. She remained a formidable though much loved presence into her nineties, an involved observer of the operatic scene, and a keen, though usually constructive, critic. She died at her home, Garrett House, Park Road, Aldeburgh, Suffolk, on 12 December 1993, following a stroke, and was buried in Aldeburgh on 17 December. As a young woman she had married James Armstrong, but the marriage did not last long and she seldom referred to it. She had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 51816


Cumming, (Felicity) Anne (1917-1993), writer and sexual adventurer, was born on 14 December 1917, at Thames Cottage, Thames Street, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, the daughter of Howard Cumming (1885-1957), captain in the Royal Flying Corps, timber merchant, and later a company director, and his wife, (Eileen) Norah, 'nee' Groves 
(later Rabeneck; 1895-1938)
. She had at least two brothers. Her grandfather was Sir Grimble Groves, brewery owner and Conservative MP for South Salford. She claimed descent from the medieval Scottish magnate Red Comyn. She spent her childhood on her father's farm in South Africa before boarding at Horsely Towers School in Kent after her parents' divorce. She came out as a debutante in 1935, during which year she lost her virginity on a park bench under the Eiffel Tower. She studied dance with a friend of Isadora Duncan in Paris and then drama at Dartington Hall with Mikhail Chekhov, the nephew of the playwright (who died in the arms of her Russian stepfather Lieve Rabeneck). Cumming also studied foreign languages in France and Germany. On 10 September 1938 she married Henry Landall Lyon Young ('b'. 1909), who had been brought up in Valparaiso, Chile, and was an aspirant playwright. He was supposedly a distant cousin of Elizabeth, later the queen mother, and author of 'Baroque Tales of Chile' (1963) and 'Regent of Paraguay' (1966). They had two daughters. Cumming, Young, and Chekhov travelled to the United States, where they hoped to set up a theatrical company, but Chekhov's death and the outbreak of the Second World War frustrated these plans. Cumming and Young continued to live in New York, where she modelled for 'Vogue' and 'Harper's Bazaar'. After wartime employment with British intelligence Cumming returned in 1944 to London. 
In 1948 Cumming eloped across Europe in an army surplus jeep with Richard Mason ('b'. 1919), whom she married later that year after divorcing Young. Mason, who had recently published his first novel, 'The Wind cannot Read' (1947), became celebrated as the author of 'The World of Suzie Wong' (1957). While working as a translator, interpreter, and courier for the British Council, Cumming befriended the writer Francis King in Greece. He found her 'an exhilarating companion, totally uninhibited in her talk and her behaviour', who joined him picking up 'eager sailors, soldiers and airmen' (King, 137). The atmosphere of expatriate male homosexuality was congenial to her. In 1952, while her husband was visiting the South Seas, she set off by herself for Marrakesh where she met the Swiss-Canadian painter, writer, and restaurateur Brion Gysin, who became her lifelong friend. She also knew William Burroughs and Paul and Jane Bowles. An intrepid and gleeful traveller, she had numerous sexual encounters with young Arab men while on a bus tour of the Sahara. She returned to her husband in Chelsea, but when in 1953 he left on a long Oriental business journey she decamped to Iran, where she had further amorous adventures. 
In 1955 Cumming separated amicably from Mason (they were later divorced); he and her first husband liked one another and were close friends. She settled in Rome, teaching English in the British Institute, and began a relationship with Beni Montresor (1926-2001), eight years her junior, who became a successful set and costume designer for films and opera. (In her memoirs he is referred to as Rudi or the Baron.) Montresor was the author of several books, including 'Cinderella: from the Opera' (1967) and 'Bedtime!' (1978). When Montresor abandoned Cumming in 1960 he gave her a gold ring inscribed 'Always and Never'; they remained devoted. In 1960 she left the British Institute to earn her living in Rome as a dialogue coach and publicist for film companies. Thereafter she used men as divertissements rather than as 'raisons d'etre'. She was a woman of tireless physical curiosity, for whom sexual acts were both agreeably stupefying and emotionally absorbing: 'Copulation is communication; and I want to be wanted' (Cumming, 'Love Habit', 18). 
After Montresor, Cumming had an intermittent twenty-year relationship with an Italian long-distance lorry driver, who provided problem-free sex, and with other men and boys of all classes, some of whom were primarily interested in other men. She also resumed her sexual 'tourism', and was gang-raped in Cairo in 1963. In 1965 she lived in Paris for a few months to write a novel, 'Beyond this Limit', about 'a homosexual who cannot love the men he sleeps with but who desperately loves a woman' (Cumming, 'Love Quest', 154). It was never finished. From 1968 she regularly visited New York where she ran a series of Chekhov theatrical workshops. She was also an occasional actress, appearing in 'The Girl who Couldn't Say No' as George Segal's mother in 1969. A publishing friend persuaded her to write a zestfully licentious account of her love life covering the decade after her fiftieth birthday. This was published as 'The Love Habit' (1977). A sequel, 'The Love Quest' (1991), describes her sexual tourism from 1952 until the early 1960s. The two books are often cheerfully raffish, but sometimes descend into gruesome particularity about men's bodies and desires. There are droll passages, but also wearying phases in both books. To publicize 'The Love Quest' Cumming was photographed topless in the 'Sunday Sport', which in turn elicited an invitation to appear as a dancer in Las Vegas. In the year of her death she appeared on television wearing only a pearl necklace, earrings, and hat in the world's first nude chat show. She revelled in colour, vulgarity, and vitality. 
In 1986 Cumming learned that she was HIV-positive and settled in London so as to benefit from the National Health Service. She preferred to keep her status confidential and she continued with her travels until her death. At her flat in Lisson Street she held a regular salon in which she sought to introduce young writers, actors, and designers to useful contacts. As a member of the 'nouveaux pauvres' she offered Marks and Spencer food on chipped porcelain bought in nearby Church Street market. Drunkenness bored her, so she served only tea poured from an enormous stained pot. She died of bronchopneumonia on 28 August 1993 at the London Lighthouse, a care centre for people with HIV and AIDS at 111-17 Lancaster Road, Kensington, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 51818


Cusack, Cyril James (1910-1993), actor, was born on 26 November 1910 in Durban, South Africa, the son of James Cusack, an Irish officer with the Natal mounted police, and his wife, Alice, 'nee' Cole, a Cockney music-hall dancer. After the break-up of his parents' marriage in 1916 Cusack spent a peripatetic childhood, initially in Ireland, touring with his mother and her actor-lover, Brefni O'Rourke. Having made his stage debut in Tipperary as Little Willie in 'East Lynne' (1916) he went on to play countless juvenile roles in melodramas staged in 'fit-ups' such as barns and pubs. He even portrayed a girl in 'Shot at Dawn' and the cat in 'Dick Whittington'. During a performance of the latter his tail became entangled in a roller curtain and he was 'left suspended in the air and had to be rescued by the second comedian' ('The Times', 28 July 1990). By this time he had already begun what turned out to be the longest screen career of any British-based performer. However, his debut in Fred O'Donovan's 'Knocknagow, or, The Homes of Tipperary' (1918) was hardly a model of realism, as the rudely healthy Cyril was cast as an evicted waif left desolate by the roadside. 
Yet, this 'glorious adventure' ('The Times', 8 Oct 1993) seriously disrupted Cusack's education, as he recalled in 'Every week in a different school', an essay in 'A paler shade of green: a unique study of the dominant expatriates of the world Irish arts scene' (1972). Speaking in a mixture of his mother's Cockney accent and O'Rourke's brogue, Cusack (who was also fluent in Gaelic) eventually settled into a council school on the Caledonian Road in north London, where he told his classmates 'how wonderful Ireland was, how there were Red Indians in Wicklow and how I had seen a lion near the mountains. I almost believed the stories myself. It was my incipient nationalism coming out' ('The Times', 28 July 1990). After returning to Ireland in the early 1920s he enrolled in the Dominican College at Newbridge, co. Kildare, and from there entered University College, Dublin, to read politics, modern history, and Roman law, with the intention of applying for the bar. However, his extra-curricular activities soon took precedence, as he published a volume of poetry and appeared in such plays as W. B. Yeats's 'The Pot of Broth'. 
It was clear, therefore, that acting was in Cusack's blood, as he recalled towards the end of his life: 'It always was. I could never get away from it. Sometimes I think acting is my 'first' nature, not my second' ('The Times', 28 July 1990). So he joined his mother and O'Rourke on their summer excursions to Norwich and Windsor, before making his London bow with a last-act cameo in Arnold Bennett's 'Milestones'. However, it was in Ireland that he found his feet, as he appeared frequently with his mother's company at the Queen's Theatre and toured with Jimmy O'Brien's troupe. His big break came with his debut at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin, in 1932. He played two small parts in A. P. Fanning's one-act piece 'Vigil', but the director listed him twice in the programme, as Cyril Cusack and Cyril O'Rourke. 
Over the next thirteen years, Cusack performed in sixty-five productions at the Abbey, although he also spent two seasons at the Gate Theatre, particularly impressing as Paris opposite Micheal Mac Liammoir in 'Romeo and Juliet'. His stock was also rising in London, with his efforts in 'Ah, Wilderness' (1936) and 'Thunder Rock' (1941) drawing critical acclaim. Yet it was with Irish drama that he was most closely associated. He excelled as Covey in Sean O'Casey's 'The Plough and the Stars' (1939), and rejected an offer of Hamlet in order to play Christy Mahon in J. M. Synge's 'The Playboy of the Western World' (1938). But it was his St Patrick's day performance as Dudebat, opposite Vivien Leigh in George Bernard Shaw's 'The Doctor's Dilemma', at the Haymarket in 1942, that made the most headlines. Having spent lunchtime sampling illicit whiskey with his stand-in, Cusack already felt unwell as the play began. By the scene in the artist's studio, he started misquoting his lines and was forced to improvise. Eventually he dried altogether and began delivering dialogue from 'The Playboy of the Western World'. The curtain was brought down and the stage manager sent out the equally inconvenienced understudy to complete the show. Next day, both Dudebats were fired by the formidable impresario Binkie Beaumont, and Cusack entered a twenty-year West End exile. 
In 1945 Cusack married the actress Maureen Margaret Kiely (died 1977); they had three daughters, Sinead, Sorcha, and Niamh, and two sons, Paul and Padraig. In the same year as his marriage Cusack severed his links with the Abbey, following a row over his insistence that a national theatre had a duty to tour the provinces. He had a spell managing the Gaiety Theatre, during which he premiered Synge's 'The Bishop's Bonfire' (1955). He also formed his own production company, and began appearing regularly in films to finance roving programmes of classical and Irish dramas. Lamenting the scarcity of Irish pictures, he mostly worked in England in such diverse projects as 'Odd Man Out' (1947), 'The Elusive Pimpernel' (1950), 'The Man who Never Was' (1956), and 'The Waltz of the Toreadors' (1962). 'In my film parts,' he said, 'I have concentrated on veracity of characterisation. In the last few years, I think my work in films has improved in some ways; it is more solid, less intuitive and perhaps technically better than it used to be' (Cusack, 30). Invariably cast in supporting roles, he effortlessly stole scenes with his customary economy and ease. Francois Truffaut, who directed him in 'Fahrenheit 451' (1966), wrote of him: 'Cyril Cusack is the most restless actor I have known. He is a man of good nature and mildness. He can play his scenes in so many styles; he can be baroque, malicious, lyrical, but he can never be terrifying. (Cusack, 24)' Perhaps the most telling description of his method came in a review of his performance in a 1988 Abbey production of Gorky's 'The Lower Depths' -- 'His touch is light like a feather, but it has the impact of an electric volt' ('The Times', 8 Oct 1993). 
The 1960s proved something of a golden age, which Cusack labelled his 'second apprenticeship' ('The Times', 8 Oct 1993). In 1961 he not only won the International Critics' Award as the best actor of the season in 'Arms and the Man' and 'Krapp's Last Tape' (both 1960), but also premiered 'The Temptation of Mr O' (1961), a play based on Kafka's 'The Trial', which he wrote in rhythmical prose and Dublinese. Two years later he returned to the London stage as Mobius in the Royal Shakespeare Company's Aldwych production of Durrenmatt's 'The Physicists' (1963), and helped restore Boucicault's 'The Shaughraun' to the international repertory with his 1968 performance as Conn. Whether on film in 'The Taming of the Shrew' (1967), 'Galileo' (1968), 'The Day of the Jackal' (1973), and 'My Left Foot' (1989), or on stage as Fluther Good in 'The Plough and the Stars' (1977), and The Inquisitor in 'Saint Joan' (1984), he continued to garner acclaim. Particularly admired was his Chebutykin in Chekhov's 'The Three Sisters' (1990), which co-starred his daughters Sinead, Sorcha, and Niamh. His wife Maureen having died in 1977, in 1979 he married Mary Rose, with whom he had a daughter, Catherine. 
Despite plans to concentrate on writing, Cusack persisted in acting almost to the end of his life, appearing with his grandson Sam in 'Danny, the Champion of the World' (1991). He died of motor neurone disease at 41 Burlington Lane, Chiswick, London, on 7 October 1993. He was survived by his second wife, Mary, and by his six children. A memorial mass was concelebrated at the Church of Corpus Christi, Covent Garden, on 4 November 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 51825


Davis, Sir John Henry Harris (1906-1993), businessman, was born on 10 November 1906 at 148 Monega Road, East Ham, Essex, the son of Sidney Myring Davis, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Harris (christened John Henry, Davis later adopted his mother's maiden name as a further forename). He was educated at the City of London School, which he left in 1924 to become a chartered secretary. In later years he liked to refer to himself as a chartered accountant, but there is no record that he ever qualified as such. 
Davis married his first wife, Kathleen Blanche Mary Coryn ('b'. 1904/5), daughter of Bertram Coryn, a merchant, on 29 November 1930. This was the first of six marriages, though in later life Davis preferred to omit two of them -- the first and the third -- from the records (he also gave a false date for the second marriage). With Kathleen Coryn he had a son, Michael, and a daughter, Barbara. On 23 January 1937 he married Joan Grace Buckingham ('b'. 1916), daughter of Frank Henry Buckingham, a clerk in the Paymaster-General's Office; they had a son, Christopher. On 22 December 1941 he married Jeanne Beryl Stephens (1918-1988), daughter of William James Stephens, a company director; this marriage lasted only three months. His fourth wife was Marion Louise ('b'. 1918/19), daughter of Thomas Sydney Gaved, an antique dealer. She had already changed her surname to Davis by the time of their marriage, on 21 April 1947; they had two daughters, Janet and Susan. On 3 March 1954 Davis married Dinah Sheridan (1920-2012), the film actress and star of 'Genevieve', daughter of James Arthur Sheridan, a photographer, and former wife of Jimmy Hanley, the actor. His final marriage, on 5 March 1976, was to Felicity Mary Rutland ('b'. 1937/8), a company director, divorcee, and the daughter of Colonel Mathew Arnold Drew, army officer. All Davis's marriages except the last ended in divorce. 
In 1932 Davis joined the British Thomson-Houston Electrical Group as an accountant. Even at this early stage of his career he was gaining a reputation for ruthlessness; it is said that one employee of the company killed himself as a result of Davis's abrasive methods. Thomson-Houston was a leading manufacturer of cinema equipment, much of it supplied to the Odeon theatre chain founded by Oscar Deutsch. In 1938 Davis joined Deutsch as his chief accountant. In 1942, following Deutsch's untimely death, the Odeon chain was absorbed by the rapidly expanding Rank empire, well on its way to becoming the dominant force in the British film industry. Davis was appointed managing director of Odeon, and in 1946 became managing director of the whole Rank Organisation under the chairmanship of flour millionaire and devout Methodist (Joseph) Arthur Rank. Over the next few years Davis's power within the combine grew steadily. Rank, a well-meaning but rather naive man with scant knowledge of film-making, looked increasingly to his right-hand man to take the tough decisions, a role for which Davis's temperament ideally fitted him. He too had little knowledge of the movie industry, nor much taste for it; but he understood money, and he understood figures. 
With his austere financial training, Davis regarded the risky, unpredictable business of film-making with implacable mistrust. Film-makers, in his eyes, were mostly temperamental prima donnas, and financially irresponsible, while actors were spoilt children who needed to be kept in line. One of his first goals at Rank was to oust Filippo del Giudice, the flamboyant moving spirit behind Two Cities Films, makers of such classics as 'In Which We Serve', 'The Way Ahead', 'Henry V', and 'Odd Man Out'. Ebullient, extravagant, convivial, a great nurturer of talent, del Giudice represented everything Davis detested in the film world and was determined to expunge from the Rank operation. In 1949, soon after del Giudice's dismissal, the Rank Organization hit a financial crisis, with losses of $16 million. Davis applied to the National Provincial Bank, who lent the money but in return insisted on a new regime of financial stringency. J. Arthur Rank, increasingly preoccupied with the family flour business after the death of his elder brother, withdrew from the day-to-day running of the organization, leaving Davis in effective control. 
For the next quarter of a century, Davis was by far the most powerful man in the British film industry. His attitude to film-making was starkly simple: it was -- or should be -- exactly like any other manufacturing process. 'The cinemas are the retail trade', he explained, 'the distributors are the wholesale, and the film-makers are the equivalent of the factory' (private information). Following this principle he cracked down on anything he regarded as waste, imposed a ceiling of $150,000 on feature-film budgets, and instituted an internal accounting and supply system called Production Facilities Ltd, known to disaffected film-makers as 'Piffle'. Even Davis's most severe critics -- whom he never lacked -- agreed that he pulled the Rank Organization back from the brink of disaster and re-established it on a sound financial footing. It was a feat that few other men could have achieved. But some would add that while he saved Rank, it was at the cost of its soul. In place of the charismatic del Giudice he installed a former exhibitor, the American Earl St John, as head of production. Amiable and bibulous, terrified of displeasing his boss, St John was contemptuously regarded as Davis's yes-man. Sensing how the wind was blowing, several of the company's most talented film-makers, including David Lean, Carol Reed, and the symbiotic team of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, decamped to more aesthetically minded producers such as Alexander Korda. With the departure of these and other gifted artists, the quality of the Rank cinematic output during the 1950s declined steadily towards mediocrity. This rarely seemed to trouble Davis, who favoured the production-line style of film-making: films devised to formula, whose costs and yield could be readily predicted -- the 'Doctor' series, the 'Carry on' films, and the comedies of Norman Wisdom. Wisdom, indeed, was one of the few actors for whom Davis ever expressed admiration, describing him as 'a great artist' (private information). 
Occasionally, though, Davis showed signs of what the critic Alexander Walker called 'a hankering for quality' ('The Independent', 3 July 1993). At his instigation Rank ventured into more ambitious areas of film-making, with expensive international stars cast in storylines aimed to capture worldwide audiences. Unfortunately, they rarely did. Few of Rank's big-budget ventures even recouped their costs and many of them, such as 'Ferry to Hong Kong' (1958) and 'The Singer not the Song' (1960), flopped disastrously, to the malicious amusement of the rest of the industry. It may have been films like these that Davis had in mind when, asked years later just what he did on Rank's production side, he responded ruefully, 'Far too much' (ibid.). Such failures confirmed Davis in his belief that the best policy the Rank Organization could adopt towards film production was to extricate itself as smoothly as possible. 
During the 1950s and 1960s Rank concentrated increasingly on the distribution and exhibition side of the industry while busily diversifying into other, supposedly more dependable, areas of activity. The company's famous logo, the man with the gong, came to adorn ten-pin bowling, ballroom dancing, gramophone records, service stations, hotels, catering services, bingo -- and, above all, photocopying. Inspiration for the company's most lucrative sideways move came from a Rank engineer, Tom Law, who brought glowing reports of a copying process developed in America by the Haloid Corporation, but Davis deserves credit for embracing the venture with such alacrity. Rank Xerox was launched in 1956; by 1969 it was contributing 90 per cent of the group's pre-tax profits. 
Not all Rank's diversification projects proved so profitable, however. Some, such as the music label, failed badly, and when this happened the luckless executives in charge could expect little mercy from Davis. JD, as he was universally known in the organization, accepted no excuses for failure, and the casualty rate among Rank personnel was legendary. Fridays were particularly feared: executives returning from lunch would find on their desks a curt note, signed JD, telling them to collect a month's salary in lieu and be out within the hour, no reason given. So numerous were those summarily fired by Davis that they formed a club, the Rank Outsiders. 
Davis ruled by fear, in a style which 'The Spectator' of 27 September 1975 compared to that of Josef Stalin. Those entering his office at South Street, in London's Mayfair, would find him ensconced at a high, massive desk at the further end, and had to walk 40 feet under his baleful gaze -- a technique borrowed from Mussolini. When the director Lewis Gilbert was making 'Reach for the Sky' (1956) a senior Rank executive came to tell him that Davis wanted a scene excised. Gilbert refused, and was amazed to see the man burst into tears, sobbing, 'But you 'must'! You don't know what he'll do to me!' (private information). Not even leading film stars were safe from Davis's wrath. The star of 'Reach for the Sky', Kenneth More, was Britain's biggest box-office attraction during the 1950s. About to be loaned out to play a lead role in Carl Foreman's wartime action film 'The Guns of Navarone' (1961), More got drunk at a Rank Christmas dinner and passed some unguarded remarks. Davis banned him from appearing in 'Navarone', and More's film career never recovered. 
Although Davis was vindictive and arrogant, no one questioned his integrity. He never went back on his word, and a verbal agreement with him was as secure as a written contract. And while his harshness was notorious, his numerous acts of charity, especially to colleagues who had fallen on hard times, were less well known. Even film-makers sometimes experienced his generosity. When Richard Attenborough was struggling to find backing for 'Gandhi' (1982), he was surprised to receive a small but useful sum from Davis as a personal gift -- though the Rank boss characteristically added that the project was an utter waste of time, as the world knew nothing of Gandhi and cared less. 
During the week, Davis lived at the Dorchester Hotel, a hundred yards from South Street. Tireless and workaholic, he was invariably at his desk by 7.30 a.m., and rarely left before 8.00 p.m. at night. In a typical year he would travel 60,000 miles visiting far-flung outposts of the Rank empire. He expected similar dedication from his employees, along with scrupulous timekeeping. 'Punctuality', he once remarked, 'is being ten minutes early' (private information). In appearance he was thickset and bullet-headed, with slightly protuberant blue eyes whose cold stare intimidated many. The film-maker Roy Boulting, no admirer, described him as looking 'like a malevolent pork butcher' (private information). 
When J. Arthur Rank retired in 1962, Davis took over as chairman of the organization. He was knighted in 1971. Under his chairmanship the organization accelerated its withdrawal from film production, a policy that had a devastating effect on the British film industry as a whole. His achievement was inexorable and startlingly absolute. In 1949, the year when Davis gained effective control of Rank, the company produced 67 feature films, two-thirds of the British industry's output. In 1977, the last year of his chairmanship, the Rank Organization financed not a single film. 
Age scarcely mellowed Davis. The rate of attrition among his underlings never abated, and he openly relished his formidable reputation. 'I eat managing directors for breakfast', he once remarked ('The Times', 29 May 1993). In 1975 he fired his second in command, Graham Dowson, when Dowson jilted his long-term mistress. The resultant row, along with some unimpressive profit figures, hit the headlines and loosened Davis's hold over the Rank trustees, who had hitherto supported him unquestioningly. (It was also said to have cost him his expected peerage, since Dowson was a friend of the then prime minister, Harold Wilson.) In 1977 Davis was persuaded to step down as chairman, but he appointed himself Rank's president for life -- too optimistically, as it proved; in 1983 he was ousted from his post and he retired in dudgeon to his 600 acre estate near Lingfield in Surrey, where he kept a dairy herd, made cheese, and liked to drive a tractor. 
Davis sold his farm in 1986, when tractor driving became too risky for an eighty-year-old, and moved to Selwood Terrace in Brompton, west London. In his later years he took up religion, becoming a 'born-again' Christian, and regularly attended Holy Trinity, Brompton. His work for the Westminster Abbey Appeal Fund earned him a CVO in 1985. He died of bronchopneumonia in a private nursing home, Beaumont House, Beaumont Street, Westminster, London, on 27 May 1993, his wife Felicity surviving him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51827


Dawson, Leslie (1931-1993), comedian, was born on 2 February 1931 in Thornton Street, Collyhurst, Manchester, the only child of Leslie Dawson (1905-1970), bricklayer, and his wife, Julia ('c'.1914-1957), daughter of David and Ellen Nolan. A small, chubby, solitary child, he grew up in some poverty in a Manchester slum. He first sought to make others laugh to stop himself being bullied at school, Moston Lane elementary, where what would become the distinguishing characteristic of his comedy -- his sensitivity to the humour inherent in words themselves -- was nurtured by a sympathetic teacher. At fourteen he began work in the drapery department of a co-operative store and he was thereafter successively an apprentice electrician, a champion jitterbug dancer, a soldier, a pianist in a Parisian bordello, an insurance representative, a local journalist, and a vacuum-cleaner salesman. His career in the last of these professions was terminated shortly after he walked on stage to compere the strip show in which he was moonlighting to see his manager in the front row of the audience. 
Dawson was then performing principally as a comic pianist and he was initially discovered in the early 1950s by Max Wall, who paid for him to have singing lessons; a fellow pupil was Julie Andrews. His first foray into the comedy theatres of London met with little success, and after a spell washing dishes in a Lyons Corner House, he retreated in frustration to Manchester. The turning point of his career came in a trawlermen's club in Hull in 1956. More than usually fortified by drink, Dawson found himself unable to perform his piano routine and instead began to give vent to his weariness at life. The comic persona that emerged was a self-deprecating pessimist whose ill treatment by his wife and his mother-in-law spawned a ready line in cynical patter. Failure was his stock-in-trade, and his constant expectation. 
Dawson's humour had its roots in music-hall, the exaggerations of seaside postcards, and a north country world of clogs, shawls, and matronly mill workers that in truth had vanished half a century before. The jokes he told were no more recent either, but Dawson carried them off effortlessly, in part because he gave the impression of not expecting anyone to laugh, and because his lugubrious Lancastrian delivery, laced with pathos and topped with an unexpected punchline, was genuinely funny. Misogyny was a staple of his repertory, the humour saved from unpleasantness by its absurdity. Thus, 'The wife's mother has things many men desire: muscles and a duelling scar', or, 'I'm not saying the wife's ugly, but every time she puts her make-up on, the lipstick backs into the tube.' Dawson derived particular inspiration for this strand of comedy from W. C. Fields. He breathed new life into what was essentially a traditional stand-up routine by garlanding his humour with picaresque verbal peregrinations. He had an autodidact's relish of language: 'I was vouchsafed this missive from the gin-sodden lips of a pock-marked lascar in the arms of a frump in a Huddersfield bordello.' The sight of this ornate speech emerging from a face not inaccurately described by its owner as resembling 'a bulldog sucking piss off a nettle' was both incongruous and irresistible. 
Dawson steadily built a following in the theatres of the north of England during the 1960s, and he then rapidly achieved national recognition after television appearances on 'Opportunity Knocks' and 'Blackpool Night Out'. In 1968 he was given his own series by Yorkshire Television, 'Sez Les'. It ran for eight years before he moved to the BBC to host 'The Les Dawson Show'. His most notable creation in these programmes was, with Roy Barraclough, Cissie and Ada, a pair of stout Lancashire housewives. Much of their time was spent 'mimo-ing' to each other, the northern practice of mouthing vocabulary relating to unmentionably delicate parts of the body or the act of reproduction. Dawson also demonstrated his ability to pull his chin over his nose, the legacy of a broken jaw sustained in a fight. 
Dawson's career faltered a little in the early 1980s, despite his creation of what became a well-known troupe of overweight female dancers, the Roly Polys. It was with some reluctance that in 1984 he agreed to succeed Terry Wogan as the host of a game show, 'Blankety Blank', but the programme's inanity proved the perfect target for his subversive humour. In an age when television was rarely held in contempt Dawson gleefully insulted the studio audience ('Good evening, culture hunters'), mocked the celebrity guests ('I've got a picture of you on my mantlepiece; it keeps the children away from the fire'), and derided the cheapness of the prizes. 
Despite his success, Dawson hoped to take on straight acting roles, but in fact he was at his best when he did not have to submerge his personality beneath that required by a part. In the mid-1970s he appeared in a trilogy of plays by Alan Plater, 'The Loner', and in 1991 was a centenarian Argentine matriarch in the black farce 'Nona'. He was an avid reader and he collected a library of several thousand books at his home, Garth House, Islay Road, Lytham St Anne's. He himself wrote several novels, mainly homages to his favourite authors, such as 'Well Fared my Lovely' (1992), a pastiche of Raymond Chandler. The majority of his output was, however, over-written and self-consciously literary. 
Dawson married, on 25 June 1960, Margaret Rose Plant ('c'.1940-1987). Despite the nature of much of his act, he was a proud husband and was overjoyed when, after enduring several miscarriages, they had a son and two daughters. He was devastated by his wife's early death in 1987, but was married again, to the much younger Tracy Roper, in 1989. They had a daughter. A heavy man with too great a fondness for cigarettes and alcohol, Dawson died on 10 June 1993 while receiving treatment for a heart complaint at St Joseph's Hospital, Manchester, and was buried on the 16th. A service of thanksgiving for his life was held in Westminster Abbey on 23 February 1994, attended by more than 2000 guests. 


@@@@@


doc= 51829


Denham, Henry Mangles (1897-1993), naval officer and author, was born on 9 September 1897 at 7 Kenton Avenue, Harrow, Middlesex, the son of Henry Mangles Denham, civil engineer, and his wife, Helen Clara, 'nee' Lowndes. He joined the navy as a cadet in 1910, going to the Royal Naval College at Osborne and Dartmouth. He went to sea at the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, joining the pre-dreadnought battleship 'Agamemnon', and served in her in the Dardanelles campaign, commanding a steam picket boat during the landings at Suvla Bay in August 1915. He later published his diaries and notes from this period, 'Dardanelles: a Midshipman's Diary, 1915-16' (1981). After service in the destroyers 'Racoon' and 'Sylph', he was one of the young officers sent by the Admiralty to Cambridge. He went up to Magdalene College in 1919 for what he recalled as one of the happiest years of his life. 
In 1920 Denham served in the battle cruiser 'Renown' during the prince of Wales's cruise to Australia and New Zealand. He then spent two years in the Rhine flotilla commanding a small armed motor launch as part of the Rhine army of occupation. Next he served in the battleship 'Centurion' in the Mediterranean before going to Austria to learn German. On 3 May 1924 he married Estelle Margaret Sibbald 
(Madge; 1898/9-1979)
, daughter of Charles Sibbald Currie, of independent means. There were one son and two daughters of the marriage. Following his marriage, Denham was a divisional officer in the boys' training ship 'Impregnable' at Devonport from 1924 to 1926 and was then invited by Admiral Sir Osmond Brock, commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, to be his flag lieutenant. In 1927 he went to the Mediterranean for more than five years, serving in the fleet flagships 'Queen Elizabeth' and 'Warspite' as boats officer and as 'snotties' nurse', in charge of the midshipmen. In 1937 he was appointed executive officer of the new light cruiser 'Penelope' and served in her during the Spanish Civil War and the Munich crisis. 
Denham first joined naval intelligence in 1939, when he created an 'information section', recruiting civilians from many walks of life to gather intelligence about enemy and potential enemy coastlines through discreet surveys by yachtsmen and disguised fishermen. He was then appointed naval attache in Copenhagen and arrived in the Danish capital on new year's day 1940. Hearing of increased German mine-sweeping activity in the Great Belt, he went down to the coast to look and he was actually sitting on the beach with a pair of binoculars on 7 April when the German cruiser 'Blucher' and other ships passed by. Denham hurried to signal the Admiralty that it was probable that the Germans were about to move against Norway. But his warning, like other intelligence pointing the same way, was ignored, and the German landings, forty-eight hours later, caught the Home Fleet off balance. When the Germans entered Copenhagen, Denham and the rest of the legation staff went by special train to Ostend and thence to London. He was then appointed naval attache in Stockholm, where he arrived early in June 1940 to find himself plunged into a diplomatic furore over four destroyers which the Swedish navy had bought from Italy and which had reached the Faeroes, where they were illegally seized by the British. Denham's tactful handling of the head of the Swedish navy defused a tense situation but Great Britain had to pay 1 million Swedish kronor in damages. 
It was Denham who first warned the Admiralty by 'most immediate' signal on 20 May 1941 that 'two large warships', escorted by destroyers and aircraft, had been sighted at sea in the Kattegat off Goteborg that afternoon. They proved to be the German battleship 'Bismarck' and the heavy cruiser 'Prinz Eugen', about to sail on their Atlantic sortie. Denham heard the news from the Norwegian military attache, Colonel Roscherlund, but doubted its authenticity. It seemed to him unlikely that the sighting could have been reported so quickly and he gave it only a modest reliability grading. But the German ships had indeed been sighted and reported by a Swedish cruiser. Denham's signal set in train the dramatic series of events which led to the destruction of 'Bismarck' on 27 May. Denham was gratified to receive an Admiralty acknowledgement of the crucial part his signal had played. Through such friends as Colonel Bjornstjerna, the director of Swedish combined intelligence, and Ebbe Munck, the Danish Arctic explorer and journalist, Denham was able to gather many other valuable pieces of information. He also played an important part in helping George Binney to organize the smuggling of special steels, ballbearings, and tools to England. 
The Swedes were always suspicious of Denham and kept a close watch on him. At dinner in his flat one evening a noise was heard overhead. A man was discovered in the loft, eavesdropping with a microphone. The Swedes were much impressed, however, when, in a dark period for the allies, they heard that Denham had sent a telegram to England, ordering a yacht to be built for him to sail after the war. In 1945 Denham was appointed CMG, a rare award for a naval officer in the Second World War. He also received decorations from the Dutch, the Danes, and the Norwegians. Even the Swedes -- though they tapped his telephone, bugged his flat, and tried constantly to have him expelled as 'persona non grata' -- offered him a decoration which the British government refused him permission to accept. 
After retiring from the navy in 1947 Denham was able to indulge his love of sailing, and he embarked on another career as a nautical travel writer. He published a series of 'Sea Guides', 'The Aegean' (1963); 'The Eastern Mediterranean' (1964); 'The Adriatic' (1967); 'The Tyrrhenian Sea' (1969); 'The Ionian Islands to Rhodes' (1972); 'Southern Turkey, the Levant and Cyprus' (1973); and 'The Ionian Islands to the Anatolian Coast' (1982). These were a most readable blend of practical seamanship, navigational tips, history, and mythology. In 1981 he published the diary he had kept (contrary to regulations) as a midshipman in the Dardanelles, containing many caustic remarks about his senior officers. His war memoirs, 'Inside the Nazi Ring: a Naval Attache in Sweden, 1940-1945', appeared in 1984. 
As a naval attache, Denham was outstanding. With his experience of 'Renown''s royal cruise and as a flag lieutenant, he was socially very accomplished. With his height and his fine-drawn features, he looked like a distinguished diplomat. Urbane and discreet, he made friends easily and had a gift for making and keeping contacts. He was a member of the Royal Automobile and Royal Cruising clubs, and of the Royal Yacht Squadron. He died at his home, 8 Carlyle Square, Chelsea, London, on 15 July 1993, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his son and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 51834


Dillon, Agnes Joseph Madeline (1903-1993), bookseller, was born on 8 January 1903 at 4 Westcroft Villas, Cricklewood, London, the third of the four daughters and fifth of the six children of Joseph Thomas Dillon, company secretary, and his wife, Teresa Joseph, 'nee' McNale, schoolteacher. Her younger sister was Carmen Dillon (1908-2000), film art director. Their parents defied Edwardian convention by ensuring that all their children, boys and girls, had a good education -- an expensive business. There was little money to spare, but the children were encouraged to be adventurous high achievers, and to 'plough their own furrow'. After the older brother was killed in the First World War and the second left for India, followed by the oldest sister, who became a Carmelite nun, the three youngest Dillon children -- Tess, Una, as she was always called, and Carmen -- became the focus of their parents' ambition. Una, dazzled by Tess's first-class degree in physics, mistakenly followed her sister to Bedford College, London, but scraping through her science examinations 'by the skin of my teeth' (Grove) convinced her that she was no academic. She accepted a post with the Central Association for Mental Welfare (later MIND); she was soon organizing successful bookstalls on its behalf, and found herself drawn to the pleasurable world of publishing and publishers. Convinced that she had found her niche she left her job, determined to buy a Bloomsbury bookshop, 9 Store Street. Unfortunately the owner, Ronald Burns, did not wish to sell. A year later her persistence paid off and Burns accepted her offer of $800. Now in her middle thirties, with no retail experience, and with loans of $600 from her father and $200 from a friend, Dillon found herself the owner of a run-down bookshop with little stock and few customers. 
Dillon quickly established herself as a formidable businesswoman, becoming a familiar sight flying round London on an old bicycle -- a tweed-suited Valkyrie determined to fulfil a customer's order within eight hours. Her philosophy, that 'trade follows the book' ('Independent'), proved sound, as did her insistence on stocking academic books alongside general subjects. She disliked specialization, believing that it stifled curiosity. Her instinct, as always, was impeccable. The small shop proved a magnet for bibliophiles and writers such as C. Day Lewis and the poet John Betjeman, who became friends as well as customers. 
In 1939 Dillon ignored advice to close her business. The total evacuation of London University and Froebel Training College was, like her bomb-shattered shop, seen as no more than a slight inconvenience. Hundreds of packing-cases were used to transport books to customers who had moved out to Cardiff, Leicester, and Knebworth House, while university library trolleys transferred her stock to an empty shop opposite in a seemingly never-ending wagon-train of books, old and new. Despite paper shortages and bombing raids, Dillon's Bookshop continued to serve the needs of London readers. 
The war over, Dillon reached a watershed in her life. She needed to expand her business if it was to survive and if she was to emulate her sisters' success in their chosen fields; Tess was now head of physics at Queen Elizabeth College, London, and Carmen had left the Architectural Association to become one of Britain's first women film art directors. Una Dillon set her sights on the newly instituted teacher-training courses, and her shop soon became an educational Mecca for Commonwealth students. Further expansion seemed impossible when a proposed partnership, with London University, Dillon, and another bookseller, fell through; the row of shops in Torrington Place, next to Gower Street, acquired by the university after the war, remained tantalizingly empty. Then in 1956, quite unexpectedly, the principal of the university, Dillon's friend Sir Douglas Logan, urged the university to approach Dillon again. She used her stock and goodwill to purchase a minority share on the understanding that the shop bore her name. By the time she retired eleven years later, Dillon's University Bookshops Ltd had an annual turnover of over $1 million and an enviable worldwide reputation. 
Even in retirement Dillon's enthusiasm and commitment to the work of booksellers never waned. She remained on the board of Dillon's until 1977, when the university sold to Pentos. One of the founders of the Charter Group of the Booksellers' Association, she campaigned to keep the 'protective' net book agreement, and assisted the British Council with the low-priced book scheme for British overseas books. A Roman Catholic, art lover, inveterate traveller, and gifted musician, for many years she was organist at St James's, Spanish Place. She was awarded an honorary MA in 1965 by London University, and three years later was appointed CBE for her services to bookselling. Although remarkably sanguine about her achievements, she found comparisons with Miss Christina Foyle, who 'inherited' her empire, odious. She also loathed the modern title Ms, which seemed to encapsulate for her an alien and impersonal London far removed from the halcyon days of childhood and pre-war Britain. 
None of the sisters married, and in 1985 Una and Carmen Dillon left their Kensington High Street mansion flat, after forty-four years, for a Victorian villa and the respectability of Hove; they were preceded by twenty packing-cases of books. Una Dillon died at the Victoria Nursing Home, 96 The Drive, Hove, Sussex, on 4 April 1993, of generalized atherosclerosis and terminal bronchopneumonia; her body was cremated. Her sister Carmen survived her. 


@@@@@


doc= 51836


Dobson, Sir Richard Portway (1914-1993), businessman, was born on 11 February 1914, at 64 Coldharbour Road, Bristol, in a family of four sons and one daughter of John Frederic Dobson (1875-1947), professor of Greek at Bristol University, and his wife, Dina, elder daughter of Harry Harvey Portway, gentleman, of Bois Hall, Halstead, Essex. Dobson was educated at Clifton College and at King's College, Cambridge. On graduating he joined the British-American Tobacco Company (BAT), in which he was to spend the greater part of his life as a businessman. He went almost immediately to China, which was at that time the most lucrative market for the company, and he remained there until late 1940. 
BAT had been formed in 1902, to achieve a division of world markets between Imperial Tobacco and American Tobacco. The American James Buchanan Duke was chairman of BAT from its formation to 1923, when he was succeeded by Sir Hugo Cunliffe-Owen, who remained in that post until 1945, when he became titular president. A Supreme Court judgment in 1911 had forced American Tobacco to sell its interest in BAT and by 1915 British interests held a majority of BAT shares. Cunliffe-Owen visited China in 1923 and created autonomous regional units of BAT (China) Ltd, designed to isolate the effects of localized difficulties from the business as a whole. He also negotiated at ministerial level on taxation and trading matters. After the communist takeover in 1949 BAT's Chinese interests were nationalized, having incurred strong nationalist criticism. 
Dobson gave a breathless and at times rather jejune account of his time in China in 'China Cycle', published in 1946 by Macmillan in their 'Centenary Books' series and awarded a supplementary prize of $100 in the non-fiction category. The dust-wrapper referred to Dobson's 'robust, cheerful and friendly personality' and these qualities would have been essential to endure the hardships and dangers of 'getting out in the field' in a territory as vast and diverse as China, with an infrastructure at that time so incomplete as to render travel over long distances a dangerous as well as unpredictable activity. To these inherent problems were added those created by the Sino-Japanese War, but even in that context BAT's target was always 'business as usual' (Dobson, 56). Dobson described the cigarette trade in China as very active and complex (ibid., 14), highly competitive, and only marginally profitable for its participants, from the supplying company down to the street-hawker, selling single cigarettes. Something of Dobson's boisterousness, which led to the famous gaffe which marked his later departure from British Leyland, will be found in 'China Cycle', although it has to be read in the context of its times: 1930s attitudes expressed in the subsequent wartime situation. Strongly critical of what he called the Asiatic 'disease of resignation' (ibid., 50), he advised the foreigner 'never [to] go further [towards the Chinese] than a bow and a smile and a shake of the hand' (ibid., 49), although his own account shows him to have been less remote than his advice suggests. Dobson considered that such Eurasians as those of Portuguese origin 'drift with the stream', although he was sufficiently fair to mention a few exceptions. 
At the end of October 1940 Dobson prevailed on BAT to allow him to enlist, and after a voyage of eleven weeks he reached the United Kingdom. The process of acceptance as a trainee pilot in the RAF was lengthy, but in November 1941 Dobson departed for South Africa, for the training overseas for which he had opted. While there, he was critical of the treatment of the African population by the white community, but came to consider that 'the South African native in general cannot be compared, for intelligence, industry and virility, with the Chinese' (Dobson, 214). Active service finally came for Dobson as a Spitfire pilot with the rank of flight lieutenant, in the Italian campaign and then in the Far East. After the war, he rejected the idea of joining the Indian Civil Service and returned to BAT in 1946. On 3 May the same year, at Holy Trinity Church, Kensington, he married Emily Margaret (Betty) Carver, widow, the daughter of James Russell Herridge, chartered accountant; there was one daughter from her previous marriage. 
Dobson worked for BAT in China and Rhodesia, and then at its London head office, where he rose to board level in 1955. He became deputy chairman in 1962, vice-chairman in 1968, and chairman in 1970, completing his life's work with BAT as president from 1976 to 1979. During these three decades, as Dobson rose to, and wielded, power, BAT prospered, often in a difficult economic and political climate. Not only was it necessary to adjust to such a major loss as that of the company's China business, but diversification of activity had to be embraced. BAT was over-dependent on a single product, especially as opposition to smoking on health grounds became a force to be reckoned with. Dobson himself made a point of posing for the camera with cigarette or pipe prominently in view and he had little time for medical or other criticism of BAT's activity. His management style as board chairman has been described as 'essentially that of a team leader, practising an 'open-door' policy' ('The Times', 27 Oct 1993). Criticism of BAT's activity, however, would not be tolerated by Dobson, whose reaction could be 'testy' (ibid.), and he firmly adhered to any course of action he had decided on. As Dobson had risen in the BAT hierarchy, the company took steps to reduce its heavy reliance on tobacco. In the 1960s and 1970s it acquired paper and packaging companies, such as Wiggins Teape, perfume and fragrance houses, such as Lentheric, and department stores. This diversity of interests led to a change of name to BAT Industries in 1976. 
In February 1976, following the death of Sir Ronald Edwards, the non-executive chairman of the ailing vehicle manufacturer British Leyland (BL), Dobson, who had been awarded a knighthood in the new year's honours, accepted an invitation to take on the post. His eventual successor at BL, Michael Edwardes, chairman of Chloride, warned him at the time that the post as constituted was unlikely to work, and so it proved. Dobson's resignation eighteen months later appeared to be the result of some injudicious remarks of a racist nature made by him, which received unexpected publicity. At a businessmen's supper club at the Dorchester Hotel his speech was secretly recorded, and appeared in the International Marxist Group's 'Socialist Challenge'. The adverse publicity for Dobson was, however, the pretext rather than the cause of his replacement by Michael Edwardes, for Edwardes had already been offered the post of chief executive at BL and had insisted on the combined role of chairman and chief executive. The robustness of character and bluntness of expression, marked already in the 'China Cycle' and necessary for the head of a major international company in an era of change, was a precipitant of this unfortunate episode, which clouded the final stage of Dobson's business life. In the event Dobson resigned on 21 October 1977, the reputation of his long and successful career at BAT tarnished at least for a time by his unwise and unsuccessful venture into a very difficult industry at a time of crisis, and by an indiscretion which did less than justice to an articulate and capable businessman. However, Dobson continued to hold other directorships, including those of the American oil company Exxon and Lloyds Bank International. He also continued his interest in writing; at his memorial service readings were given from his poems. He died of respiratory failure and pneumonia, on 24 October 1993, at 20 Devonshire Place, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 51840


Donaldson, Arthur William (1901-1993), politician, was born on 13 December 1901 at 27 Rosefield Street, Dundee, the third and youngest son of George Donaldson (1859-1909), yarn dresser, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Kerr ('b'. 1860). He was educated at Harris Academy, Dundee, where he gained five higher leaving certificate passes in 1917. His first job was as assistant registrar of births, marriages, and deaths in Dundee, but in 1919 he began a career in journalism as a reporter with the Dundee 'Courier'. In 1923 he pursued new career opportunities in the USA. Employed at first in the motor industry in Detroit, he rose to become assistant secretary in the Chrysler Corporation's public procurement division, responsible for dealing with the department of defense in Washington. On 24 September 1932, in Gates' Mill, Ohio, he married Violet Glenday Bruce ('b'. 1907), from Forfar, who, like him, had come to work in America. They had one son and one daughter. In 1928, though resident in the United States, he joined the newly formed National Party of Scotland, which sought full Scottish independence to be achieved through the contesting of parliamentary elections by this party which was to be wholly free of any other political affiliations. Although these commitments were on occasion challenged, as in 1934 and 1942, Donaldson was always loyal to the original principles. 
In 1937 Donaldson returned to Scotland, where he became a poultry farmer in Lugton, Ayrshire. At the same time he began to write articles presenting the nationalist view on such topics as finance, resources, land use, and economic issues in general. He revealed as himself an informed authority upon whom his colleagues relied for guidance. As war threatened he argued, first, for Scottish neutrality, and then against the imposition of conscription, in both cases because Scots had no government democratically empowered to take such decisions affecting them. These activities no doubt caused his detention under section 18B of the defence regulations in May 1941, until petitions to the secretary of state for Scotland secured his release. Donaldson's stance on the war and on conscription was shared by Douglas Young, elected in 1942 chairman of the Scottish National Party (SNP), as the National Party of Scotland had become, following its merger with the Scottish Party in 1934, and when Young contested a by-election in Kirkcaldy in 1944, Donaldson acted as his agent. In 1945 he himself was SNP candidate in Dundee. In 1948 he moved to Forfar, where he soon became editor of the 'Forfar Dispatch'. He became active in municipal affairs and for some years served as a councillor and as burgh treasurer. These commitments meant that he was not active in the elections of 1950, 1951, and 1955, but in 1959 he fought the Kinross and West Perthshire constituency and he contested the same seat in a by-election in 1963. 
In 1960 Donaldson became chairman of the SNP, bringing to the job exactly the qualities then required. An inspirational speaker, he enthused supporters and impressed the uncommitted. He toured branches and constituencies, and the party's growth in membership, branches, and votes throughout the decade was phenomenal. He led from the front, being a candidate in the general elections of 1964, 1966, and 1970, contesting West Perth, Moray and Nairnshire, and finally Galloway. Significantly all these areas were subsequently won by his party. He was replaced as chairman in 1969, not because he was the target of any dislike or criticism, but rather because a new generation was ready to take office. He remained active at branch, constituency, and national level well into his eighties. 
A wiry and agile man, even in his later years, Donaldson's body language told of his indomitable dedication. He entered any company briskly and with a spring in his step, and his bright eyes and strong features marked him for the good-humoured but determined warrior which he was. He died of bronchopneumonia on 18 January 1993 in Forfar, and was cremated on 23 January in Dundee. He was survived by his wife and by his son, Arthur, his daughter, Beth, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51841


Dorman, Sir Maurice Henry (1912-1993), colonial governor, was born on 7 August 1912, the elder son of John Ehrenfried Dorman, of Eastgate, Stafford, an engineer with W. H. Dorman & Co., and Madeleine Louise, 'nee' Bostock, dentist. Her family owned Lotus Shoes. From Sedbergh School Dorman went up to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he took a lower second class in history. On graduation he applied for the colonial service and in 1935 was posted to Tanganyika as an administrative cadet. After only ten years' service, during which he had caught his superiors' eyes by his work as clerk of councils in Tanganyika from 1940 to 1945, he was singled out as assistant to the lieutenant-governor of Malta, the civilian deputy to the traditionally armed forces holder of the governorship of that 'fortress' colony. Already on the fast track, Dorman was promoted in 1947 as principal assistant secretary in Jerusalem, where the Palestine mandate was in its final stormy years. In 1948 he was seconded to the Colonial Office to take charge of the rapidly expanding social services department. With a successful tenure behind him, Dorman was posted to the Gold Coast in 1950, as director of social welfare and community development. By now his reputation was such that in 1952 he was chosen as colonial secretary of Trinidad and Tobago, conventionally a Colonial Office proving ground for potential governors. In 1956 the plum colonial service promotion to a governorship came with his appointment to Sierra Leone. 
West Africa was already embarked on its decade of decolonization, but unlike its near neighbours Gold Coast and Nigeria, the relatively sleepier Sierra Leone (despite its conspicuous Creole elite in the capital, Freetown) was not yet prey to the exuberance of colonial nationalism. Dorman's principal political challenge was to encourage the up-country protectorate into a closer relationship with the sophisticated colony area, while at the same time ensuring that the stimulated advance towards self-government was not accompanied by any breakdown in law and order. His outstanding tact, empathy, and emphasis on good relations with the emergent political leadership were evidenced in 1961 by the request of the newly independent government of Sir Milton Margai that Dorman should stay on as the country's first governor-general. Nor was this a mere token of courtesy, for despite the constitutional fact that the post was a figurehead devoid of any executive power, Dorman's advice was in the event frequently sought, discreetly given, and often quietly taken. Coincidentally, Dorman's younger brother Richard was to become Britain's deputy high commissioner in Freetown in 1964. 
By then Dorman had left. Dramatic political changes in Malta brought him back to the island in 1962. The years of political stalemate had been broken by the success of Dr Borg Olivier at the polls, a political outcome reinforced by the economic threat of the likely reduction of Britain's historic naval presence in Malta. Perceiving that what was needed was firm guidance from a civilian at the helm rather than the conventional military appointment, the Colonial Office turned to Dorman, with his proven diplomatic skills and personal experience of the art of the transfer of power. Once again his natural humanity and enlightened attitude secured local confidence, to such an extent that despite several trials and tribulations he found himself genuinely identifying with the Maltese. Once more, as in Freetown in 1961, Dorman was invited, at Malta's independence in 1964, to become the island's first governor-general. Remarkably, he remained in office for seven years, not leaving until 1971 when the new prime minister, Dom Mintoff, requested a local appointment. During his tenure Dorman turned the conventional role of the queen's representative upside-down, by speaking out against the defence cuts threatened by Britain and, to the dismay of Whitehall, declaring that he stood 'four square' with the government and people of Malta in their dispute with London. 
Dorman's long service overseas was not yet finished. He was deputy chairman of the abortive Pearce commission in 1971-2 assessing African opinion on the Rhodesian government's constitutional proposals. He was to return to Rhodesia in 1980 as chairman of the British observer group monitoring the election which led to the independence of Zimbabwe. 
After thirty-six years in the colonial service Dorman was ready to settle in England. With his wife, Florence Monica Churchward Smith (died 1993), daughter of Montagu Smith of Devon, whom he had married on 4 December 1937 and with whom he had one son, John, and three daughters, he settled in Wiltshire. He turned his administrative talents to health administration, spending the next decade as chairman of the Swindon hospital management committee and then of the Wiltshire (and later the Swindon) Health Authority. He was a trustee of the Imperial War Museum and chairman of the West of England Building Society, and also life governor of Monkton Combe School and president of the Old Sedberghians' Club. From 1972 to 1975 he was deputy lieutenant for Wiltshire. 
Dorman's colonial service was recognized by his appointment as CMG in 1955; he was advanced to KCMG in 1957 and to GCMG as well as being made GCVO in 1961. A committed Christian, Dorman and his wife were both active in the order of St John, whose fortress home had long been in Malta. He was successively chief almoner and chief commander of the St John Ambulance Brigade, becoming lord prior in 1980. He was also made knight grand cross of the Maltese order of merit. Academic honours included honorary degrees from Durham University and the Royal University of Malta. His hobbies he recorded as 'once sailing, squash, and sometimes golf' ('WWW'). He and his wife were deeply appreciated in Malta as patrons of the arts, and regularly made the Palace of San Anton available to the local dramatic society. On retirement they built a private house at Fawwara in the hope of spending part of each year in Malta. 
Although Dorman's career spanned the transition from the high noon of empire, when he was a district officer in Tanganyika, through the transfer of power, in which he was the last colonial governor of Sierra Leone, to the emergence of the Commonwealth, where he was the first (and last) British governor-general of an independent Malta, his part was never that of the typical pro-consul of empire. Throughout he combined the professionalism of a colonial administrator with the enlightenment and empathy of a constitutional monarch. He accepted and accomplished the challenge, as his colonial service peer Lord Grey put it, 'to look and play the part and achieve by personality what had hitherto been won by laying down the law' ('The Independent', 10 Nov 1993). He was not only one of the last distinguished overseas career civil servants, he was also one of that handful of adaptable final colonial governors whose emollient yet fundamentally firm and fair role and capacity for personal friendship with the nationalist leadership were instrumental in effecting a smooth and mutually respecting transfer of power. 
Dorman died of cancer at his home, the Old Manor, Overton, Wiltshire, on 26 October 1993. His widow, appointed dame of the order of St John of Jerusalem in her own right in 1968, died six weeks later. 


@@@@@


doc= 51842


Dowding, Muriel, Lady Dowding (1908-1993), animal rights campaigner, was born on 22 March 1908 at 74 Castellain Mansions, Paddington, the elder of the two daughters of John Angelo (Jack) Albino, goldsmith, and his wife, Hilda Gertrude, 'nee' Barnes. After attending St Thomas's School for the sons of gentlemen, in Porchester Terrace -- she was the only girl on the roll -- she attended Walthamstow Hall, in Sevenoaks, and then the Convent of the Holy Child in Sussex. Although her father had been a Catholic she was influenced by her mother's spiritualist and theosophical views from her teenage years. Interested in astrology and spiritualism, she became a member of the theosophist lodge in Tunbridge Wells -- and subsequently its lecture secretary for many years -- and, later, a member of the White Eagle lodge run by the spiritualist Grace Cooke. She married her first husband, Jack Maxwell (Max) Whiting, businessman, on 24 August 1935 and their only child, David Maxwell, was born in September 1938. During the Second World War her husband served as a bomber pilot in the RAF, and went missing in action over Norway in May 1944. She contacted Air Chief Marshal Hugh Caswall Tremenheere Dowding, later first Baron Dowding (1882-1970), for information about the circumstances of her husband's mission. Her meeting with Dowding, also a keen spiritualist, led both to their marriage at Caxton Hall on 25 September 1951 and to joint public campaigns on behalf of animals. 
Both Dowdings were active anti-vivisectionists. Hugh used his position in the House of Lords to speak against animal experimentation and against the cruel ways in which animals were poisoned in the wild; indeed most of his speeches in the Lords were on animal welfare. Although Muriel was at first reluctant to speak in public she soon became a member of the committee of the Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society, founded by Louise Lind af Hageby, and a council member. She then for many years chaired the National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS), and in that role, and later as president of the NAVS, she led demonstrations, presented petitions to parliament, represented the organization at international conferences, and helped to increase the public profile of the anti-vivisectionist cause. Her writing for the NAVS drew attention to the part played by women such as Anna Kingsford and Frances Power Cobbe in earlier campaigns. In 1967 she attempted unsuccessfully to re-unite the NAVS and the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV), the two leading anti-vivisectionist bodies in Britain. The BUAV had broken away in 1898 over disagreements about the best tactics for ending animal experimentation. 
In the late 1950s Muriel Dowding, with like-minded friends, founded Beauty without Cruelty, originally to campaign against existing cruel practices in the fashion and cosmetics industry. She helped to publicize the ingredients of cosmetics, in particular the use of whale oil in lipsticks and civet in scent, and the testing of cosmetics and shampoos on animals; she also compiled lists of brands free from cruelty. Beauty without Cruelty held its first official meeting in autumn 1959. Imitating the practice of animal rights campaigners such as Louise Lind af Hageby, Muriel Dowding organized alternative fashion shows in London, New York, and Amsterdam, demonstrating synthetic and cruelty-free alternatives to furs. The Beauty without Cruelty fashion and cosmetic business followed, and boutique premises were obtained in the 1960s. The organization attracted much publicity, helped by the participation of 1960s fashion model and pro-animal activist Celia Hammond. 
Hugh Dowding acted as president of Beauty without Cruelty and as patron of the International Association against Painful Experiments. Three years after his death, in February 1970, the Lord Dowding Fund for Humane Research, to promote practical alternatives to animal experiments, was established by the NAVS, as was the annual world day for laboratory animals, on his birthday, 24 April. 
Muriel Dowding continued her campaigning work after her husband's death, promoting the fund and speaking at a number of public events. As a participant in a televised debate in November 1970 she declared: 'If we can put a man on the moon, surely we are clever enough if we put our minds to it to evolve the alternatives to using animals' ('Animals' Defender', Jan-Feb 1971, 68-73). In the early 1970s she was described as an indefatigable person who devoted 'abounding time and energy to the pursuit of compassion for all living things' (ibid., editorial). Having for many years taken stray animals into her own home, in 1977 she established the Lychgate Animal Sanctuary in Coldwaltham, Sussex. In November 1979 she received the Richard Martin award of the RSPCA, the society's highest recognition for outstanding service to animal welfare for those not associated with the organization. She continued her high-profile work for the NAVS until incapacitated by a stroke in the 1980s. She died, of heart failure and a brain haemorrhage, at The Pines, Furze Hill, Hove, Sussex, on 20 November 1993. She was survived by the son of her first marriage. 
While much of the work of promoting Beauty without Cruelty was undertaken after Hugh Dowding's death the activity of both husband and wife was commemorated on Muriel's death. As a NAVS obituary stated somewhat optimistically, 'Both Lord and Lady Dowding were vegetarians and pioneers of a humane movement that we now take for granted' ('The Campaigner'). 


@@@@@


doc= 51843


Downes, Ralph William (1904-1993), organist, was born on 16 August 1904 at 61 Arthur Street, Derby, the only child of James William Downes (1873-1954) and his wife, Constance Edith, 'nee' Platt (1876-1922). He was educated at Derby municipal secondary school, which he left at 'exactly 16' (Downes, 19). Compulsively drawn to the organ from about the age of nine, he became thoroughly soaked in the sounds of the Derby instruments over his remaining years at school. He was for a time deputy organist of All Saints' Church (later the cathedral), and made his first acquaintance with the Mustel harmonium in a local cinema. Faced with the necessity of finding a job he played the organ, first in cinemas in Nottingham, and then, back in Derby, as 'star performer' on the Mustel in 1922. From the autumn of that year he studied at the Royal College of Music, London, taught by Walter Alcock, Henry Ley, and Edgar Cook; he was Cook's assistant at Southwark Cathedral from 1923 to 1925, at which point he went to Oxford as organ scholar of Keble College. He was active in the University Musical Club, becoming president in 1927, and directed the orchestral ensemble for several Keble summer plays, some of the music being composed or transcribed by him. Jack Westrup, his contemporary and later professor of music in the university, played trombone in the orchestra; he once described Downes as appearing 'almost dashing' at this time (personal knowledge). 
On leaving Oxford in 1928 Downes departed in August for Princeton University where he became the first organist and director of music of the new Gothic chapel; this appointment came about after an interview in England. In 1929 he married Agnes Mary Rix (1889-1980), daughter of John Joseph Helsdon Rix, an English schoolteacher settled in the Netherlands, where she herself was private secretary to the US envoy. They had one son, the art historian Professor Kerry Downes ('b'. 1930). Downes remained at Princeton until 1935, becoming also a lecturer in the music department, which was started in 1934. His experience of Princeton was not all he hoped, as the organ, which had an excellent specification, was badly balanced, the imposing-looking chapel contained large amounts of acoustic tiling disguised as stonework, and the academic level of undergraduate students in music was not up to the standard that he expected. As he later recounted, he tried to improve the organ at various times and learned much from American organ builders, principally Donald Harrison of the Aeolian-Skinner company. 
Downes converted to Roman Catholicism in 1930 and, at the beginning of 1936, became organist of Brompton Oratory, London, retaining this post until 1978 when he became organist emeritus. He did not have responsibility for the choir, but provided accompaniments on the organ to all the church music. In 1937 he was able to obtain a Mustel harmonium for the oratory, and in the same year visited Paris, where particularly the great Cavaille-Coll organs made a revelatory impression on him. It was in his first years at Brompton Oratory, and those immediately after the Second World War, that Downes was probably at his finest as an organist. He performed the major works of Reger, Hindemith's organ sonatas, and Schoenberg's 'Variations on a Recitative', as well as countless other modern works largely neglected by the general run of organists; many of these were played in recitals for the Organ Music Society, and he was a frequent broadcasting recitalist for the BBC. Although he played Messiaen's organ compositions he seemed to be not over-enthusiastic about them -- 'bad music' was one description. One particular association was with the Aldeburgh Festival, in which he took part (almost without a break) from its beginning in 1948 until 1985. 
Downes is most widely perceived as having been the guiding light in transforming people's attitudes to the organ in mid-twentieth-century Britain. He did this most decisively in the design for the organ in the Royal Festival Hall, London, on which he worked from 1948. As newly appointed organist of the London Philharmonic Orchestra, intended to be the resident orchestra of the as yet unbuilt hall, Downes was the natural choice to be designer of the organ; and while this may have seemed to the London county council (LCC) harmless enough, in a very short time the project became extremely contentious, with damaging interventions from the LCC's musical advisers and other influential persons. In the end Downes's quiet persistence persuaded a distinctly uneasy LCC, in May 1950, that the planned scheme should go ahead. 
For Downes life was something of a balancing act, with home life, church (there were many demands at the oratory in addition to Sunday services), performing both as soloist and in concerted music, organ building and maintenance, teaching, examining, and adjudicating. As an interpreter, he had metamorphosed from the youth who had 'got the bug' into a discriminating musician by his early twenties; he gave entertaining accounts of some of his adventures in 'Baroque Tricks' (1983). My own experience comes to mind when, as a brash former national serviceman, I said to him at a lesson that taking a rarefied view was all very well, but what would Bach do if he had our conditions. 'Ah', he replied, quietly and tellingly as always, 'you are taking a subjective view, while I am trying to be objective'. When, on a much later occasion, we were having a conversation about teaching, he remarked that he had never felt himself particularly suited to it because many of the practical elements of organ playing had come to him naturally, and he could not readily explain them to a student who found things difficult. 
Downes was, in his son's description, a romantic, one who was forever seeking the ideal means of expression, in one instrument, of styles which could be strange bedfellows. He repeatedly claimed, before it was built, that the Royal Festival Hall organ was to be an all-purpose instrument, yet the reeds were given twentieth-century French voicing (by Louis-Eugene Rochesson) which made their use perilous, particularly in such a location. He was strongly influenced by the American reform movement of the 1930s, which was wedded to electric actions for many years to come, and indeed the principal instruments with whose construction he was associated (at the Royal Festival Hall, Buckfast Abbey, Brompton Oratory, Paisley Abbey, and St Albans and Gloucester cathedrals) had electric rather than mechanical action to their keyboards. The great leap, for him, to mechanical action came with the design for the organ in St David's Hall, Cardiff, which was completed in 1982. 
Downes was appointed CBE in 1969 and a knight of the order of St Gregory the Great (an honour conferred by the pope) in 1970. He died of pneumonia in London on 24 December 1993 and was buried in Kensington borough cemetery, London, on 7 or 8 January 1994. He was survived by his son. A solemn mass for him was celebrated at Brompton Oratory on 10 May 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 51847


Harold John Pye (1901-1986), born at 19 Humberstone Road, Chesterton, Cambridgeshire, on 27 November 1901, joined the company after graduating from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1923, and was made a partner in 1924. He was an energetic salesman and a skilled engineer. His receivers of the '700' series, designed to meet customers' needs, were the first really successful Pye sets. With careful attention to the styling of the receivers' cabinets, demand increased rapidly. The radio side of the company expanded to occupy the whole of the original factory site by 1927; the instrument business was again obliged to move into new premises. Harold's former tutor, Sir Edward Appleton, was technical adviser to the company at this period. 


@@@@@


doc= 51848


Calder, Fanny Louisa (1838-1923), promoter of education in domestic subjects, was born on 26 March 1838, at 26 Rodney Street, Liverpool, the youngest of the eleven children of James Calder and his wife, Jane Elizabeth Mitchell. Her father was a cotton merchant and the family had lived in South Carolina for many years before settling in Liverpool about 1835. 
A devout Anglican, in youth Fanny followed a common pattern of women's voluntary work, Sunday school teaching, and running a 'Bible' class for mothers. While working with the poor she formulated the philanthropic enterprise that was to become her life's work. 'In my early days of social work... I soon learnt that the too evident degraded condition of the women and girls... was not from poverty in the main, but from absolute ignorance of the essential methods of 'making a home'' ('The F. L. Calder College of Domestic Science', F. L. Calder College archives). Aged thirty-six, she formed a committee of like-minded women to organize cookery teaching in Liverpool, and for the next fifty years single-mindedly promulgated the systematic teaching of domestic skills to women and girls. 
The Ladies Committee formed in 1874, of which she remained honorary secretary until her death, inaugurated the Liverpool School of Cookery in the following year by running classes at St George's Hall, Liverpool, with the aim of training educated women to teach cookery around the city and beyond. Miss Calder was soon convinced that teaching adults would not herald improvements in the conditions of the poor. She persuaded local elementary board- and church-school managers to support her experimental schemes of instruction and allow the teaching of cookery to girls. The school's staff and members of the committee ran demonstration and practice classes in all types of cookery. The unrealized hope was that the income from classes attended by wealthy women would subsidize the training of teachers and the direct work with children. 
In parallel Miss Calder began the task of persuading local and national education authorities to support the teaching. She worked with her Ladies Committee at the school, and with the founders of similar schools throughout England and Scotland, to promote the training of women who would provide practical programmes of instruction in the growing elementary school system. With representatives of the Yorkshire, Edinburgh, and Glasgow schools of cookery she founded the Northern Union of Training Schools of Cookery in 1876. This organization issued teaching diplomas, and worked to standardize instruction and to persuade the education department to develop the teaching. 'There was a great deal of difficulty in persuading educationalists that the duties of home life could be systematised and organised as practical science', she recalled (Calder, 318). The education code of 1882 admitted practical cookery as a grant-earning subject. After continual pressure from Miss Calder and others in the domestic subjects movement, laundry work was added to the code in 1890, and the 1880s and 1890s saw the steady growth of practical domestic training in schools. 
Miss Calder was instrumental in founding the movement's first national organization, the Association of Teachers of Domestic Science in 1897. This organization furthered the work of popularizing and professionalizing domestic subjects, and by 1914 had more than 1300 members. The Liverpool school remained in the forefront, and in 1898 the duchess of York became its patron. In 1903, in recognition of her work, Miss Calder was invited to join the new Liverpool education committee. A tall and striking woman, she was nevertheless unassuming and reserved. She attended committee meetings conscientiously, but rarely spoke. Yet in her propagandizing of cookery teaching she noted, 'I visited many cities and villages, explaining possibilities to large gatherings of ladies and gentlemen interested in the welfare of the people.... In fact I missionised the subject' ('The F. L. Calder College of Domestic Science', F. L. Calder College archives). She also wrote articles and letters about her mission, promoted the distribution of cheap cookery books produced at the school, and co-authored with E. E. Mann, head cookery teacher at the school, what was probably the first laundry work teaching manual, 'A Teachers' Manual of Elementary Laundry Work' (1891). 
Miss Calder's efforts to develop national regulation of the training of teachers of domestic subjects met with less success, and the Liverpool school, like others, continued to be privately funded until the first decades of the twentieth century. Not surprisingly, therefore, much of Miss Calder's energies were devoted to the financial and curriculum management of the school, and she doggedly pursued benefactors to ensure the expansion of its work. Development was expensive, however, and reluctantly in 1920, unable to continue to subsidize the Liverpool school from the private purses of her committee, she requested Liverpool education authority to continue the work. In her honour the school was renamed the F. L. Calder College of Domestic Science. 
While Millicent Garrett Fawcett believed that the 'new born zeal for needlework and cookery... has arisen mainly as an offshoot of the 'women's rights' movement' (M. G. Fawcett, 'The future of Englishwomen: a reply', 'Nineteenth Century', 4, 1878, 354), late twentieth-century historians have disputed the significance of the domestic subjects movement. The place of domestic ideology and work in women's lives is a contentious issue. Fanny Louisa Calder's contemporaries, however, acknowledged her personal and local achievements for women's education when, in 1913, Liverpool University conferred upon her the degree of MA 'honoris causa' in education. Her life has a wider significance as that of one of the many single, mid-Victorian, middle-class, philanthropically inspired women who worked in education with a zealous and often crusading commitment to raise the status of women's household work. In 1892 Florence Nightingale wrote to her, 'Good speed to your great work -- Saint of the Laundry, Cooking and Health' (F. Nightingale to Fanny Calder, 21 Nov 1892, copy in F. L. Calder College archives). Fanny Calder died at her home, 49 Canning Street, Liverpool, on 6 June 1923, and was buried at Smithdown Road cemetery in Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 51849


Broad, Mary Aylett (1860-1942), headmistress, was born on 13 December 1860 at Brunswick Lodge, Wandsworth Road, Kennington, London, the eldest of twelve children, seven of whom survived (three boys and four girls), of Arthur Broad, a mercantile clerk, and his wife, Sarah Ann West. The family had a strong tradition of religious and philanthropic work, Mary's paternal grandfather having given up his prosperous London business to become a Baptist minister. Unusually for the period her father believed that all his daughters should have a boarding-school education, and at the age of eleven Mary was sent to Carlton House, a boarding-school in Melbourn in Cambridgeshire. In 1876 she became a pupil at the newly founded Wandsworth high school and in 1878 passed the Oxford local examination. From September that year she taught at a private school in Gipsy Hill, and then in two other small schools. 
But Mary Broad was ambitious to have a school of her own that would teach a curriculum such as the new high schools were offering, and on 29 October 1885 set out with her friend Miss Thresher to ''a very nice little place near Christchurch' called Bournemouth' ('Jubilee Book', 19) to search for a suitable school to buy. They found one in Bradburne Road where the proprietor was about to be married, and in January 1886 it opened under its new ownership with thirty girls. Early pupils remembered Mary Broad's enthusiasm and high spirits, and how she joined the fourth form for Latin and maths -- subjects which she had never studied in her own schooldays. In 1889 Miss Thresher, who had been responsible for the organization and finance, left to get married, and the school became Mary Broad's sole responsibility. 
Mary Broad had always admired North London Collegiate School which Frances Buss had founded in 1850, and hoped that her own private venture could become a public school like it. But Miss Buss warned her not to put her school under the control of a body of governors until she had herself built the sort of buildings she wanted, otherwise 'you will wait many years for them' ('Jubilee Book', 28). But by 1898 the strain was too much for her and she handed over the school -- which then became Bournemouth high school -- to the Winchester diocesan trustees. (Though brought up a nonconformist she had joined the Church of England soon after she came to Bournemouth.) The original trustees persuaded her to accept the guarantee of a pension when she retired, but as this meant the school would have to forgo an increased grant from the Board of Education, she renounced the pension in 1902. Eventually she agreed to accept an annuity in exchange for the freehold of one of the houses that then made up the school. 
Mary Broad's generosity was always unstinted; her favourite maxim was: 'The glory of life is to love, not to be loved; to give, not to get; to serve, not to be served' ('Jubilee Book', 73). And she was light-hearted; unlike North London Collegiate in Miss Buss's time, Bournemouth high school was run with a lot of laughter and only two rules: 'No talking on the stairs' and 'Keep to the right' (ibid., 41). She was an excellent mimic with a keen sense of humour, who gloried in jokes about herself. When she saw a caricature of herself, very broad in the beam and clad in her shapeless old cardigan, she ordered that prints should be sold for the building fund. Many of the best-known girls' boarding-schools grew from tiny beginnings out of the vision of a dedicated founder. The big day schools, however, were usually born out of corporate effort, so that Mary Broad's achievement must be reckoned to approach that of Frances Buss. 
Mary Broad had aged early and in 1924 retired, first to a house in Bournemouth and latterly to Wallington, Surrey, where she had once taught. Here she interested herself in the Girl Guides and in the local schools. Miss Buss's prophecy had been correct; the school did not have its own purpose-built premises until ten years after Mary Broad left. She laid the foundation-stone of what was later to be known as Talbot Heath in December 1933, and was present when it was formally opened by William Temple, archbishop of Canterbury, in 1935. Characteristically she refused to buy any new clothes for this occasion. Though she came down to Bournemouth at the outbreak of war, Mary soon returned to Wallington, where she died at her home, 34 Grosvenor Road, on 13 July 1942. She was buried in Wallington. 


@@@@@


doc= 51850


Collin, Mary (1860-1955), headmistress, was born in Cambridge on 1 April 1860, the daughter of William Collin. Educated at a private school in Cambridge and at Notting Hill High School for Girls, London, she graduated in honours French and German at Bedford College, London. She taught for a time on the staff of her former school and of Jersey Ladies' College, and in 1884 went as second mistress to Nottingham high school, another of the schools founded by the Girls' Public Day School Company. In 1892 she became principal of St Catherine's School in Park Place, Cardiff. 
Miss Collin's experience both as a pupil and as a teacher had been until that point within the private sector of girls' education. When, under the far-reaching and visionary 'Welsh Intermediate Education Act' of 1889, it was decided to set up a municipal secondary school for girls in Cardiff, Miss Collin was appointed as its first head in 1895. 
Miss Collin was a dignified figure, a fine-looking, attractive woman with sparkling blue eyes, which twinkled with merriment or bore down on wrongdoers as the occasion demanded. Contemporaries invariably commented on her sharp intellect, her integrity, and delightful sense of humour. The girls of Cardiff high school regarded her with awe, respect, and affection. Her achievement as headmistress is impressive. Drawing her inspiration from the public and high schools of England, she turned what had originally been designated as Cardiff Intermediate and Technical School for Girls into a first class girls' high school. She promoted high standards and an academic ethos within the school. She extended the curriculum to include the sciences, not then usually considered appropriate for girls, and she devoted much time to encouraging extra-curricular activities. Although criticized by some contemporaries as elitist because she was reluctant to accept girls from elementary schools, under her autocratic but benign regime the numbers rose from ninety-four girls in 1895 to more than 400 on her retirement in 1924, making Cardiff high the largest girls' school in Wales. 
Influenced by Harriet Morant Jones, headmistress at Notting Hill, an early pioneer of girls' secondary education and third president of the Association of Headmistresses, following Miss Buss and Miss Beale, Mary Collin was a committed feminist. The education of girls in Wales profited from the wealth of experience she brought with her and which she had gained in the formative years of its development in England. She assisted many Welsh educational organizations, always promoting the cause of girls and women, including the Association of Welsh Head Teachers, the University of Wales, and the Central Welsh Board. The University of Wales awarded her the degree of MA for services to Welsh education in 1925. 
A 'new woman' in the 1890s, who shocked the Cardiff tradespeople by riding a bicycle, and a dedicated and tireless suffrage campaigner, Mary Collin worked throughout her life to promote the cause of women. An admirer of Mrs Fawcett, whom she recalled from her Cambridge childhood, she aligned herself with the moderate wing of the suffrage campaign and became the acknowledged leader of the women's suffrage movement in Cardiff. She was for many years the 'chairman ['sic'] of executive' of Cardiff and District Women's Suffrage Society. During the First World War the Cardiff society, under her guidance, suspended its activities and threw itself into the war effort and into helping the local community to cope with the difficulties created by the war. She played an active part in assisting unemployed women and women war workers, and enthusiastically engaged in the recruitment of women to the women's auxiliary services: she held recruiting meetings at the school and, to set an example to others, released her own two domestic servants to join the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps. At the end of the war, she resumed her suffrage activities and continued to play a leading role in the newly reconstituted Cardiff Women's Citizens' Association, which in 1921 replaced the suffrage society. In the inter-war years she campaigned vigorously on such issues as widows' pensions and women police, and throughout her life pressed for the involvement of more women on public bodies. 
Mary Collin died on 22 July 1955 at St David's Hospital, Cardiff. She retained close contacts with the school until the end and, mindful of the continuity of Cardiff high, bequeathed in her will the treasured album bearing the names of old girls which she had received on her retirement in 1924. She died in the school's diamond jubilee year. 


@@@@@


doc= 51852


Rachael Emily Poole (1860-1937), historian of portraiture, was born on 13 June 1860 at 6 Marlborough Hill, St John's Wood, Marylebone, London, the second daughter of Frank Rodbard Malleson (1831-1903), wine merchant and son of John Philip Malleson. Her father and, especially, her mother, Elizabeth Malleson, nee Whitehead (1828-1916), were active in the advancement of working-class, women's, and mixed education, and she met Reginald Lane Poole through the involvement of his uncle Reginald Stuart Poole in the same causes. Educated at home, she was a connoisseur of portraiture and music and a skilled administrator who gave much voluntary service to Oxford. Her 'Catalogue of Oxford Portraits' (3 vols., 1912-25), the product of twenty years' skilled research, is a work of permanent value. She was one of the founders of the Bach Choir in 1896. She was honorary treasurer of the Association for Promoting the Education of Women in Oxford (1892-1901) and a member of its council (1901-20); she also served on various university delegacies concerned with women students. In 1926 she was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, a rare honour for a woman at that time; the University of Oxford conferred the honorary degree of MA on her in 1932. She died on 9 April 1937 at home at 19 Banbury Road, Oxford, and was buried on 13 April in Wolvercote cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 51854


Bruce, Alice Moore (1867-1951), educationist, was born in London on 29 April 1867, the youngest of six daughters and two sons of Henry Austin Bruce, first Baron Aberdare (1815-1895), and his second wife, Nora Creina Blanche (died 1897), daughter of General Sir William Napier. Among her brothers was the army officer and mountaineer Charles Granville Bruce; there were also two daughters and one son surviving from Lord Aberdare's first marriage. Her father's chairmanship of the departmental committee on intermediate and higher education in Wales (1880-81) generated the blueprint for educational reform in Wales. Her mother was one of the leading protagonists in the establishment of the Aberdare Hall for women students at Cardiff in 1883, and was president of the hall from 1883 to 1895. Educated at home and at Bedford College, London, Alice entered Somerville Hall, Oxford, in 1887, where she gained a second in modern history in 1890. 
After four years at home Alice Bruce returned to Somerville in 1894 as secretary to the new principal, Agnes Maitland. From 1898 until her retirement in 1929 she was vice-principal. She was elected an official fellow in 1922 and honorary fellow in 1929. She consecrated years of devoted administrative and tutorial work in English and French to her alma mater, claiming to have held every office in the college except for the tutorships in science and classics. An accomplished tennis player, she encouraged sports in the college. Elsewhere, she gave devoted service on many committees at Oxford, and as council member and vice-president of the Girls' Public Day School Trust ['see also 'Girls' Public Day School Company]. She represented the privy council on the council of the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire. 
From 1929 to 1936 Alice Bruce served as president of Aberdare Hall, Cardiff, where she consolidated her mother's efforts on behalf of women's higher education in Wales. The virtues of residence in a university hall were highlighted, a personal library of modern language books donated in 1935, and a $500 bequest given in her will. In character and temperament she was warm-hearted and impulsive, but also critical and discriminating. Generations of students, including Vera Brittain, recalled her 'gentle, diffident shyness' (V. Brittain, 'The Women at Oxford', 1960, 121), generous and deeply affectionate nature, love of music, and lively interest in public affairs. She was an effective participant in committees, where her knowledge of educational matters and wise judgement proved invaluable. In 1951 a former fellow of Somerville recalled her 'wise and tolerant view in college affairs' and her quest for 'the constitutional basis of any questions' ('The Times', 20 Nov 1951). Alice Bruce died at her home, Whitegables, Headington Hill, Oxford, on 4 November 1951, and was buried at St Andrew's, Old Headington, Oxford, on 8 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 51856


Archibald Colville (1853-1916). John Colville was born on 3 July 1852 at Glasgow, and acquired a knowledge of iron manufacture at the Clifton works. He married, first, Janet, daughter of Dr Joseph Brown of Glasgow, and then Christian, the daughter of Provost Downie of Kirkintillock, with whom he had one son and one daughter. Archibald Colville was born in 1853 in Glasgow, and received a commercial training at the famous East India trading house of James Finlay & Co. He married Jeannie Miller, and they had two sons and five daughters. The search for a possible location led to David [i] Colville's accepting the offer of a suitable site on highly favourable terms by the agents of the Hamiltons of Dalzell, who were anxious to develop their estates around the small burgh. Construction began in February 1871 and in just over a year the first of the twenty furnaces was commissioned. Rolling began two weeks later in April 1872. 
While Colville was laying down the Dalzell works, the Steel Company of Scotland was established. Within a few years it had become apparent that steel would displace malleable iron as the basic raw material in the heavy industries of the west of Scotland. Keenly aware of this possibility, David [i] Colville sent his youngest son to the Steel Company's Hallside works to be fully trained in the new technology. This was 


@@@@@


doc= 51859


Sir Harold Edgar Yarrow, second baronet (1884-1962), shipbuilder, was born on 11 August 1884 at Ardmore House, Blackheath Park, Charlton, London. He inherited his father's business acumen and man-management skills. After attending Bedford grammar school he underwent a training which included a spell at the rival French shipyard of Augustin-Normand. He then returned to Yarrow & Co. Ltd at Poplar, London, and played a large part in the removal to Scotstoun, on the River Clyde. He was married twice. His first wife, whom he married on 27 February 1906, was Eleanor Etheldreda Aitken (1884/5-1934), daughter of W. H. M. H. Aitken, canon of Norwich; they had one son and three daughters. On 6 February 1935 Sir Harold married Rosalynde Vere ('b'. 1896/7), daughter of the scientist Sir Oliver Joseph Lodge; they had a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 51860


Hodgkin, Thomas Lionel (1910-1982), historian, was born on 3 April 1910 at Mendip House, Headington Hill, near Oxford, the elder son of Robert Howard (Robin) Hodgkin (1877-1951), historian of Anglo-Saxon England, and his wife, Dorothy Forster (1886-1979), fourth child of the historian Arthur Lionel Smith (1850-1924) and his wife, Mary Florence Baird. Hodgkin's childhood was disrupted by the First World War as his father, despite a Quaker upbringing, served in the army on the home front. The family returned to Oxford in 1919 and Hodgkin began an accomplished progress through the Dragon School, Winchester College, and Balliol College, Oxford, to a first in Greats in 1932. As an undergraduate he indulged in social escapades, wrote and acted in plays, contributed to university journals, and spoke at the union. He was believed to fall in love easily, and out of love painfully. A student contemporary, Diana Hopkinson, recalled that the striking colour of his fair hair 'gave him the appearance of a magnificent golden mole' (Hopkinson, 78). Hodgkin, in the hope of going to Palestine, went for Colonial Office interview in his final year and was offered instead an appointment in Gold Coast Colony. Friends, tutors, and family urged him not to lose himself in what was then regarded as darkest Africa. Hodgkin succumbed and rejected the post. In a letter to F. F. Urquhart of Balliol College, on 13 September 1932, he described the Gold Coast as 'a country with no past and no history -- and no present either -- only perhaps a promising future -- and that at a Kindergarten level' (priv. coll.). 
Hodgkin went to Palestine to an archaeological dig at Jericho for the first half of 1933. After spells of teaching in Cumberland and Manchester, when he began to encounter Marxist ideas, in April 1934 he was offered the cadetship he wanted in the Palestine civil service. Two years in this post gave him a disturbing awareness of the nature of Western imperialism in general, and of British imperialism in particular. In a time of Arab nationalist awakening Hodgkin, on prison visits, was impressed that the Palestine Communist Party had members of all religions. He resigned from the colonial service and hoped to remain in Palestine to observe the aftermath of the Arab uprising of April 1936. However, the British administration in May ordered him to leave Palestine within twenty-four hours. He sent an anonymous article to 'Labour Monthly' for July 1936 criticizing Britain for holding the Arabs down by force. 
Hodgkin subsequently travelled for three months in Syria and Lebanon before returning to Britain in September 1936 to take digs with no bathroom in Holford Square, London, and join the London Library and the Communist Party. He became a committed user of the library but an intermittent and fringe member of the party. He went on to stay in west London with his father's cousin Margery Fry, penal reformer and former principal of Somerville College, Oxford. A fellow guest in March 1937 was the Somerville scientist Dorothy Mary Crowfoot (1910-1994) ['see 'Hodgkin, Dorothy Mary], who was in London to photograph insulin at the Royal Institute. Undertaking a teacher training course, Hodgkin had an uncomfortable experience of teaching schoolboys. He therefore abandoned the training and left London at the end of March 1937 for more congenial adult education in Cumberland. Margery Fry had encouraged him to go for medical examination in which narcolepsy was diagnosed and benzedrine treatment prescribed. Hodgkin and Dorothy Crowfoot were married on 16 December 1937. They were to have a son in 1938, a daughter in 1941, and a second son in 1946. Dorothy Hodgkin became one of the most eminent scientists of her time. 
Hodgkin was rejected on medical grounds for military service in the Second World War. In September 1939 he became a Workers' Educational Association tutor in north Staffordshire, where the future Labour politician George Wigg was district secretary. Hodgkin spent the war years conducting classes with civilians and armed forces personnel, and in September 1945 became secretary of the Oxford University delegacy for extra-mural studies. With the stimulus of George Wigg and Colonial Office interest, he began in 1947 to initiate extramural work in Gold Coast Colony and Nigeria. Hodgkin's first journey to the Gold Coast in February 1947 brought him into contact with many Africans, including the senior history master at Achimota College, Miguel Ribeiro. It was a turning point in Hodgkin's life as he first learned of the kingdoms of western Sudan and recanted his error of fifteen years earlier that the Gold Coast had no history. After further journeys to Africa, Hodgkin wrote for the periodical 'West Africa' in 1950 (and again in 1951) a long series of topical and scholarly articles on the background to African nationalism. He and Basil Davidson, the general secretary of the Union of Democratic Control (UDC), organized a pioneering conference at Haywards Heath on 22 and 23 October 1950 for Europeans and Africans to discuss the 'crisis in Africa'. An enduring friendship followed Hodgkin's meeting in Accra in March 1951 with Kwame Nkrumah, then recently released from colonial imprisonment to lead the Gold Coast government (and eventually independent Ghana). The UDC in August 1951 published a pamphlet by Hodgkin supporting freedom for the Gold Coast. Hodgkin's political views had by now raised alarm both in the Colonial Office and in Oxford. 
Hodgkin left his delegacy post in May 1952 and spent his gratuity on independent travel in Africa, including France's colonies. Under close watch by French intelligence, he found pre-colonial history a less sensitive theme than his keen interest in contemporary politics, but soon became devoted to history. He published a seminal book entitled 'Nationalism in Colonial Africa' (1956), then in the late 1950s turned to the considerable role of Islam in African history and the recovery of Arabic manuscript sources for that history. He took part-time appointments in American and Canadian universities and produced an important anthology of historical writings, 'Nigerian Perspectives' (1960), and a contemporary comparative study, 'African Political Parties' (1961). The former study was revised and republished in 1975. He served as joint secretary of a commission on reform of the Ghana university system, and in 1962 returned to Ghana for three years as director of a new Institute of African Studies in the University of Ghana. 
For Hodgkin the decolonization of history and the rediscovery of the African past was implicit in the political decolonization. The changed perception was filtering into the university mainstream. Oxford University created an appointment for him in October 1965 as lecturer in the government of new states and he was elected to a senior research fellowship at Balliol. He supervised graduate students from many countries in academic fields he had helped originate. When he took early retirement in 1970 thirty scholars contributed papers to a Festschrift and a selection was published as 'African Perspectives' (1970). He intended to write stories for children but was diverted into an unpublished satirical novel entitled 'Qwert'. Journeys to Vietnam in 1971 and 1974 led to a history of Vietnam over 4000 years, 'Vietnam: the Revolutionary Path' (1981). 
Hodgkin was increasingly debilitated by emphysema. He was the Antonius memorial lecturer at St Antony's College, Oxford, in June 1981, and attended, but his paper was read on his behalf. He went to Sudan to escape the harshness of the English winter and spent from November 1981 to mid-March 1982 in Omdurman. However, on the return journey to England he paused in the Greek Peloponnese in the resort village of Tolon, near Nafplion. There he suffered a heart attack and died at the Hotel Minoa, Tolon, on 25 March 1982. His obituary in 'The Times' said he did more than anyone to establish the serious study of African history in Britain. Hodgkin was buried on 27 March in the Tolon cemetery overlooking the Aegean Sea. 


@@@@@


doc= 51861


Thomson, James (1779-1850), calico printer, was born on 6 February 1779 at Blackburn, Lancashire, the second of the five children of John Thomson, an iron-liquor merchant (iron-liquor, acetate of iron, was a mordant for the calico dyeing industry), and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1824). Thomson wrote of his 'closeness' to the Peel family, and it has been suggested that his mother was a sister of the first Sir Robert Peel. 
Thomson, whose skill as an industrial chemist and whose success in improving the quality of design led to his being called the 'Duke of Wellington of calico printing' (Turnbull, 80), grew up in Lancashire before beginning in 1793 a year's study at Glasgow University. There he began lifelong friendships with Gregory Watt, the son of James Watt, and the poet Thomas Campbell. At the age of sixteen he began work for Joseph Peel & Co., the London house of the extensive calico printing business. He remained there for six years, furthering his education by private study and through friendships with Sir Humphrey Davey and other scientists. Thomson's knowledge of chemistry impressed his employers, who sent him to manage their works at Church, near Accrington, where he remained until 1810. In that year he and John Chippendale, a Blackburn cotton merchant, became calico printers at Clitheroe, briefly at Up Brooks, and in 1811 at Primrose, where they established an industrial colony renowned both for the superiority of its products and for its paternalism. 
Thomson travelled widely on the continent between 1814 and 1817, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1821. Though he combined 'in an eminent degree scientific with practical knowledge' (Baines, 277), he combed Europe for outstanding chemists and artists. And as a means of enhancing standards in the trade, he supported schools of design and successfully campaigned for the act of 1842, which extended the copyright on dress patterns to nine months and on those for furnishings to three years. It was said of him, however, that 'His love of art, taste and progress carried him in many cases beyond the taste of his consumers, and he often reaped the reward of genius in advance of the age -- disappointment' (Potter, 17-18). 
Primrose, 'a large village, in which square and lofty mills... stand in lieu of cottages and ordinary dwellings', employed 'twelve hundred people in... stamping millions of yards of cotton' with indelible colours and designs (Granville, 363). During the 1840s the firm registered on average more than 500 dress designs each year, and 'there was no house did better work than Primrose in its halcyon days' (Hargreaves, 80). 
Thomson married, on 18 March 1806, Cecilia, the eldest daughter of the Revd Thomas Starkie, vicar of Blackburn. They had four sons and two daughters. Thomson, a Liberal in politics, was the second mayor of Clitheroe, in 1836-7, and he became a JP in 1840. As well as a number of trenchantly argued pamphlets on the copyright question, he wrote the article on 'Manufacture of cotton' in Rees's 'Cyclopaedia' (1812). 
One of Thomson's favourite sayings was that men who became calico printers had only two choices -- 'the Gazette or the grave' -- something he himself bore out. On 17 September 1850, he was at home preparing for the Great Exhibition of the following year when he died from an attack of paralysis, aged seventy-one. He was buried at St Mary's Church, Clitheroe, on 23 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 51864


Temple, William (bap. 1705, d. 1773), clothier and writer on economics, was born at Trowbridge, Wiltshire, where he was baptized on 3 August 1705, the son of William Temple (died 1736), a clothier, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was brought up a General Baptist as a member of the Conigre church, which during his early life was moving into Arianism, and he was almost certainly educated at the dissenting academy associated with the church. He was in business as a clothier on his own account by 1724 and left off trade about 1756. 
Temple's first published work was a eulogistic obituary of his father, contributed to the 'Gloucester Journal' in 1736. In 1738 trade depression led to weavers' riots in west Wiltshire. Their complaints, particularly of lowered rates for weaving and of truck payments, were vividly and sympathetically presented by Country Commonsense (Thomas Andrews of Seend) in an 'Essay on riots' in the 'Gloucester Journal'. Temple's reply also appeared in the 'Journal' and was reprinted as a pamphlet, 'The Case as it now Stands between the Clothiers, Weavers and other Manufacturers', under the pseudonym Philalethes. In this work Temple adopted a tone which was a sorry contrast to the measured statement of the 'Essay on riots'. He bitterly attacked the justices who supported prosecutions for truck payments, he complained of the idleness and drunkenness of the workpeople, and he argued that high prices and low wages were necessary to make them industrious. Weavers were the object of his particular scorn, 'the most feeble, weak, and impotent of all the manufacturers'; putting a child apprentice to a weaver meant that he could obtain 'a comfortable subsistence with scarce any human abilities' (W. Temple, 'The Case as it now Stands', 1739, 12, 13). 
It was at the same period that Temple entered into controversy with John Smith, the author of 'Chronicon rusticum-commerciale, or, Memoirs of Wool' (1747). In 1739 he replied to Smith's anonymous pamphlet 'The Grazier's Complaint', which complained of the low price of English wool, with a characteristic piece of detailed argument to show the greater advantage to the country gained by working up the wool into cloth; this appeared in the 'Sherborne Mercury' under the pseudonym Weaver on 6 February 1739. Smith's 'Chronicon rusticum-commerciale' provoked a 'Refutation' by Temple of one of its principal arguments, that English wool was underpriced compared with Spanish. This pamphlet appeared in 1750, as did a rejoinder by Smith 'in answer to Mr. Temple's (pretended) Refutation'. Early in 1751 Temple had the last word in an 'Epistle' to Smith, subtitled 'An Expostulatory Address to him upon his Forgery and Chicanery'. This pamphlet announced proposals for printing 'A Discourse upon Wools' by Temple, but it is not known to have been published. 
In 1758 Temple's controversial skills were deployed against William Bell, who had received a Cambridge prize for a 'Dissertation on Populousness' which advocated the renunciation of commerce in favour of a purely agricultural society. Temple's 'Vindication of Commerce and the Arts' appeared under the pseudonym I. B., MD. 
In his later years Temple was a supporter of John Wilkes; he held a fete in his garden to celebrate Wilkes's release from prison in 1770, sent $20 towards his expenses in 1772, and in his will left him $500 'for his strenuous exertions in the cause of liberty'. He died at Trowbridge on 16 May 1773 of a paralytic stroke and was buried at St James's Church, Trowbridge, on 20 May. 
Temple left no living children, and his wife, Grace, had died in 1769. Also in his will he left $2000 to the City of London to found a professorship at Gresham College; the holder was to expound the views expressed in the 'Vindication', which was summarized under seven headings in the will, beginning: '1. That all mankind are naturally inclined to indolence'. The will provided that Temple's papers should be edited and a digest printed and sold at a moderate price, one copy being given gratis to each corporation in England. His library of 1500 volumes was left to Gresham College. In fact, for reasons unknown, none of the provisions of the will was acted upon. 


@@@@@


doc= 51866


Eason, Ursula Vernon (1910-1993), broadcaster and broadcasting executive, was born on 19 August 1910 in Streatham, London, the fifth of six children of Edward Eason, auctioneer and surveyor, and his wife, Aisling (Nancy), 'nee' Bruton (died 1967), from a well-known Gloucester family of auctioneers. She was educated at Mount Nod School, Streatham, and University College, London, where she took a good degree in English. After a secretarial course she worked for nine months at the Times Book Club as secretary to the assistant manager. 
Eason had always loved the theatre and enjoyed acting, so she applied to the BBC, where she was interviewed by John Reith. In an interview report she was described as 'a practical, sensible, nice-looking 23-year-old' ('The Independent', 15 Jan 1994) and she was offered a post in 1934 as children's hour organizer in Belfast, where she stayed for eighteen years. There she became a producer and head of the children's hour unit. She took part in the programmes as Auntie Phoebe and was also responsible for all gramophone transmissions from Belfast. In spite of her attempts to return to London she remained based in Belfast, and when many male staff left for war service she was made acting programme director, planning and producing all the output from BBC Northern Ireland. After the war she had become so indispensable that it was not until 1952 that she was transferred to London and the growing television service. 
Eason was attached first to television talks, then to the film unit, and in 1953 to children's programmes. In 1955 she became assistant head of the department and stayed in the same post until she retired in 1970. Her knowledge of the BBC and her dedication to public service made her invaluable to the producers and to the four heads under whom she served: Freda Lingstrom, Owen Reed, Doreen Stephens, and Monica Sims. A more selfish or ambitious person might have resented the people who were promoted over her head but she supported them all loyally. Her wisdom was greatly appreciated and was influential in maintaining the high standards that she felt children deserved. She loved and respected the audience and encouraged young producers to recognize their responsibility to respond to the individual needs of children at different stages of development. 
Eason had some hearing difficulties herself and was particularly concerned for deaf children. In 1953 she created a monthly programme, 'For Deaf Children', with the co-operation of the Royal National Institute for the Deaf (RNID). In 1964, with the imaginative contribution of the producer Patrick Dowling, she introduced the weekly series 'Vision On'. This was directed to the whole audience, not solely to deaf children, and was one of the first truly visual programmes, not depending on words for comprehension. Original cartoons, mime, dance, drama, drawing, and painting drew on all the techniques available at the time. The programme won the top prize for the best children's programme at the Prix Jeunesse. The presenter was Pat Keysell, who used sign language and later was a founder of the British Theatre of the Deaf. Some teachers objected to signing, but with the support of the RNID and the National Deaf Children's Society it later became familiar to audiences in many theatres. 'Vision On' invited children to send in their art work, stimulated by the creations of the artist Tony Hart, who displayed selections each week from the thousands entered. The shoestring budget for the programme led to many experimental forms of animation, including the plasticene man, Morph, who was the forerunner of Wallace and Gromit of the Aardmann Studios in Bristol. 
Humour was essential in a department steeped in different theories of child psychology and arguments between idealistic producers. It was Eason's throaty chuckle that could produce a calmer sense of proportion. Her well-founded good taste and experience informed her judgement of programmes and of people. Thus she dismissed the saccharine sweetness of a French puppet series but recognized its potential value, if given an astringent sound track. 'The Magic Roundabout', with commentary by Eric Thompson, subsequently became one of the series best loved by both adults and children, and a cult on building sites and in university common rooms. In purchasing American series she rejected violence and bad language or any assumptions in which villains were shown as black people or foreigners. 
Eason's tall, handsome appearance and modestly diffident manner could camouflage her keen intellect and firm moral outlook; her retirement robbed the BBC of a distinguished public servant. In private life she enjoyed family gatherings at her beautiful Georgian house on Kew Green, travelling in India and the Middle East, and working for charities and deaf people. She died in Kew on Christmas day 1993, a few years after the onset of Alzheimer's disease, and was cremated at Mortlake. She never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 51868


Elworthy, (Samuel) Charles, Baron Elworthy (1911-1993), air force officer, was born on 23 March 1911 at Gordon's valley, Timaru, New Zealand, the second of five children and the elder son of Percy Ashton Elworthy, a sheep farmer, and his wife, Bertha Victoria, 'nee' Julius. The family later moved to England. Elworthy attended Marlborough College and subsequently read law at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was captain of the boat club and twice a trial cap. He graduated in 1933, was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1935, and on 5 June 1936 married Audrey (1910-1986), the daughter of Arthur Joseph Hutchinson, a company director; they had three sons and one daughter. 
An enthusiastic pilot in the Auxiliary Air Force, Elworthy (known as Sam by friends and family, but as Charles more generally) changed career in 1936 and took a permanent commission in the RAF. A year flying Hawker Harts and Hinds with 15 squadron at Abingdon was followed in November 1937 by appointment as aide-de-camp to Sir Edgar Ludlow-Hewitt, commander-in-chief of Bomber Command -- a remarkable acknowledgement in one so young of the talents that would eventually take him to the top. He was thus able to observe the strengths and weaknesses of one of the RAF's most senior commanders, to appreciate the huge problems facing the bomber force as war approached, and to gain an inside view of the events of the time, notably the Munich crisis. 
In January 1939 Elworthy returned to flying, building up a new operational training unit for the Blenheim bomber (for which he received the Air Force Cross) and then commanding 82 (Blenheim) squadron operating over north-west Europe during late 1940 and early 1941; this earned him the DFC and DSO, whose citation stated that, 'by his magnificent leadership and complete disregard of danger, he brought his squadron to the highest peak of war efficiency'. Now it was back to the headquarters of Bomber Command, where in 1942, as group captain operations, he won the trust of the new commander-in-chief, Sir Arthur Harris. There followed a year in charge of one of the command's most important stations, Waddington, after which Harris chose Elworthy as his representative with the headquarters of General Eisenhower for operation Overlord. Elworthy finished his war as senior air staff officer (SASO) at 5 group. 
Elworthy remained in the bomber world for two more years, now at the central bombing establishment at Marham, leading the development of bombing tactics, before going to India as SASO of 2 (Indian) group. After independence he was seconded to the new Pakistan Air Force. In 1949 he attended the Staff College at Camberley and went on to serve on the personnel staff in the Air Ministry. In 1951 he entered the fighter world, first commanding the Meteor station at Tangmere, next Odiham, at the time of the queen's coronation review, and finally the metropolitan sector of Fighter Command at North Weald. In 1957 he became commandant of the Bracknell Staff College, which provided a good opportunity for bringing himself up to date on the major issues of RAF policy arising from the Sandys defence review and led to his appointment to the Air Council as deputy chief of air staff in November 1959. 
Elworthy did not stay long. In July 1960 -- at the specific instance of Lord Mountbatten, chief of defence staff -- he became commander-in-chief of the first post-war integrated command, British forces Arabian peninsula, soon to be retitled Middle East command. In due course, despite considerable single-service resistance, a remarkable degree of co-operation was achieved between the three services and the civilian administration. The contingency planning which Elworthy had also set in train paid off in July 1961 after Iraq had renewed its long-standing claim to Kuwait and massed a large armoured force on the frontier. In operation Vantage, Elworthy quickly moved major reinforcements in from Aden and elsewhere, and the Iraqi army stayed put. It was an object lesson in deterrence. By the time Elworthy departed in 1963 the unified command had been severely tested, both operationally and administratively, and its efficiency gave proof of his talents for achieving harmony between the three services and handling the political intricacies. 
It was another story in Whitehall, where Elworthy returned in September 1963 as chief of air staff. Here he encountered entrenched attitudes and constant controversy, though he and Denis Healey, the Labour government's defence secretary for most of his time there, had great respect for each other and generally got on well together. Much time was devoted to future aircraft purchases, and a major issue that came to a head in 1964, soon after the Labour Party's election victory, was the future of the tactical strike and reconnaissance aircraft (TSR2) by which the RAF had hitherto set great store. Elworthy was becoming increasingly worried that its costs seemed to be running out of control and at risk of draining dry the RAF budget, and he agreed to its cancellation on the firm understanding that the American F111 strike aircraft would be ordered instead. The HS 681 transport aircraft he also saw as ambitious and over-extravagant, and this was dropped in favour of the American C130, the future Hercules. Thus ended the peacetime policy of always buying British military aircraft; here was the realist at work. One major British project that did survive was the Harrier, destined to fill a long-term place in Britain's armoury. 
Another of Elworthy's preoccupations was Britain's worldwide role, especially east of Suez. The confrontation with Indonesia demanded much attention; it provided a stern reminder of how far all three services were now stretched and caused much debate on how far such distant commitments should be retained and by what means. Among such issues was the aircraft-carrier controversy, which led to the resignation in 1966 of Sir David Luce, the first sea lord; Elworthy, though not opposed to large carriers 'per se', thought it no longer practicable to provide sufficient of these and was convinced that the job must be done in other ways. Other major matters were the evacuation from Aden and the possibility of military intervention in Rhodesia, which he strongly opposed. More domestic concerns included the withdrawal of Britain's first V-bomber, the Valiant, the planned reorganization of the RAF's home command structure, and the decision to end the cadet entry at the RAF College, Cranwell, in favour of graduate entrants, a switch he thought essential in the light of changing patterns of national education. 
In April 1967 Elworthy became chief of defence staff, where over the next few years he exercised much influence on defence policy under both Denis Healey and Lord Carrington. This was in his view a period of great and alarming Soviet expansion, marked particularly by the Czechoslovak crisis of 1968, and he accompanied Healey to many of the NATO meetings where the new policy of flexible response was being worked out. Several times he visited Northern Ireland, where the emergency was beginning to cause severe problems, particularly for the army and its garrison in Germany. In 1968 the order for the F111 was cancelled against the advice of the air staff; this flew in the face of the assurances Elworthy had previously received when the TSR2 was abandoned, and both he and Healey seriously considered resignation. On more positive notes, however, the nuclear deterrent was successfully transferred from the V-bomber force to the Polaris submarines, planning was started for the multi-role combat aircraft, the future Tornado, the military salary was introduced, and the position of the chief of defence staff was gradually strengthened. 
Elworthy departed the national scene in 1971, after eight years at the heart of military affairs. He had been much criticized for not having made a firmer stand over some of the cutbacks being demanded by the politicians, but in retrospect hard choices were unavoidable. The political and economic circumstances of the 1960s had compelled strong measures to contain Britain's defence spending and commitments, and Elworthy had never hesitated to take on the politicians and civil servants in the attempt to secure the best deal he could. For him 'the art of the possible' was always the final guideline. 
Ennobled in 1972 as Baron Elworthy of Timaru, the first RAF officer to be thus honoured since the high wartime commanders, Elworthy spent the next seven years as constable and governor of Windsor Castle. He became knight of the Garter in 1977, and he also served as lord lieutenant of Greater London and held several academic and business appointments. In 1978 he returned to Gordon's valley, in his native New Zealand, where he spent the rest of his life, visiting Britain annually to attend the Garter ceremony and perform duties as a steward at Henley Royal Regatta. Elworthy died at Christchurch, New Zealand, on 4 April 1993. He was cremated and his ashes were returned to Gordon's valley. He was one of the most distinguished of the RAF's chiefs, a man who, as both chief of air staff and chief of defence staff, was held in the highest regard and respect by service colleagues and politicians alike during the years when the United Kingdom came to accept that she was no longer a world power. 


@@@@@


doc= 51869


Emeleus, Harry Julius (1903-1993), inorganic chemist, was born on 22 June 1903 in Poplar, London, the second of three sons and the second of the five children of Karl Henry Emeleus (1869-1948), pharmacist, and his wife, Ellen, 'nee' Biggs (1873-1965), a secretary at the Scandinavian Sailors' Home near the West India docks in London. His father, a Swedish speaking Finn, was born in Vaasa, Finland, but eventually settled in England at the turn of the century. His mother was the daughter of George Biggs, an engineer in charge of the dock gates. Three months after Emeleus was born the family moved to the Old Pharmacy in Battle, Sussex, and this was to remain the family home. Emeleus's older brother, Karl George (1901-1989), later became professor of physics at the Queen's University of Belfast. 
Emeleus attended St Leonards Collegiate School, Hastings, and Hastings grammar school (1914-21) before going up to the Royal College of Science, Imperial College, London, graduating ARCS with first-class honours in chemistry in 1923. At that time this did not automatically qualify for the University of London BSc, so he took the London External BSc with a different syllabus later in the same year, again obtaining first-class honours. He was awarded his PhD (London) for work on the luminescent oxidation of phosphorus in 1926 and DSc three years later. An Exhibition of 1851 senior studentship in 1927 enabled him to spend some time in Karlsruhe with Alfred Stock, one of the world's greatest exponents of preparative inorganic chemistry, and this had a profound influence on his subsequent research. He also became fluent in German and an expert glassblower. Then as a Commonwealth Fund fellow (1929-31) he spent two highly productive years at Princeton University working on various aspects of photochemistry with Professor Hugh Stott Taylor. It was also at Princeton that he met his future wife, (Mary) Catherine Horton (1906-1991) of Richmond, Virginia, who was working in the university library, and who shared Emeleus's interest in folk dancing. They married in New York on 26 May 1931. The marriage was a long and happy one and they had four children: George Cowling (1934), Sidney Carlstrum (1938), Frances Virginia (1943) and Martha Ann (1950). 
Returning to England, Emeleus was appointed as a junior demonstrator / assistant lecturer in the chemistry department at Imperial College, where he set up an active research group studying the chemistry of several main group elements. He also collaborated with his colleague J. S. Anderson in writing a renowned textbook, 'Modern Aspects of Inorganic Chemistry' (1938), which ran through several editions and was to change the perception of the subject throughout the world. Defence related studies at Imperial College occupied most of 1939-45, except for a short period at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, as part of the British contingent working on the atomic bomb project. Emeleus also held a commission in the Home Guard, as battalion gas officer, and, with Ewart Jones, was senior gas adviser for London. Fortunately gas was never used, and his responsibilities were limited to lecturing to gas officers. 
In October 1945 Emeleus took up a permanent appointment at Cambridge, first as reader and then, after a few months, as a personal professor in inorganic chemistry and fellow of Sidney Sussex College. He remained in Cambridge for the rest of his life. At the old university chemical laboratory in Pembroke Street there was virtually no research in inorganic chemistry. Alexander Todd had recently been appointed as head of the department and had already begun a drastic reorganization of the labs, which were still lit by gas and were very poorly serviced. By mutual agreement Emeleus was able to concentrate on teaching and research without being greatly burdened by matters of finance and administration. He always acknowledged his good fortune in this respect and it undoubtedly contributed to his happiness and productivity in Cambridge. 
Several research groups on preparative inorganic chemistry were set up under Emeleus's general leadership to study new volatile compounds of silicon and the preparation of novel metal fluorides. He also opened up a fertile new field which exploited the use of highly reactive halogen fluorides as non-aqueous solvents. His most extensive series of investigations was the development over some twenty-five years of the chemistry of the extraordinarily versatile trifluoromethyl group. This resulted in more than sixty papers (one third of his total output) and involved some thirty-seven co-workers, more than half of them from a dozen different countries overseas. With these and other similar studies he succeeded in building up an internationally acclaimed school of inorganic chemistry at Cambridge, which dominated the subject for several decades. Indeed, an astonishing number of his research students and collaborators went on to distinguished careers and to senior academic positions both in Britain and abroad. 
Emeleus was closely involved with the Ministry of Defence's Chemical Defence Advisory Board during the Second World War, and for several years after served as its chairman. He was a member of the technical committee concerned with the development of the first British nuclear power plant at Windscale, and was a consultant for many years to several major chemical firms. He was particularly active in the learned societies and served as president both of the Chemical Society (1958-60) and of the Royal Institute of Chemistry (1963-5); he was also president of the inorganic chemistry division of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (1955-60). He served as a trustee of the British Museum (1963-72) and was chairman of its committee for the research laboratory, whose work included the development of conservation treatments and techniques. 
After his retirement in 1970 Emeleus continued to do experimental work until he was over eighty. Throughout his long career he was awarded many scholarships and prizes and received a remarkable number of international honours and awards. These included the Harrison memorial prize (1932), Tilden lectureship (1942) and Liversidge lectureship (1954) of the Chemical Society; fellowship of the Royal Society (1946); CBE (1958); the Davy medal of the Royal Society (1962); the Henri Moissan prize for fluorine chemistry, Germany (1991); the Lavoisier medal of the French Chemical Society; Alfred Stock memorial prize and medal of the Gesellschaft Deutscher Chemiker; honorary doctorates from seven universities; honorary membership of six chemical societies worldwide; and honorary membership of eight overseas academies of science. Despite this panoply of honours Emeleus remained a quiet, modest man, always appearing at ease with himself. His kindly manner, abiding courtesy and gentle sense of humour endeared him to colleagues and students alike. He had a passion for fly-fishing and it was said that he did much of his chemical thinking with a rod in his hand. His legacy was a rejuvenated academic discipline in the UK and a worldwide network of disciples who were enriched both by him and by the southern charm and generous hospitality of his wife who kept open house for them in Cambridge. He died peacefully of heart failure at Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, on 2 December 1993. The funeral was held in Trumpington church, Cambridge, a week later, followed by cremation. His ashes were interred in Battle churchyard. A memorial service was held in Sidney Sussex chapel on 30 April 1994. He was survived by his four children, his wife having died in January 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 51870


Estorick, Eric Elihu (1913-1993), art collector and dealer, was born Elihu Estorick on 13 February 1913 in Brooklyn, New York, the only child of Morris Estorick (died 'c'.1979), paint manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Cutler (died 'c'.1969). His parents were Jewish, and had emigrated from Russia in 1905. He was educated at James Madison High School, New York, and from 1930 at Washington Square College, New York University, graduating in 1937. It was at the Gallery of Living Art in Washington Square College, a collection created by Albert Gallatin, that Estorick first discovered modern European art. From 1935 he worked as a research secretary for Waldo Frank, the prominent left-wing novelist and political commentator, and after completing an MA in sociology at the New York University School for Social Research in 1938, he taught sociology at New York University from 1939 to 1941. He published 'Stafford Cripps: Prophetic Rebel' in 1941. During the Second World War he worked in Canada and England for the foreign broadcast intelligence service of the United States government, becoming head of the British empire division, and in 1943 wrote the first of several introductions to a series of books by Commonwealth leaders which appeared during the 1940s. 
Estorick settled in London in 1947 after his marriage on 12 October that year to Salome Dessau (1920-1989), textile designer and daughter of Henry Dessau, a Nottingham textile manufacturer who had left Leipzig in 1932. They had one son and one daughter. He published a second biography of Cripps, 'Stafford Cripps: Master Statesman' (1949), and 'Changing Empire: Churchill to Nehru' (1950), a history of the evolution of the British empire into the Commonwealth, becoming closely involved in Labour Party politics. From 1950 to 1953 he worked as archivist for Marks and Spencer, for which his wife was designing lace underwear; he wrote a history of the firm, which remained unpublished. 
Estorick began to collect twentieth-century Italian art after the war, and with his wife travelled frequently to Italy in the late 1940s and 1950s, visiting dealers and artists' studios. His interests focused on Italian futurism, the movement launched by the poet Marinetti in 1909 as an attempt to develop an aesthetic based on modern life and technology, especially speed and the machine. He acquired paintings by all the leading futurists, including Giacomo Balla's 'La mano del violinista' (1912), Umberto Boccioni's 'Idolo moderno' (1911), Carlo Carra's 'Uscita dal teatro' (1910), Gino Severini's 'Le boulevard' (1910), and Luigi Russolo's 'La musica' (1911). But he also collected works by other modern Italian artists, including sculpture by Medardo Rosso, drawings and sculpture by Emilio Greco, bronzes by Giacomo Manzu and Marino Marini, paintings and drawings by Mario Sironi and Massimo Campigli, still lifes and landscape etchings and drawings by Giorgio Morandi, and two early works, 'Melanconia' (1912), and 'The Revolt of the Sage' (1916), by Giorgio de Chirico. He also acquired several drawings by Modigliani, including 'Caryatid' (1916), and the oil portrait 'Dr Francois Brabander' (1918). He put his collection on show in a series of public exhibitions beginning in 1954, and in 1956 mounted an exhibition, 'Modern Italian Art from the Estorick Collection', composed entirely of works from his own collection, at the Tate Gallery in London. In 1979 the Italian government awarded him the title 'commendatore' for his services in promoting Italian art. 
In 1960 Estorick gave up collecting and moved to full-time art dealing. He opened the Grosvenor Gallery in Mayfair that year, selling works by artists such as Chagall and Magritte as well as by previously unknown painters, especially from Czechoslovakia. He also turned his attention to modern Russian art, in particular the art of the Russian avant-garde during the revolutionary period, and he mounted an exhibition in 1965 of the works of Oskar Rabin ('b'. 1928), the leader of 'unofficial art' in Russia in the 1960s, the first one-man show by a living Russian artist. He also mounted the first London exhibition devoted to El Lissitsky, in 1966. This was followed by 'Aspects of Russian Experimental Art, 1900-1925' in 1967. In 1966 he began to buy work by the Russian-born French artist, illustrator, costume and set designer Erte (Romain de Tertoff), whose art deco work had been popular in the 1930s. After the success of the first London Erte exhibition at the Grosvenor Gallery in 1967, when the Victoria and Albert Museum bought many of his works, the Estoricks signed an exclusive contract with Erte, and initiated a series of one-man exhibitions in Europe and the United States which brought him back into the public eye and made him one of the best-selling artists of the 1980s. Estorick published 'Erte, the Last Works: graphics and Sculptures' in 1992. 
Estorick moved to St Peter, Barbados, in 1975. In the 1980s he made frequent visits to Israel as a benefactor of the Israel Museum in Jerusalem, where he donated a study area as a memorial to his wife after her death in 1989. He was involved in establishing the centre for Jewish art at the Hebrew University, where he helped to document Jewish art from the Soviet Union, and he financed exhibitions in Jerusalem of William Blake, Leon Bakst, Erte, and the Russian avant-garde. 
Estorick -- described by one observer as 'a large bearded figure with intelligent owl-like eyes and a serious, almost pained expression' ('The Guardian') -- died on 25 December 1993 at Flat 21, 22 St James's Square, Westminster, London, following a heart attack. Shortly before his death he had set up the Eric and Salome Estorick Foundation, and in 1998 the Estorick collection of modern Italian art opened in Northampton Lodge, Islington, London, a permanent collection of eighty works of art, considered to be one of the best collections of modern Italian art outside Italy, with space for temporary exhibitions from other collections and a library of over 2000 books, mainly on early twentieth-century Italian art. 


@@@@@


doc= 51874


Fairlie, Alison Anna Bowie (1917-1993), scholar of French literature, was born on 23 May 1917 at the manse, Lerwick, Shetland, the eldest daughter of Robert Paul Fairlie, minister of the Church of Scotland, and his wife, Florence Annie Allan, 'nee' Wilson. She always maintained an intense feeling for her homeland. Scotland was where she spent most of every August, on holiday with her family, up to 1947, and thereafter she returned at every opportunity. She was educated at Ardrossan Academy, Dumfries Academy, and then, between the ages of twelve and seventeen, as a boarder at Penrhos College, Colwyn Bay. As an undergraduate at St Hugh's College, Oxford, she came into contact with the group of scholars who were then laying the foundations for Oxford's outstanding contribution to the development of French studies as a modern university discipline. She remembered with particular pleasure the lectures or tutorials given by Gustave Rudler, Will Moore, Enid Starkie, E. A. Francis, Cecile Hugon, Rhoda Sutherland, L. A. Bisson, and H. J. Hunt. At Oxford she also joined the Communist Party, at the same time as her exact contemporary Denis Healey and many others of their generation. She joined not because she had deeply studied Marxist doctrine, nor even because she had been persuaded by its principal tenets, but as a way of expressing her indignation and disgust at the rise of fascism in Europe. Her membership probably lapsed at the end of her undergraduate career, but throughout her later life her political views remained steadily of a sceptical left-wing kind. 
After taking a first in medieval and modern languages in 1938, Fairlie began work on her DPhil thesis, supervised by Rudler. Initially her research was conducted in Paris, but on the outbreak of war she returned to Britain and undertook voluntary work in billeting and rationing offices. Early in 1940 she was advised by the central employment bureau for universities to complete her research. In accordance with this advice she returned to Paris with the Zaharoff research scholarship that she had been awarded in the summer of 1939, and continued research until the fall of France in June 1940. For Fairlie these were months of intensive and exhilarating scholarly enquiry, during which she accumulated the unruly mass of material on nineteenth-century intellectual history that was eventually published, in a pruned and methodized form, in 'Leconte de Lisle's Poems on the Barbarian Races' (1947), the book form of her thesis, for which she was awarded a DPhil in 1943. What emerges from her own modestly worded accounts of this period is the single-mindedness of her devotion to scholarship -- part of her fully expected the Bibliotheque Nationale to remain open in defiance of the German armies as they advanced on Paris -- and the good-humoured courage with which she faced physical danger. By the time she reached Bordeaux, and a cargo steamer prepared to convey her back to Britain, the local docks and shipping offshore were already under German bombardment. 
The years 1940-42 saw Fairlie back in Oxford, finishing her thesis. From September 1942 she served for two years as a temporary administrative officer with the Foreign Office, spending most of her time in naval section 6 at Bletchley Park. Her academic career began in the autumn of 1944, when she was appointed lecturer in French at Girton College, Cambridge. She was elected fellow and director of studies in modern languages in 1946, and university lecturer two years later. The arrival of Odette de Mourgues as a research fellow of Girton in 1948 marked the beginning of a long professional collaboration and a lifelong friendship between the two. In 1967 Fairlie became university reader, and in 1972 the first holder of a personal professorship in the Cambridge French department. Although she repeatedly refused offers of professorships at other universities, new and old, her outlook was in no way parochial. In 1968 and 1969 she was elected president of the Society for French Studies; in 1969 a member of the council of the Association Internationale des Etudes Francaises, becoming one of its vice-presidents in 1983; and in 1972 a member of the editorial board of 'French Studies'. Her election to an honorary fellowship of St Hugh's in 1972 gave her particular pleasure. She was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1984, and became one of the founding honorary senior research fellows of the Institute of Romance Studies, University of London, in 1989. 
Very soon after her arrival in Cambridge Fairlie's name became a byword in the university and outside for her abilities as a college teacher. She had an unusual and not entirely comfortable tutorial style. She considered that the function of the tutorial hour was for students to bring and explore their own ideas: 'they' were expected to do the talking, with only occasional incisive comments from her. If they had not done enough work, or if their ideas dried up, she would ask a probing question and then simply wait and wait for the answer, the ash on her cigarette growing ever longer and sometimes finally dropping off on her clothes. The silence would grow until it became unbearable, and would at last be broken either by an admission of ignorance from the student or by a pointed remark from her to the effect that such and such 'needed further thought'. Many Girtonians found this technique terrifying. 
Fairlie's most remarkable achievement as a university teacher was the central part she played in relaunching modern languages as a serious intellectual discipline in British universities. Until then the subject had been something of a poor relation to history and classics, and had often had little ambition beyond the efficient inculcation of basic linguistic skills. Fairlie brought to the study of French a keen responsiveness to the grain and texture of literary language, and in her own critical writing skilfully exposed layers of implied meaning in works that others had been content to characterize simply as 'masterpieces' or as 'typical of their time'. 
In her criticism Fairlie's manner was often one of questioning and speculation, but the questions she asked and the hypotheses she ventured invariably took their cue from the words on the author's page and, far from clothing the literary text in interpretative fantasies, sought to bring the reader back with clearer sight and a renewed power of enjoyment to its central riches. During a period when criticism of French literature suffered from severe factional narrowness and ill temper, she remained generously plural in her interests and approach. While attending closely to the formal and expressive properties of the individual literary work, she remained scrupulously aware that many things lying beyond that work -- manuscripts, variant readings or 'sources', the author's personal relationships or his letters -- could prompt the scholar to valuable new kinds of critical perception. Perhaps most important of all, the language she herself used was, in its attunement to the subjects discussed, its economy, and its discreet inventiveness, a lesson to all those critics who sought, by their luxuriant verbal displays, to outwit and outwrite their writers. 
The close examination of Leconte de Lisle was an improbable training ground for a scholar who later contributed decisively to the study of Constant, Baudelaire, Flaubert, and Nerval. For although the poet in mid-career was still driven by strong sexual and political passions, he had the ambition of becoming the exemplary literary artist of his age and this involved him in an extensive programme of scholarly and semi-scholarly reading. Fairlie took her reader back from the serried verbal textures of Leconte de Lisle's poems to the bibliographical labyrinth in which they had been conceived. What was more impressive, however, than her willingness to document the poet's reading was her insistence upon historicizing his historical project. The historians of Leconte de Lisle's day, upon whose work he drew so trustingly, were often exceptionally unreliable. Their skewed and imprecise vision of the past was then subject to a variety of further distortions, conscious and unconscious, as the poetic imagination played upon it and turned it into verse. Fairlie proved adept at detecting and teasing out the disparate source materials that lay behind Leconte de Lisle's orotund periods. Her readings of the 'Poemes barbares' were a series of elaborate radiographic portraits, and the book as a whole offered a working model of the acquisitive and integrative literary imagination at work. 
This quality of Fairlie's book prepared her extremely well for her later researches. Although she never again devoted such intensive scrutiny to any single body of textual sources, her later work was born of the same fascination with literary texts as complex semantic fields. Constant, Baudelaire, Flaubert, and even Nerval, who was extremely erudite in his own fashion, did not call for the same sort of detective work as had Leconte de Lisle. But in Fairlie's view all four writers did demand to be discussed in terms of the co-present and interactive ideas, images, and verbal motifs that their works contained. Her skill in anatomizing such canonical texts as Constant's 'Adolphe', Baudelaire's 'Les fleurs du mal', or Flaubert's 'Madame Bovary', and her ability to preserve, while doing so, an overall sense of their drama, made her essays and monographs into standard works. 
Fairlie's 'retirement' was energetic: during it she was a member of the editorial team responsible for the new 'OEuvres completes' of Benjamin Constant and always available to help and encourage an innumerable company of friends, colleagues, and fellow scholars from around the world. Her appetite for experience persisted even after she had been diagnosed as having inoperable lung cancer. Equally persistent, however, was the wish to share her experience with others, and it was this that made her into a compelling literary critic, an inspiring teacher, and an irreplaceable friend. She died at Papworth Hospital near Cambridge on 21 February 1993; her body was cremated at Cambridge. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 51875


Colville family (per. 1861-1916), iron- and steelmasters, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 51876


Denny, Peter (1821-1895), shipbuilder and shipowner, was born in Dumbarton on 25 October 1821, the fifth son of William Denny (1779-1833) and his wife, Christeanne, formerly McIntyre. The Denny family had been involved in boat-building in the town since at least the mid-eighteenth century and were then engaged in developing steamships. Denny was apprenticed at first to a local lawyer and then at the Dumbarton glassworks. At the age of twenty-one he joined his brothers in the shipbuilding trade, gaining experience in bookkeeping in the counting house of Robert Napier & Sons. When his brothers established their own shipbuilding firm at Dumbarton in 1844 he became a junior partner, using his commercial knowledge to organize the office. On 26 January 1846 he married Helen Leslie, with whom he had eight sons, including the shipbuilder and engineer Sir Archibald Denny, and seven daughters. 
In 1850 Denny went into partnership with two engineers, John McAusland and John Tulloch, to form the marine engineering business of Tulloch and Denny, to operate in parallel with, but independently of, the shipyard. His eldest brother, William, after whom the business was named, died four years later, leaving Peter virtually in sole charge as his other brother James had more or less withdrawn from the firm. Learning from Napiers, he saw the advantage of investing in shipping ventures to secure a market for the yard. At the time of the Disruption in the Church of Scotland in 1843, he had joined the Free Church of Scotland, which brought him in touch with the partners in the shipping firm of Paddy Henderson & Co. He began to build ships for them and to take shares in their various ventures, including support for the Free Church colony on the south island of New Zealand. The business grew rapidly and in 1859 a new shipyard, the North yard, was acquired and the engine works extended. His brother James and John Tulloch retired in 1862; Peter Denny took sole charge of the shipyard, and the engine works was renamed Denny & Co. An enlightened employer, he laid out at the same time a model factory village -- Dennistoun -- for the workforce of both businesses at a cost of almost $3300. A completely new shipyard was constructed in 1866-7. Despite his commercial background he served on the parliamentary committee on the design of warships in 1871 and on the royal commission on the loss of life and property at sea in 1876. 
Using profits made from building blockade runners and speculating in Confederate bonds during the American Civil War, Denny began to invest very heavily with the Hendersons in new shipping companies, personally buying large blocks of shares in 1868 in the Albion Shipping Company and the Irrawaddy Flotilla Company. Building vessels for the latter, which provided services on the shallow winding Irrawaddy River in Burma, was a considerable technical challenge that demanded not only the development of special hull shapes but also lightly constructed engines with well-distributed weight. The firm's success in overcoming these obstacles yielded a flood of orders and profits from the flotilla company. Technical improvements, particularly in hull forms, along with the management of the yard and engine works were increasingly the responsibility of Peter's eldest son, 
In 1870 William Denny began to experiment with piece-work for the iron trades in the yards to improve productivity, which was eventually extended to all the firm's trades. He also established an awards scheme -- the first of its kind in Britain -- to encourage members of the workforce to suggest improvements in working practices, methods, and equipment. At the same time he introduced progressive speed trials over a measured mile for all vessels built in the yards. This led to an interest in hull forms and contact with the well-known naval architect William Froude. Denny published many papers on this subject and on the techniques of construction. He designed revolutionary shallow-draught vessels for the Irrawaddy and other estuarial navigations and from 1876 pioneered steel shipbuilding, culminating in the construction of the 'Rotomahana' (1879) -- the first ocean-going steel ship. To enhance even further the quality and efficiency of the firm's hull shapes, he persuaded his father to build the first commercial test tank in the world at Dumbarton in 1881, with assistance from Froude's son, superintendent of the Admiralty test tank in Torquay. This investment was part of a massive extension of the yard, which included a new wet dock, longer berths, and heavier cranes. Critical of Lloyd's rules for the construction of iron steamships, William Denny was appointed a member of the Board of Trade load-line committee in 1884. 
By handing over much of the day-to-day management of the business to his son, Peter Denny had more time to devote to his other business interests and to winning custom for the yard. He became chairman or a director of twelve companies, mostly enterprises connected with the Henderson family, including Paddy Henderson itself, the Albion Steamship Company, the British and Burmese Steam Navigation Company, and Rio Tinto Mines, earning during his career over $20,000 in fees. He cultivated orders from foreign governments, particularly Spain, Portugal, and Belgium, all of which honoured him for his services. He also willingly loaned money to local firms either to get them out of difficulty or to help them develop. Befitting his wealth and status he built an impressive home -- Helenslee, named after his wife -- overlooking the Clyde at Dumbarton, between 1866 and 1868. He gave large sums to charitable bodies such as Glasgow Western Infirmary and the Glasgow home for incurables, and, deeply committed to education, he established scholarships at Dumbarton schools and at the University of Glasgow. His services to education were recognized with the award of an LLD by the university in 1890. 
In an attempt to repeat their success on the Irrawaddy, the Denny and the Henderson families took a large stake in La Platense Flotilla Company in 1882 to operate river steamers in Argentina and Uruguay. William Denny was appointed a director to represent the families' interests on the board. Repeatedly troubled with bouts of ill-health, put down to overwork, he suffered a breakdown in the autumn of 1882. Having returned home after a long convalescence on the continent, he and his wife were taken seriously ill with typhoid in 1883. During his recuperation his Dumbarton home, Bellfield, with its valuable library, was destroyed by fire, encouraging a morbid fascination with the medico-religious philosophy of James Hinton. Although he had already left the Free Church of Scotland in 1873 and joined the more liberal United Presbyterians, this did not prevent him from believing that he was destined to die young. 
When he returned to the yard William Denny threw himself into work unsparingly. Determined to prevent stoppages and strikes, he pioneered a works council in 1884, first to discuss the charitable giving of the workforce but soon to negotiate new rules and to settle demarcation and other disputes before they became a problem. The rules, which unusually applied to the management as well as to the workforce, embraced the novel concept that all fines for infringements would be returned to the employees. The La Platense venture never lived up to its promise and was taken over in its entirety by the Dennys and Hendersons in 1885-6. In the face of severe local competition, matters went from bad to worse. William Denny recommended that the local opposition should be bought out at the huge cost of $720,000, a decision which proved ill-advised. Deeply troubled by this experience, he sailed for South America in June 1886 in an attempt to save the business. Conscience-stricken by the scale of the catastrophe, he committed suicide in Buenos Aires on 17 March 1887. He was survived by his wife, Lelia, eldest daughter of Leon Serena of Venice, with whom he had a son and three daughters. La Platense was wound up three years later at a total loss. 
The effect of this tragedy on Peter Denny was devastating. Already more or less retired, he withdrew from the business. He died at Helenslee on 22 August 1895, leaving about $200,000 -- only a fraction of his net drawings during his career, which have been estimated at nearly $1.5 million. His wife survived him and died on 5 March 1905. 


@@@@@


doc= 51878


Lithgow family (per. c.1870-1952), shipbuilders and industrialists, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 51879


William Todd Lithgow (1854-1908), shipbuilder, and his sons, James and Henry. Born at Port Glasgow, William Todd Lithgow was the second son of James Lithgow (died 1870), a cotton yarn merchant, and his wife, Margaret MacNicol (died 1861). His father had moved from Glasgow to Greenock before setting up in Port Glasgow in 1856. Lithgow became a premium apprentice with the old-established Port Glasgow shipbuilder John Reid & Co., and he was trained as a ship's draughtsman just at the time when the River Clyde was emerging as the main seat of iron and steam shipbuilding in Britain. 
The young William Todd Lithgow had little opportunity to draw on family support in developing his career: his mother died when he was only seven, and his father died in 1870 when William was still only sixteen and had barely begun his apprenticeship. By 1874 he was acting draughtsman for John Reid & Co. and he had invested his $1000 patrimony in a new partnership with an experienced shipbuilder, Joseph Russell, and another young man, Anderson Rodger. The firm of Russell & Co. had a capital of $7000 -- $5000 from Russell with $1000 each from the two young men. The new firm did not try to rival the emerging metal and steam shipyards which required large capitals, but concentrated on exploiting the opportunity of the depression years of 1874-9 by building large, simple, iron-hulled sailing ships, designed for long hauls of bulk commodities which did not have to meet urgent delivery deadlines. From the outset Lithgow influenced the company in designing semi-standard bulk cargo sailing vessels with interchangeable components and crew-saving devices, and the company also helped to sell its ships by taking shares with the shipowners. The formula was simple, but effective. 
The new company leased its shipyard, the Bay Yard, and by 1879, as the depression eased, extended its capacity by leasing a second yard, the Cartsdyke Yard at Port Glasgow. Two years later in 1881 it purchased the site of what was to be its main yard, the Kingston Yard, establishing there a new yard with six berths. Between 1874 and 1881 William Todd Lithgow's investment of $1000 had grown to $4893, and he had also withdrawn $7830 from the business, of which $4951 had been reinvested in ships. As Lithgow's fortune prospered, in 1879 he married; his wife was Agnes Birkmyre, daughter of Henry Birkmyre, rope manufacturer, whose family owned the Gourock Rope Company and were also substantial shipowners. The couple had two sons. The elder, 


@@@@@


doc= 51880


Henry Lithgow (1886-1948), was born on 23 December 1886. 
The 1880s were a busy period for the firm of Russell & Co., in which Lithgow acted as the chief designer. While the relationships between Lithgow and the older partner, Joseph Russell, were amicable, that with Anderson Rodger was strained and Lithgow indicated a desire to leave the partnership in 1889. He was dissuaded from doing so by Russell, who offered to withdraw himself from the partnership to leave Lithgow in control; matters, however, deteriorated and in 1891, with Rodger ill, Lithgow again sought to leave the partnership; it was dissolved by mutual agreement on 30 November 1891, leaving Lithgow as sole proprietor of Russell & Co. operating from the Cartsdyke and Kingston yards; Rodger retained the Bay Yard and continued to build independently. That Joseph Russell was close to William Lithgow is clear in the terms of the settlement. Russell lent Lithgow $122,965 to buy out Rodger and set up his own operations; Russell also continued to act as a bookkeeper for Lithgow and as an adviser on the purchasing of timber. By 1891 Lithgow's capital in the business had grown to $159,386. In addition, since 1874 he had withdrawn capital of $67,940, of which $40,681 was reinvested in ships. Russell's judgement of Lithgow was that he was 'very clever, sharp, light headed but strong willed'. This had been amply borne out by Lithgow's rapid progress in business. 
Under Lithgow's sole control the firm of Russell & Co. prospered, and by the mid-1890s was transferring its formula of constructing standard cargo ships to a new generation of through-deck tramp steamers, of between 4000 and 5000 gross registered tons. He also began concentrating more on steamship construction and the last sailing vessel was launched in 1894. Profitability remained strong in these years, rising from $15,500 in 1899 to $123,601 by 1901, the year in which William Todd Lithgow brought his elder son, James, into the business as an apprentice. With an eye to diversifying and securing his personal wealth, William Todd Lithgow ceased investing in shipping and transferred into equities, purchasing almost $200,000 worth of stock between 1901 and 1903, while at the same time buying a country estate, Ormsary, in Knapdale, Argyll, in 1902. Large capitals of $313,304 were withdrawn from the business between 1903 and 1906, most of this being transferred as 'inter vivos' gifts to his sons; the younger son, Henry, took up his apprenticeship in 1905. 
Even as the family business grew in wealth and prosperity, William Todd Lithgow declined, his health breaking early in 1907. Before the end of the year he had undergone surgery for stomach cancer and in November 1907 he brought his two sons into full partnership, while his long-time friend Joseph Russell came out of retirement to help the young men run the business. The founder of the family business and fortune died from cancer on 7 June 1908 at Drums, at the early age of fifty-three. His business career had lasted only twenty-six years, in which he had turned his $1000 investment into a fortune of about $2.2 million; his personal estate at death was valued at $1,000,237, of which $102,000 was invested in shipping, but he had also made cumulative drawings of nearly $1,240,000 from the business during his working life. His sons inherited the leading cargo construction yard on the Clyde, but they themselves were only twenty-five and twenty-two, with little experience of the business. 
At the time of their father's death the two brothers still lived at Drums; they had been schooled together by private tutor before both going to Glasgow Academy and then serving their apprenticeships. They were remarkably close, sharing a staunch Presbyterian upbringing and outlook, and were deeply attached to the attractions of the grouse and deer shoots on the family estate at Ormsary. They were a complementary team, James taking the lead as the elder, while Henry supported and followed in his path, although later correspondence shows that once Henry had made up his mind his elder brother often recognized that he could not be persuaded to another course of action. Where James could be abrupt and forceful, Henry was a man who liked to take time to think over a problem and in this he was a moderating influence on his brother. It is clear that they trusted each other completely and that in business no important matter was ever entered into that did not have both brothers' full support and approval. 
In the six years between their father's death and the beginning of the First World War James and Henry Lithgow quickly grew into the control of their family business, and began to lay the foundations for expansion. In 1911 the original yard of Russell & Co., the Bay Yard, was acquired on the death of Anderson Rodger; this added to the Lithgow capacity while ensuring that no newcomer could set up business in the Lithgow domain at Port Glasgow. At the same time, James Lithgow took a first step into wider industry affairs, becoming vice-president of the Clyde Shipbuilders' Association; he was its president in 1912-13. It was there that he met and formed a friendship with Andrew Rae Duncan, an industrial lawyer who became secretary of the Shipbuilding Employers' Federation, then a director and industrial adviser to the Bank of England and chairman of the Central Electricity Generating Board. He was to be greatly influential in bringing James Lithgow into public affairs and involving him in industrial reconstruction in the 1930s. Before the war, the only other involvement that James Lithgow had outside the business was in the volunteer force of the Port Glasgow company of the first Renfrew and Dumbarton Royal Garrison Artillery. He had been involved in this since 1905 and was commissioned as a second lieutenant. When the volunteer force became the Territorial Army in 1908, James Lithgow was promoted to the rank of captain. This involvement was a deliberate choice of the two brothers; the elder took on the public responsibility in case of war, while the younger Henry was to concentrate on the shipyard management. Consequently when war did come James spent the first year and a half manning the river defence unit at Fort Matilda in Greenock. In summer 1915 he and his men were sent to Plymouth and then to Lydd in Kent to train with new howitzers. The battery finally sailed for France in February 1916 and James Lithgow spent the next fifteen months at the western front, gained the Military Cross, and advanced to the rank of brevet colonel. 
In contrast Henry kept control in the Port Glasgow yards and proved to be a tough and capable manager, maintaining production under difficult conditions while being forcefully critical of the way the government squandered effort and resources in ship construction. During these years, with the agreement of his brother, Henry took the chance to expand the business. In 1915 the Lithgows took over the local yard of Robert Duncan & Co., and in 1917 bought into David Rowan & Co., marine engineers at Govan in Glasgow. 
From letters written to Henry it is clear that James Lithgow ultimately came to regard his time at the front as a waste of his talent; after the battle of the Somme he wrote in November 1916: 'The authorities can claim what they like for military service: three of the four juniors who came out with us are now considered fit to do my job here and the supply of such fellows is ample. I am therefore forced to the conclusion that I would be more useful helping you in our own business than messing about out here.' However, James Lithgow's desire to return to his shipbuilding business and employ his talents more effectively in aid of the war effort were not to be quickly answered. Not until May 1917, when Sir Eric Campbell Geddes was appointed controller of merchant shipbuilding, was James Lithgow finally recalled from the front to take up a new position of director of merchant shipbuilding with the responsibility of ensuring that the merchant yards met the country's needs for new tonnage. Quite suddenly he was enmeshed in a network of influence, forming working relationships with men who were to be useful contacts in his later career, notably through his work with Lord Pirrie, controller of Harland and Woolf, and Lord Weir of Eastwood. 
James Lithgow was able to return to Port Glasgow to join his brother early in 1919, and at this time the name of the business was at last changed from Russell & Co. to Lithgows Ltd and the brothers changed the partnership to a private limited company. This was a prelude to much expansion and merger activity, encouraged by the buoyancy of demand for new tonnage at the end of the war. The Lithgows widened their own control of the local industry, acquiring another two yards in 1919, those of Dunlop Bremner & Co. and William Hamilton & Co. The Clydeside industry was then also reshaping itself in order to secure its supplies of steel, and the Lithgows integrated into coal, iron, and steel with the acquisition of James Dunlop & Co. Consequently, by 1920 the two brothers presided over a much enlarged business empire, which was vertically integrated with interests in coal, iron and steel making, marine engineering, and shipbuilding, and in shipowning and ship operation. 
With both brothers now at home in Port Glasgow, the pattern of management reshaped itself, with James based in his office in the old William Hamilton's yard and Henry in the East Yard, purchased from Duncan & Co., while the Kingston site was the base for their manager, John Muirhead. The three worked closely together and on this foundation the Lithgow yards sustained a high level of activity during the difficult years of the 1920s and 1930s. Between 1920 and 1939 the Lithgow group launched 1.017 million tons of merchant ships, making them the third yard by rank in Britain behind Swan Hunter and Harland and Woolf. During this period they launched nearly twice as much tonnage as the next ranked Clyde yard of Barclay Curle & Co. 
In the period following the First World War Henry Lithgow and John Muirhead were closely concerned with the day-to-day management of the yards while James Lithgow was soon sucked into public affairs. In 1920 James Lithgow became president of the Shipbuilding Employers' Federation; this re-established his wartime contacts with Lord Weir of Eastwood who was then president of the National Confederation of Employers' Organisations, and James Lithgow became vice-president of that body in 1922, representing the employers at the International Labour Organization in Geneva between 1922 and 1927. There he met Horace Wilson, permanent secretary of the Ministry of Labour, who was to become industrial adviser to the government and ultimately head of the civil service. 
Even as his public career was opening up, James Lithgow began to enjoy a different style of life: in 1924, at the age of forty-one, he married Gwendolyn Amy Harrison, daughter of John Robinson Harrison, a former Clyde shipowner. The couple had a son and two daughters. He then also built his own home, Gleddoch House at Langbank, finally moving out of Drums, leaving his brother Henry to live at home with his mother. Henry then purchased another house of his own at Ormsary where he could entertain his own guests. Like James he was passionately fond of country pursuits, and at the same time he purchased a grouse moor at Duchal in the Renfrewshire hills behind the shipyards, where he built a 7 mile long light railway to carry him and his guests on the shoots. Henry Lithgow remained unmarried. This busy period also saw the Lithgows again extend their industrial empire by acquiring the engine works of Rankine and Blackmore in 1923. James Lithgow's public involvement brought him a baronetcy from Stanley Baldwin in 1923. 
The Lithgow brothers had very strong views on the post-war condition of British industry, and James was their joint spokesman. They both believed that competitiveness could only be regained through reducing costs, and by organized labour delivering a fair day's work for fair wages. They were openly critical of the attitude of organized labour to wages and to manning arrangements, and believed that labour was obstructive to their efforts to introduce labour-saving machinery which could have improved productivity. They also feared that the excessive wartime expansion of capacity, costs, and wages would have to be paid for, and this was borne out in the difficulties of the later 1920s and early 1930s. Both James and Henry Lithgow were ultimately to be converted to the view that a fundamental readjustment of industry was required which involved the rationalization of capacity, bringing with it a loss of jobs and the closure of redundant capacity. 
Sir James Lithgow took a leading role in preparing the shipbuilding industry for this experience, being the main spokesman in designing the industry rationalization scheme. At this point his friendship with Andrew Duncan made it possible for him to bring his proposal to the attention of Montagu Norman, governor of the Bank of England, who was committed to the concept of rationalization, as well as seeing it as a measure to untangle the morass of debt which bore down on the banks and heavy industry by the end of the 1920s. The Bank of England agreed to underwrite the shipbuilding industry's scheme, which created the rationalization company National Shipbuilders' Security Ltd (NSS) in November 1930. Lithgow was not only the major industry spokesman for this purpose but became chairman of NSS in 1930 and at the same time president of the Federation of British Industry. In the same year he showed his commitment to industrial regeneration by becoming chairman of the Scottish National Development Council executive committee. 
Under Lithgow's guidance NSS successfully purchased and closed about one-third of shipbuilding industry capacity between 1930 and 1939. James Lithgow defended this action and the loss of jobs as necessary to put the industry on a firm and competitive footing which would allow it to re-employ men as business regained momentum. He also believed it was necessary for industries to put their own house in order so that the government would not be drawn in. The first great casualty of NSS was the huge Beardmore Yard at Dalmuir on the Clyde, in which the Bank of England held considerable debt. Lithgow's role in relieving the Bank of England of this responsibility was not unconnected with the terms on which, in 1934, the Lithgow brothers were able to purchase Beardmore debentures from the Bank of England in order to take control of that great iron and steel company. 
The steel industry was also subject to rationalization at this time and the Lithgow ownership of James Dunlop & Co. involved them in the rationalization of Scottish steelmaking capacity. The main player here was John Craig of the Colville group; in discussion with Craig the Lithgows agreed to merge their Dunlop holdings with the Colvilles in 1931, as a consequence of which both brothers joined the board of the Colville companies. Later in 1934 the Bank of England accepted the advice of their steel rationalizer J. Bruce Gardner to help the Lithgow brothers buy the shares of the Steel Company of Scotland. Their ownership of these shares posed a threat to the growing monopoly of the Colville group in supplying the shipbuilding market, and encouraged the Colville group also to incorporate the Steel Company of Scotland in its rationalization scheme. When the Colvilles purchased the Steel Company of Scotland from the Lithgows in 1936 they paid $951,750, while the Lithgows had purchased the company for $672,975; the profit, however, was donated by the two brothers to the Church of Scotland. 
Henry and James Lithgow consequently played a significant role in the creation of the new Scottish steel industry in the 1930s, as well as securing their own interests in shipbuilding. Their involvement with Montagu Norman and Andrew Duncan again placed them in the position to acquire the shares of the troubled Fairfield yard after it was involved in the insolvency of the Anchor Line. Norman and Duncan made it possible for the Lithgows to acquire Fairfields and bring that great but ailing yard within the Lithgow group in 1935. 
The Lithgows led by James Lithgow emerged as leading players in Scottish industrial politics and policy in the 1930s. While James took the public role, he was enabled to do so because Henry took the brunt of the responsibility of the day-to-day industrial management of their expanding business empire. James Lithgow also emerged as the leading spokesman for new industrial development in Scotland and he was much involved with the Scottish Economic Committee and its labours to attract new lighter industry to the economy in these years. Henry supported James's efforts in this regard because both brothers shared a highly moral philosophy on business responsibility. They believed that 'those who had made their money in Scotland have an obligation to keep it there and to use their best endeavours to develop and keep the health of the industry to which they owe their own prosperity'. 
This same commitment to their industry and their country set the pattern for their roles in the Second World War. Sir James was almost automatically called to London by Winston Churchill in 1940 to become controller of merchant shipbuilding and repairs. He also became one of the lords of the Admiralty, was briefly controller of tanks, and also acted as deputy chairman of the industrial capacity committee of the production council, working there with Harold MacMillan as chairman. He was also president of the Iron and Steel Federation between 1943 and 1945, while retaining his chairmanship of both Beardmores and Fairfields. The public pressure on James Lithgow was obvious and intense, but the private pressure on his brother Henry was unremitting. Henry now lived alone at Drums after his mother's death, and his sole family life came from his attachment to his brother's family. He carried most of the burden of wartime management of the Lithgow yards, and he was usually there in the yards seven days each week unless James was home from London and they could snatch a little shared leisure together. 
At the end of the war James returned eagerly to Port Glasgow to rejoin his brother and his family, but neither brother was long to survive the wartime pressures. Henry had never been robust and his health deteriorated abruptly in 1947; he died at home at Drums on 28 May 1948. Except for wartime duty the two brothers had never lived more than a few miles apart and had always depended heavily on each other. Henry's death faced the Lithgows with death duties of $2 million, which Sir James paid within a week of receiving the statement. Henry's death was a bitter blow to James, for the demands for new tonnage were unceasing and the post-war scarcities made it difficult for yards to meet all the demands made upon them. James, however, was not to have the opportunity to cope effectively with the post-war condition of the industry, for four months after his brother's death he suffered a serious thrombosis while shooting on his estate at Ormsary. He fought the consequences of his stroke for three years but never fully recovered, dying on 23 February 1952 at Gleddoch House, Langbank. He was buried at Ormsary, Argyll. He was survived by his wife. 
With the death of the two brothers, Sir James's son William inherited the baronetcy and also the largest private shipbuilding concern in the world. The two brothers had been given early control of a substantial shipbuilding and shipping business when their father died, and during the next forty years extended this business into Scotland's leading industrial dynasty. They did so through re-investing heavily in their own operations and through long hours of hard work in the yards and in public service, sustained throughout by a strong sense of duty and a desire to give back to others what life had delivered to them. They were both staunch supporters of the Church of Scotland, which benefited greatly from their donations. They were also continuous benefactors of their industrial community and especially of the town of Port Glasgow, which honoured Sir James in 1951 by creating him the first honorary citizen of the burgh. The driving force behind the Lithgows was a desire to serve and give value for money. Henry made his contribution in the yards and on the boards of the companies in the Lithgow group, while James extended his service to the industry and to the country at large, emerging as an industrial statesman of rare quality. 
Between 1874 and 1952 the Lithgow family created an industrial empire unrivalled in Scotland's economic history. Little of consequence was achieved in Scotland's industrial economy between the 1920s and the 1940s that did not in significant measure owe something to the contribution, the drive, the energy, and the leadership of the Lithgows of Port Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 51882


Smith, Madeleine Hamilton (1835/6-1928), accused poisoner, was born in 1835 or in the first quarter of 1836, eldest of three daughters and two sons of James Smith (1808-1863), a rich Glasgow architect, and his wife, the daughter of David Hamilton (1768-1843), architect. Educated for three years at Mrs Gorton's Academy for Young Ladies, a boarding-school at Clapton, near Hackney, until 1853, she was a serious, voracious reader with an independent outlook and a talent for intrigue. 
At the end of 1854, or possibly in March 1855, (Pierre) Emile L'Angelier ('b'. 1826?) procured an introduction to her in a Glasgow street. He was a Frenchman who had risen from recent destitution to respectability as a packing clerk in a Glasgow merchant house. This outwardly personable, if volatile, young man was vain of his success with women and hoped to raise his station in life by marriage into the moneyed classes. In 1852 he had made suicidal gestures after being jilted by a prosperous woman. L'Angelier reached an understanding with Madeleine Smith by April 1855. Romantic and self-dramatizing, they maintained a constant, clandestine correspondence (in her case written with perfumed inks) and became secretly engaged. She attempted to break with him in the summer, but L'Angelier responded with sanctimonious reproaches and gently implied that he might send her letters (which she had asked him to burn) to her father. The latter refused consent to their marriage in September 1855. During the winter their surreptitious assignations resumed. Probably on 6 May (possibly 6 June) 1856 they became lovers in the woods at Rowaleyn, her father's country house near Helensburgh. 'If we did wrong last night it must have been in the excitement of our love', she wrote exultantly next day. 'Tell me, pet, were you angry at me for allowing you to do what you did -- was it very bad of me.... I suppose we ought to have waited until we were married' ('Trial of Madeleine Smith... for Poisoning', 96). 'My dearest and beloved wife Mimi', L'Angelier replied with characteristically joyless ingratitude, 'Since I saw you I have been wretchedly sad.... Why, Mimi, did you give way after your promises?... I do not understand, my pet, your not bleeding, for every woman having her virginity must bleed.... Be sure and tell me immediately you are ill next time and if at your regular period. (Wilson, 77)' Later in 1856 Smith's passion cooled, and on 28 January 1857 she privately accepted a proposal of marriage from a prosperous neighbour, William Harper Minnoch. When in February she broke with L'Angelier he refused to return her letters, which he threatened to give her father. Foreseeing her irredeemable ruin she implored L'Angelier not to disgrace her, and contrived a reconciliation. Near the end of that month he was taken ill with a severe stomach upset but recovered after a few days. On 12 March she agreed to marry Minnoch in June; on 6, 18, and 19 March she bought arsenic (telling the chemists variously that it was to kill rats or for use as a face wash); she invited L'Angelier to her house on 21 March (afterwards denying that they actually met), and on 23 March he died. Her letters were soon discovered in L'Angelier's office and lodgings, and his body, when exhumed on 31 March, was found to contain eighty-eight grains of arsenic; she was taken into custody. 
On 30 June 1857 Smith's trial opened at the high court of the judiciary in Edinburgh. James, first Baron Moncrieff, who prosecuted her, contended that on three nights she had invited L'Angelier to her father's house at 7 Blythswood Square, Glasgow, and handed drinks of poisoned cocoa or coffee to him from her bedroom window so as to prevent exposure of her transgressions and to extricate herself from a disastrous entanglement. Moncrieff declared the story of her intrigue with L'Angelier 'should carry a chill of horror into every family' ('Trial of Madeleine Smith... for Poisoning', 132-3). The correspondence read in court, he said, disclosed 'almost incredible evidences of disgrace, of sin, of degradation' (ibid., 128). Certainly the assumptions of the Victorian paterfamilias were brutally affronted by the revelations of her trial, which created a national sensation. Her candid sexual pleasure and deception of her father seemed equally depraved. John Hope, the lord justice clerk, typically condemned the 'ill-regulated, disorderly, distempered, licentious feeling' of her letters and likened her to 'a common prostitute' (Smith, 272-3). Though at times the language of her prosecutors suggests that she was on trial for her virginity, or that she must be punished for her sexual independence, there was indubitably a case for her to answer once arsenic was discovered in L'Angelier's corpse and her efforts to buy it were traced. Smith was superbly defended by John Inglis. He contended that L'Angelier had destroyed himself either deliberately (citing some loose talk of suicide) or accidentally, for L'Angelier was a hypochondriac with a tendency to rash self-medication. Though Smith's situation between her affianced and discarded lovers was desperate, Inglis denied her motive to kill, for there was no advantage in L'Angelier's death as long as her incriminating letters were unretrieved and liable to the exposure which she dreaded. Hope's concluding address indicated that though there could be strong presumptions of guilt, at crucial points the prosecution's case was 'radically defective in evidence' so that 'the guilt could not be brought home to her' (Smith, 254, 271). There was no proof of their meetings (because L'Angelier's appointment book was ruled inadmissible as evidence) and therefore no proof of the administration of poison. On 9 July 1857 the jury returned a majority verdict of not guilty on the charge of feloniously administering poison with intent to murder on 19-20 February, a verdict of not proven on a similar charge of administering poison on 22-3 February, and a majority verdict (13 to 2) of not proven on the third charge of murder on 22-3 March. 
Smith was firm, calm, and self-possessed during her ordeal. On 4 July 1861 she married George Young Wardle (1836-1910) (son of Hugh Wardle, druggist), artist and student of medieval art, afterwards foreman-manager of William Morris. They had one son and one daughter. She became a socialist and was treasurer of the Socialist League's Bloomsbury branch from its foundation in 1885. After George Wardle's death she emigrated to the United States where she reportedly married a man called Sheehy, who died in 1926. At the age of ninety she was threatened with deportation as an undesirable alien. She died on 12 April 1928 at 4298 Park Avenue, Bronx, New York, and was buried as Lena Wardle Sheehy in Mount Hope cemetery, New York. She is the subject of Emma Robinson's novel 'Madeleine Graham' (1864). 


@@@@@


doc= 51886


Shortt, William Hamilton (1881-1971), railway engineer and horologist, was born on 28 September 1881 at 22 Courthope Villas, Worple Road, Wimbledon, Surrey, the only son of Charles Henry Shortt (1852-1915), civil engineer, and his wife, Fanny Catherine Lise, 'nee' Dobson (1855-1950), sister of the poet Austin Dobson. He was educated at Christ's College, Blackheath, and the Goldsmiths' Technical Institute before joining the London and South Western Railway (LSWR) in 1902, as an articled pupil of the chief engineer, J. W. Jacomb-Hood. During his three years under Jacomb-Hood he continued to study at the Goldsmiths' Institute and also at Birkbeck Institute and King's College, London. Jacomb-Hood demonstrated his confidence in his pupil's ability by calling upon him to establish a civil engineering laboratory. In 1907 Shortt was elected to associate membership of the Institution of Civil Engineers, by which time he had already laid the foundations for a successful career as a railway engineer. However, a series of events occurred which added another dimension to his life, and one for which he is principally known. 
In 1906 a serious accident occurred on the LSWR when an express train was derailed at Salisbury Station with the loss of twenty-eight lives. The Board of Trade inquiry concluded that the derailment was caused by excessive speed on a curve, and in 1908 a subcommittee of the Railway Engineers Association was formed to report on this issue, under the chairmanship of Jacomb-Hood. Shortt acted as secretary and technical assistant to the subcommittee from 1908 to 1910 and in this capacity he devised an instrument for accurately recording the speed of trains. The speed was determined by measuring the time taken to traverse a known length of track, and this kindled in Shortt an interest in precision time-measurement which was to last all his life. At the same time he described a graphical method for improving existing railway curves, a subject to which he was to return in 1923. 
In 1910 a meeting took place between Shortt and Frank Hope-Jones (1868-1950) which was to have a significant effect in briefly regaining for England the pre-eminence in precision clockmaking that it had once enjoyed. Hope-Jones was the proprietor of the Synchronome Company and had been largely responsible for establishing the electric clock as a reliable timekeeper in the UK. Hope-Jones and Shortt were kindred spirits, professional engineers outside the horological establishment, and receptive to new ideas. Encouraged by Hope-Jones, Shortt began a series of meticulous experiments at his home workshop at Bramcote Road in Putney and also at the Synchronome workshops in Clerkenwell in order to improve the performance of the pendulum clock. This occupied most of his spare time until 1916, when he was released from his railway duties to serve in France as a captain in the Royal Engineers. Following demobilization in 1919 he resumed his position with the LSWR and continued his horological experiments. 
It had been recognized for some time that the ideal mechanical timekeeper was a pendulum swinging freely in a vacuum with the least possible interference, but there was no consensus about how this could be realized in practice. Hope-Jones, who was strongly influenced by the work of R. J. Rudd, was convinced that this could be achieved by using a separate slave clock to perform the normal functions of a clock and to provide an impulse to keep the free pendulum swinging. Eventually Shortt also adopted this method and was able to construct an effective free-pendulum clock, which he installed at the Royal Scottish Observatory in Edinburgh during Christmas 1921. Figures published by the astronomer royal for Scotland, Professor Sampson, in 1924 showed that the performance of the Shortt free-pendulum clock exceeded that of other mechanical timekeepers. The Synchronome Company produced a sightly modified version of this clock, which became the standard timekeeper in many observatories and institutions throughout the world. 
Early in 1922 Shortt moved to Exeter, and following the regrouping of the railways he became district engineer of the western district of the Southern Railway, a post which he was to occupy until his retirement twenty-four years later. On 1 June 1937 he married Katherine Winifred Messer (1905-1968); they had three daughters. Shortt was a shy and retiring man who was confident in the areas of his expertise. Although he was not directly involved with the development of precision clocks after his move to the west country, he continued to be a director of the Synchronome Company which had the benefit of his advice. His contributions to horology were recognized by the award of a gold medal by the British Horological Institute in 1931, the John Price Wetherill silver medal of the Franklin Institute in 1935, and the Tompion medal of the Worshipful Company of Clockmakers in 1954. He was made a liveryman of the company in 1931 and master in 1950. 
In 1946, when Shortt retired from the railway, Dame Georgiana Buller was establishing the firm of Devon Instruments to provide employment for disabled persons. Shortt acted as technical adviser to the firm, which made a range of clocks, and when Dame Georgiana died in 1953 he succeeded her as chairman of the company, a post which he occupied until 1966. He died on 4 February 1971 at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, at Exeter, survived by his three daughters. He was cremated on the 10th in the Exeter and Devon crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 51887


Gerhard, Roberto Juan Rene (1896-1970), composer, was born on 25 September 1896 in Valls, Catalonia, Spain, son of a Swiss-German father, a wine merchant by trade, and a French mother. His teenage years were spent in Germany and in Switzerland, where in 1908 he embarked on training for a career in commerce at the school in Zofingen at the insistence of his parents. He transferred to Neuchatel three years later, but by 1913 he had switched to studying music with the Lausanne-based musician Hugo Strauss. At the outbreak of the First World War he was studying the piano at the Munich Academy and taking private composition lessons from Walter Courvoisier. Gerhard returned to the Catalonian capital of Barcelona in 1914 and continued his studies with his eminent countrymen Enrique Granados and Felipe Pedrell. In 1923 he was accepted as a pupil of Arnold Schoenberg, with whom he studied first in Vienna and then at the Prussian Academy of Arts in Berlin. 
Despite such an international approach to his academic studies, Gerhard was deeply committed to retaining, promoting, and developing a distinctive Catalan cultural identity. He returned to Barcelona in 1929 and in the following year married Leopoldina (Poldi) Fiechtegger (died 1994), whom he had met in Vienna. In 1931 he was appointed professor of music at the Escola Normal de la Generalitat, Barcelona. By this time he was already a significant figure in the cultural life of Catalonia, promoting the works of Schoenberg, Anton Webern, and Hanns Eisler, with his own compositions promoted by the Associacio de Musica Catalana and a number of articles and translations published. His interests ranged across the arts, and in 1932 he co-founded the organization Amics de l'Art Nou (Friends of New Art) with Salvador Dali, Lluis Montanya, and Sebastia Gasch. Gerhard was then appointed head of the music section at the Biblioteca de Catalunya in Barcelona, where he edited works by the eighteenth-century Spanish composers V. M. y Soler and D. M. B. Terradellas. From 1937 to 1938 he was adviser to the ministry of fine arts in the Catalan government and on the Central Musical Council of the republican government. The defeat of the republicans in 1938, while Gerhard was in Warsaw as a member of the jury of the International Society of Contemporary Music, precipitated his life as an emigre. He did not return home but instead took refuge with the painter Joan Miro (with whom he had collaborated on the ballet 'Ariel' in 1934) and Josep Lluis Sert in Paris. In 1939 Gerhard secured a fellowship at King's College, Cambridge, thanks to the intervention of Professor Edward J. Dent. He subsequently made Cambridge his permanent home, accepting British citizenship in 1960. 
Even after the move to Cambridge, Gerhard's works remained overtly nationalistic, being infused with Iberian folk melodies and rhythms; but his wider European experience had brought him into contact with serial techniques, and it is the fluctuation between Mediterranean ebullience and German tradition that makes them so distinctive. Neither of these qualities endeared him to the conservative musical establishment of Britain in the decade following the Second World War. The remarkable dodecaphonic operetta 'The Duenna' (1945-7), which was not staged until 1992, and the ballet 'Don Quixote' (1947-9) mark the peak of this nationalist period, after which his music became increasingly concerned with the abstract potential of sound. Described by the composer-conductor Antal Dorati as 'a very shy, retiring, modest man', Gerhard stayed on the periphery of Cambridge academic life, earning his income mainly through writing incidental music for thirty-eight theatre, radio, and television productions. In 1943 he also made several arrangements of popular Spanish music at the behest of the BBC Theatre Orchestra under the pseudonym Juan Serrallonga (the name of a seventeenth-century Catalan fighter against Castilian oppression). 
Gerhard was an avid collector of sounds on tape and was described in 'The Guardian' as 'a connoisseur of unfamiliar, delicious and unexpected sounds'. This talent, combined with his literary interests, produced spectacularly atmospheric scores for works by authors and playwrights as varied as Salvador de Madariaga, Cervantes, Albert Camus, Shakespeare, J. B. Priestley, Jean Rhys, Schiller, Wyndham Lewis, Lorca, Chekhov, Gogol, Hoffmansthal, Robert Graves, Hemingway, and Dorothy L. Sayers. Gerhard had met Edgar Varese, the American pioneer of electronic music, in Catalonia in 1933. Working in a tiny studio in his new home in Cambridge, Gerhard became one of the first composers in Britain to experiment with taped sounds. In 1955 he composed an electronic score for Peter Brook's staging of 'King Lear' in Stratford which no doubt contributed to the notoriety of this production. That he is not better known may perhaps be because such a significant proportion of his work is incidental music and therefore remains unpublished. 
In the late 1950s Gerhard began to benefit from a decision by Sir William Glock, head of the Third Programme, to extend the patronage of the BBC to commissions for concert works. In an obituary of Gerhard, Glock stated: 'At present we are apt to seize on the high ratio of brilliance and sheer impetuous movement in his works, and on his instrumental mastery. The other qualities -- of nobility, restraint, of a poetry which rejects any borrowed world of emotion and is itself severely disciplined in every chord, every progression -- will grow on us. And perhaps the brilliance itself will be more deeply understood. ('The Listener')' The freedom to try out new techniques of structure and orchestration in the incidental scores undoubtedly informed Gerhard's concert works, which develop groups of characteristic intervals into contrasting textural episodes. His music was criticized by contemporary critics for its lack of motivic development and for being merely a succession of cleverly balanced aural events. Perhaps this opinion is valid in some of the larger-scale orchestral works: the first two of the four symphonies, 'Epithalamion', and the concerto for piano. What is so striking and perturbing about Gerhard's compositions, however, is his ability to create radical sonic structures using serial means. 'Of all the atonal composers of stature, Roberto Gerhard... is the most likely to disarm the listener suspicious of serial techniques. His music has two characteristics immediately attractive to any audience -- incisive wit and propulsive rhythmic drive, qualities either lacking in the works of the great Viennese atonalists or else so deeply embedded as to be imperceptible to the average listener. ('The Guardian')' Where this fusion of means undoubtedly works is in the single-movement compositions 'Nonet' (1957), 'Concert for Eight' (1962), 'Hymnody' (1963), and 'Concerto for Orchestra' (1965) and the three 'horoscope' pieces 'Gemini' (1966), 'Libra' (1968), and 'Leo' (1969). Such innovative works still reveal their Catalan roots, however, with allusions to flamenco rhythms and guitar strumming. Most haunting, however, is the simple and beautiful folk-like clarinet tune that closes 'Leo', significantly named after Gerhard's own zodiacal sign and his last completed composition. 
Gerhard was invited to the United States of America twice: in 1960 as visiting professor of composition at the University of Michigan, where he wrote his symphony no. 3 ('Collages'), and in 1961 as composition tutor at the Berkshire Music Center, Tanglewood, Massachusetts. He was made a CBE in 1967 and was awarded an honorary doctorate of music by the University of Cambridge and a fellowship of University College, London, in 1968. He died at his Cambridge home, 14 Madingley Road, on 5 January 1970. 
A revival of nationalist interest in Catalonia in the post-Franco era and the opportunity for promoters to highlight Gerhard's music in the centenary year of his birth in 1996 has led to increased recognition and critical acclaim, as foretold by Sir William Glock. In 1992 'The Duenna' received a triumphant stage premiere at the Teatro Lirico Nacional in Madrid, at the Gran Teatre del Liceu in Barcelona, and subsequently on tour in the UK with the British company Opera North, all conducted by Antoni Ros Marba. Many of the concert works are now available on quality commercial recordings, and the chamber pieces, especially the 'horoscope' trilogy, are in the repertory of many of the specialist contemporary music ensembles in Europe. 
Gerhard's posthumous reputation is that of a composer who successfully wove together fragmenting elements of twentieth-century musical styles -- nationalism, electronic music, new formal structures, new instrumentations -- without ever resorting to the 'mix and match' of post-modernism. The music, like the composer's life, is eclectic and quixotic but drawn together by a vigorous intellectual coherence and integrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 51888


William le Meschin (d. 1129x35). William went on the first crusade, where he is mentioned, as 'William son of Ranulf 'le vicomte'' at the siege of Nicaea in 1097 (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 5.59). In Cumbria William le Meschin was first given charge of Gilsland, which he failed to hold against the Scots, and then Egremont (the barony of Copeland). He built the castle at Egremont, and close by on the coast he founded the priory of St Bees, a further daughter house of St Mary's, York. William le Meschin married Cecily de Rumilly, the daughter of Robert de Rumilly and heir to the barony of Skipton in Craven, west Yorkshire, thus creating a substantial cross-Pennine estate. William and Cecily were the founders of the priory of Embsay, which later removed to Bolton in Wharfedale. In addition to the two baronies of Egremont and Skipton, William le Meschin acquired tenancies in several counties, the more significant held of his brother in Lincolnshire (where the Lindsey survey of 1115-18 provides detailed record) and in Cheshire. William remained closely linked with Ranulf, whom he survived by just a few years, dying before 1135. An elder son, Matthew, having predeceased him, William's heirs were successively his younger son, also called Ranulf le Meschin, and three sisters, Amice, Alice, and Matilda, who in the course of a total of seven marriages comprehensively dismembered the estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 51892


Barlow, Thomas (c.1669-1730), builder and estate surveyor, played a significant part in the expansion of the West End of London which took place in the first three decades of the eighteenth century. Nothing is known about his origins and early life. In a deposition sworn in April 1721 he gave his age as about fifty-two, which would suggest that he was born in the late 1660s, and he was probably the Thomas Barlow who married Ann Kinsey at St Giles Cripplegate on 18 November 1689. His first wife's name was certainly Ann, and by the late 1690s they were living in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, where they had numerous children, only one of whom, a son, Richard, born in 1709, survived infancy. Ann Barlow died in 1713, and on 14 August 1715 at St Martin-in-the-Fields Barlow married Bridget Scarlett as his second wife. 
Barlow worked as a carpenter in Covent Garden, undertaking substantial repairs to the roof of St Paul's Church in 1714-15 and erecting a flagpole in the piazza to celebrate the accession of George I in 1714. He played a prominent part in the life of the parish, acting as churchwarden in 1712-14. He also undertook speculative house building, both in Covent Garden and elsewhere. In 1701 he was building in Albemarle Street, and shortly afterwards erected a large house in New Bond Street for the duke of Grafton. He built other houses in this area, including one in New Bond Street in which he and his second wife lived after moving from Maiden Lane. Barlow Place, off Bruton Street, is named after him. He was also building in Queen Square, Holborn, in 1709-11. 
In 1715 Barlow appeared in a new capacity as agent for Lord Scarbrough, the landowner, in negotiations over the site of the future church of St George, Hanover Square. He may thus have been responsible for the layout of the Hanover Square area. He undoubtedly built several of the large, Germanic style houses in Hanover Square and St George Street. Letters from him about the fitting out of one of the latter for its first occupant, Earl Cowper, are preserved in the Hertfordshire Record Office (Herts. ALS). 
On 10 August 1720 Barlow, who had by then a well-established reputation as a master builder, was given his most important commission when Sir Richard Grosvenor appointed him to oversee the development of his family's hundred-acre estate in Mayfair. The work was to be carried out according to 'a Scheme or Plann of the Said Intended Building... Drawn by the said Barlow' (Grosvenor archives, Eaton Hall, fourth baronet's personal MSS). With such a large area at his disposal Barlow could plan on a lavish scale, and his grid of wide, straight streets centred on Grosvenor Square, which itself covers some 8 acres and is the largest square in London apart from Lincoln's Inn Fields, is an outstanding example of early Georgian town planning. 
Barlow took a long lease of a large area in the south-east corner of the estate, doubtless to encourage other builders to follow suit, and erected the first building on the estate, the Mount Coffee House in Grosvenor Street (now demolished), where much of his business was apparently conducted. In general, however, he built little on the estate, concentrating instead on his duties as estate surveyor in drawing up building agreements and arranging for leases to be granted to other builders. 
Barlow was one of the founder directors of the Westminster Fire Office, a commissioner of sewers for Westminster, and one of the initial members of the select vestry of the new parish of St George, Hanover Square. When he died on 17 January 1730 he was described as 'a very noted Master-Builder' ('Daily Post', 22 Jan 1730). His funeral took place on 21 January at St Paul's, Covent Garden, where his first wife and several of his children were buried. He was said to have left a leasehold estate worth $600 per annum in ground rents, $500 in improved rents, and $400 in rack rents, besides a personal estate of upwards of $1000. His widow, Bridget, died in 1733, and his son, Richard, in 1740, 'haveing greatly wasted and outrun his fortune' (TNA: PRO, C12/2201/2). 


@@@@@


doc= 51893


Burt family (per. c.1830-1964), building contractors and civil engineers, achieved prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 51895


Sir John Mowlem Burt (1845-1918), contractor, born in Paddington on 2 February 1845, godson of John Mowlem, took up his dominant role. Physically, John Mowlem Burt strongly resembled his father. Educated privately and at Marischal College, Aberdeen, he began as a mason in the company's Aberdeen yards (acquired in 1858), before returning to London; instructed in all the departments, he proved 'a quick learner and an active man in carrying forward work', as well as a 'kind-hearted lad' ('Aberdeen Free Press'). He became a partner in 1875, overseeing such major works as the Admiralty extensions and arch (1896-1901, 1906-14); New Scotland Yard (1908); Institution of Civil Engineers (1911); and refronting Buckingham Palace (1913). As contractor for the coronation annexe at Westminster Abbey he was knighted in 1902. The firm was incorporated in 1903 but reverted to a private company in 1908. 
John Mowlem Burt married Marion (1847-1903), daughter of Robert Ker Aitchison, merchant, on 9 February 1869; they had one son and two daughters. The year after her death he married Grace Emma, daughter of Joseph Blackstone, a doctor. Like his father, Burt was a freemason. In 1881 he was living with his wife and children, three servants, and a nurse, at 18 Grosvenor Road, adjoining Mowlem's extensive leasehold premises. On his second marriage he bought Durlston, Elsworthy Road, Hampstead. In 1916 he moved to his house at Swanage, where he had long been active in local government. He died on 20 February 1918 at his Swanage house, Carthion. He divided the bulk of his estate equally among his three children, his son having the option of taking his holding in J. Mowlem & Co. 
His nephew, 


@@@@@


doc= 51896


George Burt (1816-1894), contractor, was born at Swanage on 2 October 1816, the eldest son of Robert Burt (died 1847), stone merchant, and his wife, Laetitia Manwell ('c'.1787-1861), sister of Mowlem's wife. After starting work as a stonemason in the Swanage quarries, at the age of nineteen George Burt was summoned to join his uncle in London, becoming his partner in 1844. Burt presided over a change in the character of the firm's work: the financial crisis of 1866-7 that brought down many great speculative contractors left Mowlems unimpeded, so that they were able to enter the list of major public-works contractors, landing one of the biggest contracts then offered, for building Queen Victoria Street in the City (1869). Their new status was secured by rebuilding Billingsgate Market (1874-7); thereafter they played a leading role in London (notably the City of London School in 1880, Smithfield fruit market in 1882, and the Imperial Institute in 1887, as well as major sewerage and railway works). 
George Burt married Elizabeth ('b'. 1812), daughter of John Hudson of Stow, Norfolk, on 19 May 1840; they had two sons and three daughters. In 1850 he leased a five-bedroomed house in Cambridge Place, Paddington, where his family lived with a governess and two female servants. Tall, with broad forehead, deepset eyes, and long, curved nose, in later life he wore a full beard and moustache. According to Thomas Hardy, who met him in 1892, Burt 'had a good profile, but was rougher in speech than I should have expected after his years in London' (Lewer and Smale, 138). He continued his uncle's transformation of Swanage into a seaside resort, buying property and planning to develop Durston Park as a villa estate; he established gas and waterworks as well as a pier from which his paddle-steamer plied to Bournemouth, and he built a pretentious mansion, Purbeck House, in the main street, and was satirized in Elizabeth Godfrey's novel, 'The Cradle of a Poet' (1910), as a vulgarian flaunting his wealth. He left a reputation as 'the amazing Burt, in whose nature eccentricity and business capacity, and the instincts of the pedagogue, the philanthropist and the money-maker seem to have been strangely mixed' (Lewer and Smale, 139). 
Collecting relics of old London, often from his firm's own demolitions, Burt re-erected many in Swanage, notably the porch for the post-fire Mercers' Hall, now adorning the town hall. He was a JP in the metropolis and Dorset, a prominent freemason, an active member of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, three times master of the Glass-Sellers' Company, and in 1878-9 sheriff of London. Although he paid for the building of St Aldhelm's Anglican church in Swanage (1892), Burt also subscribed to rebuilding the Methodist church (1886), where his face was carved over the entrance. He died suddenly, of heart disease, at Purbeck House on 18 April 1894, but was buried at Kensal Green cemetery in London. He established a Purbeck Estate Trust to perpetuate the house for his family's residence, its contents devolving as heirlooms with the estate. His other extensive property in Swanage he bequeathed to his children to be developed for building. 
George Burt's elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 51897


John Mowlem (1788-1868), contractor. He was born at Carrants Court Cottages, Swanage, Dorset, on 12 October 1788, the third child and eldest son of John Mowlem (1751-1837), quarryman, of a family long established there, and his wife, Hannah Froom (1764-1836). 'His father and his three brothers and himself were the last gang of quarrymen who worked at Tilly Whim', an ancient Purbeck stoneworking (Hardy, 121). 
Though he himself told of quitting home for London almost penniless, travelling free on a stone-brig, it appears that when employed as a mason at Norris Castle, Isle of Wight, Mowlem was recommended by the architect to the master mason Henry Westmacott with a wharf in King's Row, Pimlico, near where Mowlem lodged on his arrival in London about 1807. 'He was a big, strong young fellow' -- aged only twelve, but tall for his age, he had been obliged to hide from a press gang -- 'with a splendid eye and hand for work' (Hardy, 122). Despite working for 'beggarly wages' he married Susannah (1788-1849), daughter of George Manwell of Swanage, at St George's, Hanover Square, on 29 February 1812. They lived at various addresses in King's Row, Pimlico, for several years; his wife soon became indisposed, suffering poor health the rest of her life. Mowlem, 'honest, industrious and sober', was 'taken from the number of journeymen to complete a job in Whittlebury Forest at the house of General Fitzroy', as foreman about 1815. 'This being completed', he recalled, 'I was made foreman over all the works then going on in London' (Baines, 1.7-8). 
Responding to the emerging demand for macadamizing London's streets, Mowlem set up as a paving contractor and stone merchant about 1823, though it took several years to establish himself. He moved from Pimlico in 1825 to share a house in Upper Quebec Street, Marylebone, with his wife's brother, Henry, parish rate collector. In 1831-6 the Mowlems lived in Chester Place, Regent's Park (partly sublet), by which time he enjoyed a substantial interest in several metropolitan paving contracts, including the West End parishes. But the competition was intense; failure to maintain an adequate supply of stone sometimes lost a contract, though his rivals suffered similarly, and there is evidence of collusion. It was by close attention to detail that Mowlem made his profits in a trade of large turnover but narrow margins -- in 1838 his turnover was probably rather more than $12,000. Perennially short of cash, he operated on bills of exchange. 
In 1839-40 Mowlem undertook his first work of national importance, paving Blackfriars Bridge with the granite sets known as 'narrow cubes', of which he was the first manufacturer. He realized that this could establish him in the first rank of paving contractors. 'This contract', he wrote, 'is one of the best I have ever had and will place me above harm and in that situation in the Metropolis where I shall be much envied' (that is, by rival contractors; Baines, 1.72-3). Leaving his ordinary business to be managed by his wife's nephew George Burt and Burt's brother-in-law, Joseph Freeman, he moved to Guernsey (where he had long been a major purchaser) for eight months in November 1839 to ensure the vital supplies of granite. 'Although this is the devil's own battle to fight, I will stick here; for if the job is completed well, all will be well afterwards... I 'will' have a large share of the Metropolis' (ibid.). 
Contending with hostile merchants, Mowlem leased and bought quarries; faced with incessant rain, he introduced tarpaulins into the quarries, and himself often took a double turn at the pump; 'I am so fatigued in the evening I can scarcely get home' (Baines, 1.72-3). Lacking sufficient stone-dressers, he raised piece-rates, brought quarrymen from the mainland, reduced his charge for dressing stones from 4died to 3died, and sent some stones for dressing in London. His gamble succeeded: he prised the St Clement Danes' paving contract from the firm that had held it for twenty years, succeeded George Manwell as office of works contracting mason for the London district, responsible for maintaining government property, and in 1842 recovered the St Martin's paviour's and mason's contract. When in January 1845 he took George Burt and Joseph Freeman into partnership, the firm's stock was valued at $4668, including stone, barges, horse-trucks, horses, a crane, and a travelling scaffold; by 1850 the valuation had more than doubled. 
Despite retiring in 1845 to Swanage, where he bought property (most extensively from 1857), became a public benefactor, and found time for an all-over wash in cold water every morning -- 'I have been too busy through the whole of my life to indulge in this sort of cleanliness' (Baines, 1.224) -- Mowlem kept a close eye on the metropolitan paving contracts. He attended committees himself when necessary, and travelled to inspect quarries -- in 1847 alone he needed 50,000 tons of Guernsey stone. Coal provided freight for his brigs when they were not carrying stone. 1848 saw a notable expansion in the firm's activities, and Mowlem secured a dominant position in the supply of granite. In May 1851 the firm was 'very successful' ('John Mowlem's Swanage Diary', 120) in bidding for the London vestries' contracts -- some for only hundreds of pounds -- that provided nearly all the firm's work into the 1870s, earning it the sobriquet of London John. Work for ten major local authorities in the 1860s grossed an average of over $50,000 per annum. 
Mowlem's manuscript diary shows that, although he had little formal education, he wrote a clear round hand, and expressed himself clearly and pithily ('as demure as an old whore at a christening'; 'John Mowlem's Swanage Diary', 73). Physically tough -- at fifty-two he described himself as 'waterproof. I stand my ground, blow high, blow low, and am as hearty as a buck, never destined for a drawing-room' (Baines, 1.79-80) --, 'too fond of money to gamble' ('John Mowlem's Swanage Diary', 83), he yet found time to go to the Derby. He enjoyed wine and music, particularly Handel and German chorales. Travelling in France and Germany in 1846 for the benefit of his wife's health, he noted the high quality of German masonry and acquired a liking for warm baths which led him to install a bathroom on his return home. 'Very respectful to upper ranks' (Baines, 1.217) and lacking sympathy for the Chartists he none the less contemned aristocratic superciliousness and sympathized with the Anti-Corn Law League. In 1849 he was elected an assistant of the Glass-Sellers' Company. Though brought up a Methodist, he became a churchgoer and was a connoisseur of sermons. He was a freemason. As a Dorset magistrate he found his colleagues 'a set of old ladies', half a millennium behind the times ('John Mowlem's Swanage Diary', 123). He died, childless, at Purbeck House, Swanage, on 8 March 1868 and was buried at Swanage cemetery. 
Mowlem's principal partner, 


@@@@@


doc= 51906


Edgson, (Walter) Stanley (1893-1950), commercial property developer, was born in 1893. Nothing else is known about his life until he began his estate agency career with the practice of Rawlins and Culver, moving to the commercial chartered surveyors Hillier and Parker, based in the West End, prior to the First World War. He joined the Middlesex yeomanry as a territorial in 1912 and was commissioned to the Royal Field Artillery in June 1915, serving in France from 1915 until 1918. He was wounded on the Somme, and retired in 1918 with the rank of major. On returning to Hillier and Parker following the war he was made a partner. 
Following its merger with the shops agency May and Rowden in 1912, the renamed Hillier, Parker, May, and Rowden grew to dominate commercial estate agency during the inter-war years. Edgson took charge of Hillier Parker's London and home counties business, becoming an eminent authority on the City and West End property markets, while Hillier Parker's other leading light, Douglas Overall, took charge of the provincial markets. During this period of rapid suburban expansion many new shopping centres were established along London's growing arterial road network. Edgson played an important part in these developments, assisting retailers in finding appropriate sites for new stores and bringing together shopping parade developers and the multiple retailers which were essential to the success of their projects. 
Edgson was also directly involved in the commercial property market, establishing Central Commercial Properties in 1929. This specialized in London area high street shops, the section of the property market with which he was particularly well acquainted. Overall and Edgson became joint senior partners of Hillier Parker in 1937, by which time the latter had married; he and his wife, Nellie, had two sons and a daughter. His son Peter was also to become a senior partner of Hillier Parker. 
Edward Erdman, another of the leading commercial chartered surveyors of this period, recalled Stanley Edgson as a dynamic personality and first class auctioneer, who was the main driving force behind Hillier Parker's spectacular success during the inter-war years (Erdman, 4). As an auctioneer he was well known for his rich turn of phrase, such as 'the pleasure of offering from this rostrum' ('Daily Express'). He won the Penfold gold medal of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and was also an active member of the Chartered Auctioneers and Estate Agents Institute, serving on its council for many years, including a period as senior vice-president. 
Edgson's non-business interests included local politics; in 1925 he became a member of Westminster city council and in 1941 he became mayor of Westminster. As vice-chairman of the council's civil defence committee he was closely involved in dealing with the effects of the blitz. In 1945 he stood, unsuccessfully, as a Conservative candidate for Balham and Tooting. He remained active in Westminster city council until his death. 
Edgson retired in 1947 and in the following years devoted much of his energy to raising funds for a new estate management department at the University of Cambridge. He died suddenly at Sunset Lodge Hotel, Montego Bay, Jamaica, on 18 February 1950, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51909


Feldberg, Wilhelm Siegmund (1900-1993), pharmacologist and physiologist, was born on 19 November 1900 in Hamburg, the third child of (Emil) Daniel Feldberg (died 1914), draper, and his wife, Amilie, 'nee' Bacharach (died 1928). His older sister, Lore ('b'. 1895), died in London in 1965; his brother, Alexander ('b'. 1899), emigrated to Paraguay and Argentina. The Feldberg family was Jewish and well-to-do. His father and uncle Solly founded a shop selling women's clothing and later owned several stores in Hamburg. 
Feldberg graduated from the Heinrich Hertz 'Realgymnasium' in Hamburg in May 1918. From June 1918 he served as a private in the machine-gun company of the 76th infantry regiment of the German army, until the revolution in November. He started his medical studies in Hamburg and Heidelberg and after completing his preclinical period went to Munich and Berlin. He qualified in medicine in Munich in 1923. He then spent six months in the Physiological Institute of the University of Berlin and six months in the medical university clinic at the Charite. He received his MD from the University of Berlin in 1925, having presented a thesis: 'The action of adrenalin on the sweat glands of the horse'. The same year he married Katherine Scheffler (1897-1976), daughter of the art historian Karl Scheffler. She was a chemist trained at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin. They had two children: Lore, a paediatric cardiologist, and (Karl) Johann David, a maker of harpsichords. 
As a medical student in Berlin Feldberg had worked in the vacation with his physiology professor, E. Schilf, who had translated John Newport Langley's book 'The Autonomic Nervous System' (1921) into German. After graduation in 1925 Feldberg joined Langley and Joseph Barcroft in Cambridge. Alas, Langley died the following year, but Feldberg was able to join Henry Dale at the famous laboratory F4 in the National Institute for Medical Research in Hampstead. In 1927 he returned to the Physiological Institute in Berlin as an 'Assistent'. He passed his 'Habilitation' to become a 'Privatdozent' in 1930 in the institute, which was then directed by Professor W. Trendelenburg, with a thesis, 'The bloodflow in the veins during circulatory failure'. 
In May 1933 Feldberg was called into the director's office and told that as he was a non-Aryan the Prussian ministry for science required that he should be dismissed with immediate effect; a request from the dean and the head of department that he should be allowed to finish the work he had in progress was denied. In June he was allowed leave for one month to visit Dale in London. As a result, at Dale's invitation and with a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation, he was able to return to Hampstead in September 1933. With a grant from the Carnegie Foundation he spent 1936-8 with Charles Kellaway at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute in Melbourne, Australia. In 1938 he came back to England as Rockefeller lecturer in physiology at the University of Cambridge. He was promoted reader in physiology in 1947. In 1949 he returned to the National Institute for Medical Research (by then translated to Mill Hill) as head of the division of physiology and pharmacology. He retired from this post in 1965 but continued to work at Mill Hill until 1990, when he was forced finally to give up his scientific work as a consequence of attacks by anti-vivisectionists. In 1961 his appointment in Berlin was restored and he received restitution payment of back salary and continuing salary and pension rights. He used this to set up a foundation under German law, the Feldberg Foundation for German-English Exchange for Experimental Medical Research (Austausch fur Experimentelle Medizinsche Forschung, Hamburg). This body has joint British and German members and has arranged annual visits of distinguished scientists between the two countries since 1961. 
Feldberg's major scientific contributions were the establishment of acetylcholine as a chemical transmitter in the nervous system, and the pharmacology of histamine. The first areas for which the transmitter role of acetylcholine was established were at autonomic endings; some of these were unexpected, such as sweat glands, which Feldberg showed were cholinergic even though they were anatomically sympathetic. With Lindor Brown he extended the concept to autonomic ganglia by showing release of acetylcholine when the preganglionic nerves were stimulated, as well as the sensitivity of the ganglion cells to acetylcholine; this met with the opposition of many neurophysiologists who believed that transmission across these synapses was due to circulating currents. Next he produced evidence with Dale and Brown for cholinergic transmission at the neuromuscular junction and finally for a variety of functional areas in the central nervous system. These discoveries involved devising methods for identifying the release of acetylcholine when the nerves were stimulated, for delivering acetylcholine rapidly close to its postulated site of action, and showing that acetylcholine was synthesized in the neurones and was rapidly removed after release by being broken down by cholinesterase. Notably with T. Mann he developed the acetone powder, cell free system for acetylcholine synthesis. He mapped the distribution of acetylcholine, the acetylase, and cholinesterase in the nervous system, and reached the conclusion that acetylcholine had a function on many but not all neurones. During the Second World War, with Edgar Douglas Adrian and B. A. Kilby, he identified the mode of action of the poisonous organophosphorus compounds, DFP and Parathion, produced in Germany as insecticides and possible war gases, and showed that they were potent inhibitors of cholinesterase. Much of his later work was concerned with investigations of the activity of the cholinergic system in identified areas and functions of the central nervous system by local application of drugs to defined areas. In the course of this work he uncovered a number of interesting activities of acetylcholine on temperature control, the regulation of blood pressure and the level of blood sugar, and the release of the hormones of the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. In short, Feldberg was a founding father of neuropharmacology. 
Feldberg's second major area of research was on histamine, a subject which had also been initiated by Dale, who had suggested its role in anaphylaxis. His initial work was on the circulatory effects, where it caused capillary dilatation but arteriolar constriction. On his return to Berlin he concentrated on anaphylaxis in the lung and was able to show the release of a substance from the perfused lung identifiable by bioassay as histamine. With Schilf he published an authoritative monograph, 'Histamin, seine Pharmakologie und Bedeutung fur die humorale Physiologie' (1930). Later, with Kellaway, he showed histamine to be released by snake venoms, and with N. Emmelin he showed that histamine was a component of nettle stings, along with acetylcholine and 5-hydroxytryptamine. 
During his second Cambridge period Feldberg was an enthusiastic and much appreciated teacher of students; his part two lecture-demonstrations were particularly popular and it was rare if his presentations did not offer some humorous stories as well as showing his profound knowledge of the relevant science. He worked very intensively and was a prolific author, producing some 350 papers over sixty-five years. 
Feldberg was a warm and friendly person, especially concerned with the welfare of his younger colleagues. His house, Lavenham, was a place of hospitality where music and fine German wines were offered in a room enriched with lithographs by Toulouse-Lautrec. His work was recognized by the award of some ten honorary degrees; his appointment as fellow of the Royal Society (1947), CBE (1963), and fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London (1978); and the award of a grand cross, order of merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (1961). 
Feldberg's first wife, Katherine, died in 1976. On 28 September 1977 he married Kathleen Marguerite (Kim) O'Rourke ('b'. 1924/5), daughter of Charles John Alfred O'Rourke, a regimental sergeant-major in the Royal Artillery. She had for many years been his secretary at Mill Hill. She died in 1981. Feldberg himself died at his home, Lavenham, 74 Marsh Lane, Mill Hill, London, of old age, on 23 October 1993. He was survived by his daughter, Lore, his son having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51910


Flack, Walter (1915/16-1963), property developer, was the son of Jewish parents who had wanted him to become a solicitor; but having failed five times to matriculate at secondary school he drifted into estate agency. During the 1930s he worked at the West End agents Dudley Samuel and Harrison, where several of Britain's leading post-war property developers obtained their initial experience in the property market. 
During the Second World War Flack enlisted in the Eighth Army, where he rose to the rank of sergeant. His commander, Field Marshal Sir Claude Auchinleck, subsequently became non-executive chairman of Flack's property company. Flack returned to Dudley Samuel and Harrison after the war, working as a negotiator, but was sacked following a dispute with Dudley Samuel, who objected to his smoking a long, curly pipe in the office. After working for another agency, Marcus Leaver, Flack formed his own agency, together with two partners, in 1949. 
Flack began his property development activities about 1956. Two years later he formed his own development company, purchasing a shell company, Murrayfield, for $11,000. This became the vehicle for the developments he had initiated during the previous two years, to which a substantial number of other projects were soon added. Flack has been described as having 'an engagingly open, buccaneering manner... people tended either to like and trust him at once or be suspicious of his charm' (Marriott, 124). Flack concentrated on the provincial shop market, an area which many developers neglected prior to the 1960s. He and his right-hand man, Alan Wright, were talented at putting people at their ease, a useful skill for shop developers as long negotiations with council officials were a necessary preliminary to development. Another of his associates at Murrayfield was Frank Price ('b'. 1922), an aggressive, controversial Birmingham politician, who served as leader of the Birmingham Labour Party, and was also lord mayor in 1964-5. Price's Labour background proved extremely useful, since the majority of the councils which launched ambitious town centre redevelopment schemes during this period were Labour-controlled. 
Flack's first major development was a group of shops in the middle of Basildon. Basildon New Town Corporation had decided that Flack's scheme was the best designed and most practical, but had doubts regarding his financial standing. After the problem was put to Flack he got up from his seat and started walking up and down the council chamber. He stared at the carpet in deep thought and then suddenly stopped, looked up, and said to the committee: 'I've got the answer, I'll give you my personal guarantee' (Gordon, 175). This won the committee over and Flack was given time to find the necessary finance. 
In order to solve the problem of financing his ever-growing activities Flack formed a partnership with Jack Cotton (1903-1964) at the end of 1959, involving an exchange of shares between Murrayfield and Cotton's City Centre Properties. The deal also entailed Cotton's lending Flack money for his developments. In 1960 Cotton merged his property empire with that of Charles Clore. Clore was said to have disliked the boisterous Flack, the antipathy being reciprocated on Flack's part. Murrayfield was completely amalgamated into the City Centre group in May 1961. Marriott stated that Flack vehemently opposed the merger (Marriott, 147), while Gordon recalled that Flack was keen for Murrayfield to become a 100 per cent City Centre subsidiary, partly because this would secure him a seat on the latter's board (Gordon, 175). 
The merger resulted in Flack's becoming a director of City Centre, Britain's largest property company. However the mutual antipathy between himself and Clore, together with Clore's own growing personality clashes with Cotton, resulted in a steady deterioration of the relationship between the three property tycoons. Flack found himself opposing the plans of both Cotton and Clore and the continuing strife began to take its toll on Flack's health, exacerbated by a growing drinking problem. In 1962 the marriage between Flack and his wife, Louise, broke up and in the autumn of that year he suffered a severe attack of jaundice. Following his recovery he had an explosive disagreement with Cotton, culminating in his resignation from both City Centre and Murrayfield on 15 January 1963. On 22 March, following his return home from a long holiday in north Africa, Flack, who was only forty-seven, was found drowned at his home, 80 Whitehall Court, Westminster, by his chauffeur. He had taken a dose of barbiturate, and fallen asleep in his bath. He was pronounced dead at Westminster Hospital; the coroner's verdict was one of accidental drowning. 
Flack was a keen sports enthusiast, particularly with regard to cricket and horse racing. In 1961 he co-owned the colt Winged Pharaoh. Another of Flack's hobbies was to serve behind the bar of his local pub in Westminster on Sundays. However, during his years with Murrayfield he had lived largely for his property company. Flack's legacy as a property developer included a number of innovative and successful shopping centre schemes, particularly the St George's Shopping Centre in Preston. He was also the first British developer to expand into the continent, developing eighty-eight luxury flats on the avenue Foch in Paris. However it is his unfortunate association with City Centre Properties, resulting in the personality clash which contributed to his early death, for which Flack will be chiefly remembered; Cotton's own death followed exactly a year later. 


@@@@@


doc= 51912


Holloway, Sir Henry (1857-1923), builder, was born on 5 August 1857 at Littleton, West Lavington, Wiltshire, the fourth of the five sons of Thomas Holloway, jobbing builder and bricklayer, of West Lavington, and his wife, Elizabeth Orchard. After the family moved to London, Holloway went to a church school in Pimlico. For a short time he worked for a firm of timber merchants, but in 1876 he, his father, and three brothers joined Holloway's eldest brother, James, who had set up his own building and contracting business in Wandsworth Road in 1875. Holloway was the office manager. On 16 February 1881 he married Annie Jane, eldest daughter of John Gollop of Clapham. They had seven children. In 1882 he and his older brother, (Henry) Thomas (1853-1914), left the firm after James had refused to make them partners, and started their own company, Holloway Brothers, in Battersea. After James's premature death in 1889, Henry and Thomas took over his business, and their father and other two brothers joined Holloway Brothers. 
The business became very successful very rapidly. The first important contract came in 1891 for the new Battersea Polytechnic, designed by E. W. Mountford in the Flemish Renaissance style. After the company won the contract for the new naval barracks at Chatham in 1897 contracts for the construction of large public buildings poured in. Among these were the Admiralty building in Horse Guards Parade (1898), the Central Criminal Court, the Old Bailey (1900-7), the United Universities Club, Pall Mall (1905-6), and the new General Post Office (1907-10), an early example of the use of reinforced concrete in a major public building in London. Whiteleys store in Bayswater (1908-12) was one of the first buildings to be built with a steel frame, allowing much larger display windows. Holloways also won several important housing contracts, including a housing scheme for Wandsworth borough council at Earlsfield, and the building of a garden city at Rosyth for the Admiralty. 
In 1900 the expanding business moved to a larger site at Victoria Wharf, Belvedere Road, on the south bank of the Thames. This meant that stone, bricks, and other materials could be landed directly onto the wharf, and timber was shipped directly from Scandinavia. New joinery and stonemasonry works were built, and it was the first London firm of builders to use electricity to drive its machinery. In 1902 Holloway Brothers (London) Ltd was registered as a private limited company, with Henry and Thomas Holloway as governing directors. Also in 1902 they opened a West End branch at 43 South Audley Street to provide craftsmen to decorate houses in Mayfair. This later became a leading interior decorator for large buildings. 
From 1906 Holloway Brothers began to take on civil engineering contracts. The first project was to build a covered reservoir in reinforced concrete for the Luton Water Company. The company went on to win dock contracts, such as that for the London docks improvement scheme, starting in 1912, railway contracts, including a new power station for the London and North Western Railway in 1914, and contracts for sea defence works such as the construction of a new sea wall at Rottingdean in 1907-13. Its first major bridge-building contract was in 1914, for a three-span reinforced concrete bridge over the River Esk at Gretna. 
Holloway Brothers was forced to move again, in 1915, because London county council wanted the Belvedere Road site for County Hall and managed to get a bill through parliament permitting this. The new site, at Bridge Wharf on the corner of Vauxhall Bridge and Grosvenor Road, on Millbank, was too small for all the works, and the joinery works had to be moved to Earlsfield, and the masonry works to Nine Elms. A branch office opened in Newcastle in 1917 to handle the growing business in the north-east. 
Holloway was knighted in 1917 for his contribution to solving the problem of the shortage of housing for the labour force needed to work in the new wartime factories. David Lloyd George, minister of munitions, approached Holloway, and he undertook to provide the necessary housing within six months. This he did, after touring the country in 1916 as director of housing construction in the labour supply department of the Ministry of Munitions, and putting local architects and builders to work, a brilliant feat of organization. 
It was Henry Holloway's drive and organizational ability that had made the company so successful so quickly. He was highly respected by his colleagues, and served as president of the Institute of Builders and of the London Master Builders' Association. A JP for the county of London, Holloway also took an interest in politics, and campaigned for John Moulton (later Baron Moulton), elected Liberal MP for Clapham in 1885, and for Reginald McKenna, who contested Clapham unsuccessfully in 1892. He was a fervent member of the Wesleyan Methodist church (his father had been a local preacher), and supported the temperance movement. 
Holloway died at his home, Draxmont, Wimbledon Hill, Surrey, on his birthday, 5 August 1923. He was survived by his wife. His youngest brother, Samuel, succeeded him as chairman of Holloway Brothers (London) Ltd. He was buried at Upper Tooting Wesleyan Church, Balham High Road, London, three days later. 
The other member of the family who was to lead the firm was Sir Henry's nephew, 
H. T. Holloway was a director from 1912, and chairman from 1933 until his death. Under his chairmanship the civil engineering side of the business expanded, starting with the new Chelsea Bridge in 1934-7, its first steel bridge. The company also took on a number of civil engineering projects in the Middle East from the 1930s onwards, including the King Ghazi and King Feisal bridges across the Tigris in Baghdad in 1936, and Baghdad railway station in 1946-52. 
During the Second World War the company built ordnance depots and factories, hospitals, army camps, and RAF stations. It also built sea forts and floating docks, and its expertise contributed significantly to the success of the Mulberry harbour project. To improve coal supplies, it built opencast coal mines from 1942 onwards in the Dukeries and Newcastle coalfields. Holloway was knighted in 1945 for his contribution to the war effort. After the war, the company was greatly involved in post-war reconstruction, including that of Trafalgar Square, completed in 1948. Holloway was a member of the council of the London Master Builders' Association, a president of the Institute of Builders, and president (1940-46) of the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors. He served on the joint consultative council of building and civil engineering institutes at the Ministry of Works in 1941-6. 
Sir Henry Thomas Holloway died on 18 September 1951 at St Peter's Hospital, Westminster. He was buried in the churchyard of All Saints' Church, West Lavington, Wiltshire. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51913


Sir Henry Thomas Holloway (1876-1951), builder. Born on 29 March 1876, at 3 Tipthorpe Road, Battersea, London, H. T. Holloway was the fifth in the family of eight children of (Henry) Thomas Holloway, co-founder of the company, and his wife, Phebe Jane Holt. Nothing is known about his education but he married Brucine Mildenhall Pimm in 1911. They had two sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 51914


Finer, Samuel Edward (1915-1993), political scientist, was born at 17 Chapel Street, Clerkenwell, London, on 22 September 1915, the sixth and youngest child of Max Finer (1866/7-1945) and his wife, Fanny Weiner (1872/3-1945), immigrants from Romania who earned a living first as market traders and, by the time of Sammy's birth, as owners of a drapery shop. His life and career were significant in at least two ways. He was one of the many children of pre-1914 Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe who were to play such prominent roles in British economic, cultural, and political life. He became one of the pioneers of political science in Britain and, in his day, probably its internationally best-known practitioner. Through his teaching at three leading universities and his numerous books he helped to form a generation of students and academics in his chosen subject. 
By winning scholarships to Holloway School in north London and then to Trinity College, Oxford, Finer was able to do justice to his intellectual promise and to follow the examples of his brothers, of whom the eldest, Herman, also became an eminent political scientist and the second a medical practitioner. At Oxford he took first-class honours in philosophy, politics, and economics in 1937, and in modern history in 1938. The war, in which he rose to the rank of captain in the Royal Corps of Signals, interrupted his academic career. He returned to Oxford in 1946 to resume his research, inspired by the now successful career of Herman, who had just been appointed to a professorship at Chicago, and whose 'Theory and Practice of Modern Government', first published in 1932, was a highly innovative and encyclopaedic work of comparative government. Its influence on the younger Finer's life's work and interests was manifest and openly acknowledged. 
Having been a senior George Webb Medley scholar at Oxford from 1938 to 1940, Finer now became a lecturer at Balliol College and was elected to a junior research fellowship there in 1949. A year later he was appointed to the chair of local government and administration at the newly founded University College of North Staffordshire (later Keele University), a post that was changed shortly afterwards to the chair of political institutions. This inspired piece of patronage by A. D. Lindsay, the master of Balliol who became the University College's first principal, gave Finer the chance to transform his research into teaching. Though he was well versed in the history of political ideas and in modern social sciences other than politics, his central interest lay in the institutions of government. He wanted to know, and to explain to others, how power is exercised, by what type of person ('the predominant decision-making personnel', as he later put it), through what instruments, and with what constraints. Though his writings ranged widely in both topic and geography, this single preoccupation ran like a scarlet thread through more than forty years of authorship. 
By the time of his appointment to North Staffordshire, Finer had already published 'A Primer of Public Administration' (1950) ('my little primer') and was well advanced in his major project on the great Victorian local-government reformer Sir Edwin Chadwick ('The Life and Times of Sir Edwin Chadwick', 1952). In parallel with this monograph he took the leading role in revising Sir John Maud's 'Local Government in England and Wales' (2nd edn, 1953). These two books marked the end of a specialized interest in local government, though the theme he touched on -- the relations between central and local authorities -- is part of the bread-and-butter of all constitutional studies and one that he never lost sight of. 
North Staffordshire in its early days was primarily a teaching university; its principal pedagogic innovation was the foundation year, which included a multidisciplinary course to which all departments contributed. Finer monopolized the politics slot and used his exceptional lecturing gifts to proselytize for his subject. The result was that a large number of students chose politics as an option for their honours course, which in turn enabled him to expand his department. This had effects beyond his own parish. Outside Oxford, the London School of Economics, and Manchester, political studies led a beggarly existence in the 1950s. Finer not only widened the field, but trained a new red-brick professoriate: of the six lecturers he recruited during his tenure, four went on to chairs at other British universities. 
Finer's sixteen years at Keele also saw him embarking on topics up to then neglected in Britain. Though there was a considerable, if largely parochial, American literature on interest groups, they had in the main been despised as cuckoos in the political nest in Britain. Finer determined to show in 'Anonymous Empire' (1958) that, whether good or bad, they were a feature of modern politics that had come to stay and needed to be studied. So, too, his more substantial study of the military in politics, 'The Man on Horseback' (1962), broke new ground in British political studies, not least through his insistence on incorporating political structures outside the developed West into the mainstream of the discipline. 
Finer's move to Manchester in 1966 marked a consolidation rather than a leap forward in his career. He joined a well-established department which offered less scope for top-down innovations. As at Keele, he lectured enthusiastically, especially to first-year students, and his research agenda became steadily more focused. Two visiting professorships in the United States -- at Cornell and Stanford -- gave him new perspectives and he distinguished more severely than before between the historical and comparative methods. While respectful of both, he now leaned more to the one that sought out patterns and regularities, rather than peculiarities and idiosyncrasies; at the same time he rejected the more extreme American behavioural and systems-based approaches, because they ignored the centrality of governmental institutions, and were ahistorical. This characteristic and individual approach became evident in his 'Comparative Government' (1970), which quickly established itself as a standard student text, his extended introductory essay to 'Five Constitutions' (1979), and in the crowning achievement of his life's work, 'The History of Government from the Earliest Times', published posthumously and discussed below. 
In 1974, after eight years at Manchester, Finer was appointed to the Gladstone chair of government and public administration at Oxford and elected to the fellowship at All Souls College that goes with that post. Though he was gratified by this recognition, this was not academically an entirely happy period in his life. Oxford is, in Finer's taxonomy, a 'nobility polity' in which the monarch counts for little. And though he felt that the Oxford politics sub-faculty -- the largest in the country and indeed in Europe -- was failing to make the necessary distinction between historical and social science approaches, its members had more confidence than he in the validity of their methods and their ability to renew and develop their teaching. As a result his attempts to change the philosophy, politics, and economics syllabus came to nothing. He retired in 1982 and in the same year was somewhat belatedly elected fellow of the British Academy. He was a founder member of the Political Studies Association of the United Kingdom and its chairman from 1965 to 1969, and was a vice-president of the International Political Science Association. 
It is impossible to separate Finer the man from Finer the scholar. He was not only an academic animal, but a political one, as one who grew up in the 1930s could hardly help being. After an early brief flirtation with Marxism, he embraced the Keynesian Fabianism that was common among his generation of social scientists. This allegiance changed abruptly in the mid-1950s, for he had emotional ties beside British domestic ones. Though not a particularly pious Jew, he felt a strong ethnic pull and was a passionate supporter of Zionism and the state of Israel. He thought the Suez operation of 1956 was fully justified and never forgave the left for taking the opposite view. He helped to organize the reception of British citizens evacuated from Egypt after Suez, for which he was appointed OBE. He did not, however, become a partisan Conservative. In the 1970s he campaigned against the prevailing party system in favour of more consensual politics, editing a volume 'Adversary Politics and Electoral Reform' (1975). After the 1979 election he became an admirer of Margaret Thatcher, less for the specific details of her policies than for the energy with which she pursued them. 
Finer's missionary zeal for teaching was an expression of his exuberant personality. He was in permanent need of an audience. When that audience was voluntary, as in a lecture theatre, it appreciated the value of what he offered. When it was captive, as in a common room, reactions could be divided. His lifelong love affair with the sound of his voice, high in pitch and decibels, entertained many, but not all, of his colleagues. He was something of a peacock, who spent extravagantly on clothes and had a taste for lurid shirts and ties, though the photograph in the common room album at All Souls shows him without either of these accessories. He had a deep knowledge, reinforced with strong opinions, of a great range of culture, including opera and literature. He was a decent draughtsman and a translator of French poetry. As one of his Keele colleagues put it, 'more than a teacher, a scholar, an entrepreneur or a friend... Sammy was an experience' (Berrington, memorial address). His idea of hell would have been solitary confinement. Such enthusiasms brought their drawbacks. In his eagerness to paint the large picture, to reach a persuasive conclusion and to puncture the balloons of received wisdom, he sometimes neglected detail. He was not the world's most diligent verifier of references. 
After his retirement from the Gladstone chair Finer continued to live in a modest house in Summertown, Oxford, most of which was given over to books and papers on sagging do-it-yourself shelves and -- a great source of pride -- his newly acquired computer. He now devoted his remaining eleven years to a project of staggering ambition that had been forming in his mind for some time and was the culmination of much of his earlier thinking -- 'A History of Government from the Earliest Times', that would be 'Comparative Government' and 'The Man on Horseback' writ large. It embedded three of his most important guiding principles: the use of history to lend perspective, the importance of studying non-modern and non-European political systems, and the centrality of the state as the instrument of rule. Basic to all states, he argued, were the military, a bureaucracy, and the capacity to collect taxes. Within these three components and in addition to them, wide variations were possible, but their number is limited and they can all be systematized. He remained faithful to the aim he had declared some years before as 'interpreting a body of knowledge... or, most simply and probably most comprehensively, making sense out of it' (S. E. Finer, 'Political science: an idiosyncratic retrospect of a putative discipline', 'Government and Opposition', 15, 1980, 363). 
In the middle of this enterprise, in 1987, Finer suffered a near-fatal heart attack. This 'memento mori' caused him to prepare his manuscript, and to store it on disc, in such a way that it could be completed after his death. In the event he was able to write thirty-four of the projected thirty-six chapters; the final version, edited by his widow, Catherine Jones Finer, and Professor Jack Hayward, running to 1701 pages in three volumes, appeared in 1997. 'It is likely to be read', one reviewer wrote, 'as long as Aristotle' ('The Economist', 18 Oct 1997, 5). For the 5200 years covered by this study he constructed four main types of state, of which the commonest are the 'palace state' (autocratic) and the 'forum polity' (participatory), with a large number of sub-types and combinations. In common with one of his mentors, the Italian sociologist Vilfredo Pareto, he saw rulers moved by passions as well as interests; religion and ideology therefore feature as prominently as strategy and economics in his explanatory scheme. For Finer the history of government was neither one of meaningless contingency nor of predestined development. Though himself devoted to the principles of liberal democracy, he did not regard the modern constitutional nation state as necessarily the end-point of an evolution. His untimely death deprived us of his verdict on the prospects for government in the post-communist world. 
Finer died on 9 June 1993 at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, and was buried in Wolvercote cemetery. He was twice married: on 19 July 1949 to Margaret Ann ('b'. 1925), a teacher, daughter of Sir Andrew McFadyean (1887-1974) (the marriage was dissolved in 1975); and on 27 April 1977 to Dr Catherine Joy 
(Kate; 'b'. 1941)
, university lecturer, daughter of Thomas Philip Jones, chemical storekeeper. There were three children of the first marriage, Jeremy (Jem), Jessica, and Josiah. Jem was a member of the Irish pop group the Pogues. At the All Souls commemoration the three children performed Jem's setting of his father's translation of Guillaume Apollinaire's 'Sous le pont Mirabeau'. 


@@@@@


doc= 51916


Fisher, Max Henry (1922-1993), journalist and merchant banker, was born on 30 May 1922 at Fasanenstrasse, Berlin, Germany, the only child of Dr Friedrich (Fritz) Fischer (1888-1971) and his wife, Sophia (Sonia), 'nee' Bakst (1897-1965). His parents both belonged to assimilated Jewish families. His father was a successful lawyer, and a fine pianist, from Upper Silesia, his mother a Russian from Lithuania. He was registered as Max Hermann Fischer and later wrote as M. H. Fisher, but was invariably known as Fredy. His parents separated in 1922 and divorced in 1928. Marie Gunderman, Fredy's governess from 1929, made him bilingual in French, and with Thekla, the family maid, provided any stability in his childhood. He attended the Fichte Gymnasium in Berlin from 1932 to 1935, but in January 1936, after his father had to leave Germany, Fisher was sent to Rendcomb College, Gloucestershire. There he demonstrated his extraordinary force of character. He knew no English and had been suddenly switched from an intensely cultured German home to cold baths and muscular Christianity. Yet by 1940 the school expected him to win an Oxford history scholarship and he had developed a lifelong (non-playing) enthusiasm for cricket. Although he had come to admire the language of Cranmer's prayer book and the King James 'Bible' he remained, as always, without religious belief. 
In May 1940 this assimilated English schoolboy was detained as an enemy alien. After eighteen months, first in England, then in Australia, Fisher volunteered for the Pioneer Corps. Permitted in 1943 to prepare for active service, he joined the 8th King's Royal Irish Hussars, a tank regiment, as a trooper. The army Anglicized his name to Fisher for security reasons but he insisted on an identity disc that marked him as a Jew. Passed over for a commission, he became a wireless operator driver. His squadron took part in the Normandy landings of June 1944, was in the forefront of the advance through France, suffered very heavy casualties, and eventually reached Berlin. 
Fisher's ambition was to become an Oxford historian. In 1946, after an exhilarating year as a sergeant interpreter and investigator for the military police in Germany, he went up to Lincoln College, Oxford. In 1948 he took a first-class degree in modern history, and planned that his historical research would rescue the eighteenth-century duke of Newcastle from Namier's deconstruction. This would have seen two outsiders, who both loved England, debating a wonderfully English theme. But Fisher needed an income, and no Oxford post materialized, so in 1949 he joined an official tripartite team, based at Bletchley, editing captured German foreign ministry documents. He worked on this task until 1956. With his American colleague Norman Rich he also edited and translated 'The Holstein Papers' in four classic volumes (1955-63). 
Fisher's academic ambitions now halted. He was a visiting lecturer at Melbourne University in 1956-7, but returned to Britain wanting to become a journalist. He had an introduction to the 'Financial Times', and suddenly Fisher's linguistic and intellectual gifts, his combined continental and British background, and his personal ambition all found their perfect outlet. With the help of several other brilliant recruits, such as Nigel Lawson and William Rees-Mogg, the 'Financial Times' was being turned by Gordon Newton into a national newspaper. Fisher made it also an international newspaper, as foreign editor (1961), deputy editor (1971), and editor (1973-80). 
Fisher was an ebullient, tireless, and sometimes irascible editor. He led the 'Financial Times' from the top. He became a confidant of successive political leaders and may have hoped for a more official role. He strongly advocated European unification, with British participation, and was responsible for launching the paper's Frankfurt edition. However, the 1970s were a period of constant economic crisis, and the paper's circulation and profits declined. There were a variety of serious management tensions. By 1980 Fisher felt he had made his contribution to the paper and was ready for a new career. The 'Financial Times' he joined in 1957 had been transformed, and to a considerable extent by Fisher's own talents. 
In 1981 Fisher joined S. G. Warburgs, the merchant bank, and until 1993 was an executive director, particularly involved with its advisory work in Germany. He was also a director of Commercial Union Assurance (1981-91) and of Booker McConnell, later Booker plc (1981-93), and was a governor of the London School of Economics (1981-93). 
Fisher was wholehearted in everything he did. He had a great love and knowledge of classical music, especially opera. He read widely, enjoyed golf, and was an outstanding bridge player. On 23 February 1952 he married Rosemary Margaret 
(Ro; 'b'. 1929)
, sculptor, daughter of Dr L. A. I. and Lilias Charlotte Maxwell, of Melbourne, Australia. They had two sons and a daughter. Devotion to his marriage was central to his life. Fisher died of ischaemic heart disease at his home, 16 Somerset Square, London, on 29 August 1993, after some years of ill health. He was cremated at Cambridge on 8 September. There was a memorial celebration on 21 October 1993 at St John's, Smith Square, London, including readings of Goethe's 'Aussohnung' and Newbolt's 'Vitai lampada', with the performance of Schubert's 'Quartettsatz in C minor', which Fisher had requested. 


@@@@@


doc= 51917


Flackes, William David (1921-1993), journalist, was born on 14 March 1921 at Bogay, All Saints, near Burt, co. Donegal, the eldest of the three children of William David Flackes, coachman, motor mechanic, and gardener, and his wife, Kathleen Jane, 'nee' McGarvey. Soon after his birth the family moved to Jordanstown, near Belfast, where Flackes attended Whiteabbey public elementary school. At Belfast Technical College he studied bookkeeping and electrical engineering, and then worked as a telephone engineer. For a journalist this was an unusual start, but he was soon contributing to several local newspapers, and in 1942 he edited a 'Whiteabbey and District Year Book'. There followed a succession of reporting jobs with local Ulster papers, until in 1945 he joined the 'Belfast News-Letter', Northern Ireland's main Unionist newspaper, for which he covered parliamentary debates at Stormont. In 1946 he published (with Michael McGill) a biography of Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery. 
In 1947 Flackes joined the Press Association's parliamentary staff at Westminster, remaining there until 1957. He mastered an idiosyncratic shorthand -- 200 words a minute was occasionally required -- became an addict of the political process and its personalities, and wrote works of science fiction under pseudonyms including Vektis Brack. In 1957 he returned to Northern Ireland at John Sayers's invitation as news editor, and later chief leader writer, of the 'Belfast Telegraph'. He also wrote a biography of Viscount Brookeborough, 'The Enduring Premier' (1962), and began contributing political commentaries to UTV, the new commercial television station in Belfast. Meanwhile, on 29 December 1948 he had married Mary Dougan ('b'. 1923/4), daughter of James Dougan, breadserver, of Armagh. They had one daughter. 
In 1964 Flackes became (almost inevitably) the BBC's first Northern Ireland political correspondent. At the time this appointment had only local significance, but from 1966, and much more after 1968, Flackes became the daily face of BBC reporting from a province which had declined into political turmoil and terrorist violence, and which from 1972 had a direct UK government presence and a constant stream of more or less unsuccessful political initiatives. For years at a time Flackes was kept close to the radio and television studios in Belfast, and increasingly in London. His strong Ulster accent, his machine-gun speed of delivery, his zest, his stamina, and his capacity for simple exposition of developments in a very complex situation made him a familiar national, indeed international figure. (Once when he and his wife had managed a holiday to Leningrad he was actually recognized and addressed by a passer-by.) His journalism succeeded because it was very factual. He did not come between his story and the listener, nor push a particular political line, if indeed he ever had one. To a remarkable extent he was trusted by politicians of all shades to keep confidences and report fairly. 
In 1980 Flackes published the first edition of 'Northern Ireland: a Political Directory'. This at once established itself as a reliable guide, described by 'The Times' as 'a unique compendium of Ulster's Byzantine politics' ('The Times', 4 Aug 1993). It grew in successive editions, latterly in collaboration with Sydney Elliott. In 1981 he was made an OBE and in 1982 he retired from the BBC. In retirement he served on the board of RTE (the Republic of Ireland's broadcasting service), expanded the 'Political Directory', and continued broadcasting, including contributions to the 'History Makers' series on Radio Ulster. 
'Billy' Flackes was a small man of plain habits, solidly built but not a pound overweight; a non-smoker who never took more than one gin and tonic before lunch. He never walked when he could run. His stamina was legendary, as were his enthusiasm and affability. When he entered a room his presence was instantly felt. 
Flackes developed motor neurone disease in 1993 and died at the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, on 1 August 1993, following a stroke. He was a member of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland and was buried on 3 August 1993 at Lisburn new cemetery, Blaris. There was a memorial service at St Anne's Cathedral, Belfast, on 22 November 1993. He was survived by his wife, Mary, and their daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 51919


Levy, Joseph (1906-1990), property developer and estate agent, was born on 27 January 1906 at 1 Mansell Road, Acton, Middlesex, the youngest of the five children of David Edward Levy, then a hotel waiter, and his wife, Ellen Kate Twine. David Levy was later described as a manufacturer's agent and as a bookmaker. Joe, as Levy was popularly known, spent his early life in Clapham and was educated at Emmanuel School, Wandsworth. 
After working at a bookmaker's and as a stock exchange negotiator Levy entered the property world in 1924, when he and his older brother David went to work for the famous office developer and estate agent Jackie Phillips, whose contracts included the development of Broadcasting House in London. When in 1939 Phillips ran up heavy debts the brothers took over the ailing business, which became D. E. and J. Levy. A year earlier, on 29 December, Joe Levy had married Frances Ninot ('b'. 1912/13), daughter of Francis Charles Henwood, a hairdresser's assistant; they had two sons and a daughter. 
During the Second World War Levy worked first as a civil defence warden and then with the National Fire Service. He was awarded the British Empire Medal in 1941 after entering a collapsing building and rescuing several people. Despite their war work the Levys were able to keep their estate agency open during the war years. They amassed a portfolio of well-located war-damaged properties which were to prove extremely valuable in the post-war property boom; as Levy later recalled, 'We were on the spot and we could see that if this country came out of the war, London would have to be rebuilt' (Marriott, 155). They entered the post-war property market with both substantial experience of the way market conditions had changed during the war and a substantial client base. They understood the complexities of war-damage regulations and arranged a number of 'lessor schemes' (by which developers built property for letting to government departments and thereby obtained the necessary building licences) on behalf of developers. During this period they became acquainted with some of the key figures of the property boom, including Harold Samuel, Charles Clore, Jack Cotton, Lew Hammerson, and Charles Forte. 
Levy was a prime mover in the 1954-64 office development boom. In the mid-1960s D. E. and J. Levy claimed to have handled for clients some 9 million sq. ft of new London offices. However, the firm's most important role was as principal rather than agent. The brothers formed a partnership with Robert Clark, a shrewd Scottish solicitor whom they had met in 1937 when looking for finance for their first development, three depots for Dunlop. Joe Levy's relationship with Clark was said to be at times stormy, though Clark's cautious temperament, together with Levy's enthusiasm, provided a highly successful blend that was to make both men millionaires. 
Joe Levy and his brother, together with Clark, initially established a separate company for each development, the three holding equal shares. However, in 1951 they acquired a small property company, Stock Conversion Investment Trust, to which they transferred their property assets. This was to become one of the most successful companies of the 'property boom' era. 
David Levy died suddenly in 1952, aged forty-seven. In the same year Joe Levy came into contact with a project which was to form the basis of the largest single development in Britain initiated by the private sector during the first two post-war decades. D. E. and J. Levy were asked to handle the sale of a 1 acre corner site facing Euston Road and Stanhope Street. The vendor withdrew the property, for tax reasons, but resubmitted it to the practice four years later. Negotiations with the London county council revealed that in return for the use of some land for a road development the council would permit a large, co-ordinated development on a 13 acre site of which this property formed a part, it being left to the developer to acquire the remainder. Levy offered the project to Charles Clore, who was initially interested but later pulled out. Levy eventually decided to conduct the expanded project via Stock Conversion, but the estimated cost of development ($15-20 million) made it necessary for the firm to bring in two major contractors, George Wimpey & Co. and Wates, as partners; Wates later withdrew, leaving the others with 50 per cent each. The necessary land was acquired secretly (to prevent the price escalating) about 315 separate deals, and development commenced in the winter of 1963-4. The value of the development, which included 100 shops, 160,000 sq. ft of showrooms, a factory, luxury flats, and a huge volume of office space, was considerably boosted by the imposition of a ban on new office development in and around London imposed in November 1964 by the new Labour government. However, a later attempt to institute a similar development, in conjunction with a road development scheme, at Piccadilly Circus produced considerable delays and complications, leading Levy to sell off Stock Conversion's Piccadilly sites, including the Trocadero. 
Levy retired from his surveying practice in September 1973 and subsequently devoted more of his time to Stock Conversion. He remained active with the company until the early 1980s, after which he suffered from increasing ill health. Levy had distributed much of his shareholding via a charitable foundation, together with various family trusts. In 1986 P. & O. took over Stock Conversion in a hostile bid; following this Levy's son Peter started another property company, Shaftesbury plc, of which the elder Levy became president, although he was by then too ill to take an active role. 
Oliver Marriott described Levy as a jovial man with an uninhibited pleasure in the material results of great wealth (Marriott, 154), while his 'Telegraph' obituary described him as an ebullient, likeable, and blunt cockney, who bubbled with enthusiasm and confidence. Levy was a keen footballer, enjoyed playing golf and tennis, and owned several racehorses and greyhounds. He was also heavily involved in charitable work, serving as founder trustee and chairman of the Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust, vice-president of the London Federation of Boys' Clubs, and a governor of Millfield School and chairman of its rebuilding fund. He was appointed MBE and CBE for his charity work. In 1972 Levy's charitable foundation bought Dickens's Old Curiosity Shop to ensure that it remained in British hands: this repeated history, as his mentor Jackie Phillips had purchased it for similar reasons in 1925, at which time Levy conducted the transaction. 
Levy died on 18 December 1990 at his home, Goldsborough, 42 Ladbroke Road, Kensington, from Alzheimer's disease; he was buried at the Jewish cemetery in Golders Green on the 20th. Despite the trusts and the charitable foundation Levy's estate was valued at almost $9 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 51921


Maunsell, Guy Anson (1884-1961), civil engineer, was born on 1 September 1884 in Srinagar, India, the second child and only son of Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Henry Maunsell (1837-1913) and Rosalie Harriet (died 1929) of Guernsey. He was educated at Eastbourne College and then studied engineering at the Central Institution, South Kensington, graduating with honours in 1906. 
A man of great vision and energy, Maunsell became an engineering designer of flair and genius. His practical training was gained in Paris and Lausanne during 1907-8. His engineering career began in 1909 when he joined the staff of Easton Gibb & Son, contractors, building the naval base at Rosyth. During 1915-16 he was chief engineer responsible for erecting cordite factories in Ayrshire and west London. In 1917 he served in France as an officer in the Royal Engineers. A year later he was seconded to design and construct a shipyard at Shoreham to build concrete sea-going vessels. After the war he worked with Sir Alexander Gibb, chief engineer at the Ministry of Transport, preparing a tidal power scheme on the River Severn comprising a barrage and combined road and rail bridge. In 1922 he married Millicent Geraldine Mockler, with whom he had two daughters. 
In 1923, as special assistant to Sir Alexander Gibb & Partners, Maunsell was engaged on the design and layout of Ipswich Dock extensions, Poole harbour, and other works. From 1924 to 1927 he was engineer and agent to Sir William Arrol & Co., working on the Falls of Clyde hydroelectric power scheme. The next three years were spent in private practice and in association with Sir Alexander Gibb & Partners. In 1931 he joined Dorman Long & Co. as agent for the widening of Sir Joseph Bazalgette's Putney Bridge. When this was completed, in 1934, he became managing director of the Anglo-Danish Construction Company, expressly formed to build the Storstrom Bridge in Denmark. Maunsell solved the difficult site erection problem by designing an ingenious floating crane capable of lifting a complete viaduct span in one piece. At the time this was the longest bridge in Europe, some 10,535 feet. The linking of the erection procedure with the design concept was a Maunsell trademark. In 1936 he formed the consulting engineering firm G. Maunsell & Partners, which he headed until his retirement in 1959. In 1940 he was invited to join Sir Alexander Gibb in the restoration of Telford's Menai suspension bridge. 
During the Second World War, Maunsell's ingenuity was fully utilized in many unusual projects, which later became the inspiration for other civil engineering developments. One was the design and installation of the 'Maunsell sea forts', a series of fortified off-shore tower structures. The Admiralty naval fort in the Thames estuary comprised four towers, each weighing about 4500 tons. They were built of reinforced concrete at Northfleet and then towed out and sunk on site in 1942. This was so successful that an army fort was also installed in the Thames estuary and another in Liverpool Bay. Another wartime project was his design and production of a series of reinforced concrete floating docks for the Admiralty, capable of lifting tugs and minesweepers, but the great civil engineering achievement of the war was the Mulberry harbour, built for the allied landing in Normandy in 1944. Many engineers and Admiralty staff were involved in this project, including Guy Maunsell, who had first proposed a floating breakwater scheme to Admiral Hughes Hallet in 1940. 
Maunsell travelled widely throughout his life and used his talent for painting in watercolours to record many of his engineering works. His last major work was the design of a 1000 ft span arch bridge which was being constructed at Gladesville, Sydney, Australia, at the time of his death. Maunsell died on 20 June 1961 at The Orchard, London Road, Southborough, Kent, and was buried at Southborough cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 51924


Lisle, Aubrey Edwin Orchard- (1908-1989), commercial estate agent, was born on 12 March 1908, at Crediton, Devon, the second of four sons of Edwin Orchard-Lisle and his wife, Lucy Ellen Lock. He was educated at West Buckland School, north Devon, and later attended the College of Estate Management in London. He left school at the age of sixteen following the death of his father, and started work with the Hampstead-based estate agents Ernest Owers. He passed the Auctioneers' and Estate Agents' Institute examination when he was twenty-one, achieving the highest mark for the London area. In 1926 he moved to Healey and Baker, an old-established surveying firm which was just beginning to move into commercial property. In 1929 he transferred to the firm's new West End office in St George Street, where he managed the development of the practice's commercial side (which was eventually to replace its residential business) together with Arthur Hemens, who had joined Healey and Baker in 1926. In 1930 his brother Mervyn also joined the practice. The two brothers, together with Arthur Hemens and, later, Douglas Tovey, were the guiding forces behind the firm's development as one of Britain's largest and most successful commercial estate agencies. 
Early deals with shop developers led Orchard-Lisle to concentrate his activities on the lucrative shops sector. A highly successful strategy was adopted of developing strong links with rapidly expanding multiple retailing chains such as Montague Burton, Marks and Spencer, and Woolworth's. Close relationships with these retailers enabled the practice to gain a key position as the presence of one of the major multiples could determine the success or failure of a development. 
Orchard-Lisle was also instrumental in forging links between retailers, property developers, and institutional investors such as the Prudential and Norwich Union. He put together deals which allowed retailers and developers to raise considerable finance on the strength of their property portfolios by selling stores to financial institutions, and simultaneously taking long (99- or 999-year) leases on them at fixed rents. Healey and Baker's success in this field led to rapid expansion; between 1930 and 1939 the number of its employees grew from fifteen to more than a hundred. In 1934 Orchard-Lisle became a partner, and in the same year he married Phyllis Muriel Viall (died 1981); they had one son. 
Shortly after the outbreak of war in 1939 Orchard-Lisle recruited Douglas Tovey, a surveyor who had worked for the Great Western Railway, and the shopping parade developer Edward Lotery; the partnership of Orchard-Lisle and Tovey was to provide the cornerstone of Healey and Baker's success in the post-war property boom. After the war ended they took over the firm's investment and West End business. Orchard-Lisle began to advise large City institutions such as the Prudential and the Pearl insurance companies, helping them to acquire investment property at a time when cheap money and government controls on capital issues greatly reduced the supply of alternative assets. He also advised some of the first pension funds to invest in property, including the National Coal Board's superannuation scheme (to which he was appointed as property consultant in 1953) and the National Bus Company pension fund. 
Orchard-Lisle worked with some of the most famous property entrepreneurs of the 1950s, including Jack Cotton, whose main property adviser he became, often setting up entire deals for him. 'If Jack Cotton said yes to Aubrey Orchard-Lisle... [he was] saying yes to a full package which included acquisition, letting and funding' (Gordon, 31). He and Cotton became close friends; the Orchard-Lisles bought a house in Marlow from one of the Cotton trusts, located across the Thames from Cotton's home. 
Orchard-Lisle was known for his single-minded devotion to business. His brother Mervyn recalled a time when they had been invited to lunch at the House of Commons; they were walking through the Great Hall of Westminster when Mervyn paused to stop and said: 'You know Aubrey, this is where Warren Hastings was impeached.' Aubrey replied: 'No, but by the way you did complete the deal with Montague Burton's at Woolwich?' (private information). However, while he listed his main recreation in 'Who's Who' as work, Orchard-Lisle was also a good all-round sportsman and was particularly keen on cricket. His business activities outside Healey and Baker included serving on the board of the General Practice Finance Corporation, as chairman of the advisory panel for institutional finance in new towns, and as a member of the board of the National Bus Company. He also applied his organizational abilities to the benefit of the National Health Service, as a governor of Guy's Hospital medical school, chairman of the special trustees of Guy's Hospital, and a member of the Lambeth, Southwark, and Lewisham Area Health Authority (teaching). He was a fellow of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and was appointed CBE in 1973. 
Orchard-Lisle became a senior partner at Healey and Baker in 1972 and continued to work for the practice as a consultant partner until he was eighty-three. He died on 5 August 1989 from cancer at the London Bridge Hospital, Tooley Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 51925


Overall, Douglas (1892-1978), chartered surveyor and commercial property developer, was born on 9 May 1892 at 18 Clifton Street, Brighton, the son of Frank Harry Overall, furniture salesman, and his wife, Sarah Jane Millard. He attended Brighton College for a time, where he studied engineering, but in 1913 he joined the commercial estate agents Hillier and Parker, becoming right-hand man to one of its founders, Tom Parker. During the First World War he was commissioned in the Royal Garrison Artillery. Mentioned in dispatches, he retired with the rank of captain. In 1919 he was made a partner with Hillier and Parker, and played an important role in the firm's merger with another prominent shops agency, May and Rowden, in 1921. 
Together with Walter Stanley Edgson, Overall developed the merged practice, Hillier, Parker, May, and Rowden, as one of Britain's most important commercial chartered surveyors. While Edgson specialized in the London property market, Overall concentrated on the provinces. He played an important part in the establishment of a national commercial property market, developing a system for assembling information on shopping centres throughout Britain in order to meet the property needs of rapidly expanding multiple retailers such as Marks and Spencer, Boots, and Woolworths. In 1937 Overall, together with Edgson, became joint senior partner of Hillier Parker. 
In addition to his work for the firm, Overall was engaged in the commercial property market as principal, as well as agent. In 1927 he established the property company Sterling Estates, which built up a portfolio of high street shop properties. Sterling was acquired by Royal Insurance in 1973, though Overall remained chairman until his death, by which time Sterling's portfolio was worth at least $50 million. Overall also perceived the growing market for factories and built speculatively for letting on the industrial estates which mushroomed along London's arterial roads during the 1930s. He set up Industrial Estates, an offshoot of Sterling Estates, to develop and hold such factories. 
Overall was also active in public life. During the war he was involved in the management of the air raid patrol, coordinating 1000 warden staff. He raised $100,000 for the pilots and crews funds of the RAF, served as a justice of the peace, an additional commissioner for taxes, a governor of Putney Hospital, a member of the boards of many charities, and as a member of Westminster city council. He also became chairman of the Association of London Property Owners and the London Auction Mart. Overall married Dorothy Grace Waters (1890-1978) about 1918. They had a son and a daughter. 
Overall was a keen golfer. When he became a president of the Chartered Auctioneers and Estate Agents' Institute he was asked to open its golfing society. In front of a crowd of spectators he failed to hit an opening shot which was designed to mark the occasion. After he missed the ball a second time the crowd fell silent: Overall turned to his caddy and, with stiff upper lip, calmly remarked: 'That's a damn long course isn't it?' (private information). He retired from Hillier Parker in 1953, after which he devoted more of his time to running Sterling Estates. He died at his home, 102 Rivermead Court, Fulham, on 13 October 1978 at the age of eighty-six. His wife survived him by only five days. His son, Tony, also served as a director of Sterling Estates for fifteen years, before establishing his own property company. 


@@@@@


doc= 51927


Peto, Henry (1774-1830), builder and contractor, was born on 4 May 1774, the fourth son in a family of nine children of James Peto and his wife, Mary, in the parish of Cobham in Kent. Documentary sources variously describe Henry as a carpenter, bricklayer, and builder, but nothing is known of his training or early working life as a builder until 1806 when he was thirty-two. Over the next two decades he emerged as one of a new breed of builder -- the general contractor whose firm executed most branches of the work and contracted 'in gross'. 
In 1806 Peto submitted drawings and a tender to the City corporation to build an extension to the sessions house in the Old Bailey, a late eighteenth-century court house designed by George Dance, the younger. Peto won the contract to build the two-storey addition within two years at a total cost of $5179. It was his first known commission. The building consisted of an open colonnaded area on the ground floor with 'Grecian Doric fluted columns of Portland stone' (CLRO, City Lands Contracts, 3), with rooms and offices above, a competent and scholarly classical design. 
In 1809 Peto successfully tendered to build the naval hospital (St Nicholas's) at Yarmouth. The building was completed in 1811, again under a contract for the whole works. Peto's next undertaking, in partnership with John Miles and based at 31 Little Britain in the City of London, was the building of the foundations and carcass of a new London custom house in the City. The construction of the custom house was begun in 1813 to the designs of the city surveyor of the day, David Laing. Peto's partner died the following year. The project turned out to be a disaster from the moment it was finished in 1815, and became a professional scandal. When the Long Room in the central portion of the building collapsed in 1824 Sir Sidney Smirke was called in to investigate. He found a catalogue of building errors, the most serious of which was the failure by Peto to supply proper foundation piling in the crucial places. Peto was sued and found guilty of greed and cutting corners in a way 'inconsistent with the character of a fair and respectable tradesman' (TNA: PRO, WORK 12/100/2, fols. 69-71). Laing was blamed for not having supervised the work properly. Both would fight in and out of court for their fortunes and reputations for the rest of their lives. 
Remarkably, notwithstanding these setbacks, Peto continued in business. Cash flow was undoubtedly a problem; money bequeathed to Peto in 1818 by Samuel Barber, a plumber and presumably a business associate, was offset by another building collapse. At this time Peto was involved in the building of Park Crescent, part of Nash's urban scheme for Regent's Park begun in 1816. Speculator Charles Mayor had begun to build six houses on the south-east quadrant of a proposed circus, and following Mayor's bankruptcy in 1817, Peto was brought in to complete them. One of the six had been damaged by fire and collapsed after Peto's rebuilding in March 1818. Investigations found more evidence of shoddy workmanship. Perhaps thanks to Nash's covering for him, Peto continued to work: at Bryanston Square on the Portman estate from 1821, and at Raymond's Buildings, a block of lawyers' chambers, from 1825 (the year in which he went into partnership with his nephew Thomas Grissell). He also designed Wood's Hotel, built on the site of Furnival's Inn; and from 1827 worked on another Nash scheme at Carlton Gardens. 
For the latter part of his life, Peto lived in Highbury Terrace overlooking Highbury Fields. His builders' yards were extensive and based in Lambeth. Peto died on 15 September 1830 having recouped some of his fee for building the custom house (later rebuilt to Smirke's designs). Unmarried and without heirs, he left most of his estate, including his business, in equal parts, to his nephew and partner Thomas Grissell (son of his sister Anne and Thomas De La Garde Grissell) and another nephew, Samuel Morton Peto, both of whom had been apprenticed to him. Peto had taken a great interest in the education of (Samuel) Morton Peto and donated prize money to his school, but once responsible for Samuel's training, Peto was apparently very strict and did not allow his nephew many holidays. After Henry Peto's death the young men took over their uncle's works at York Road and Edward Street in Lambeth and formed a new company, Grissell and Peto, well known as builders of the houses of parliament and of railways later in the century. 


@@@@@


doc= 51929


Rowles, Henry (bap. 1777, d. 1840), builder, was baptized on 8 December 1777 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, the son of James Rowles and his wife, Catherine ('nee' Holland), the favourite sister of the architect Henry Holland. He was trained in Holland's office but then entered business as a builder. Presumably his family contacts stood him in good stead. 
On 16 April 1807 Rowles married Adelaide Theresa Georgiana Gourdez at St George's, Hanover Square. Henry Holland had leased to him the sites of twenty-one houses in Upper Cadogan Place on the Holland Park estate in west London; the largest of these houses, at the east end of the street, became Rowles's own residence. At about this time Rowles entered into a partnership with his uncle Alexander Copland, one of the most successful of the early building contractors, and from 1811 the two men were responsible for developing part of the Tothill Fields estate belonging to the dean and chapter of Westminster Abbey. In parallel with this work Rowles entered into several major contracts on his own account. These included a saltpetre warehouse on south quay at the East India docks (1806) -- Henry Holland had completed the company's headquarters in Leadenhall Street; the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane (1811), one of the first examples of a contract in gross; and the Royal Mint (1818), where Rowles was the office of works contractor for the masonry, bricklaying, and carpentry work. An estimate by Rowles dated 1807 for undertaking all the building work at East India College, Haileybury, survives in the Soane Museum, London. 
About 1821 Rowles withdrew from the building industry altogether. He subsequently became a director of several dock, railway, and other companies, including the Globe Fire Insurance Company (of which he was chairman), St Katharine's Dock, and the Rhymni ironworks. He served as managing director of the latter until his death: the ironworks was established in 1837 as successor to the Bute ironworks and its first chairman was W. J. Copland, which suggests that the earlier business connection still endured. 
Rowles was one of the principal witnesses examined by the 1828 select committee on the office of works. He and another witness, William Cubitt, were described as two of the principal London general builders. In his evidence Rowles was generally critical of the method of pricing works for government contracts by 'measure and value' and strongly advocated contracts in gross as more advantageous to the employer. He commented that this system was 'very generally used now; I believe almost every new club house in London is built on the same principle' (Satoh, 38). 
Rowles inherited all Henry Holland's architectural books and papers and his collection of antiquities. Many of the latter found their way into Sir John Soane's collection. The two men were on cordial terms and it seems likely that Rowles made Soane a present of the antiquities. In low spirits in later life, Rowles was found dead in the water closet of his home, 15 Stratton Street, Piccadilly, London, on 23 October 1840, having on that evening blown his brains out with a double-barrelled gun. He was buried on 27 October at Kensal Green. 


@@@@@


doc= 51930


Preston, George Dawson (1896-1972), physicist, was born on 8 August 1896 at Bardowie, Orwell Park, Rathgar, Dublin, the eldest of the three children of Professor Thomas Preston (1860-1900), physicist, and his wife, Katherine Mary Preston, nee McEwen (1868-1951), eldest daughter of Thomas McEwen, headmaster, of Baldernock, Stirlingshire, and his first wife, Eliza Gray Mann; at the time of George's birth his mother was lecturer in Italian and she later became lady principal of Alexandra College, Dublin. 
Preston's father died in 1900 leaving the family in reduced circumstances until 1910, when they inherited family property in co. Armagh. He attended school in Dublin and at thirteen won a scholarship to Oundle School, chosen on advice from his father's successor as HM inspector of schools, Sir Robert Blair, that it was the best school for science in the UK. In 1915 Preston won a scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, but, against the advice of his headmaster, Dr Sanderson, chose to enlist instead. Soon after, in a near-fatal hand-grenade incident, Preston lost his right patella, resulting in a permanent 'gammy' leg and a 75 per cent pension from his military service; he was also infected with tuberculosis. Preston was posted to the Ministry of Pensions, but at the armistice -- by then a lieutenant and assistant adjutant of 49 squadron, Royal Flying Corps -- decided to 'desert', as he described it, and went to Jamaica for a year to recuperate. 
Preston finally took up his place at Gonville and Caius in 1920. In Cambridge he met Margaret Chrystal (1898-1994), also a physicist, and daughter of Captain Alexander Chrystal; they were married in 1924 after a four-year engagement. Preston was awarded a double first in the natural sciences tripos and became Sir Ernest Rutherford's graduate student working in the new field of X-ray crystallography. 
In 1922 Preston moved to the department of metallurgy at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), where until 1943 he pursued topics within the emerging mainstream of X-ray crystallography as well as in a branch of related research, electron microscopy. His interests ranged from the study of molecular structures by X-ray methods to thermal vibrations in the crystal lattice and oxidization in metals. One result of his early career, the Gunier-Preston layer, a clustering of solute atoms during precipitation hardening, was named after him. 
In 1938 Preston was promoted to senior scientific officer at the NPL and from this time, although still active in other research, he led British work on electron microscopy. His pioneer apparatus had a magnification of only about x 600 diameters, roughly the limit of optical microscopy. Funding for this was withdrawn in the year prior to the outbreak of the Second World War: the decision, ultimately made by the Home Office on a cost-cutting initiative, meant that American research soon outstripped the British effort, producing the Metro-Vic electron microscope which magnified x 15,000 diameters. Preston was elected by fellow scientists to the Whitley Council in 1940 to represent them in negotiations with the relevant government bodies. He felt that the decision to cut funds for electron microscopy had been a political one, on the grounds that there was no practical application for such a device, but its true worth soon became apparent. By 1941 two Metro-Vic microscopes had been sent from the United States on separate ships; the first became a U-boat casualty, but the second machine was used under Preston's supervision. 
The initial focus of research was on war-related issues, and the apparatus was used to study viral and bacterial specimens in conjunction with agricultural research at Rothamsted, especially in response to crop diseases and the overall food shortage. Other research was in metallurgy and mineralogy, notably of coal. At the time of Dunkirk some Bren gun breech-blocks were exploding and crews were reluctant to fire them. The NPL metallurgy team soon found the cause and Preston, as a veteran, was able to convince the military that the new block was safe. 
In 1942, despite his role in halting research four years earlier, home secretary Sir J. Anderson planned to visit Preston's laboratory and to become the first non-scientist in Europe to witness the capabilities of electron microscopy. On 26 December, just prior to the visit, Preston pre-empted him by smuggling his own young son Tom past NPL security to secretly claim this first. Anderson was subsequently informed by Preston that he had not actually been the first non-scientist in Europe to see beyond the limits of light. 
In 1943 Preston was appointed by St Andrews University to the Harris chair of natural philosophy at Queen's College, Dundee. He had proceeded ScD of Cambridge University in that year. In Scotland he continued work in electron microscopy, X-ray crystallography, and diffraction grids, becoming a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and fellow of the Institute of Physics in 1944. As chairman of the 1947 Electron Microscope Society meeting, Preston remarked that 'as three dimensional images can be made with electrons, it ought also to be possible to do so with light'. Later Dennis Gabor, inventor of holography, attributed his idea of 'incoherent light in contrast to coherent electrons' to Preston's words. 
Although his appointment was for life Preston retired when he was about seventy. His main intellectual activity and hobby was the study of quaternions while for exercise he gardened at his mansion, Craigellie, Alyth, in Perthshire. He shunned the limelight, declining potential honours, finding it convenient to say that the ceremonies would be too tiring on his old war wound. He died at Meigle Cottage Hospital, Perth, on 22 June 1972, survived by his widow and four children, Margaret, Thomas, Mary, and George. 


@@@@@


doc= 51931


Williams, Sir (Evan) Owen (1890-1969), civil engineer and architect, was the son of Evan Owen Williams, a grocer of Welsh provenance settled in Amhurst Park, Stoke Newington, London, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Roberts. He was born on 20 March 1890 at 16 Caroline Terrace, St Ann's Road, Tottenham. From 1901 he attended Tottenham grammar school where he did well in mathematics and matriculated in 1907. He then took an apprenticeship with the Metropolitan Electric Tramways Company, which was extending its network over northern districts of London. Simultaneously Williams went to evening classes at the Northern Polytechnic Institute, whence in 1911 he graduated with first-class honours in engineering. 
In that year Williams entered the field which he was to make his own, that of structural engineering in reinforced concrete. Little more than a decade old but fast expanding, it was dominated by competitive contracting-engineering firms which were exploiting different patent systems of reinforcement. Williams worked briefly for the Indented Bar and Concrete Engineering Company, then in 1912-16 for the larger, American-owned, Trussed Concrete Steel Company, first as senior designer and afterwards as chief estimator. In the former capacity he designed his first building, a six-storey cabinet factory for the Gramophone Company (later EMI) at Hayes, Middlesex, but most of his responsibilities concerned bridges, docks, reservoirs, and industrial plant, often in south Wales where he spent time on site. In 1916-17 Williams worked for the Wells Aviation Company, designing a flying boat; then in 1917-18 he was chief engineer at the Admiralty shipyard at Poole, where he built reinforced concrete lighters and tugs (as others were also doing). This led to an unexploited patent for a system of ship construction. He designed further concrete barges and coasters during the Second World War. 
Williams's independent career began straight after the First World War, when the patent licensees for concrete construction ceased to be dominant. He gained rapid success as a consulting engineer, with an office in London. Industrial buildings, especially in south Wales, were at first the staple of his work. He stepped into the limelight as engineer for the whole of the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley, opened in 1924. The vast and manly forms of the palaces of industry and engineering and of the Wembley stadium had more to do with Williams than with their architect, Maxwell Ayrton. They earned him an unexpected knighthood at the age of thirty-four, when he had yet to be recognized by his professional contemporaries. Williams and Ayrton went on to collaborate on a series of notable bridges, particularly at Findhorn, Spey, Crubenmore, and Loch Alvie on the A9 in the Scottish highlands (1924-8). These commissions for the Ministry of Transport were the first structures in Britain convincingly to develop a distinctive aesthetic for reinforced concrete and display the raw, heavy, angular idiom which Williams was to make his own. 
In 1929 Williams trespassed upon the realm of high architecture when he was invited by McAlpines, contractors for the Empire Exhibition, to design the whole of the Dorchester Hotel in Park Lane, London, including interiors and elevations. The structural candour of Williams's design proved too much for the syndicate to swallow. He was sacked after construction had commenced but took bitter delight in sending the drawings round to his successor, the architect W. Curtis Green, in a taxi. This episode ushered in an energetic decade during which Williams dazzled the avant-garde with a batch of big projects that were at the forefront of modernism yet, unlike the modernism of the architects themselves, owed little to continental paradigms. They included the 'Daily Express' buildings in London, Manchester, and Glasgow, the first structures in Britain to explore the aesthetic of the curtain wall with a sure sense of style; the Boots 'wets' factory at Beeston, Nottingham, Williams's masterpiece, in which an open production space in the centre, designed for cleanliness, is flanked by flat-slab floors on mushroom-headed columns, drawn out to the perimeter and revealed between continuous strips of glazing; the Boots 'drys' factory, also at Beeston; the Pioneer Health Centre, Peckham, London; the Dollis Hill Synagogue, Dollis Hill, Middlesex, with an early 'folded plate' roof; and, back at Wembley, the Empire pool, where Williams spanned over 230 feet with three-pinned arches counterbalanced by ranks of external fins with little water towers perched over the corners. The contrast between this building (1933-4) and its predecessors at Wembley manifested Williams's spectacular development. 
A setback to Williams's career occurred in 1940 when the Vickers-Armstrongs aircraft factory at Blackpool, a rare example of his engagement in steel-framed design, collapsed during construction; prolonged litigation ensued. In 1945 Sir Owen Williams & Partners were appointed engineers for the Newport (Monmouthshire) bypass, the first British road to be designed to motorway standards. Though not built until 1957-67, the project secured Williams's pre-eminence in the early years of British motorway design. The most famous fruit of this was the Luton to Crick section of the M1, opened in 1959 and punctuated by ponderous bridges that exploit concrete for monumentality rather than elegance; there is a specially noble viaduct, unseen by motorists, over the River Ouse in Buckinghamshire. Because of his commitment to roads, Williams was less involved with buildings after 1945. His most complex achievement, the structure of the 'Daily Mirror' building, London (1955-61), was hidden behind banal elevations by another hand. In his British Overseas Airways Corporation maintenance headquarters (now Technical Block A), Heathrow airport, London (1950-55), Williams renewed his pre-war ambitions as an architect-engineer to create a building of unique form in which four wide-span aircraft hangars are sandwiched between offices and workshops, the hangars having entrance arches of 336 feet in span with vast external counterbalances, and roofs consisting of deep V-shaped trusses running 420 feet from front to back. 
On 31 July 1915 Williams married Gwladys Clarissa Tustian (1888-1947), with whom he had a son, Owen Tudor Williams, and a daughter. After her death he married, on 24 October 1947, Doreen Elizabeth ('b'. 1913/14), daughter of Percy Harold Baker, who survived him and with whom he had a further son and daughter. 'O. T.' Williams (1916-1996) joined his father's firm and succeeded him as managing partner of Sir Owen Williams & Partners. He was responsible for much motorway work during and after his father's lifetime, most famously for 'spaghetti junction' on the midlands links motorway north of Birmingham. Williams retired to Berkhamsted because of failing health in 1966 and died at the West Hertfordshire Hospital, Hemel Hempstead, on 23 May 1969. 
Sir Owen Williams was the most creative of all British structural designers working in his lifetime. Single-handedly, he revived the noble native tradition of empirical architect-engineer. He was an ambitious autodidact whose career crossed boundaries and whose combative attitudes rustled the dovecotes in two professions. Building was his personal passion; he had an insatiable appetite for work. As a designer, Williams was a poor delegator and sometimes radically changed arrangements at a late stage. He wrote little, but enjoyed challenging orthodoxies and proposing cheap and bold solutions to public projects in letters to 'The Times'. Compared to his nearest rival, Oscar Faber, Williams was not a structural theorist, though his understanding of concrete construction, especially of arches, was profound. His commitment to concrete was complete, though he could be conservative about the development of techniques, as in his aversion to pre-stressed concrete. To architecture he brought a plain man's economical and pragmatic attitude which appealed to clients, yet he was able after 1930 to convert this into a progressive idiom wholly his own which has given him international status in the architectural canon. He was at his best with big, functional buildings. The lumpy angularity of his cheap bridges faced in raw concrete and of his mushroom-columned factory frames prefigured and in part inspired the British 'brutalist' aesthetic of the 1960s, with which Williams would have claimed no connection. His tall and broad physique and tough personality are lastingly expressed in his structures. 


@@@@@


doc= 51935


Cory, Sir George Edward (1862-1935), chemist and historian, was born on 3 June 1862 at 9 Palatine Place, Stoke Newington, London, the son of George Nicholas Cory and his wife, Susannah Emma Flowers. His father followed a variety of occupations and never settled long in one place. Cory's early schooling was consequently fragmentary, and at the age of thirteen he was put to work. During the next few years he employed all his spare time in studying, using popular manuals and self-educators, and in 1879 he entered St John's College, Hurstpierpoint, where he remained for three years. He then went to work for Sir William Siemens at Woolwich, where he was engaged first in testing transatlantic cables, and then in electric lighting; he helped to install the first arc lamps in London, at the Savoy opera-house. 
With the aim of resuming his academic studies, in 1884 Cory began teaching at St John's College, and moved subsequently to Northwich grammar school, and then to a private school in Cambridge. In 1886 he became a non-collegiate student and attended university lectures for the science tripos (in chemistry, physics, and anatomy), taking his BA two years later and an MA in 1892. He was admitted to King's College in 1888, and was university demonstrator in chemistry (1888-91). He was elected a fellow of the Chemical Society and began to study for a medical degree, but never completed it. 
In 1891 Cory went to South Africa to take up the post of vice-principal of Grahamstown public school. He became public analyst for the Eastern Province, and in 1894 was appointed lecturer (later professor) in chemistry at St Andrew's College, Grahamstown, where he designed a new laboratory. In 1904 he became the first professor of chemistry at the newly founded Rhodes University College, Grahamstown. In 1895 he married, in South Africa, Gertrude Blades, the second daughter of C. M. Blades, the public analyst for Northwich, Cheshire. They had three sons and three daughters. 
Cory's strong interest in the history of the Eastern Province -- where the first British settlers had arrived in 1820 -- soon grew into a systematic research programme, displacing any chemical studies and becoming his life's work. He interviewed elderly settlers and native African chiefs, photographed historical sites, and sought out collections of historical documents housed throughout the region. The work, aided by financial support from the estate of Cecil Rhodes and from the Union government, was eventually published in six volumes entitled 'The Rise of South Africa' (5 vols., London, 1910-30; vol. 6, Cape Town, 1940). Cory also edited the diary of the Revd Francis Owen, an early missionary (1926). 
Cory earned wide recognition as a historian. He was awarded an honorary DLitt from Cambridge in 1921, and in the following year he was knighted for services to science and literature. He visited England in 1922, when he was elected a fellow of the Royal Historical Society. He was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Empire Society in 1933. A cheerful and kindly man, he presented a somewhat dishevelled appearance, and enjoyed singing, walking, and bowls. He was known as a vivid speaker and a good teacher. 
In 1925 Cory retired from Rhodes University College where -- despite his historical interests -- he was still professor of chemistry. He was then appointed professor emeritus. He was subsequently also appointed as honorary archivist to the Union government of South Africa, and moved to Cape Town, where he worked daily at the Cape Archives until shortly before his death in Cape Town on 28 April 1935. 


@@@@@


doc= 51936


Clifton, Robert Bellamy (1836-1921), physicist, was born at Gedney in Lincolnshire on 13 March 1836, the only son of Robert Clifton, a landowner, and his wife, Frances Gibbons. After schooling in Peterborough and Brighton he studied at University College, London, and in 1855 entered St John's College, Cambridge. His position as sixth wrangler in the tripos in 1859 was seen as disappointing, but he was second Smith's prizeman and became a fellow of his college. In 1860 he was appointed the first professor of natural philosophy at Owens College, Manchester. There he lectured successfully and in 1862 married Catharine Elizabeth Butler (died 1917) of Brighton. They had three sons and a daughter. 
Clifton's application for the new chair of experimental philosophy at Oxford in 1865 was supported by testimonials from Henry Roscoe, William Thomson, James Prescott Joule, William Whewell, George Gabriel Stokes, and J. C. Adams, as well as from Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff of Heidelberg, who had met Clifton during a visit to Manchester in 1862. This support and his record at Cambridge and Manchester set him comfortably ahead of the only other applicant, George Griffith, an Oxford graduate and part-time schoolmaster at Winchester College, who had deputized as professor of experimental philosophy during the protracted incapacity of the Revd Professor Robert Walker. After arriving in Oxford in 1866 Clifton began his tenure of the chair promisingly. More than a decade after its foundation, the school of natural science had achieved respectability, and the opening of the university museum in 1860 had further advanced the interests of science in the university. The flow of students seeking laboratory instruction immediately rendered the space for experimental philosophy in the museum inadequate, and Clifton began a campaign for the new laboratory that was to constitute his greatest single contribution to the discipline and to Oxford. 
Although Clifton's case rested on a belief in the importance of training in experimental technique that most progressive physicists would have shared, it appeared initially to have little chance of success. But it carried the day when the trustees of the funds arising from the bequest of the great-grandson of the earl of Clarendon offered $10,700 for the erection of what was to be the first purpose-built physics laboratory in the world. The Clarendon Laboratory, as it soon came to be called, was completed in 1872 at a total cost of $12,000. 
The internal design and fitting out of the Clarendon reflected Clifton's concern for detail and his vision of the laboratory as a leading centre for teaching and research in the physics of precise measurement. Conscious of the delicacy of much of the equipment, he devoted each room to a specific range of experiments, so that the students, rather than the equipment, moved about the building. Fear of the harm that could befall apparatus in inexperienced hands also made him cautious about releasing it from the locked cupboards in which it was kept when not in immediate use. These attitudes discouraged all but the most committed students, and few chose to specialize in physics for the honour school. In 1887 Clifton's failure to develop the subject at the honours level had its inevitable consequences when convocation rejected his request for $4800 for the construction of an electrical laboratory. This defeat, allied to the persistent neglect of his case for the appointment of other professors (in particular, of someone who would teach electricity, in which he had little competence), appears to have undermined Clifton's will to fight for his subject, and in 1895 he reallocated his personal laboratory for the purposes of teaching. In fact, the decision to relinquish his laboratory had few consequences, for Clifton had published only one substantial scientific article since arriving in Oxford. 
The last two decades of Clifton's career, until he retired in 1915, were marked by the undiminished fastidiousness of his teaching but also by tensions. The long-awaited appointment of a second professor, J. S. E. Townsend, in 1900 brought him more unhappiness than relief. He and Townsend never worked well together, and Townsend consistently attracted the larger share of serious students and of material support, notably for a new and quite separate electrical laboratory, opened in 1910. 
For much of his career Clifton was active in the wider world of science. As a fellow of the Royal Society, to which he was elected in 1868, he served three times on the council and was vice-president from 1896 to 1898. He was also president of the Physical Society from 1882 to 1884 and maintained friendships in the discipline, notably with Stokes. But he was a reserved and at times difficult colleague. Although a fellow of Merton College (from 1869) and an honorary fellow of Wadham, he took little active part in college life and never secured the allies that his discipline needed within the university. He was best known, in fact, for quiet domestic hospitality, offered at his home in Oxford until his wife's death in 1917. 
Clifton's involvement in public life beyond science tended to be concentrated in his earlier years in Oxford. In the late 1860s and 1870s he was an informative witness before the Devonshire commission on scientific instruction and other inquiries, and from 1879 to 1886 served on the royal commission on accidents in mines, for which he performed experiments and even designed a new safety lamp. A more enduring and, in the years of agricultural depression, burdensome commitment was his supervision of the property in Gedney that he inherited on his father's death in 1873. It was typical of Clifton that his activities were so dispersed and that he invested so much energy in each of them. Despite his thin record in research his life was full and, not least because of his curious habit of working from midnight until the early morning before sleeping for a couple of hours and appearing in the laboratory at 11 a.m., quietly productive. He died at his home, 3 Bardwell Road, Oxford, on 22 February 1921. The obituaries that followed convey the impression of someone whose personal dignity and achievements as a teacher were valued more highly than the subsequent, generally critical assessments of him would suggest. 


@@@@@


doc= 51937


Muir, Sir Thomas (1844-1934), mathematician and educationist, was born on 25 August 1844 in Biggar, near Lanark, Scotland, the son of George Muir, railway superintendent, and his wife, Mary Brown. The family moved away from Biggar, and he was sent to Wishaw public school. Afterwards he attended Glasgow University (1863-8), where he was influenced by Lord Kelvin, whom he greatly admired. Muir was the first Greek and first mathematical student of his year, but though Greek was his first love he turned to mathematics. 
Muir's first appointment was as mathematical tutor at the University of St Andrews (1868-71), where he made a modest reputation as a mathematician. He continued his mathematical training by spending short periods in Berlin and Gottingen. After St Andrews he became assistant to Hugh Blackburn, professor of mathematics at Glasgow University. Muir remained at the university a short time (1871-4) but in this period discovered his real talent for teaching mathematics. He left to become head of the mathematics and science departments at the high school of Glasgow (1874-92). On 12 October 1876 Muir married Maggie (died 1919), youngest daughter of Dugald Bell, merchant, of Dunbartonshire, and his wife, Isabella Young. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Muir pursued mathematical research in continued fractions and determinants and one of his early contributions drew a published response from the English mathematician Arthur Cayley. Muir won the Keith prize of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1884 and again in 1899, and he was one of the founders of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society. 
Muir's life took a dramatic turn in 1892 when, seeking a warmer climate for the benefit of his wife's health, he moved to southern Africa. He had considered an application for the vacant chair of mathematics at Stanford University in California but, after a vacancy arose in Cape Colony to succeed Sir Langham Dale as superintendent-general of education, he applied there instead, and was appointed by Cecil Rhodes, prime minister in Cape Colony, who was then visiting England. When an official wanted to scrutinize Muir's testimonials, Rhodes is reputed to have exclaimed: 'Damn the testimonials! I have seen the man' ('Cape Times', 22 March 1934). He immediately cabled his cabinet to make the appointment. 
In his service in the Cape (1892-1915) Muir reorganized the whole public education system from elementary school to university. He abolished the overly academic examinations in the schools, formed an efficient system of training colleges for teachers, and virtually created science teaching. A prime minister of Cape Colony, J. X. Merriman, said that in Muir's plan educational thought always went ahead of practice and reflected that 'no better day's work had ever been done than when they secured Sir Thomas for South Africa' ('Cape Times', 22 March 1934). Some in South Africa even said Muir was 'the man who taught the Cape to read and write'. Reform is never without opposition and literary-minded critics of his plans for education claimed he 'had scotched it but not quite killed it' (Aitken, 'Thomas Muir'). For his part, Muir never regretted his decision to go to Africa, where he found the opportunity fully to employ his wide-ranging skills. 
Muir served as vice-chancellor of the University of the Cape in 1897-1901, and was elected FRS in 1900. He was equally a mathematician, educational administrator, teacher, and capable historian of mathematics. He was president of the South African Association for the Advancement of Science in 1910 and represented the Union of South Africa at the Imperial Education Conference in London in 1911. He was knighted in 1915 for his services to science. 
Muir's mathematical reputation rests on his work on determinants (a numerical value obtained from an array of numbers). Between 1875 and 1880 he conceived the ambitious project of writing a history of determinants. His first bibliography (forty pages) of writings on determinants appeared in the 'Quarterly Mathematical Journal' of 1881, and a second in 1886. He published his first book, 'Treatise on the Theory of Determinants', in 1882, and his second in 1890. During the South African War (1899-1902) he found determinants offered a welcome distraction from the worries of war and he temporarily revived his previous studies. The 1890 book was the precursor for the volumes which will always be associated with his name, the monumental 'History of the Theory of Determinants' in five volumes, published in 1906-29 (the final volume when he was eighty-six). A projected sixth volume was never finished. The complete work encompasses a catalogue with commentaries of all the known papers on determinants from Leibniz's work in the seventeenth century until 1920. Muir's commentaries varied in length from eighty-four pages devoted to Cauchy's classic paper of 1812 to a few lines for slight contributions. The subject material emphasizes the importance of determinants in nineteenth-century mathematics in contrast to the more fundamental subject of matrices which only developed from a halting start in the 1850s. Muir's work was of great assistance to those who wished to consult the papers of important mathematicians of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 
Muir wrote approximately 307 papers, listed in the Royal Society catalogue, mostly on determinants and connected subjects. He was able to return the compliment he received in youth by putting the finishing touches to one of Cayley's own papers. He read widely and enjoyed literature almost as much as mathematics. When Rudyard Kipling visited South Africa as the guest of Rhodes, Muir immediately struck up a friendship with him. He regarded Pauline Smith (who wrote 'The Little Karoo') as the greatest writer on South Africa, and his refined taste in poetry found expression in his admiration of Roy Campbell's 'Adamastor'. On occasion he was susceptible to the quirky sense of humour often found among mathematicians. Thus, postulating that any book on philosophy will contain a 'hole' in its argument, he went on to conclude that Jan Christian Smuts's 'Holism and Evolution' was especially vulnerable. 
Muir was physically active throughout his long life, although after a severe illness he gave up tennis and contented himself with lighter exercise. When he was eighty-nine it was observed that 'his faculties are unimpaired and he still works hard' ('Cape Times', 25 Aug 1933, 11). He presented a figure of admiration and curiosity to his neighbours, who watched a gentleman from the Victorian age diligently pursuing mathematics, sitting upright at his desk in winged collar and bow tie, preparing his work. He died at Rondebosch, Cape Town, South Africa, on 21 March 1934 and was buried in the Maitland cemetery near Rondebosch. 


@@@@@


doc= 51939


Rado, Richard (1906-1989), mathematician, was born on 28 April 1906 in Berlin, the second son of Leopold Rado from Budapest. He studied at the University of Berlin, and also spent some time in Gottingen. He took a DPh at Berlin with a thesis described as a 'mathematical jewel' ('Jahresbericht', 128), under Issai Schur in 1933. On 16 March 1933 he married Luise Zadek, the elder daughter of Hermann Zadek, whom he had earlier come to know when he needed a partner to play piano duets. Their only son, Peter, was born in 1943. 
As Hitler came to power in 1933, the Rados made their way to England. The decree on the civil service, issued soon after the National Socialists took power, made it impossible for those classified as Jewish to pursue academic careers in Germany, and Rado was interviewed at Berlin by Lindemann (Lord Cherwell) with a view to finding a place in England. On Lindemann's recommendation he was granted a scholarship of $300 per annum (by the chemist and philanthropist Sir Robert Mond) to enable him to study at Cambridge. He entered Fitzwilliam House in the same year and studied for a PhD under G. H. Hardy. During his stay at Cambridge he was closely associated with Harold Davenport and Hans Heilbronn, among others, and first met his later collaborator, Paul Erdos. After gaining his PhD in 1935 Rado was a temporary lecturer in Cambridge until 1936 when he was appointed assistant lecturer (and later lecturer) at the University of Sheffield. Among the refugee scientists living in Britain during the thirties, Rado's path to success was unusually straightforward, and he may have been assisted by the fact that he emigrated right at the beginning of his career. By 1939 he was able to assist his teacher, Issai Schur, to emigrate from Germany to Palestine. 
After the war, in 1947, Rado was appointed to a readership at King's College, London, and in 1954 he became professor of mathematics at Reading, where he stayed until his retirement in 1971. He was active in the London Mathematical Society, which he served for a time as president, and he founded the British Combinatorial Committee, which he chaired until 1987. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1978. In 1981 he went to the Free University of Berlin to deliver lectures and to receive an honorary doctorate; this was described as perhaps 'the most moving experience of his life' ('The Times', 2 Jan 1990). He was an extremely methodical person and was in the habit of making verbatim shorthand notes of lectures, seminars, and even senate meetings; his sixty-four extant diaries are likewise written in shorthand. 
Rado had very wide mathematical interests and published 121 mathematical papers on an exceptionally varied range of topics. His main contribution was the development with Paul Erdos of the 'partition calculus'. A trivial example is the remark that if six people meet by chance, one can be sure that either at least three all know each other or there are at least three with no two knowing each other. A remarkable example (due to B. L. van der Waerden) shows that if 'k' and 'l' are given positive integers, then there is a large integer 'N', depending only on 'k' and 'l', such that, if the numbers 1, 2,..., 'N' are split up to form 'k' sequences then at least one of the sequences contains an arithmetic progression of length 'l'. Rado and Erdos, with some help from others, developed these and a few other isolated examples into a coherent theory, a partition calculus, with an amazing variety of applications in mathematics and mathematical logic. Rado was fascinated by mathematical beauty and sought after it. He always tried to formulate his results at their natural level of generality, so that their full power was exhibited, without their content being obscured by over-elaboration. His work with Erdos and others on partition relations is described in Erdos, Hajnal, Mate, and Rado, 'Combinatorial Set Theory: Partition Relations for Cardinals' (1984). 
Rado and his wife had a double partnership: she went with him to mathematical conferences and meetings and kept contact with his mathematical friends, he was an accomplished pianist and she was a singer of professional standard. They gave many recitals both public and private, often having musical evenings in their home in Reading. Rado was the kindest and gentlest of men. He died suddenly at the Thamesfield Nursing Home, Wargrave Road, Henley-on-Thames, on 23 December 1989, and his wife died a few months later (2 June 1990). Rado was cremated at Reading on 29 December 1989. 


@@@@@


doc= 51941


Stephen family (per. 1750-1976), shipbuilders, came to prominence with Alexander Stephen (1722-1793), the son of William Stephen, a tenant farmer near Lossiemouth on the Moray Firth; he set up business at Burghead, 8 miles from Lossiemouth, in 1750, building small vessels for local customers. He was joined in 1777 by his brother's son, William Stephen (1759-1838), who worked with him at Burghead for ten years before returning to his home town of Aberdeen to learn ship drafting in James Cochar's yard. Aberdeen at that time had the largest concentration of shipbuilding activity on the east coast of Scotland. By 1793 William Stephen had set up on his own to build ships in competition with Cochar at Footdee in Aberdeen. The Stephens then had two yards, the original one at Burghead operated by Alexander Stephen, and the Footdee establishment at Aberdeen operated by his nephew William Stephen. It was from this second enterprise that a further six generations of Stephens were to become shipbuilders, moving progressively down the east coast from Aberdeen to Arbroath and then Dundee, and finally westward to the Clyde. 
The first move outward from the Footdee base was made by William Stephen's eldest son, another William, who leased a yard at Arbroath in 1814 and extended the family interests into a new local market. William's second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 51945


Morton, Savile (1811-1852), journalist and philanderer, was born on 1 August 1811, the fourth of the five sons who survived infancy of Charles Carr Morton, landed gentleman, of Kilnacrott House, Drumrora, co. Cavan, and his wife, Charlotte (died 1854), second daughter of John Tatlow, of Crover, co. Cavan. He also had three sisters. Morton entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1830, as a scholar, and graduated BA and twenty-second wrangler in 1834. An 'Apostle', and close friend of Edward FitzGerald (who called him 'my wild Irishman'), Thackeray, Tennyson, Frederick Tennyson, and Richard Monckton Milnes, he was interested in the classics, literature, architecture, and medicine. 
Brilliant but spendthrift, unstable and restless, in the 1830s Morton travelled in Europe, particularly in Italy, with Frederick Tennyson. He was apparently of independent means, but the death of his father revealed that the family estates were deeply in debt. In 1838 he entered the Inner Temple, but was not called to the bar. More and more dependent on concerned but increasingly despairing friends, from 1841 to 1844 he lived in Rome as an artist. Letters to his friends revealed fine descriptive skills and penetrating insights, an ability which enabled him in 1846 to become the foreign correspondent in Constantinople for the 'Daily News', through Thackeray's good offices. He later served in the same capacity in Athens, Madrid, Vienna, Berlin, and Paris, also becoming Paris correspondent of the 'Morning Advertiser' in 1852. During his time working as a journalist, Morton travelled in Turkey, Persia, and, with Henry Rawlinson, in Babylonia. His Berlin friends included Varnhagen von Ense, the historian, and Bettina von Arnim, the biographer and reformer. He supported liberal political causes there and in Paris, where he opposed Louis Napoleon's attempts to censor English journalists' reports after the coup of 2 December 1851. 
Morton's fair hair, blond beard, genial countenance, and friendly bearing made him attractive to women, and the attraction was mutual. Fickle, heartless, and not quite in touch with reality, he took full advantage of this. From Rome in 1843, his artist friend Augustus Brotherton reported (without malice) that Morton had stolen 'his whore' (F. Tennyson MSS, Lilly Library, University of Indiana, Bloomington), and Edward FitzGerald's letters expressed concern for the misfortunes of the otherwise unidentified 'Poor Elizabeth' whom Morton had seduced and with whom he may have fathered a child, since both Thackeray and FitzGerald later gave her financial assistance ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 1.514, 528, 555; 'Letters and Private Papers of... Thackeray', 2.227; supplement, 1.174). This affair may have been a factor in Thackeray's finding Morton his foreign posting. After Morton fought a duel in Paris in December 1850 Thackeray commented: 'Morton has a genius for scrapes such as no man out of Ireland can ever hope for: and the wonder is that he has lasted up to 40 years of age with a whole skin -- Why he is always in some feminine mischief. ('Letters and Private Papers', 2.726)' He later wrote: 'he is 'shocking' about women. Directly I hear of his being fond of one I feel sorry for her. He lusts after her and leaves her... Women think of 'reclaiming' a libertine & then, & then all the fat is in the fire. (ibid., 3.24)' By 1851 Morton was involved with the actress Lola Montez (1818-1861), who incited him to fight another duel. Most seriously, in December 1851, he met Harold Elyot Bower (1815-1884), a journalist and Cambridge acquaintance, who was apparently conducting an extra-marital affair. Morton became friendly with Mrs Bower, maintaining that he was helping her to obtain a divorce. In September 1852 she gave birth to her fifth child, claiming Morton as the father. Morton denied it, but Bower became jealous, and fatally stabbed Morton in the neck when he was visiting the Bower household at 2 rue de Seze on 1 October 1852. Morton died almost immediately. 
Thackeray wrote to Milnes that Morton had 'rushed upon his fate. Haven't I often said to you he would come to a violent death?', and he supplemented this, in a letter to Dr John Brown, with: 'He did not care for the woman -- at least she was one of a dozen the poor headlong fellow pursued... all the family were crazy, and my poor Savile the maddest wildest and gentlest of creatures -- scarce answerable for his actions or his passions. ('Letters and Private Papers of... Thackeray', supplement, 1.485, 486-7)' Fitzgerald asked 'Didn't he die in character?' and writing to Thackeray reported Frederick Tennyson's comment, 'Morton, he thinks, could only grow a more gigantic Rebel against Good Morals if he grew immortal, and he wishes him Eternal Rest!' ('Letters of Edward FitzGerald', 2. 71, 75). Morton was buried in Montmartre cemetery, and Bower was acquitted of his murder in December 1852. In 1844 FitzGerald had put together extracts from Morton's letters, hoping publication might provide Morton with some income, but they were rejected by both 'Fraser's' and 'Blackwood's'. In 1866 he made a fresh selection, 'Fragments of some letters from an ill-starred man of genius', before destroying the originals, but these remain unpublished. Thackeray used the young Morton as his model for Philip Firmin in 'The Adventures of Philip' (1861-2) and freely drew on his later life in the Saverne episode in 'Denis Duval' (1864). 


@@@@@


doc= 51946


Moore, Sir Norman, first baronet (1847-1922), physician and Irish scholar, was born at Higher Broughton, Manchester, on 8 January 1847, the only child of Robert Ross Rowan Moore (1811-1864), barrister and political economist, of Kilmainham, Dublin, and his wife, Rebecca (1819-1905), daughter of Benjamin Clarke Fisher, a Quaker of Lifford, co. Tipperary. Robert Moore, a campaigner with Cobden and Bright against slavery and the corn laws, left his wife before his son's birth. Moore was brought up by his mother, supported by her circle of Manchester Liberal nonconformist friends. She ran a Froebel kindergarten until her retirement in 1877. 
Moore left Chorlton high school at fourteen to work in a cotton mill, then attended Owens College, 1862-5, to study for London matriculation. From both choice and necessity he explored much of northern England and Ireland on foot. A Manchester friend recalled him 'leaving my house at midnight, a hawk on his wrist, to walk the 50 miles to Lancaster' ('Manchester Guardian', 16 Dec 1922). At fourteen Moore undertook his first long walking tour in Ireland, a country for whose people, history, and language he had an intense attachment, perhaps to replace the father he admired but never met. He spoke Irish fluently, having learned the rudiments in childhood from an Irish shoemaker in Manchester, and achieved an international reputation as an Irish scholar and historian. In 1863 Moore visited Walton Hall, Wakefield, to see the natural history collection of the explorer Charles Waterton, author of 'Wanderings in South America' (1825). A friendship ensued which influenced the boy profoundly. Waterton regarded him as a second son, and Moore was with him when he died in 1865. 
From 1865 to 1868 Moore read natural science at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he formed lifelong friendships with Charles Darwin's son Francis, and the Revd Whitwell Elwin, rector of Booton, Norfolk, among others. A former editor of the 'Quarterly Review', Elwin gave Moore valuable introductions to the literary world, including the publishers John Murray, father and son, Leslie Stephen, and W. J. Craig, the Shakespearian scholar. Moore's natural history interest was encouraged by the zoologist Professor Alfred Newton, the anti-Darwinian Professor Richard Owen, and by Charles Darwin. Having gained an eight-year residential scholarship at St Catharine's, Moore was invited by George Murray Humphry, the anatomy professor, to help establish the Cambridge school of science. However, the master, the Revd C. K. Robinson (notorious for having voted himself into office), unjustly rusticated Moore after a minor scuffle in hall. Elwin initiated a vigorous pamphlet war and Moore was allowed to sit the tripos, but lost his scholarship. In 1869 he enrolled at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, to study comparative anatomy. A year later he wrote to Elwin's son 'The sages have decided I am to give up science and stick to medicine'. In 1909 St Catharine's made him an honorary fellow. 
Moore obtained his MD in 1876. His thesis, 'The Causes and Treatment of Rickets', noted the value of cod-liver oil, foreshadowing the discovery of vitamins. At St Bartholomew's he was warden of the college from 1873 to 1891, lecturer in anatomy, pathology, and medicine, and physician to the hospital in 1902. He was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1877. He visited Ireland annually, increasing his already extensive knowledge of its language and history. He corresponded with Owen on bone cancer in deer, with Francis Darwin on electrical impulses in plants, with Standish Hayes O'Grady on ancient Irish texts, and learned palaeography from Henry Bradshaw, Cambridge University librarian. He published a life of Waterton in a new edition of his 'Essays in Natural History' (1871); 'The Loss of the Crown of Loegaire Lurc', a translation from the 'Book of Leinster' (1881); and in 1882 a translation from the German of Windisch's 'Concise Irish Grammar'. In 1876 Leslie Stephen asked Moore to contribute to a new project, a dictionary of national biography, for which Moore wrote 459 lives. Field Marshal Sir Evelyn Wood VC, another lifelong friend (and patient), fostered his interest in military history. Moore's son recorded that 'next to native Irish speakers & well-read old ladies, he most enjoyed meeting & listening to military men of mark'. 
One of Rebecca Moore's friends was Barbara Leigh Smith Bodichon, cousin of Florence Nightingale, a founder of Girton College, and campaigner for women's rights. She introduced Moore to artists and writers: H. B. Brabazon, William de Morgan, the Rossettis, Helen and William Allingham, George Eliot, and Mme Belloc and her children, Hilaire and Marie. In 1876 Moore proposed to Barbara Bodichon's seventeen-year-old niece Amy Leigh Smith (1859-1901), who accepted. Her parents objected, forbidding all communication. When they eventually relented Norman and Amy were married by Elwin at Westfield, Sussex, on 30 March 1880. They lived in the Warden's House, Little Britain, West Smithfield, until 1891, then at 94 Gloucester Place, west London. They had two sons, Alan Hilary (1882-1959) and Gillachrist (1894-1914), who was killed in the first battle of Ypres, and a daughter, Ethne Philippa (1885-1968). Moore was a skilled pathologist, diagnostician, and teacher. His casebooks show that he complemented physical examination with conversation about the patient's work and daily life. He advised students to remember that medicine concerned the 'whole man'. Moore was instrumental in establishing medical education in the restructured University of London, first through the royal commission, later on the board of advanced medical studies. In 1900 Amy, who was dying of tuberculosis, converted to Roman Catholicism. Moore, though a nonconformist by upbringing and an Anglican by inclination, followed her. He was devout but disliked discussing theology. 'If they teach what is ridiculous you don't believe it' (private information). Amy died on 25 August 1901, and in 1903 Moore married her first cousin, Milicent Ludlow (1868-1947). 
Moore, a short, fair haired, bearded man, never smoked and rarely drank. He was considered a fascinating conversationalist, though some found the flow of talk overwhelming. His enemies were few, but powerful. In 1915 he was unexpectedly defeated for the presidency of the Royal College of Physicians. A grudging and inaccurate 'Times' obituary said his work 'lacked that deeper scholarship' which would 'render it lasting'. M. R. James, provost of Eton College, refuted this, adding 'I have never met any man whose erudition was so varied, lay so ready to hand, or was so delightfully enlivened by human and humorous touches' ('The Times', 8 Dec 1922). 
Moore inspired lifelong and devoted friendship among a wide circle in all walks of life. He had two happy marriages; he was amused and amusing. 'His laughter was accompanied by a moistening of the eyes', wrote E. V. Lucas, 'which his friends found very well worth striving after' (private information). He impressed and delighted children by reciting all the rhyming page headings in Thackeray's 'The Rose and the Ring'. A friend's small daughter recalled the joy of his visits: 'He made the very dullest subject amusing, because to him nothing was dull, and he had the power of taking away the dullness from the person he was talking to' (private information). Moore's circle of 'well-read ladies' included the gardening expert Ellen Willmott, and the scholarly Ethel Portal, a close friend who helped with his research. 
On retirement in 1911 Moore was appointed consulting physician to St Bartholomew's, emeritus lecturer in medicine, and hospital governor. He published numerous papers, served on medical and educational committees, was secretary of the Literary Society, and librarian of the Royal Society of Medicine (1899-1918). At the Royal College of Physicians he became Harveian librarian, served on its conjoint board, and for twenty-one years represented the college on the General Medical Council, where he supported the interests of patients rather than the profession. He was the 1901 Harveian orator, and was elected senior censor in 1908. His many official lectures included the Linacre ('The Physician in English History', 1913), Lumleian, Bradshaw, FitzPatrick ('The History of the Study of Medicine in the British Isles', 1908), and Hunterian, and in 1914 the Cambridge Rede lecture, all of which were published. In 1918 Moore -- 'the then pre-eminent British physician' (Linnett, 15) -- became president of the Royal College of Physicians and a trustee of the British Museum. His monumental 'History of St Bartholomew's Hospital', in two volumes, was published the same year. He read, and copied by hand, nearly 1000 medieval charters, and would walk the ancient City streets at night to reconstruct its links with twelfth-century London. 
Moore was created a baronet in 1919 and in 1920 received an honorary LLD from Cambridge. His powers began to decline, his writing showing early signs of Parkinsonism. The war had aged him: he never wholly recovered from the loss of his younger son, Gillachrist. On 30 November 1922 he died at his wife's house, Hancox, Whatlington, near Battle. He was buried on 5 December in the churchyard of St John the Baptist, Sedlescombe, Sussex. His son Alan succeeded him as second baronet. 


@@@@@


doc= 51947


Williams, John Charles (1861-1939), gardener and politician, was born at Caerhayes Castle, Cornwall, on 30 September 1861, the second son of John Michael Williams (1813-1880), mine owner, banker, and landowner, of Caerhayes Castle, and his wife, Elizabeth Maria (died 1884), elder daughter of Stephen Davey of Bochym, Cornwall. He was a descendant of John Williams (1685-1761), who had moved from Wales to Burncoose, near Truro, in 1715 to establish a mining dynasty that eventually played a prominent role in the industrial revolution in Cornwall. 
The family seat of Caerhayes Castle had been acquired by his grandfather 
Michael Williams's career highlights the growing social status of the Williams family. In 1839 he was appointed sheriff of Glamorgan following the purchase earlier that decade of the Morfa copper smelting works, and he later became deputy warden of the Cornish stannaries. Through his purchase of Caerhayes Castle in 1854 he symbolically moved the family's geographical base away from the mining parishes of west Cornwall to assume a new role as rural landowners in the Roseland area of mid-Cornwall. Yet the cultural significance of this move was not really evident until the time of his grandson, John Charles Williams. In the meantime the family continued to focus on its mining and banking interests alongside a new concern for parliamentary politics. Michael Williams's nonconformist upbringing in a Methodist family meant that it was natural for him to become an active supporter of political reform. Even in the 1830s he used his business and kinship networks to help prevent a tory challenge in the mining districts and from 1853 to 1858 represented the county seat of West Cornwall in the House of Commons as a Liberal. His moderate stance, combined with respect for his achievements as one of Cornwall's leading businessmen, ensured that he was returned unopposed in the two elections that he contested. Michael Williams died at Trevince on 15 June 1858 and was buried six days later in the family vault in Gwennap churchyard. 
His grandson, John Charles Williams, or J. C. as he was affectionately known, pursued a different path in life. Educated at Rugby School and Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was in residence for only a year, he married, on 15 October 1884, his cousin Mary Christian (1861-1922), the second daughter of Sir Frederick Martin Williams, second baronet, of Tregullow. They had five sons and one daughter. Although he had inherited Caerhayes on the death of his father in 1880, he initially lived at Werrington Park, near Launceston, since his mother continued to occupy the family home until her own death four years later. His own wealth, combined with the fact that his elder brother Michael Williams (1857-1899) took over the responsibility of managing the family's business interests, meant that he was able to devote a considerable amount of time to his passion for collecting. Caerhayes became home to three major mineral collections. 
In line with family tradition Williams played a prominent role in political and civic affairs in his native Cornwall. The internal dispute within the Liberal Party over the issue of Irish home rule in 1886 had a particular impact on Cornish politics where a number of leading radical families such as the Bolithos and the St Aubyns abandoned their traditional loyalties in favour of Liberal Unionism. Williams was no exception. Although there are indications that the family was losing its enthusiasm for official Liberalism shortly after the death of Michael Williams in 1858, it appears that the prospect of Irish home rule was the issue that led to his grandson's personal defection and in 1892 he was comfortably elected as Liberal Unionist MP for the Cornish division of Truro. He apparently had a strong dislike of both London and Westminster and in 1895 he decided not to seek re-election at Truro, thereafter restricting his political activities to local government. After becoming a founder member of Cornwall county council in 1889 he served as a respected chairman of both the highways and sea fisheries committees. He was also an influential figure in the campaign to provide school playing fields and continued as a county councillor until his retirement in 1931. 
Williams was a leading figure in the provincial establishment in Cornwall. In 1888, aged only twenty-seven, he became high sheriff of Cornwall and from 1918 to 1936 served as lord lieutenant of the county. He was first chairman of the Cornwall music festival when it was established in 1910 and served as president of the Royal Institution of Cornwall in Truro. He was noted for his generosity to local causes, though many of his donations were anonymous (such as that for the town clock in Truro). He was also deeply concerned with the long-term threat to Cornwall's landscape. In 1930 he was a pivotal figure in raising money for a survey by the county branch of the Council for the Protection of Rural England on the effects of tourism on the coastal and rural environment. A year later he presented 108 acres of his estate on the Roseland peninsula to the National Trust in order to protect the picturesque Nare Head for the benefit of future generations. 
Williams is chiefly remembered for his contribution to the development of gardening in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. At Caerhayes he set out to create an example of a more informal or 'wild gardening' style. His garden book contains entries on over 1650 days from 1897 to 1934, detailing the introductions for which the garden became famous. He had begun planting Sino-Himalayan rhododendrons there in the 1880s, and became a leading patron of gardening expeditions to Asia in search of rhododendrons, camellias, and magnolias. The first consignments of plants obtained by E. H. Wilson from plant collecting expeditions to China in 1899 and 1907 were planted on Williams's estates, and many introductions flowered there for the first time in Europe. Wilson, who considered Williams 'the first amateur to appreciate the horticultural value of the Rhododendrons of western China' (Brown, 142), named 'Rhododendron williamsianum', a rare, scented species found in western Szechwan (Sichuan), for him. By 1917 over 250 species and natural varieties of Rhododendron were growing at Caerhayes. Wilson later sent a complete collection of Kurume azaleas from Japan. In 1912 Williams was one of the principal backers of George Forrest's major expeditions to China. This resulted in a considerable amount of new seed being sent back by Forrest to his patron in Cornwall, and Williams, described by Forrest as 'generous in pay, words, and actions' (McLean, 118), distributed seeds to the botanic gardens of Edinburgh, Dublin, and Kew. In 1916, along with John Guille Millais (1865-1931), Charles Eley (1873-1960), and his cousin Percival Dacres Williams (1865-1935) of St Keverne, Lanarth, he was a founder member of the Rhododendron Society, and was chairman until it was reconstituted as the Rhododendron Association in 1928. 
Williams was in an ideal position to play a prominent role in gardening history. The mild climate of Caerhayes on the south Cornwall coast meant that it enjoyed a fine reputation for outdoor planting, with the greenhouses on the family's Werrington estates providing a means of support for more tender specimens. The conservatory at Werrington was also popular in the gardening world and provided orchids for Covent Garden up to 1955. Williams was widely well regarded for the care that he took with his new plants, his experiments in hybridization, and his personal contribution to leading gardening publications including the annual journal of the Rhododendron Society. In the 1920s he raised 'Camellia x williamsii' ('japonica x salvensis') which, with many cultivars, became the outstanding garden camellias of the twentieth century. 
Williams also took a keen interest in the hybridization of the daffodil, and was apparently responsible for growing forty new varieties of this particular flower, including the popular 'Narcissus croesus' and 'Bartley'. In 1897 he was a co-founder of the Cornish Daffodil and Spring Flowers Society, established to encourage commercial flower production. In 1898 he became a vice-president of the first midland daffodil show at Birmingham. 
Two of J. C. Williams's sons were killed in the First World War. Two others continued the family's political transition away from Liberalism, his eldest son, Charles Williams (1886-1955), serving as Conservative MP for Tavistock, 1918-22, and Torquay, 1924-55, while a younger son, Alfred Martyn Williams (1897-1985), was Conservative MP for North Cornwall, 1924-9. Following the death of his wife, who had been in charge of the VAD hospital at Launceston during the First World War, he was looked after by his daughter, May Williams. He died at Caerhayes Castle on 29 March 1939 and was buried at Caerhayes. The garden he created at Caerhayes remains 'probably the most important plantsman's garden in Cornwall' (Pett, 137). 


@@@@@


doc= 51948


Jeune, (Susan Elizabeth) Mary, Lady St Helier (1845-1931), hostess, was born in Munich, Bavaria, on 18 May 1845, the eldest of the three children of Keith William Stewart-Mackenzie (1818-1881) of Seaforth, army officer, and his first wife, Hannah Charlotte Hope-Vere (died 1868). Her family was connected to the earls of Galloway and Hopetoun, the marquess of Ely, and the duke of Wellington; her grandmother Mary Elizabeth Frederica Stewart-Mackenzie was the chief of the Clan Mackenzie. Her younger sister Julia Charlotte Sophia (1846-1937) was married successively to the ninth marquess of Tweeddale, the financier Sir John Rose, first baronet, and the politician Sir William Eden Evans-Gordon. She was brought up quietly in a house near Brahan Castle (her grandmother's home) in the highlands, where the austerity of the Free Church of Scotland to which her family belonged was mitigated by the persistence of local beliefs in the supernatural and by the regular arrival of visitors to her aunt, Louisa Baring, Lady Ashburton, and her grandmother, to whom Mary became 'more or less a companion-secretary' (St Helier, 'Memories of fifty years', 22) at the age of fifteen. Hospitality was extended widely, to visitors as disparate as W. E. Gladstone, Robert Browning, J. T. Delane of 'The Times', Landseer, and the explorer Joseph Wolff. 
Mary Stewart-Mackenzie was presented at court in June 1864 and enjoyed the social life of a debutante until she married, on 15 August 1871, Lieutenant-Colonel the Hon. John Constantine Stanley (1837-1878), second son of Edward John Stanley, second Baron Stanley of Alderley. Stanley had been educated at Harrow School, served in the Crimea, as ADC to Lord Canning while he was governor-general of India, and then in Canada. The Stanleys of Alderley were a famously contentious family, and Mary and John Stanley added political disagreement (they were Conservatives) to the domestic mix. They had two daughters, Madeline, ('b'. 1876) and Osma Mary Dorothy ('b'. 1877), but Stanley, whose health had been ruined in India, died on 23 April 1878. It was perhaps under the influence of her formidable mother-in-law, Henrietta Maria Stanley, Lady Stanley of Alderley, that Mary Stanley took her first steps in organized philanthropy, by becoming honorary secretary of the Princess Helena College and serving on the ladies' committee for the relief of sick and wounded Turkish soldiers during the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-8. It was also during these years of marriage and widowhood that she began to develop her extensive social network, entertaining in London at 39 Wimpole Street and later at Putney. Prominent among her political guests at this time were the Conservative 'Fourth Party', led by Lord Randolph Churchill; it was at her table that Churchill claimed he 'Forgot Goschen' when resigning as chancellor of the exchequer in 1886. But her guests were not all political: in an intimation of things to come, Oscar Wilde was a regular visitor for a time, recruiting her as an author for his magazine, 'The Woman's World', and using her connections to garner support for the project. 
After three years of widowhood, on 17 August 1881 Mary Stanley married Francis Henry Jeune (1843-1905), at that time a rising barrister; their son, Christian, was born the following year. Having settled at 79 Harley Street (with a country house, Arlington Manor, near Newbury), she rapidly became one of the more important London hostesses. 'Society' had been largely restricted to the aristocratic elite; Mrs Jeune (Lady Jeune from 1891) was instrumental in widening its scope to include persons of talent, whatever their social background: not only aristocrats, politicians, and philanthropists but also artists, actors, and literary men and women were to be found at her dining table. The young Winston Churchill cultivated Lady Jeune, who helped persuade the military authorities to allow him to go to the war in the Sudan in 1898; the novelist Thomas Hardy became a close family friend and made Lady Jeune's house his London base; Arthur Conan Doyle considered her lunch parties to be 'quite one of the outstanding institutions of London' (Conan Doyle, 'Memories and Adventures', 232-3); Ida B. Wells, the African-American civil rights activist -- in Britain on an anti-lynching campaign -- called on her at Arlington Manor, and encouraged her to hold a drawing-room meeting on the subject. Although a committed Conservative (and member of the Primrose League), she entertained across party lines, except during the difficult years of the home rule crisis, when 'it would have been quite impossible to have asked any leading man of the Liberal party to meet anyone except his own political friends' (St Helier, 'Memories of Fifty Years', 254). Lady Jeune's passion for 'lion-hunting' (as the collection of celebrity scalps was known) was such that an apocryphal story did the rounds: a cannibal, about to cook a European traveller, recognized his potential meal as a former fellow guest of Lady Jeune's and offered him hospitality instead. 
Mary Jeune did not confine herself to entertaining, however. Her interest in social problems led her to seek practical solutions, from the provision of boots and seaside holidays, to her contribution to the commission on the housing of the poor in the notorious 'Old Nichol' area on the border of Bethnal Green and Shoreditch. Drawn in by the controversy over W. T. Stead's articles in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' entitled 'Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon', she began to write regularly -- and under her own name -- for the periodical press. Her contributions to such periodicals as the 'Fortnightly Review', the 'National Review', and the 'North American Review' concentrated on the two fields she knew best: the changing 'mores' of aristocratic society in London and interventions in debates on the welfare of women and children. On both topics she expressed qualified conservative views: 'Society' was going to the dogs, but she admitted the many conveniences and advances of modern life; the children of the poor needed to be provided with meals and holidays in the countryside, but attempts to prevent their exploitation in theatres were misguided; and upper-class women should embrace their position as wives, mothers, and daughters without seeking the unnecessary excitements of careers or political power -- although she admitted the capacity of middle-class women to engage in careers. 
This was, of course, all deeply ironic, given that Mary Jeune had been personally responsible for introducing many of the 'new people' into society, and that she was taking full advantage of her public voice. She was not a signatory to the 1889 anti-suffrage petition in the 'Nineteenth Century', despite the support of many of her closest friends and relations; instead, she was involved in the counter-petition raised by a committee headed by Millicent Fawcett. Her views on the suffrage question were, however, moderate: although she acknowledged that 'logically, perhaps, the refusal to give them the Parliamentary franchise is indefensible', she doubted whether 'the majority of women in this country are very anxious to acquire it' (St Helier, 'Memories of Fifty Years', 342). Many of her articles were collected and published as 'Lesser Questions' in 1894. 
Lady Jeune's only son, an officer in the Grenadier Guards, died from enteric fever in India in August 1904. Sir Francis Jeune resigned his judicial offices in January 1905 and the following month was raised to the peerage as Baron St Helier, only to die within a matter of weeks. Lady St Helier, as she now became, sold Arlington Manor, and built a new house (The Poplars) at Cold Ash near Newbury, and declared her intention of moving to Shoreditch; if she did so, the experiment was short-lived, for she was soon receiving guests again at her new home at 52 Portland Place. It was here that she welcomed Edith Wharton, who found her 'a born 'entertainer' according to the traditional London idea, which regarded... the act of fighting one's way through a struggling crowd of celebrities as the finest expression of social intercourse' (Wharton, 'Backward Glance', 213-16); here, too, she introduced Winston Churchill to his future wife, her great-niece, Clementine Hozier, and hosted their wedding reception. In 1909 she published her 'Memories of Fifty Years'. 
In later life Lady St Helier's political and philanthropic interests found new outlets in official life: in 1910 she was appointed an alderman on the London county council, and co-opted onto the education committee. She served continuously until 1927, taking a particular interest in questions of housing and the promotion of garden suburbs. The St Helier estate in Morden, Surrey, was named after her. She was appointed DBE in 1925. 
Lady St Helier died at 52 Portland Place, London, on 25 January 1931, and was buried with her second husband at Chieveley, Berkshire. A woman of her prominence inevitably had her detractors (Winston Churchill thought that his mother disliked her; Oscar Wilde's 'alter ego', Esme Amarinth, makes a waspish remark about her in 'The Green Carnation'), but they were outnumbered by her admirers. For, despite her passion for 'lion-hunting', her potential critics were disarmed by her personal charm, her 'vigorous personality' and 'generous and independent character' (Wharton, 'Backward Glance', 214). 


@@@@@


doc= 51949


Brychan Brycheiniog (fl. c.500), king of Brycheiniog, was allegedly son of the Irish king Anlach, son of Coronac, and of Marchell ferch Dewdrig of south Wales. He was the legendary dynastic founder and eponym of the early medieval kingdom of Brycheiniog (Brecknockshire) in south Wales. Nothing historically reliable is known about his life or rule, though later hagiographical and genealogical accounts would suggest that he flourished in the late fifth or early sixth century. According to the dynastic origin-legend, Brychan was son of one Marchell, a daughter of a local petty king called Tewdrig. Marchell was sent to Ireland to marry the king, Anlach son of Coronac (perhaps Cormac), on the understanding that if a son issued from the union he should return to Wales to reclaim his rightful kingdom. Thus, when Brychan was born, the couple returned thither with the child. As a youth he is said to have been sent as 'hostage' to the kingdom of Powys where he violated Banhadlwedd ferch Banadl, the daughter of the king, who subsequently gave birth to Cynog, afterwards St Cynog. Brychan is most famous for his allegedly large progeny by three wives -- Eurbrawst, Rhybrawst, and Proestri -- numbering twelve sons and twenty-four daughters according to the earliest lists, and both figures increase in later accounts. His daughters are linked to a number of figures of saintly and secular importance, most notably with St David and Cadog and the kings Urien Rheged and Maelgwn Gwynedd. There are also some entirely different accounts of Brychan's saintly descendants located in Cornwall and Ireland. Brychan is said to have been buried at 'Ynys Brychan', near 'Mannia' or 'Manar', but the location has not been identified. 
Although much of this account is probably hagiography and origin-legend, and therefore difficult to credit historically, Brychan's alleged connection with Ireland is important. His name probably derives from the Irish personal name Broccan, and the region of Brecknockshire contains a large number of ogham inscriptions suggesting significant Irish settlement in the region, perhaps in the fifth century. Also Brycheiniog houses the only known example of a crannog, or lake settlement, outside Ireland and Scotland, at Ynys Bwlc at Llan-gors, again implying an Irish connection. This was probably the 'Brecenanmere' destroyed by AEthelflaed, 'lady of the Mercians', in 916. However, the settlement probably dates no earlier than the ninth century. This would be too late for Brychan of 'c'.500, but it is worth noting that his father's name has also been identified as the Irish name Amlaib (from Olaf), suggesting a ninth- or tenth-century origin. Whether this affects understanding of Brychan himself is not clear. 


@@@@@


doc= 51950


Brynach (fl. 6th cent.), founder of the church of Nevern, Pembrokeshire, was not of Welsh descent. His pedigree is in neither of the two main collections of saints' genealogies, 'Bonedd y saint' and 'Achau'r saint', and his life, twelfth-century in its present form, fails to give the names of his parents, though it does say, probably as a mere hagiographical formula, that he was of noble descent. Much of the substance of the life is a collection of traditional narrative motifs, some purely hagiographical (such as voyaging upon a rock), others more general; it is, however, a well-constructed text written in good and vigorous Latin. There are two main sections: first, the saint's wanderings, and, second, his dealings with Maelgwn Gwynedd. 
The life portrays Brynach as a pilgrim-saint ('peregrinus'), who moved from one place to another as soon as his reputation for holiness endangered his monastic seclusion. First, he travelled from his homeland (not named) to Rome, where he freed the citizens from the attentions of 'a pestiferous monster' ('Vita sancti Bernacii', chap. 2). His fame then caused him to journey to Brittany, where, again, his reputation made it impossible for him to stay. He took ship, on a rock, and came to Milford Haven, where he temporarily settled. Here, however, it was the amorous attentions of a nobleman's daughter that made it impossible to remain: once rejected her love turned to hatred, and she arranged an attack in which Brynach was wounded. He then moved to Pontfaen, and from there to a nearby site on the River Nyfer. Here, with his companions, he prepared a permanent settlement, but each night their day's work vanished. Brynach decided that they should await illumination. This came in the form, traditional in Irish hagiography, of an angelic message declaring that their present site was not Brynach's 'place of resurrection' ('Vita sancti Bernacii', chap. 7). He was directed to follow a white sow with white piglets which would lead them to their dwelling place. Once established at Nevern, Brynach made friends with a local ruler, Clechre, who had prophesied Brynach's arrival, and whose twenty sons were instructed in the monastic life and became 'coheirs' with the saint. The descendants of Clechre were, in the language of the Irish laws, 'the kindred of the land', while Brynach was the patron saint; since he had no descendants (as a 'peregrinus' and an ascetic), they became the hereditary kindred of Nevern. The theme of the first half of the life, the 'peregrinatio' of the patron saint, thus led naturally to a preordained conclusion, the alliance between saint and kindred, joint heirs of Nevern. 
The second part of the life had an equally clear purpose and achieved it with similarly entertaining narrative detail. The link between the two halves was an account of the character of the saint's life -- so holy that, not only did he enjoy converse with angels, but the very wild beasts were tame at his bidding. In particular, the one cow of the community was guarded by a wolf, the friend and servant of the saint. The protagonists in the second part of the life were the saint, Brynach, and the king, Maelgwn Gwynedd. Maelgwn arrived and demanded a night's hospitality ('gwest'). This was refused and the king sent men to take the one cow. The wolf complained to Brynach, who put his case before Heaven. Maelgwn Gwynedd and his men, now afflicted by extreme hunger, were distressed to find that, however high they stoked the fire, the water in their stewing-pot remained stubbornly cold. By this miracle they were compelled to acknowledge the authority of the saint. Brynach then changed tactics -- having revived the cow -- and invited Maelgwn and his men for dinner and a night's rest. Given the exemplary ascetic poverty of the community, such entertainment required miracles: loaves were found growing on trees; the water of the local stream turned into wine; Maelgwn and his men were royally entertained. The king, duly impressed, granted to Brynach a perpetual immunity from royal exactions for the monastery and all its possessions; it was at Nevern that he was to die, on 7 April in an unspecified year, and where he was buried, outside the east wall of the church. 
The king chosen to grant this privilege was a king of Gwynedd, not a king of Dyfed. Otherwise, Brynach's career in Wales was confined to Dyfed: it was where he landed and all his settlements, up to and including Nevern, were within the one kingdom. There may be two reasons: first, Maelgwn had already appeared in a similar role in the life of St Cadog, likewise a southern saint. More interestingly, however, it was prudent to obtain such a grant from an over-king and to get it not just for Nevern but for all the possessions of Brynach. Although the life does not mention it, Llanfrynach, 2 miles to the south-east of Brecon, was another important church of the saint. A mere local privilege, from the king of Dyfed, would not have helped a church situated in Brycheiniog. 
The main evidence for the early importance of Nevern is the surviving sculpture. This falls into three groups. First, there are two fifth- or sixth-century inscriptions, both bilingual (Irish and Latin). If they attest an early cemetery of the period when Irish settlers ruled Dyfed, this need not yet have been ecclesiastical and they do not, therefore, provide good evidence for a church. Second, there are three stones, of the seventh to the ninth centuries, at a farm some 3 miles to the south, Tre-bwlch. Third, two stones of the tenth and eleventh centuries are on the site of the church. One of them is highly ornate, in the same style as the Carew stone commemorating a king of Dyfed, Maredudd ab Edwin (died 1035). Only this third group confirms the importance of the church in the pre-Norman period. 


@@@@@


doc= 51951


Monteith, Robert (1811-1884), politician and philanthropist, was born in Glasgow on 23 December 1811, one of fourteen children, but the only surviving son, of the marriage between 
Robert Monteith, after studying at Glasgow University, proceeded, with his cousin Francis G. Garden, to Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating in 1829. A member of the Apostles, he became a close friend of Richard Monckton Milnes (later Lord Houghton), Alfred Tennyson, John Sterling, Henry Hallam, Richard Chenevix Trench, A. J. C. Hare, William Palgrave, and many others. He was acquainted with W. E. Gladstone, W. M. Thackeray, Coventry Patmore, and Francois Rio, the French art critic, and shared in many literary and artistic endeavours, such as the 1839 Eglinton tournament, the restoration of Glasgow Cathedral, and the Burns and Scott memorials in Edinburgh. His hospitality was always lavish. He was prevented from going to support the Spanish liberal cause in 1830, but he travelled the continent and visited Rome in the 1830s: he passed many winters there in Catholic aristocratic circles in the 1850s. After unsuccessful attempts to win a seat in Glasgow in the tory interest twice in 1837, he refused to stand later on at least two occasions. He unsuccessfully contested Bewdley in 1841. In 1844, at Morden parish church, Monteith married Wilhelmina Catherine Anne (died 1884), the third daughter of Joseph Charles Mellish, a former consul-general at Hamburg and translator of Schiller's 'Mary Queen of Scots' (1801). They had two sons and three daughters. 
Various influences encouraged the development of Monteith's social Romanticism: Kenelm Digby; his association with French liberal Catholicism; Bishop Gillis's mutual improvement and benefit society; the Holy Guild of St Joseph, Edinburgh; Catholic notions of international law; and the patient suffering of the Irish workers in his textile mills. In the debates over the established churches of Scotland and England, he fell under Romantic rather than rational German influences. He consulted John Henry Newman at Littlemore, who received him into the Roman Catholic church in 1846. His wife followed shortly afterwards. His godfather was Ignatius Spencer, an earlier convert and Passionist priest. Monteith came deeply under the influence of David Urquhart, the renowned Russophobe, whose Glasgow visit in 1838 made Monteith a close supporter. Urquhart and Monteith believed that Russia had infiltrated the British government, fomented unrest among workers, and destroyed their sense of community: they argued that a just international order would bring domestic peace. Monteith championed the poor. He attended the great Birmingham Chartist gathering of 1840, and worked with Chartists such as Robert Lowery and William Cardo to prevent an Anglo-French war in 1841. If poverty horrified him, pauperism, or state-induced dependence, he believed to be worse. He and Urquhart pressed their views on Catholic clergy and Oxford scholars: they hoped to establish a chair of international law at Oxford. From the 1850s Monteith supported Urquhart's working men's foreign affairs committees and newspaper, the 'Free Press', to which Karl Marx was a contributor. With Thomas Chisholm Anstey MP, and Urquhart, he campaigned against Russian expansion, British imperialism, and the despoiling of the highlands. He promoted savings banks for workers. With Urquhart he supported the introduction of Turkish baths into Britain for social harmony and health: he addressed the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science on the subject in 1874. He also patented several early forms of refrigeration for foodstuffs. A peace advocate, if not a pacifist, to his death, he bitterly opposed the military conscription common in continental states in the nineteenth century. His campaign for the reassertion of the law of nations at the Vatican Council of 1870-71 was a logical development of his view that conscription encouraged war as a regular arm of policy. Using a variety of influences -- the 'Diplomatic Review', Bishop Mermillod of Geneva, the French sociologist Frederic Le Play, a visit to Turkey to win over the Armenian bishops, and, not least, lavish Roman hospitality -- he won the attention of the pope, and the issue reached the council. In a similar vein, Monteith led a delegation of working men to the French national assembly in 1873 to promote social peace and international harmony. He also showed great interest in the Italian Don Bosco and his work with poor boys. 
Prominent in the Scottish Catholic revival, Monteith was a member of the Catholic Poor Schools Committee and the Catholic Defence Association, which worked against the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Act' of 1850. He had earlier established the Association of St Margaret (1848) to bind together the aristocratic, convert, and Irish elements in Scottish Catholicism in order to support Catholic legal defences, education, vocations, and the poorer parishes of Scotland. He saw congregational singing as part of his schemes for social unity and composed hymns to promote this aim. He brought some 10 tons of religious statues to Scotland, and encouraged and financially supported the return of religious orders: Franciscan and Good Shepherd nuns, Jesuits, Passionists, and, unsuccessfully, Christian Brothers. His financial backing was important in many endeavours: he was largely responsible for St Mary's, Lanark, and the Smyllum orphanage and hospital. His influence was significant in a poverty-stricken church: Rome found it useful in the bitter public clash between Scottish and Irish Catholics in the 1860s. 
The ill health of his wife and his own decline meant that Monteith was less active in his last years, wintering in France. He died at his home, Carstairs House, Lanarkshire, on 31 March 1884, having played an important, if idiosyncratic, role in the revival of Roman Catholicism in Scotland. His wife died within days of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 51954


Blair, Dame Emily Mathieson (1890-1963), nurse and nursing administrator, was born on 12 January 1890 at Boghead, Lenzie, Kirkintilloch, daughter of Hugh Blair, muslin manufacturer, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Croll. Blair trained as a nurse at the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, from 1912 to 1916. In July 1916 she was appointed ward sister at the VAD hospital, Higham, where she worked until February 1917. She was then a sister at the RAF hospital at Halton, near Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, as a member of Queen Alexandra's Royal Naval Nursing Service (Reserves), and in 1918 she was recommended for a permanent commission with the RAF nursing service, the forerunner of Princess Mary's Royal Air Force Nursing Service (PMRAFNS), formed by royal warrant in 1921. Blair soon showed that her enthusiasm and ability were above average, and that she was tactful in dealing with staff and patients, and in 1923 she was recommended for accelerated promotion. 
Blair's first permanent commission was as sister at the Central Hospital, Hampstead, London, and from 1919 to 1922 she was again at the RAF hospital at Halton. Her first tour of duty abroad was to Baghdad Hospital (1922-4). She also worked in Basrah (1926-8), Palestine (1928-30), and Hinaidi, Iraq (1935-7), with intervening spells in Uxbridge, Halton, and Cranwell. After September 1937 she remained in England, working at Halton and Cranwell. She was a senior sister from January 1925, an acting matron from January 1927, and matron from January 1930. On 6 May 1935 she was presented with the king's jubilee medal. In December 1937 she was moved to the Air Ministry, and was appointed as matron-in-chief of the PMRAFNS from January 1938 until her retirement in 1943. On 6 September 1938 she was awarded the Royal Red Cross (first class) by the joint war committee (the wartime union of the British Red Cross Society and the order of St John of Jerusalem). This was given for her exceptional devotion and the competence she had shown while nursing and caring for the sick in RAF hospitals at home and abroad. Blair was mentioned in dispatches on 1 January 1941. She was created a dame of the British empire (military division) on 2 June 1943. She was appointed to the order of St John on 24 February 1944 in the grade of officer sister and given the honorary position of matron-in-chief of the order of St John. 
From 1943 to 1947 Blair was matron-in-chief of the joint war committee. When this disbanded she continued as matron-in-chief of the British Red Cross Society from 1947 to 1953. She was awarded the Florence Nightingale medal in 1947 by the international committee of the Red Cross for her great services to nursing. During the war the appointment of all the trained staff in the 250 joint war organizations' hospitals and convalescent homes was her responsibility. She was immensely tactful and able to ensure that in all the hospitals and homes the relationships between the professional nursing staff and the auxiliary nurses from the Red Cross were happy. She also selected many nurses for overseas service. She was on the executive committee of the Red Cross from 1946. When she retired from the British Red Cross Society she was made an honorary life member. A collection was made for her retirement and she was presented with a wireless on 24 November 1953 by Lord Woolton and Lady Limerick, representatives of the British Red Cross Society. She died, unmarried, on 25 December 1963, at 12 Avenue Road, St John's Wood, London, from lung cancer, and her remains were cremated. A memorial service was held on 28 January 1964 at St Clement Danes, London, which was attended by representatives of all the organizations with which she had been associated. 


@@@@@


doc= 51957


Beale, Dame Doris Winifred (1889-1971), nurse, was born on 9 August 1889 at 42 London Road, Sydenham, London, the daughter of George Beale, master draper, and his wife, Annie Maria, formerly King. Doris was educated at Prendergast School, Lewisham, and on leaving school she worked as a clerk before eventually embarking on nurse training at the Royal London Hospital. She was appointed a probationer at the London Hospital on 11 October 1912, and attended the usual six-week preliminary training course at Tradegar House, Bow. Her training certificate was awarded on 16 December 1916 and she passed with honours. The training record proclaimed that 'she gave the impression that she had the latent capacity for ward management and for taking more responsibilities' (Royal London Hospital, archives LH/N/4/4). Doris was promoted to holiday sister on 26 November 1914, and, in the register of sisters and nurses held at the Royal London archives, she is described as one who 'fully justified her promotion as holiday sister' (ibid.). Clearly the London Hospital wished to retain the services of Doris Beale, and the matron, Eva Luckes, offered her an appointment as sister of a children's ward. However, for some time Doris had harboured ambitions to join the Queen Alexandra's Royal Naval Nursing Service. Eva Luckes, recognizing that these ambitions were dearly held, gave Doris her full support. 
Thus on 7 February 1917 Doris left the London Hospital to join the Queen Alexandra's Royal Naval Nursing Service. As a nursing sister she worked in the following locations: Royal Naval Hospital (RNH) Plymouth (1917), RNH Haslar (1918), RNH Gibraltar (1919), RNH Chatham (1923), RNH Malta (1925), and RNH Chatham (1927). As sister-in-charge Doris worked at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, from 1930 until 1933, when she became the superintending sister at RNH Chatham. On 10 March 1937 she was promoted to the rank of matron, and served first at RNH Haslar and later at RNH Plymouth. 
On 14 July 1941 Doris became matron-in-chief, and was based at RNH Haslar until 19 September 1941, when she was moved to RNH Chatham. Here she remained for just over a year. She moved to the medical department of the Admiralty on 10 November 1942, and finally retired from naval service on 13 July 1944. Her main contribution to nursing lay in her commitment to the training of nurses and in her leadership skills. During her years of naval service Doris was awarded the Royal Red Cross, second class, in 1937 and the Royal Red Cross, first class, and bar in 1944; she was made a dame of the British empire on 6 June 1944. 
After retiring from naval service Doris became a prominent member of the joint war organization of the British Red Cross and the order of St John. Between August 1944 and September 1946 she worked as deputy matron-in-chief of their trained nurses department. Her untiring efforts on behalf of the British Red Cross were recognized in 1951, when she was awarded the Florence Nightingale medal by the international committee of the Red Cross. 
Doris Beale's energy was also valued by the governing body of Prendergast School, Lewisham. She displayed a keen interest in the fortunes of her old school, and acted as governor from 1945 to 1964. She was also a member of the United Nursing Services Club, and her recreations included gardening and travel. Throughout her life Doris demonstrated tireless compassion for the sick and wounded, and invaluable leadership skills for her junior nurses. A slim, elegant, and attractive woman, Doris was greatly respected by her friends and colleagues. She died suddenly and peacefully at her home, 84 London Road, Forest Hill, London, on 14 January 1971. Her body was cremated following a service at St Paul's, Forest Hill, two days later. She was unmarried. 


