@@@@@


doc= 51964


Colville, Lady (Helen) Cynthia (1884-1968), courtier and social worker, was born on 20 May 1884, the third daughter of Robert Offley Ashburton Crewe-Milnes (1858-1945), Liberal politician, who the year after her birth succeeded as second Baron Houghton and who subsequently became the first and last marquess of Crewe. Her mother was his first wife, Sybil Marcia (died 1887), daughter of Sir Frederick Graham, third baronet, and his wife, Lady Jane St Maur. She had a twin sister, Celia Hermione; her only brother died in childhood. After their mother's death the children lived principally with their uncle, the third Baron Crewe, and had a spell in Dublin when their father was Gladstone's lord lieutenant of Ireland (1892-5). Cynthia was educated by governesses and studied piano at the Royal College of Music. 
On 21 January 1908 Lady Cynthia married George (Geordie) Charles Colville (1867-1943), barrister, third son of Charles Colville, first Viscount Colville of Culross. They had three sons. Lady Cynthia shared her husband's enthusiasm for sailing, and they made the annual pilgrimage to Cowes. After her marriage she became very active in social work, joining the committee of the Charity Organization Society in Shoreditch, the district of London with the highest infant mortality rate in the city. She was for twenty years the honorary secretary of the pioneering infant welfare centre opened there and became involved in many other committees and organizations devoted to the welfare of the borough, including a school for mothers and the council's public health committee. In 1948 the metropolitan borough of Shoreditch renamed the Felton Street estate the Colville estate in the light of her long association with the borough. 'My sole 'qualification' I think, is that I just love Shoreditch, and have done so for quite a long time' Lady Cynthia was minuted as writing to accept the honour (Hackney Archive Service, S/CE 48, p. 321). A strong Liberal, she was invited to stand for parliament for the party in Shoreditch in 1923. In 1929 she was appointed a magistrate and served in the east London juvenile court, becoming eventually a juvenile court chairman. She shared the conviction of her generation and class that there had been a slackening of morals, attributable to 'the over-indulgent parents, the absentee mother, the lack of any fixed standard of right and wrong, the silly sexy stories that constitute the bulk of light reading matter, [and] the dramatic presentation of violence' (C. Colville, 142). She believed that 'kindly deflation' was a more effective approach to take to young male delinquents and criminals than 'fear-inspired seriousness', while 'the quasi-prostitute girl of fourteen or fifteen can be made to feel ignorant and pathetic sooner than adult and romantic' (ibid., 143-4). In 1952 she was appointed a lay justice at Bow Street magistrates' court. 
In 1923, following a royal visit to Shoreditch, Lady Cynthia was invited to become a woman of the bedchamber to Queen Mary, and retained the position until the queen's death in 1953. She was invaluable to the queen as a source of information on health and welfare issues, in which the queen was very interested. According to her son, Lady Cynthia lent Queen Mary a copy of 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' in 1933, earning a rebuke from the king, who was subsequently found reading it himself as it was 'his duty to study the kind of temptations to which his subjects were exposed' (J. Colville, 41). She had also the unenviable task of breaking to Queen Mary the news of the deaths of two of her sons: the duke of Kent and King George VI. The Colville family connections with the royal court were continued in the next generation: her youngest son, Sir John Rupert Colville, served as a page of honour to King George V and later as private secretary to Princess Elizabeth. 
Lady Cynthia Colville was appointed DCVO in 1937 and DBE in 1953. She was made an honorary LLD by Leeds University, and delivered the Clark Hall lecture ('Social progress and the individual') in 1954. She published her autobiography, entitled 'Crowded Life', in 1963 and died at her home, 4 Mulberry Walk, Chelsea, on 15 June 1968. 


@@@@@


doc= 51968


Burnett, Dame (Annie) Maud (1863-1950), local politician, was born at 10 Prior's Terrace, Tynemouth, Northumberland, on 27 February 1863, the second daughter in the family of two daughters and two sons of Jacob Burnett (1825-1896), and his first wife, Annie Daglish (1830-1866); there were a further daughter and son from his second marriage. Her father, the last of the Tyneside alkali manufacturers and a shipowner, was also a patron of the arts and a collector of pre-Raphaelite paintings, who had moved to Tynemouth by 1861. Maud was educated first at Miss Baker's school and then at Miss Hoald's school, both in Tynemouth, and completed her education at Vevey, Switzerland. She honed her public skills with work at the church of the Holy Saviour, Tynemouth, a 'Bible' class in North Shields, and voluntary welfare work of various kinds. Though said to espouse no particular party she followed her family's political sympathies and was honorary secretary of the Tynemouth Women's Liberal Federation from 1895 to 1910, assisting at three parliamentary general elections. 
When in 1902 it became necessary for there to be two women on municipal education committees Maud Burnett was co-opted onto that for Tynemouth. In 1907 she founded a branch, at Tynemouth, of the Women's Local Government Society (WLGS) and in 1909 she stood unsuccessfully as an independent candidate for election to Tynemouth council. She was returned in the following year, with Liberal support, for the Dockray ward, becoming the first woman in the north of England to become a municipal councillor, following the passage in 1907 of the WLGS's bill allowing women ratepayers to be elected. She was immediately placed on the committees for health, finance, smallholdings and allotments, public libraries, education, local pensions, and distress. In 1915 she was made deputy chairman of the committee for the care of the mentally defective. She also concerned herself with the provision of welfare for mothers and babies (including play centres) and with the issue of women's employment. Described as a 'charming suffragette' ('Tyneside Weekly News', 1 Jan 1909) she supported the non-militant campaign for women's parliamentary suffrage. 
During the First World War Maud Burnett was president of the War Savings Association in Tynemouth and chairman of committees concerned with war aims, food control, and food economy. She served on the YMCA committee on comforts for the forces, and on the naval and military war pensions committee. For her war work she was created DBE in 1918. She was appointed a JP on 28 August 1920 and retired from Tynemouth council in 1921 to resume voluntary work within the town. She was re-elected to the council in 1926, and served as mayor of Tynemouth in 1928-9 and 1929-30, being the first woman to hold that office. She finally retired from the council in 1934. Comparing her municipal record with the rest of Tyneside there were women councillors at Newcastle upon Tyne by 1919 and in Gateshead by 1920, the latter being in 1929 the first Tyneside municipality to raise a woman to the aldermanic bench. 
Indomitable in old age, Dame Maud Burnett ruled the women's organizations of Tynemouth village with a rod of iron. In her seventies, when she lost her eyesight, she learned Braille and took up blind welfare. She died at her home, Collingwood House, Collingwood Terrace, Tynemouth, on 17 November 1950 and was buried at Preston cemetery, North Shields, on 21 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 51969


Buller, Dame (Audrey Charlotte) Georgiana (1883-1953), worker for the disabled, was born on 4 August 1883 at Downes, Crediton, Devon, the only child of Sir Redvers Henry Buller (1839-1908), landowner and army officer, and his wife, Lady Audrey Jane Charlotte (1844-1926), youngest daughter of the fourth Marquess Townshend and widow of the Hon. Greville Howard. She was considerably influenced by her father, who was highly respected locally both as a landowner and for his leadership in the army. During the South African War he was responsible for organizing the relief of Ladysmith, in 1900, and he was regarded as a hero both locally and nationwide. Georgiana was educated at home and at the Phonetic Institute, Bath, where she gained a Pitman's shorthand certificate in 1907. She was actively involved with charitable organizations, especially the Voluntary Aid Organization (British Red Cross Society), and by 1914 she was deputy county director for Devon. She was very keen on hunting but injured her spine in a fall. In early 1914 it was thought that war was likely, and the Voluntary Aid Organization was asked to prepare hospital accommodation in Exeter. Georgiana Buller was asked to supervise this; she ended her convalescence and set to work. 
It was originally estimated that 160 beds would be needed, but by August 1915 more than 1400 beds were in use. The Red Cross Voluntary Aided Hospital in Exeter, which Buller organized, was taken over by the War Office in 1915 as the Central Military Hospital with Georgiana Buller as administrator, the only woman to hold such a post. She was also responsible for forty-four affiliated auxiliary hospitals. During the war more than 35,000 patients passed through the hospital, staying on average twenty-five days. Georgiana Buller and her voluntary staff worked very hard. She had extremely high standards, and some found her demands unreasonable. On being demobbed in 1920 she was exhausted and went into a physical and mental decline. She was awarded the Royal Red Star (first class) by the British Red Cross Society in 1920 and was made a DBE on 24 December 1920. 
Dame Georgiana Buller was next informed by two medical friends of the great need in Devon for an orthopaedic hospital for children. When she began to plan ways of raising money she quickly realized how acute the need was, as she discovered that many children were suffering at home from orthopaedic conditions simply because there was no hospital nearby. In 1927 the Princess Elizabeth Orthopaedic Hospital was opened in Exeter. Dame Georgiana also worked with the Central Council for the Care of Cripples and was chairman of the Devon Association for Cripples Aid. She then became aware of another problem in relation to disability: the lack of training facilities for those permanently disabled. From 1935 onwards she concentrated her energies on establishing two training colleges, the St Loyes Training Centre for Cripples in Exeter, and Queen Elizabeth College in Leatherhead. Dame Georgiana's aim was for each person with disabilities to become independent through learning a marketable skill. She met with opposition when insisting that disabled people deserved training, but then enlisted the support of the minister of labour Ernest Bevin. Bevin had gone to school in Crediton and had often stolen apples from her father's orchards which were next to the village school. 
Dame Georgiana also established the British Council for Rehabilitation and believed that the resources of the state and the voluntary spirit could be combined for the benefit of the disabled. Funds were always needed for the training centres and she harnessed volunteers to run events as diverse as a flower ball in the Savoy Hotel in November 1947 and a 'Play-time work' exhibition in Exeter. Portland College, near Nottingham, was founded on the same lines as the St Loyes centre, as were other centres throughout Britain. 
Dame Georgiana was chairman at St Loyes for many years. She supported the Girl Guides, the Boy Scouts, and the St John Ambulance Brigade. She was a JP for twenty years. In 1947 she initiated preparatory training for those facing long stays in hospital and who could enjoy academic work. On 11 March 1953 she was interviewed on the BBC radio programme 'Woman's Hour' about her life and her work for the disabled. She died from carcinoma on 22 June 1953 at her home, Bellair House, Topsham Road, Exeter, and was buried on 26 June at Holy Cross Church, Crediton, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 51970


Brock, Dame (Madeline) Dorothy (1886-1969), headmistress, was born on 18 November 1886 at 496 Caledonian Road, Islington, London, second daughter and youngest of three children of George William Frederick Brock, commercial clerk, and his wife, Eliza Jane Wilkins. Sir Laurence George Brock (1879-1949), chairman of the Board of Control (1928-45), was her elder brother. The family moved about 1891 to the house at Bromley, Kent, which remained its base for more than half a century. The household she grew up in was happy and hospitable, prominent in the local Congregational church and liberal in outlook. The daughters attended Bromley high school, founded by the Girls' Public Day School Company, from which Dorothy, supported by a Kent county scholarship, entered Girton College, Cambridge, in 1904 to read classics. She spent six blissful years there, progressing via a first class in the tripos (1907) to a Pfeiffer research studentship (1909-10) and a seat, albeit lowly, at the Girton high table. Cambridge degrees being closed to women she took her BA (1907) at Trinity College, Dublin. Her dissertation on the Latin author Fronto, which earned her a Dublin LittD, was subsequently published (1912). A brilliant pianist, she was the mainstay of college concerts, as also of more frivolous occasions, and made many lasting friendships. She remained deeply attached to Girton and later on represented the old students on its governing body. 
In 1910, realizing perhaps that a life of pure scholarship would not satisfy her human interests, Dorothy Brock joined the staff of the King Edward VI High School for Girls, Birmingham, where she discovered her true vocation. In January 1918, just turned thirty-one (and the youngest of fifty applicants), she became headmistress of the Mary Datchelor, an endowed girls' grammar school supported and managed by the Clothworkers' Company which from its site at Camberwell in south London served a lively clientele consisting in roughly equal proportions of fee-payers, with at best moderate means, and scholarship-holders from the elementary schools. Here Dorothy Brock was content to stay, declining attractive invitations to move elsewhere, until she retired in 1950. She made the school famous: for its scholarly attainments, achieved in part by unconventional teaching methods; for the variety of careers it opened to its pupils, in industry, commerce, and social service, as well as more traditional occupations such as nursing (she was a member of two inquiries into nurse training, the Lancet commission, 1931, and the government-appointed Athlone committee, 1937); and most markedly for its all-pervasive music. She was alert to the ever-narrowing gap between schooldays and adulthood, signalized politically in 1928 by the lowering of the voting age for women to twenty-one, and in her benign conduct of the school she linked freedom with responsibility. 
Dorothy Brock quickly made her mark in the Association of Headmistresses (AHM), of which she was chairman, 1927-9, and president, 1933-5, and was the first woman to chair the Joint Committee of Four Secondary Associations, 1935-7. Her management of meetings was relaxed yet businesslike, allowing scope for disagreements which 'left no sting' ('M. Dorothy Brock', 24). She made her debut on the national educational scene in 1919 as a member of the committee appointed by the prime minister to inquire into the position of classics in the educational system; in 1930 she became the first woman vice-president of the Classical Association. She was a member from 1931 to 1940 of the Board of Education's consultative committee on secondary education and hence contributed to the Spens report (1939); she served a long stint on the Secondary Schools Examination Council (1937-51); and she was a member of the committee on public schools which produced the Fleming report in 1944. Her presence on such bodies was made doubly valuable (and doubly onerous) by the general sparsity of women members and she seized every opportunity to promote awareness in government circles of girls' schools and their achievements. 
Still at the height of her powers in 1939, Dorothy Brock grappled successfully with the many problems attendant on the evacuation of her school first to Kent and then to Llanelli in south Wales. During the post-war years before her retirement she played a leading part in the negotiations which secured voluntary aided status for the Mary Datchelor under the 1944 'Education Act' and in 1947 became nationally famous as the first serving headmistress to be advanced to DBE (she was appointed OBE in 1929). She frankly enjoyed her honours, which included the freedoms of the Clothworkers' Company and City of London (1936) and borough of Camberwell (1950) and an honorary LLM from London University (1947). 
Dorothy Brock retired with her greatly beloved sister Elsie, who also never married, to Whitstable in Kent, where seabathing long formed part of their daily routine. As well as involving herself in local affairs, she was for many years a director of the University of London Press, overseeing in particular its output of school books. She died after a long illness on 31 December 1969, at Barham Nursing Home, Barham, eager to the last for news of the Mary Datchelor and perhaps unaware that its future within the evolving comprehensive system was precarious; it eventually closed in 1981. A memorial service was held on 20 February 1970 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
Dorothy Brock was witty, eloquent, and handsome, dressing with a casual elegance which enhanced her feminine charm. Her interest in people of all sorts was unfeigned and she was an unfailing source of kindly, practical advice, backed by a moral authority made all the greater by the lightness of her touch. Normally high-spirited, she had her bleak moments, discernible only to the most observant. In good times and bad she was sustained, latterly as an Anglican, by a deeply held Christian faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 51971


Forbes, Dame (Katherine) Jane Trefusis (1899-1971), businesswoman and director of the Women's Auxiliary Air Force, was born on 21 March 1899 in the Chilean desert, the youngest of three children, and the second daughter, of Edmund Batten Forbes (1847-1924), civil engineer, and his wife, Charlotte Agnes Wauchope (died 1958). Little is known about her schooling, except that part of it was conducted in London, but, whether it was learned or inherited, Jane Trefusis Forbes combined a lively and creative mind with formidable and tireless powers of organization and leadership, which served her well in both business and military environments. Her business career was successful and varied. A breeder of prize-winning Dandie Dinmont terriers, in the 1920s she founded Bell Mead kennels and canine nursing home. In the 1930s she combined work as managing director of this enterprise -- by now a company -- with managing a housing trust, Caroline Trust Ltd Estates. After the Second World War she revived her interest in housing as chairman of Draydonne Properties, and she branched out into the dry-cleaning industry, retiring as managing director of Davis Dry Cleaners in the 1960s. 
However, it was in the military sphere that Jane Trefusis Forbes was particularly celebrated. Her military career started in 1916 when she joined the Women's Volunteer Reserve as a driver. The women's voluntary services were disbanded at the end of the war, but in 1934 German rearmament prompted women who had served in the First World War to prepare for a revival of their wartime role. In 1935 Jane Trefusis Forbes joined the Emergency Service, a voluntary Officers' Training Corps formed to train women for service in the event of a national emergency, and as senior cadet she played a key organizational role. The Emergency Service was renamed the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) on receiving Army Council recognition in May 1938, and Trefusis Forbes served as chief instructor at its school of instruction until, when the Air Council requested that some ATS companies be attached to RAF stations, she became company commander of no. 20 RAF (County of London) company, ATS. On 28 June 1939 the RAF finally took the plunge and formed its own independent women's service -- the Women's Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF); two days later Jane Trefusis Forbes was appointed as its first, non-executive, director. The outbreak of war saw a distracted Air Ministry largely unencumbered by a coherent strategy for the organization and administration of the WAAF, and Trefusis Forbes needed all her powers of tact, diplomacy, and, on occasion, no small degree of cunning, to see that the service-women were clothed, accommodated, and trained, and to reconcile a host of often conflicting interests and needs while establishing the service on a firm organizational footing. The remarkable expansion of the service from 1734 at its mobilization to 181,835 at its peak in July 1943 stood as testament to her success. She firmly believed that the WAAF could only contribute to the war effort to the fullest extent and with the greatest efficiency if airwomen served on equal terms with airmen as an integral part of the RAF. In an atmosphere not always conducive to such an egalitarian agenda she worked tirelessly, and doggedly when need be, to expand the employment of service-women into skilled, technical trades, and into positions of authority and responsibility. She also looked beyond a purely wartime agenda: her 'progressive training' scheme to enhance airwomen's sense of themselves as citizens displayed an exceptional and creative long-term vision of women's role in the post-war world, and she gave considerable and detailed consideration to the problems that both service-women and -men might encounter on demobilization. She resigned as director in October 1943, convinced (incorrectly) that Air Ministry plans for the decentralization of the WAAF would diminish its overall efficiency. It was a further year before she retired from the service, however, having conducted a fact-finding mission to North America, India, Gibraltar, Ceylon, the Middle East, and the Far East. Her role as deputy director and then director of welfare services for the Allied Control Commission for Germany from 1946 to 1948 called on many of the skills she had displayed as director of the WAAF, and her work producing a welfare handbook, increasing the scope of leave centres in the British zone, and organizing cultural and sporting competitions did much to ease the difficulties faced by civilian staff in unfamiliar surroundings. 
Slim, tall, a little plain, but always immaculate in uniform, Trefusis Forbes's austere appearance belied a charming manner. An impressive speaker with a commanding presence, she could inspire the loyalty and boost the morale of service-women of every rank, while those with whom she worked closely praised her colossal energy and drive, her originality of thought, and her outstanding organizing ability. Her interest in, affection for, and readiness to serve the RAF never diminished: after her retirement from the service she was vice-president of the WRAF Officers' Association and of the RAF Association (RAFA), deputy chairman of the RAFA executive, and a member of the RAFA council, the RAF Benevolent Fund council, and of numerous subcommittees. Her charitable interests included the national advisory council for the employment of the disabled, and the disabled advisory committee, Hammersmith. She was appointed CBE in 1941 and DBE in 1944, and in 1968 was awarded an honorary LLD by St Andrews University. On 10 March 1966, in a quiet ceremony at Kensington register office, she became the third wife of Sir Robert Watson-Watt (1892-1973), the developer of radar, with whom she had worked during the war. She survived a coronary thrombosis in 1970, but died at their home in London, 7 Crescent Place, Brompton Road, Kensington, following a second heart attack on 18 June 1971. 


@@@@@


doc= 51972


Findlay, Dame Harriet Jane, Lady Findlay (1881-1954), political activist and philanthropist, was born on 12 March 1881, the only daughter of Sir Jonathan Edmund Backhouse, first baronet (1849-1918), and his wife, Florence (died 1902), youngest daughter of Sir John Salusbury Salusbury-Trelawny, ninth baronet. Her father, a banker, was a director of Barclay & Co. Sir Edmund Trelawny Backhouse, second baronet, the Sinologist, was the eldest of her five brothers, two of whom became admirals ['see 'Backhouse, Sir Roger Roland Charles]. Nothing is known about her education or her early life before her marriage, on 9 July 1901, to Sir John Ritchie Findlay (1866-1930), son of John Ritchie Findlay of Aberlour, Banffshire, proprietor of 'The Scotsman' newspaper. Her husband, who succeeded as proprietor of the paper, also inherited his father's interest in Scottish culture, and advised on the national galleries, ancient monuments, fine arts, and education. On the outbreak of the First World War he became chairman of the Scottish National Housing Company, entrusted with the construction of housing at the naval base at Rosyth. During the 1920s he advised the Conservative government on house-building in Scotland. He was appointed KBE in 1917 and was created a baronet in 1925. 
The couple had three sons and two daughters, but later Harriet Findlay devoted much of her time to political activities and charitable work, particularly for institutions promoting the health and welfare of women and children, which she was in a good position to support because of her wealth and social standing. It is not known whether she had earlier participated in the campaign for women's suffrage, but during the 1920s she was involved in politics through the work of the Scottish Unionist Association, the successor to the National Union of Conservative Associations for Scotland. She also played a role on the Scottish women's committee of the party, established in 1920 as a belated response to the enfranchisement of women two years earlier. She became a JP in Edinburgh in 1926. In 1927 she was elected president of the Scottish Unionist Association, the first woman to hold the office. She was appointed DBE for political and public service in 1929. In the following year she was widowed; her eldest son, Sir John Edmund Ritchie Findlay (1902-1962), who succeeded to the baronetcy and the proprietorship of 'The Scotsman', was Unionist MP for Banffshire, 1939-45. 
Lady Findlay chaired the management board of Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, and her energy, ability, and tact helped steer the institution through the financial difficulties created by the depression. She was also a manager of the Edinburgh Royal Maternity Hospital, a member of the council of the Queen's Institute for District Nursing, and president of the Banffshire Nursing Association. Perhaps influenced by the seagoing tradition of her husband's home county and her brothers' naval careers, she did much voluntary work for the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. In 1932 she was appointed an honorary life governor and received a vellum signed by the president, the prince of Wales, the highest honour the institution could give. Her drive and enthusiasm were such that lifeboat days in Edinburgh saw a succession of imposing financial returns. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War Lady Findlay volunteered for the Women's Auxiliary Police Corps, which assisted the police and civil defence in emergencies. She worked in the canteen section and became a sergeant. For many years she played a prominent role in the Victoria League, which established canteens and hostels for members of the forces. She was chair of the committee of management of the Princess Margaret Rose Hospital, an Edinburgh institution for the care and rehabilitation of disabled children, and welcomed Princess Margaret on her first visit there in 1946. She was further involved in Highland Home Industries, a promotional and marketing organization for handicraft and other goods manufactured in the Scottish highlands. On several occasions she accompanied members of the royal family on visits to the organization's depot in Edinburgh. She was also a trustee of the National Library of Scotland. 
Lady Findlay died at her home, 13 Moray Place, Edinburgh, on 24 July 1954. According to a tribute which appeared in 'The Scotsman', she had devoted much of her life to charitable and social work, to which she brought 'a gracious personality, an unflagging enthusiasm, a conscientious devotion to duty, as well as intellectual ability'. A memorial service in St Giles's Cathedral celebrated her public service. This kind of commitment was typical of many women of her generation and class, but why in the longer term she eschewed politics is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 51986


Greville, Dame Margaret Helen (1863-1942), society hostess, had a difficult early life. She was born at 4 Wellington Place, London, on 20 December 1863. Her mother, Helen, 'nee' Anderson (1835/6-1906), had married William Anderson, day porter at the Edinburgh brewery of William M'Ewan ['see 'McEwan, William (1827-1913)]. M'Ewan supposedly put Anderson on night duty to facilitate his own access to Mrs Anderson, who was a cook. After the porter's death M'Ewan in 1885 married Helen Anderson and adopted her daughter, who was his presumptive only child. He was a plain, blunt man, and a domineering but indulgent father. 
On 25 April 1891 Margaret Anderson married the Hon. Ronald Henry Fulke Greville (1864-1908), elder son and heir of the second Baron Greville. He was a suave and genial captain in the Life Guards, but she so disliked army society that after a few years she threatened to leave him unless he sent in his papers to enable her to launch her social career in London. Her husband complied, and became a reputable if unexciting Unionist free-trader MP for East Bradford (1896-1906). Their marriage was her grappling hook onto society, where her father's money and her own persistence secured her a permanent place. After 1901 she was one of the pretty young hostesses who entertained Edward VII. Her energetic worldliness proved well attuned to the temper of the court. 'I don't follow people to their bedrooms,' she told the marquess of Carisbrooke, 'it's what they do outside them that is important' ('Chips', ed. James, 336). Her success with the old king provoked resentment: the diversions provided for him by Lord and Lady Savile at Rufford Abbey and by the Grevilles at Reigate Priory earned them the sobriquet of the Civils and Grovels. 
M'Ewan in 1906 bought for the Grevilles the Surrey estate of Polesden Lacey. The original Grecian villa built under the supervision of Thomas Cubitt in 1824 had recently been extended by Ambrose Poynter for Sir Clinton Dawkins. Its interior was sumptuously refitted for the Grevilles by Charles Frederic Mewes and Arthur Davis, the architects of the Ritz Hotel, in a manner reviving the Windsor Castle style of the 1820s. Polesden Lacey is a consummate display of Edwardian opulence and eclecticism: the woodwork in the hall was made from the altarpiece of a Wren church in the City of London; 'the Drawing Room is a sumptuous mock-Louis-Quatorze confection in white, gold and red with wall mirrors, ornate pilasters, imported French Rococo fireplaces and Italian ceiling paintings' (Pevsner, 415). Maggie Greville inherited some good English pictures, and bought others herself. Although only 22 miles from London, the house was surrounded by sylvan gardens and commanded glorious views over the Dorking valley. Polesden Lacey's parvenu luxuries and spacious seclusion were mistaken for aristocratic elegance by middle-class politicians such as Sir Robert Horne. 
The premature death of Ronnie Greville from throat cancer in 1908 required little adjustment in his widow's life. Early in her widowhood Maggie declined a proposal from Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise, and after hesitation she decided not to marry Sir John Simon in 1917. By the death of her father in 1913 she inherited an estimated $1.5 million including two-thirds of the voting shares in William McEwan's brewery, a private company which merged with William Younger to form Scottish Breweries Ltd in 1931. McEwan board meetings were held at Polesden Lacey, where she treated the directors with such autocratic harshness that they would leave her room trembling. She had a highly materialistic outlook, and was implacable in her pursuit of material gain. She also inherited M'Ewan's Mayfair home, which formerly had been the town house of the earls of Craven. Its upstairs drawing-room floor was fitted with priceless Louis XIV 'boiserie' producing an effect 'of great beauty, very perfect in taste' (Repington, 2.482). 
Maggie Greville was first cousin to George Younger and Robert Younger, who were both raised to the peerage in 1923, and as a rich brewer was herself created DBE during the former's chairmanship of the Unionist Party (1922). 'Appropriately she looked a rather blousy old barmaid', according to Sir Oswald Mosley (Mosley, 79). Kenneth Clark characterized her guests as 'stuffy members of the government and their mem-sahib wives, ambassadors and royalty' (Clark, 269). She shunned bohemians, and admitted only the most plutocratic Americans to her salon. Though Edward VIII ostracized her as a bore, her appetite for royalty remained insatiable. 'One uses up 'so' many red carpets in a season', she declared (Pearson, 134); another boast was that in the course of one morning three kings sat on her bed. During a visit to India as the guest of the marquess of Reading in 1922 she chaperoned Edwina Ashley, who accepted a proposal from Lord Louis Mountbatten in Greville's sitting room in the viceregal lodge. The future George VI spent part of his honeymoon at Polesden Lacey in 1923. 
In addition to cultivating monarchs Maggie Greville was assiduous in entertaining foreign ambassadors. This brought her one innocuous advantage: red carpets and special trains during her inveterate travels. There was a less innocent consequence of her attentions to diplomatists. Harold Nicolson complained in 1939: 'The harm which these silly selfish hostesses do is really immense.... They convey to foreign envoys the impression that policy is decided in their own drawing-rooms... They dine and wine our younger politicians and they create an atmosphere of authority and responsibility and grandeur, whereas the whole thing is a mere flatulence. (Nicolson, 396-7)' After she had decried Churchill in 1942, the diplomat Charles Ritchie similarly deplored her 'trivial but not harmless gossip' (Ritchie, 145). Her waspishness was such that Lady Leslie exclaimed, 'Maggie Greville! I would sooner have an open sewer in my drawing-room' (Lees-Milne, 1.109). The earl of Crawford described her in 1933: 'Full of stories, and if with a spice of scandal so much the better; very anti-semitic -- a real good sort; but I should love to see her in a temper' (Vincent, 551). 'There is no one on earth quite so skilfully malicious as old Maggie', Henry Channon wrote approvingly in 1939, 'she was vituperative about almost everyone' ('Chips', ed. James, 208). Loyal in her friendships, she was unforgiving to her enemies, especially her rival Emerald Cunard. 'You mustn't think that I dislike little Lady Cunard, I'm always telling Queen Mary she isn't as bad as she's painted,' she catted to Carisbrooke ('Chips', ed. James, 336). She found Hitler charming and Mussolini pompous. 
During the blitz Greville shut her Mayfair house and lived mainly in Claridges and the Dorchester hotels. After a long period of disablement, during which she continued to entertain gamely, she died on 15 September 1942, at the Dorchester Hotel, and was buried on 18 September outside the walled rose garden at Polesden Lacey. In her will (for which the executors included lords Ilchester, Bruntisfield, and Dundonald) she left Marie Antoinette's necklace to Queen Elizabeth, $25,000 to the queen of Spain, $20,000 to Princess Margaret, and $10,000 to Osbert Sitwell. Polesden Lacey was bequeathed to the National Trust. 
'She was so shrewd, so kind and so amusingly 'un'kind, so sharp, such fun, so naughty', wrote Queen Elizabeth after Greville's death, 'altogether a real person, a character, utterly Mrs Ronald Greville' (Bradford, 111). Sir Cecil Beaton was less enamoured: 'Mrs Ronnie Greville was a galumphing, greedy, snobbish old toad who watered at her chops at the sight of royalty... and did nothing for anybody except the rich' (Buckle, 215-16). 


@@@@@


doc= 51992


White, William (1807-1882), printer, and door-keeper of the House of Commons, was born of East Anglian nonconformist stock, probably in Bedford, and educated at Bedford grammar school. His grandmother's maiden name was Hale, suggesting a connection (unproven) with the seventeenth-century chief justice Sir Matthew Hale. White established himself around 1830 as a bookseller and printer in Bedford, and married Mary Anne Chignell of Colchester. He was a strict Calvinist Congregationalist and a political radical, regarded as one of Bedford's best public speakers. As a member of Lord John Russell's election committee in 1832 he was besieged by a mob and had the windows of his house broken. In 1843 he defeated almost single-handed a move to impose a requirement that all schoolteachers under the Bedford Charity should be Anglicans. His newspaper letters on this affair were reprinted in a pamphlet 'Bedford Charity not Sectarian'. Influenced by Carlyle he became disenchanted with Calvinist orthodoxy. When in 1852 his son (William) Hale White, later well known as a writer under the pseudonym Mark Rutherford, was expelled from a Calvinist seminary for questioning the unique inspiration of the 'Bible', he came to his aid in a pamphlet 'To Think or Not to Think'. Hale White claimed that his literary style owed much to his father. 
White's political activities ruined his business and he ran into debt. Lord Charles Russell, stepbrother of Lord John and serjeant-at-arms, appointed him assistant, later principal, door-keeper of the House of Commons. He used his ringside seat to gather material for sketches of parliamentary life for the popular weekly 'Illustrated Times'. These sketches draw a vivid picture of many notable parliamentary personalities and events of the period from the Crimean War to White's retirement in 1875. A selection of them was published in 1897 by Justin McCarthy, the Irish nationalist MP, under the title 'The Inner Life of the House of Commons'. White died at Carshalton, Surrey, on 11 February 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 51993


Cowan, Sir John, baronet (1814-1900), paper manufacturer and political organizer, was born at 5 St John's Street, Edinburgh, on 7 May 1814, one of the eight children to reach maturity of Alexander Cowan (died 1859), also a paper manufacturer, of Edinburgh and Valleyfield, Penicuik, Midlothian, and his wife, Elizabeth Hall (died 1829), daughter of George Hall of Crail, Fife, merchant. Two of his three brothers achieved prominence as Liberal politicians. His elder brother Charles Cowan (1801-1889) defeated T. B. Macaulay at the general election of 1847 and went on to represent Edinburgh for the next twelve years. His younger brother James (1816-1895) likewise represented the city from 1874 to 1882. 
In his youth Cowan established a reputation as a dedicated student. After attending Edinburgh high school (where he used to beg his father to let him start the day at 4.15 a.m.) he continued his education at the universities of Edinburgh and Bonn. He then joined his brothers in the Penicuik paper-making firm, the original mill of which his grandfather Charles had bought and renamed Valleyfield. In later life Cowan was to head this family business, by then operating under the name of Alexander Cowan & Sons. 
Twice married -- first, in 1847 or 1848, to Jane Menzies (1820-1854), daughter of Alexander Gillespie of Sunnyside, near Lanark, and second, in 1857 or 1858, to Jane Falconar (1826-1861), daughter of William Currie of Linthill, Roxburghshire -- Cowan was from 1861 a widower. Three children died before reaching adulthood. 
Cowan was chairman of the Midlothian Liberal Association when the constituency was thrust into national prominence by having W. E. Gladstone as its MP. Under the impetus and sponsorship of the fifth earl of Rosebery and the organizational supervision of W. P. Adam, the Liberal chief whip, Cowan chaired the meetings held in Midlothian to request Gladstone to stand and sent the formal invitation. Gladstone accepted in a public letter addressed to Cowan in late January 1879. In the August of that year it was Cowan who wrote to Gladstone suggesting that he come to the constituency to address the public meetings held in November 1879 which made up Gladstone's first campaign in Midlothian. Although illness prevented Cowan from chairing any of the campaign meetings, he had already played a significant part in the organization of Gladstone's triumphant, if not unexpected, return over Midlothian's sitting Conservative MP, the earl of Dalkeith, at the general election held in April 1880. The Midlothian campaign of late 1879 and its follow-up of March and April 1880 resulted in the establishment of Gladstonianism as the dominant force in Liberal politics. 
Cowan was a similarly central figure in all of Gladstone's subsequent re-elections for the county. He was active in national politics also to the extent that he held office in the Scottish Liberal Association and the Scottish Liberal Club. The relationship between Cowan and Gladstone was one marked by great warmth on both sides. Gladstone visited his constituency chairman several times at Beeslack House, Cowan's family home near Penicuik. 
Cowan remained loyal to Gladstone when the Liberal Party split over the latter's Irish home-rule policy in 1886. Cowan's record of service and loyalty was recognized when he was created a baronet in 1894. It was to him that Gladstone wrote announcing his intention to stand down as Midlothian's member at the dissolution of 1895. 
Like his brothers, Cowan was a founder member of the Free Church of Scotland. The family was related through both his father and his mother to Thomas Chalmers, the Free Church's leading figure in the Disruption of 1843. Cowan was an elder at Penicuik Free Church from 1850. His charitable instinct led him to set up a fund through which a proportion of the family firm's profits were channelled into philanthropic works. During his time as head of the business the Cowan Institute was built as an educational and leisure facility for the people of Penicuik. Cowan was also active in foreign missions and contributed generously to the work of David Livingstone, whom he counted a personal friend. 
Cowan died on 26 October 1900 after suffering a heart attack near Beeslack House and was buried on 4 November at Old Glencorse kirkyard, near Penicuik. He was survived by two daughters, the baronetcy becoming extinct on his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 51995


Cox, Homersham (1821-1897), judge, mathematician, and author, was born on 19 June 1821 at Newington, Surrey. The fourth son of Edward Treslove Cox, he was educated at Tonbridge School (1830-39) and at Jesus College, Cambridge (1839-44), graduating with second-class honours in the mathematical tripos. He registered as a student of the Inner Temple on 2 May 1845, and was called to the bar on 13 June 1851. 
Cox supplemented his income from his law practice by writing for the 'Daily Telegraph' for a number of years. He was acknowledged as both a speedy and a brilliant writer of leaders. He also wrote books upon a remarkably diverse range of subjects: differential and integral calculus, the institutions of British government, the law of parliamentary elections. His best-known and most successful work was titled 'The First Century of Christianity' (1886; rev. edn, 1892); his 'History of the Reform Bills of 1866 and 1867' (1868) and his 'Institutions of English Government' (1863) are probably those of enduring interest, the latter reflecting his whiggish historicism. 
Cox was appointed a commissioner at the Beverley election inquiry in 1869, and two years later was made a county court judge to serve on circuit no. 24 in mid-Wales. Thirteen years later, in 1884, he transferred to Cardiff, but within months replaced Judge Lindsdale on the Mid Kent circuit, where he remained until his retirement in 1893. The townsfolk of Tonbridge evinced much pride and pleasure in the success of a local boy as judge, and were gratified that Cox was awarded 'the biggest pension that could be awarded him' ('Maidstone & Kentish Journal'). 
Cox was married to Margaret Lucy ('b'. 1832/3), whose maiden name is not known. They had at least five daughters and four sons. His second son was the economist and journalist Harold Cox. He died at his home, Marlfield House, Tonbridge, after a very short illness, on 10 March 1897, and was buried two days later at Tonbridge cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 52001


Sanderson, William (1547/8-1638), merchant, was the eldest son of William Sanderson (died 1570) and his wife, Jane, formerly Wall. The Sanderson family had moved from Pontefract to London in the person of the younger William's grandfather Stephen Sanderson (died 1495). Sanderson learnt the merchant's trade under Thomas Allin, and travelled widely in Denmark, Poland, Germany, France, and the Low Countries. At some time before 1592 he joined the Fishmongers' Company and was on the court of assistants until he moved from London in 1595, although he was a member until his death. He was well known in Elizabeth's court, and to the duke of Norfolk, and lords Burghley and Leicester. 
His travelling days over, Sanderson was a wealthy man; in addition to his trading profits, he had inherited property in several counties of England and in Ireland. His first London house was in the parish of St Magnus the Martyr, by London Bridge. He married, probably about 1584-5, Margaret, daughter of Hugh Snedale of Cornwall and his wife, a sister of Sir Walter Ralegh. The names of a daughter and seven sons are known, the eldest being Sir William Sanderson (1586-1676), while three others bore the names of his friends: Ralegh, Cavendish, and Drake. Sanderson was eager to invest in new ventures. Henry Lane of the Muscovy Company compiled for him an account of voyages to the Russian Arctic between 1553 and 1583, but Sanderson seems to have rejected this route in favour of a north-west passage to the riches of the Orient. He funded Martin Frobisher's three voyages towards Greenland and Baffin Island. The family connection with Ralegh was supported by Sanderson's purse: he several times stood bond for Ralegh, for sums said to exceed $100,000, and indemnified Ralegh's exploits in Virginia between 1584 and 1590. He provided the majority of the money that, supplemented by the merchants of Exeter, funded John Davis's voyages of 1585-7, and Sanderson's own ship 'Sunshine', with his servants travelling as supercargo, accompanied Davis on all three voyages. Although China eluded him, Davis brought back from Greenland a profitable cargo of sealskins, and on his last voyage reached 72 degree 41' N, where he named two prominent features, Sanderson's Tower on Baffin Island and, on the Greenland side, Hope Sanderson. 
Sanderson also supported Emery Molyneux, the first English globe maker. His large terrestrial and celestial globes were published in 1592 and presented to Queen Elizabeth at Greenwich. A second terrestrial globe, bearing Sanderson's newly bestowed arms and a declaration of his patronage, was presented to the queen at an entertainment at Sanderson's house in Newington Butts, to the south of London. As a farmer of the Mines Royal, Sanderson visited Derbyshire, Worcestershire, and Devon; in 1600 he was among the company shareholders accused of misbehaviour at the Isleworth brassworks and in 1602 he was named in an action in Star Chamber. 
In the latter days of Queen Elizabeth Sanderson was involved in an examination of the mechanism of foreign exchange; his report survives as BL, Harley MS 5208, fols. 50-52. He also oversaw the business of goods coming into Leadenhall during the years about the accession of James I. In 1594 Sanderson was in Devon making final arrangements with Ralegh and his associates for a voyage to Guiana. In view of the hazardous nature of this enterprise, Sanderson presented Ralegh with an account of the expenses, a release was signed and then altered, to operate in the event of Ralegh's death. But Ralegh accused Sanderson of dishonest accounting and Sanderson thought the altered release a forgery. They parted in anger; the matter eventually went to Star Chamber in 1613, although there is no record of the outcome. When Ralegh was executed in 1618 Sanderson was obliged to go to law in order to recover the considerable sums owing to him. 
In the early decades of the seventeenth century Sanderson was beset by troubles, probably caused by unwise investments in voyages and properties, as well as expensive litigation. He spent at least seven years in prison between 1613 and 1622, at first in the Gatehouse at Westminster, then in the Fleet. The evidences given by his enemies at the Star Chamber hearings present him as a ruined and broken man. In 1656 his son, Sir William Sanderson, published 'A compleat history of the lives and reigns of Mary queen of Scotland, and of her son King James, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, the sixth' in which he blackened Ralegh's actions and character; in reply, Ralegh's son Carew Ralegh published, anonymously, a pamphlet attacking the author and his father, in which he stated that William Sanderson had died in a debtors' prison. This in turn led Sir William Sanderson to issue 'An Answer to a Scurrilous Pamphlet Intituled 'Observations...'', which presented his father in a better light. This account reveals that Sanderson died at his house in the Strand, Westminster, in 1638, aged ninety, and that his body was embalmed for several months before being buried in the parish church of the Savoy. The Savoy Chapel was at this time serving the parishioners of St Mary-le-Strand, their church having been demolished about 1548. He was said to have left lands to his children, but no will has been found. Of his sons, Drake Sanderson and another son pursued Ralegh in his last voyage, Drake dying at San Domingo in the West Indies. A third son died while on Captain Weymouth's voyage to the Arctic in 1602, and a fourth, possibly Hugh (died 1624), in the East Indies. A fifth, Thomas (died 1635), fought with the Dutch against the Portuguese, in the East Indies, eventually taking over 2000 men by sea to Russia to fight at Smolensk. 


@@@@@


doc= 52003


Bayning, Paul (c.1539-1616), merchant, was the son of Richard Bayning, a gentleman from Dedham in Essex, and Anne, the daughter of John Baker of Ipswich. He emerges in 1572 as a factor for merchants trading to Portugal, though it seems that he was engaged in clandestine trade with Spain during an embargo, and he was caught by two Spanish pinnaces from Vigo, and roughed up by his captors. He was soon involved in the Venice trade, and along with his brother Andrew ('c'.1544-1610), with whom he probably acted in partnership, was among the Venice merchants absorbed into the Levant Company when it was incorporated in 1592. This was a hugely lucrative trade (the port books show Bayning importing currants, silks, cotton wool, and spices), but one vulnerable to the deteriorating international situation. When Philip II ordered the seizure of English cargoes in 1585 Bayning and his partner sued for losses amounting to $37,422. He was unsurprisingly among the English merchants who turned to privateering, contributing a ship to the Cadiz expedition in 1587, and investing heavily in Sir James Lancaster's Pernambuco venture of 1595, and the earl of Cumberland's Puerto Rico expedition of 1598. Alongside Sir John Watts, whose son was Bayning's godchild, he was one of the leading privateering magnates of his generation, and like many of them he was a sponsor of the East India Company at its inception, becoming its treasurer in 1600, and selling it his ship the 'Great Susan'. 
Bayning was one of the new breed of thrusting, outward-looking, and frankly abrasive merchants; his relationship with the more conservative city establishment was always tense. He had secured his city freedom by unconventional means; not having served an apprenticeship in one of the trading companies, he was made free by redemption at the request of the lady mayoress, Elizabeth Ryvers, in November 1574. It was a controversial move, as the aldermen followed his admission with an immediate order that no merchant be admitted in this fashion in the future, while Bayning himself played off the Mercers and Grocers to avoid paying any fees. Nevertheless he accepted election as alderman in February 1593, and served as sheriff for the year 1593-4. His tenure of the latter office was characteristically tempestuous, as he fell out with the lord mayor by making a novel claim to appoint an important legal officer, the secondary of the counter. Not only had Bayning sought to appropriate patronage that did not belong to the admittedly expensive office of sheriff, but he also failed to show due respect to the mayor, who complained to the privy council that Bayning had neglected the 'ordinary attendance due to my place', showing 'open contempt not so much of myself as of order and magistracy' ('Salisbury MSS', 4.521). Bayning was probably not committed to city politics: his attendance record at the court of aldermen after 1594 was only 22 per cent, worse than that of any of his peers. 
It was probably the duties of hospitality entailed upon the shrievalty that explain Bayning's purchase for $1300 from Sir Francis Drake of a substantial city mansion called The Erber; next to the church of St Mary Bothaw, it was previously inhabited by George, duke of Clarence, and had been recently rebuilt by another city magnate, Sir Thomas Pullison (it is now the site of Cannon Street railway station). The house was sufficiently grand to be regularly requisitioned by the authorities for lodging visiting ambassadors. But however magnificent the outward face of the Bayning household, all was not well within. 
Bayning's first wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Mowse), about whom little is known, had died of a consumption at the age of twenty-eight in 1579. He remarried, probably in 1581, his second wife being Susanna Norden (died 1623), daughter of a Suffolk gentleman. Perhaps the marriage was happy at the outset, for Bayning named ships after her -- 'Susan's Handmaid' and the 'Great Susan' -- and his heir, baptized Paul, was born in the Armada year of 1588. But six years later the marriage had broken down. It is possible that Susanna's adulterous relationship with Jonas Bodenham, one of Drake's captains (her husband's involvement with privateering doubtless made for some heady company) caused the breakdown, but it is not clear whether this liaison began before or after Bayning expelled his wife from the house and refused further communication with her in 1594. In 1597 Susanna complained to Richard Bancroft, bishop of London, and when he prevaricated, to Lord Treasurer Burghley. Bayning attempted a series of legal manoeuvres to avoid answering, but eventually in July 1598 the bishop ordered him to take his wife back. This did not end the matter, for in December 1600 the couple's case came before the high commission and a decree of separation was issued. The case made the Baynings obvious targets for the scandalmongers. James Abell, a disgruntled servant dismissed from Bayning's household, was accused of conspiracy to libel with Susanna's lover Bodenham and the printer and playwright Henry Chettle. The libel accused Bayning of buggery, and although the charge is unproven, the fact that rumours like this were circulating was a sign of how low his stock had fallen. 
Bayning was in line for the mayoralty, and his domestic circumstances must have compromised his credibility. It is therefore unsurprising that he sought to be discharged from his position as alderman in March 1602, though John Chamberlain said that 'it was for spite, that he would not have his wife Lady Mayores' (McClure, 1.144). But Bayning had not given up his harassment of his wife. In the face of her attempts at a reconciliation, he promoted a bill against adultery in parliament in 1604, which as she pointed out to Sir Julius Caesar, 'doe argue in him a contynavall mallece, and therfor small hope of faythfull reconciliation' (BL, Lansdowne MS 161, fol. 161). The bill was thrown out by the Lords, who were alive to Bayning's vendetta. The couple's continuing separation still vexed the authorities, for in 1606 James I had to order through the archbishop of Canterbury and the bishop of London that Bayning continue to make maintenance payments to his wife. When he died, he did leave her an annuity of $300, but that was the limit of her claim on the estate. Susanna Bayning always had her supporters -- 'that helpless (though I hope guiltless) poor woman', according to Lady Ursula Walsingham ('Salisbury MSS', 7.317) -- and the stain on her reputation did not prevent her remarriage, to Sir Francis Leigh. 
Little is known of Bayning's last years. He probably retired from active trade and concentrated on his substantial landed estate -- at his death he possessed seven manors in Suffolk and Essex. But if this was the case, his household always retained traces of his exotic career. Among his bequests was one of $10 to John Simpson, the minister of St Olave, Hart Street, of which half was to be used for 'instructing Anthony my Negro in the principles of the Christian faith and religion when he shalbe fitt to be baptised' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/128, fol. 256'v'). Bayning died on 30 September 1616, when he was said to be aged seventy-seven, and was buried on 1 October in the church of St Olave, Hart Street, where there survives an interesting monument to him and his brother Andrew: they stand on a corner wall, with busts of Andrew facing west and Paul facing south. Paul had inherited the bulk of his brother's estate in 1610, and their combined fortunes provided the launching pad for the career of Paul's heir, his son Paul (1588-1629), later Viscount Bayning, whose moneylending enabled him to leave an estate worth $153,000 in goods, as well as extensive properties in Essex and Suffolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 52005


Hore, Richard (fl. 1535-1538), mariner, was a citizen and leather-seller of London. Late in 1535 he attempted to generate interest in a voyage to the 'northwest parts of America'. Several gentlemen of the inns of court and chancery responded to his approach; their motive -- being 'desirous to see the strange things of the world' (Hakluyt, 8.3) -- has since inclined commentators to regard them as proto-tourists. Hore hired two vessels, the 'Trinity' and the 'William'. With a complement of 160, including 30 gentlemen, he departed from England at the end of April 1536. Almost two months elapsed before the ships sighted land, near Cape Breton. Moving north-eastwards without making formal observations of the coastline, they anchored for several days off Newfoundland. There they sighted, and disembarked to chase, a party of Indians, but were unable to make contact. From this point their stores failed them, and extreme solutions -- as were later reported -- became necessary. Several acts of murder and cannibalism apparently took place among the crew. As their number decreased, 'the officers knew not what was become of them', until one man, challenging another for a piece of meat, asked its provenance. 'If thou wouldst needs know', he was told, 'the broyled meate that I had was a piece of such a mans buttocke' (ibid., 8.5, 6). Despite Hore's exhortations to curb such unpleasantness, his mariners had reached the stage of holding a lottery to decide whom among their number should provide the next meal, when a French ship entered their harbour and was seized by the famished Englishmen. With this prize they returned to England, reaching St Ives in October 1536. 
The only account of the voyage is that provided by Hakluyt, and its accuracy is highly suspect. Much of what he reported was third-hand, via his cousin, the lawyer Richard Hakluyt, from conversations with one of the gentlemen voyagers. The only original source was a surviving member of the 'Trinity''s crew, whom Hakluyt interviewed almost half a century after the voyage took place. Such evidence as exists contradicts both men's statements. Following his return Hore failed to honour his contract with the 'William''s owner, William Dolphyn, and the ship's cargo was seized. Examined in the court of admiralty, Hore claimed that he had intended a fishing voyage; and he was certainly carrying fish when he returned to England, so acts of cannibalism hardly seem to have been necessary. It may rather be the case that the voyage's unaccustomed hardships may have inclined the 'tourists' to overstate their ordeal somewhat. 
In the following year Hore was before the admiralty court once more, having hired another vessel, the 'Valentine', voyaged to Portugal, and undertaken to transport several Portuguese travellers to England. In fact he kidnapped them, brought them to a haven near Cardiff, and demanded money for their release. He seems successfully to have argued himself free from custody. In September 1538 the 'Valentine' was arrested upon the action of her owner, to whom Hore owed $280. Predictably her cargo of salt and wine was suspected to have been obtained dishonestly. The over-enterprising Hore thereafter disappears from extant records. 


@@@@@


doc= 52008


Browne, Maurice (1555/6-1583), adventurer and courtier, was the fourth son of John Browne, merchant, of London, and his third wife, Christian, daughter of William Carkett of London. He was thirteen at the time of the visitation of London in 1568. John Browne died in September 1570, leaving Maurice's education to the care of his executors: Maurice had matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1569. His father had made a contract securing a little London property in Hart Street for him, probably from Maurice's mother's family. In 1576 Sir Thomas Smith referred to Maurice Browne as his servant and kinsman, and by 1580 he was apparently one of Sir Francis Walsingham's assistants. He was also the busy London agent for the Thynne family of Longleat, dealing with all kinds of tasks for them, domestic and political -- he provided a lively commentary on the implications of court fortunes for the Thynne-Knyvet alliance. He negotiated with Walsingham and other court patrons for help against Thynne's enemies, especially Lord Stafford; and for John Thynne's appointment to Wiltshire offices. He informed Thynne in April 1580 that his ally Henry Knyvet would not gain the office of 'custos rotulorum' of Wiltshire, because the earl of Leicester supported the earl of Pembroke for it. In May 1583 Browne described the rise to royal favour of Walter Ralegh, noting Ralegh's luxurious surroundings and sumptuous apparel. Since Thynne was at loggerheads with Ralegh's brother Carew, Browne thought Thynne should create a more dashing image when coming to court by investing in new clothes. Browne's advice was to cultivate Leicester, but also to approach a different patron, Sir Christopher Hatton. Browne also reported on family events in London such as the planned marriage of Thynne's widowed father-in-law, Sir Rowland Hayward, to the young daughter of Thomas (Customer) Smith. 
In 1581 Browne went to Terceira in the Azores, probably sent by Walsingham as an agent for England's support of Don Antonio's claim to the Portuguese crown, against Spain. Browne returned about September 1581, with a Father John of the Holy Spirit, who was to serve as a 'living letter' ('CSP for.', '1581-2', nos. 366-7, 439), to report on the state of the island and its readiness for Don Antonio's defence. 
Browne became interested in maps and cosmography, and in August 1582 Sir Humphrey Gilbert convinced him of the great riches expected in Gilbert's proposed colony in North America. Walsingham was a supporter of Gilbert's project, and encouraged Browne to go, and on his return to tell the queen of the colony's establishment, upon which news she had promised to send more shipping and men. During the long delays of late 1582 and early 1583 Browne spent much time with Gilbert. The little expedition departed in June 1583. Browne went as captain of the 40 ton 'Swallow', despite his lack of marine expertise; and he could not prevent the men from plundering a passing fishing ship. After Gilbert formally claimed possession of Newfoundland for England, Browne was appointed captain of the 120 ton 'Delight' for the continuation of the voyage, leaving St John's on 20 August 1583. Allegedly, Gilbert insisted that the three ships sail a course towards Sable Island. On 28 August the men on the 'Delight' were heard carousing with trumpets, drums, and fifes all night, but the crew did not keep proper watch as the wind rose, and the ship grounded next morning, with the loss of the supplies, and almost a hundred men. According to Edward Hayes's account, Browne nobly refused calls to save himself in the small boat in which sixteen men survived, instead going up to the highest deck to await imminent death. Browne had been an assiduous and apparently charming courtier, on the fringe of the Walsingham-Gilbert-Hakluyt connection, and he impressed people: Walsingham and Gilbert gave him responsibilities, and Edward Hayes lamented the loss of a virtuous, honest, and discreet gentleman. However, enthusiasm could not compensate for inexperience (or Gilbert's misjudgements), and Browne could not adequately discipline the rough sailors. On 9 September Gilbert drowned too. This ambitious venture to colonize North America failed. Browne's untimely death on 29 August 1583 cut short his promising career and ended his lively reporting on the Elizabethan court. 


@@@@@


doc= 52009


Spert, Sir Thomas (d. 1541), naval administrator, of unknown parentage, must have distinguished himself in naval service well before 1512. His marine skills are attested by payment to him from January 1512 of 8died a day from the petty customs of London for looking after the king's new ship, 'Mary Rose'. Sir Edward Howard's appointment as lord admiral on 7 April 1512 brought Spert to prominence as Howard immediately sought competent captains for his fleet of eighteen ships. On 16 April Thomas Spert of Stepney was paid 'conduyte money' at the rate of 6died per man recruited for each 12 miles of distance travelled in 'garderying together' mariners. By 12 June Spert had recruited men at distances of between 130 and 150 miles from London. The significance of that wartime allowance (later raised to 30's'. a month under Sir William Fitzwilliam) emerged six months later when Spert together with three other expert masters were paid 100's'. for horse hire during the week that they journeyed from Southampton to Eltham and back to share with the king 'their mynde in bestowyng the Kyng's shippes this winter' -- that is from 28 October 1512 until 11 February 1513. As 'Master of the 'Mary Rose'', Spert had a budget of $200 for her winter care, approving payment of $132 4's'. 31/2died to John Hopton, then clerk controller, for organizing her hard standing near Woolwich between 28 October 1512 and 11 February 1513, and to pay John Brown, painter, for fourteen flags and pennants with St George's cross. On 15 March 1513 Spert was paid 100's'. for his 'lodesmanshippe' or pilotage to Danzig; $4 for the lodging of himself and another pilot in Zeeland (Thomas Frende, purser of the 'Dragon', for whom he had signed a petition to the lord chancellor seeking diplomatic protection as he had retained his services for the war effort); plus 60's'. for piloting the 'Mary Rose' into the Thames. On 21 April 1513 Spert assumed a similar role for the bigger 'Henri Grace a Dieu' procuring her new rigging and decking, and also flags and pennants. On 10 November 1514 Spert was granted an annuity of $20 in succession to Master Woodless for keeping the secret of the newly discovered Black Deep Channel into the Thames. 
From 1511 to 1514 Spert petitioned to transform the body administering Trinity House's almshouses in Deptford into an important marine corporation, and to initiate a census of all English shipping over the next decade he acted with Robert Brygandyne, clerk of the ships, and others when charging the treasury of the chamber for naval repairs. A letter from the lord high admiral, William Fitzwilliam, to Wolsey of 16 August 1522 reveals Spert had found at Portsmouth 'a place nearly a mile within the haven where the 'Henry' and the 'Great Galley' can lie without spending half as much tackle as now, and they will be safer from rafts'. In April 1523 Spert was consulted by Fitzwilliam on how to destroy Scottish vessels at Boulogne. 
Spert was promoted clerk comptroller of the king's ships in 1524 to work with 'the rule of all the foresaid ships maisters, and maryners with the advise of Brygandine'. From 1524 he worked closely with William Gonson authorizing many repairs -- for example approving payment of $79 13's'. 4died in August 1529 for rigging and trimming for the 'Minion' and the 'Mary Guildford', and making payments for the victuals and wages of the keepers of the king's ships while the ships were wintering. Spert was knighted for his part in such matters at Whitehall Palace in 1529 and received a grant of arms. Until 1533 he acted as master of the 'Henri Grace a Dieu'. From 1527 Thomas Jermyn, Trinity House pilot, who had found the Black Deep Channel, succeeded Brygandyne as his deputy and paymaster. In 1535 Spert was described as master of the king's ships while undertaking a seagoing command to curb 'certain rovers active in the Channel'. 
During 1536 Spert sat as an assessor in the high court of admiralty when Trinity House's right to levy pilotage charges for the Thames was upheld. In 1536 he saw the Trinity House of Newcastle upon Tyne chartered and in 1537 had its charter of 1514 slightly amended. During 1538 and 1539 as the captain of Portsmouth he supervised the fortification of Gosport later known as 'Spert's bulwark'. In March 1539 he led a formal naval inspection of the 'Great Nicholas' of Bristol because Gonson was incapacitated by gout. 
Spert's version of the charter of 1514 (London, Guildhall, MS 3001A, later misdated 20 May 1513) follows a woodcut of two carracks flying St George's crosses and a waterside chapel. Another element drafted on 21 February 1541 shows him as the master of Trinity House devising an educational regime for children of the brotherhood free of charge to their parents or friends, to which duty he appointed the chaplain (first envisaged in 1514) to teach for $8 a year plus lodging and clothing. His piety is apparent as these pages are bound with 'Horae beatissme virginis' and woodcuts by Wynkin de Worde printed between 1509 and 1534. 
In August 1541 Spert acted for the last time as an assessor in the high court of admiralty. He had married three times, first Margery, then Anne Salkell, and last Mary Fabian, daughter of John Fabian and his wife, Anne Waldegrave; John Fabian's uncle was the chronicler Robert Fabyan. With Mary, Spert had two children, Anne, who married Thomas Brook and later John Skott, and Richard, who later married Grissell Salkell of King's Wood, Wiltshire. Mary was the executor named when on 28 November 1541, 'sick in bodie', Spert made his will. He died at Stepney in the following December (not, as erroneously stated on his monument in St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, on 8 September). Under the terms of the will, Mary received his profitable Blackwall pasturage until Richard should come of age. Lesser bequests went to his married daughter and to his cousin, Margaret Spert, married to the famous Guinea seaman, John Lok. 


@@@@@


doc= 52010


Blackburn, Jemima (1823-1909), painter and illustrator, was born on 1 May 1823 at 31 Heriot Row, Edinburgh, the youngest of the six children of James Wedderburn (1782-1822), solicitor-general for Scotland, and Isabella Clerk (1789-1865). Her early childhood was overshadowed by the death of her father (before her birth) and beset by intermittent illness. She was encouraged to draw by her doctor, the distinguished John Abercrombie, and although she seems to have received no artistic training and little formal education, Jemima Wedderburn lived in vibrant intellectual surroundings which moulded her remarkable, enquiring mind. (As a child she used to skin mice so as to find out how their muscles worked.) Her cousin the physicist James Clerk Maxwell moved to 31 Heriot Row after the death of his mother and the close friendship that developed was vital and stimulating to both. The physician Henry Acland introduced her to John Ruskin who took a keen interest in her work, even thinking of her, according to a letter from Effie Ruskin, 'as the best artist he knows' (Lutyens, 113-14). Sir Edwin Landseer claimed that in the drawing of animals he had nothing to teach her (G. Du Maurier, 'The Young George Du Maurier: a Selection of his Letters', 1860-67, appendix, 287). On 12 June 1849 Wedderburn married Hugh Blackburn (1823-1909), professor of mathematics at Glasgow University. Outside term they stayed at Ardmillan House in Ayrshire until, in 1853, they purchased the estate of Roshven lying on the remote north coast of Moidart in the west highlands. It was there that her best work was accomplished. She often painted ambitious compositions, such as the magnificent watercolour 'Building a Haystack' ('c'.1857), and she has come to be regarded as one of Scotland's first major women artists of the modern period (MacDonald, 113). Blackburn kept a visual journal (Christies, 1 December 1994, dispersed) from the age of twelve, describing the day's activities. Each entry contained at least one drawing or painting and described the circles in which she moved, her wide travels, and life on a Victorian west highland estate. Her work grew in popularity and she became much sought after as an illustrator of books and periodicals, 'The History of Thomas Thumb' (1855) and 'The Cat's Pilgrimage' (1870) being perhaps the most attractive. Blackburn had always held a keen interest in natural history and Charles Darwin acknowledged that it was she who first recorded how the young cuckoo ejects its rivals from the nest (Darwin, 'Origin of Species', 6th edn, 1882). In 1862 she produced 'Birds from Nature', a volume of bird illustrations painted from life which immediately placed her in the first rank of Victorian ornithological illustrators. The book was reissued in 1868 in an enlarged edition, though only six copies were coloured, a fact which undoubtedly has led to her lack of recognition. 
Blackburn travelled widely, visiting countries from Egypt to Iceland, the latter visited in a party which included Anthony Trollope with whom she produced an idiosyncratic account of their adventures: 'How the Mastiffs Went to Iceland' (1878). With much taste and judgement, the Blackburns turned Roshven into one of the most beautiful estates on the west coast and for a time it became a summer destination for many of the most distinguished scientists and artists of the age, in particular Hugh Blackburn's closest friend, the physicist and mathematician William Thomson, Lord Kelvin, and the German physiologist and physicist Hermann von Helmholtz. Her artistic and intellectual powers diminished by senile dementia, Jemima Blackburn died on 9 August 1909. Her husband, who was two months and one day younger, survived her by exactly two months. They were buried in the private graveyard at Roshven. The National Portrait Gallery and British Museum, London, the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh, and the Royal Library, Windsor, hold collections of her works. 


@@@@@


doc= 52011


Russell, Edward Richard, first Baron Russell of Liverpool (1834-1920), newspaper editor and proprietor, born on 9 August 1834 at the Barbican, London, was the son of Edward Haslingden Russell (1809-1851) and Mary Anne Crook (died 1851). He received an elementary education to the age of fourteen, and thereafter taught himself. Orphaned at sixteen, he was already so well launched upon a career in journalism that he was soon appointed editor of the 'Islington Gazette'. However, Russell's unwonted enthusiasm for radical politics led to the newspaper being successfully sued for libel and him consequently forfeiting his job. This proved a temporary set-back for, in 1860, at the precociously early age of twenty-six, Russell accepted the invitation of the owner, Michael Whitty, to become assistant editor of the 'Liverpool Daily Post'. He stayed six years, but resigned when refused a limited partnership by Whitty. For the next four years he freelanced in London, and was deputy editor and chief leader writer for Justin McCarthy's 'Morning Star'. The intelligence, shrewdness, and judgement he demonstrated in his political commentaries won glowing tributes from the leaders of the Liberal Party. Early in the 1860s, in an obscure magazine, 'Every Month', Russell became the first to canvass the name of W. E. Gladstone as the future Liberal leader. 
In 1869 Russell returned to Liverpool as editor of the 'Daily Post'. Shortly after Whitty's death in 1873, with A. G. Jeans, Russell became the newspaper's co-proprietor. In 1879 the two men started a complementary evening newspaper, the 'Liverpool Echo'. In 1905 the 'Liverpool Daily Post' merged with the 'Daily Mercury', and continued to flourish throughout the half century that Russell was its editor. A Liberal newspaper in a tory stronghold, the 'Post' owed much of its distinction and popularity to Russell's writing. He was a perspicacious literary and theatre critic. His parliamentary reporting demonstrated an intimate knowledge of Westminster. He explained complex and divisive issues to his readers with a felicity and sureness of touch. His writing, like his public speaking, was informed, fluent, sensible, and convincing rather than brilliant. 
An advanced Liberal, Russell early espoused home rule and profoundly admired Gladstone. Ireland's political future sundered relations between Joseph Chamberlain and Russell. The ambitious politician had assiduously cultivated the editor as an important ally in the provincial press who could explain and help popularize his new policies, a process that culminated with the publication of Chamberlain's so-called 'unauthorized' programme in 1885. Russell nurtured parliamentary ambitions himself. The 'Pall Mall Gazette' (3 July 1885) asserted that it was infinitely more important for Russell to be an editor than an MP. Nevertheless, Russell stood and was elected as Liberal member for the Bridgeton division of Glasgow in November 1885. He was successfully re-elected as a Gladstonian Liberal in July 1886, but took the Chiltern Hundreds the following year, possibly because of pressure of work. He had not been long enough in the house to make a reputation, but his best, most persuasive speeches were on home rule, making plain his disappointment at Chamberlain's 'betrayal'. 
Russell remained an important figure in Liberal politics, and an influential friend to successive Liberal leaders. In local affairs he enjoyed an enormous personal following that breached conventional party political loyalties. Never was this better demonstrated than in 1905 when he was carried upon the shoulders of a cheering throng from St George's Hall where he had won a famous victory at the assizes. He had been charged with criminal libel for asserting that certain tory licensing justices were too friendly to the drink trade. 
Russell took a prominent part in Liverpool's educational and cultural life as president of the city's Literary and Philosophical Society and a life member of the university's court. A great theatre enthusiast, he was a founder of the Liverpool Repertory and remained a director until 1917. 
Russell married twice. His first marriage was on 16 December 1858 to Eliza Sophia, daughter of Stephen Bradley of Bridge, Kent. They had two sons. Eliza died on 22 January 1901. On 30 April 1902 Russell married Jean Stewart ('nee' Macdonald), widow of Joseph M'Farlane. Russell was fearless and uncompromising in public life, but at home in his later years was somewhat cowed by his dour second wife, who died in 1927. 
In 1893 Russell was knighted. Somewhat paradoxically, as a radical Liberal who had long considered the hereditary principle in the House of Lords doomed, he accepted a barony in 1919. Ironically the king twice opposed Russell's elevation as too great a step for a 'mere knight bachelor' and because of his great age. The creation was approved, reluctantly, only because Lloyd George insisted. Russell had eagerly anticipated renewing his parliamentary career, interrupted in 1887, but he died on 20 February 1920 at his home, The Gables, at 5 Croxteth Road, Toxteth Park, Liverpool. He was buried on 23 February at Childwall. 
Born to neither wealth nor privilege, in a long life Russell, by his intelligence and industry, gained both fame and fortune. He was always content to remain in the background 'pulling the strings that made others dance his tune' ('Liverpool Post', 21 Feb 1920). The doyen of provincial newspaper editors, Russell was blessed with 'the sweetest disposition, a generous nature and an even temperament'. To the end of his very long life, an admiring colleague, Sir Henry Lucy, observed, 'like Peter Pan, he never seemed to grow old' (Russell, 65-6). 


@@@@@


doc= 52017


Wingate, William (1808-1899), missionary to the Jews, was born in Glasgow on 7 October 1808, the eldest of the three sons of Andrew Wingate (1778-1860), merchant, and his second wife, Margaret Miller. During his schooling at Glasgow grammar school, and his further education, which included attendance at university classes, he showed academic promise, and at the age of twenty-one he became a partner in his father's business. In 1835 he married his cousin, Jessie Buchanan (died 1838); they had a daughter and a son. The deaths of his wife and infant son brought about an increased earnestness in his personality and, under the influence of Robert Wodrow, an elder of his church who had an interest in the conversion of Jews, he resolved to become a Christian missionary to the Jews. 
In 1841 Wingate travelled to Berlin in order to study German and Hebrew, and it was during his absence that his daughter died. In the following summer he and Robert Smith arrived in Pest to join one of the two Church of Scotland missions recently established in central Europe. At the disruption of the Church of Scotland in 1843, all the missionaries there joined the Free Church of Scotland. Wingate should have returned to Scotland to pursue his studies, but instead he was ordained, in August 1843, by a specially convened presbytery consisting of his colleagues Robert Smith and John Duncan and the Indian missionary John Wilson. With Duncan's return to Scotland imminent, Wingate married his stepdaughter, Margaret Wallace Torrance (1824-1909), on 12 September. They had five daughters and five sons. 
The mission in Pest held services in German and English and ran a school. Wider influence was exercised throughout Hungary by 'colporteurs', converted Jews, who sold bibles and tracts; co-operation was also developed with local reformed churches. The mission received impressive converts, who included Alfred Edersheim and Adolph Saphir, though opposition from most Jews was considerable and the mission was barely tolerated by the authorities. A degree of protection was afforded in the early stages by the assistance of Archduchess Marie Dorothea, at whose instigation the mission had been established. 
The situation in Pest was more encouraging than that facing the embattled mission station at Jassy, in Moldavia, to which Wingate was attached in the winter of 1847-8 and where local hostility and general conditions were very discouraging. Catherine Edward, the missionary's wife, described Wingate as: 'worthy Mr Wingate marching through the mud, his trousers tucked up above his Wellington boots, and clogs over his boots, a huge Hungarian fur cloak on, a Boonda and comforter round his neck, and thus rolled up, coming home with whiskers and even eye-lashes frozen. ('Missionary Life', 129)' A return to Pest in the spring was followed by a withdrawal to London in September as Hungary was engulfed by war. It was possible to return to Pest in 1849, but official tolerance of the missionaries ended in January 1852, when all the Scottish missionaries were summarily expelled. 
Wingate remained fixed in his concern for the conversion of the Jews and after his return to England he wished to continue such a mission in London. However, concern that such an initiative by the Free Church might offend English presbyterians prevented it. Wingate resigned about 1854 and for the rest of his long life exercised his influence without status or salary. A pious man of great persuasive powers, his fascination with the Jews established a family tradition which was passed on to his grandson, Major-General Orde Wingate. After a period in the Isle of Wight, where he withdrew with his wife in an attempt to restore her health, he finally made his home at Bayswater in London. Remaining involved with people and institutions committed to Jewish missions, he published 'The Close of the Times of the Gentiles' in 1872. He died at 100 Talbot Road, Westbourne Park, London, on 24 December 1899, survived by his wife, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 52020


Lambert, Dame Florence Barraclough (1871-1957), physician and public health administrator, was born on 13 August 1871 at Northwick, Harrow, Middlesex, the daughter of Thomas Henry Lambert, a solicitor and a partner in the firm of Lambert Brothers, coal exporters, and his wife, Sarah Ann Harrison. 
Florence Barrie Lambert, as she was known most of her life, was educated in France and then trained between 1895 and 1898 as a nurse at the London Hospital. In 1899 she went to South Africa as a nursing sister with the imperial yeomanry, and served until 1901. After returning to England she studied medicine at the London School of Medicine for Women, where she qualified MB BS (Durham), on 9 October 1906. Her main interest from then onwards was in public health, and in 1907 she obtained a diploma in public health from Cambridge University. 
Lambert was fortunate in being able to devote time to voluntary work, in particular to child welfare. She became honorary director of the Central Council for Infant and Child Welfare, honorary secretary of the Central Council for the Care of Cripples, and an active member of the Invalid Children's Aid Society. This work channelled her interest into physical medicine, and she undertook postgraduate study at the University of Stockholm. As a result of this she was appointed physician in charge of the mechano-therapeutic department of the Charing Cross Hospital, London, and assistant physician in similar departments in London at St Mary's Hospital and the Royal Free Hospital. In 1913 she was elected a member of the State Medical Service Association, the precursor of the Socialist Medical Association. 
Lambert's specialized knowledge of what became known as physiotherapy led to her appointment, in 1915, as inspector of military massage and electrical services, with the honorary rank of major in the Royal Army Medical Corps; she was also a member of the electro-medical committee of the War Office. She held these posts until 1919, when she was appointed a medical officer of the newly formed Ministry of Health. This office involved the inspection of child welfare and orthopaedic work carried out by local authorities throughout the country, which gave her a valuable insight into local government. 
In 1921 Lambert resigned from the Ministry of Health in order to devote her talents to public service in the political field, and in March 1922 she was elected an alderman of the London county council (LCC). Throwing herself wholeheartedly into the work of the council she served on the public health committee from the year of her election, and chaired the committee from 1928. She was still chair in 1930 when, with greatly increased functions, it became the central health committee and subsequently the hospital and medical services committee. These bodies were charged with the enormous task of taking over the seventy-six hospitals (42,000 beds) previously administered by the Metropolitan Asylums Board. Lambert personally visited all these hospitals, and in spite of the economic crises of 1931 and 1933, when the Municipal Reform Party lost its majority at County Hall, she brought about or set in train many necessary changes. 
After 1934 Lambert was 'leader of the opposition' on the hospitals and medical services committee, but both she and her successor, Somerville Hastings (1878-1967), had similar objectives and a keen desire to improve the public health and municipal health services in London, and they worked together in close co-operation. Appointed a CBE in 1920 for her war work, Lambert was made a dame commander in the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire in 1938. When hospitals were nationalized in 1948, she was appointed a member of the South-East Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board, and she chaired the nursing committee. She retained her membership of the LCC health committee and strove to effect a close liaison between the work of the local health authorities and that of the regional hospital boards. 
Lambert, who was also vice-president of the Medical Defence Union, resigned from her office as county alderman in 1952. She died at her home, 1 Langton Ridge, Langton, Speldhurst, Kent, on 11 December 1957. Not having married she left most of her estate to two nieces, Patricia Ainsworth Barnard and Joan Barrie Lambert. According to 'A.D.', writing in 'The Lancet': 'Dame Barrie was indefatigable in her visits to hospitals. She had a tenacious memory and was an excellent debater. She was a firm supporter in time of trouble and tough when she felt she was right. She was no political partisan and was prepared to fight within her own party to get more money for hospitals. She was generally successful. She had vision and insight; these combined with her toughness enabled her to overcome obstacles. Few Londoners realise how much they owe to her for the whole-hearted energy with which she attacked the enormous problem of transforming the poor-law hospitals into a co-ordinated hospital system providing a first-rate service for the public. ('The Lancet', 21 Dec 1957)' 



@@@@@


doc= 52021


King, Dame Ethel Locke (1864-1956), motor-racing promoter and hospital patron, was born on 3 June 1864 at Government House, Hobart, Tasmania, the younger daughter of Colonel Sir Thomas Gore-Browne (1807-1887), governor of Tasmania, and his wife, Harriet Louisa, daughter of James Campbell of Craigie House, Ayrshire. Wilfred Gore-Browne (1856-1928), bishop of Kimberley and Kuruman, and Sir Francis Gore-Browne (1860-1922), an authority on company law, were her brothers. Ethel left Tasmania in 1868 and spent 1870 and 1871 in Bermuda during her father's term as governor of the colony. The family subsequently returned to England. 
On 3 January 1884, at St Mary Abbots, Kensington, at the age of nineteen, Ethel married Hugh Fortescue Locke King (1848-1926). They were married by her uncle, the bishop of Winchester. Her husband was the eldest surviving son of Peter John Locke King (1811-1885), MP. After their wedding Ethel and her husband travelled to Cairo in Egypt where they spent the remainder of the winter. There were no children from the marriage. Wintering abroad became a regular practice, and after Hugh's father died in 1885 the couple acquired the Mena House, once a royal lodge used by the khedive Isma'il, as a home for themselves. The house was near the pyramids and they turned it into a hotel, enlarging and furnishing it with the proceeds from the sale of parts of the Portmore estate which Hugh had inherited. Because of the couple's extravagance the hotel ran at a loss and was eventually sold at some point after 1900. 
Back in England, Ethel Locke King played an important part in her husband's management of his property and in farming his estates in Surrey and elsewhere. She was also involved in his decision in 1906 to build the world's first banked motor-racing course in a 'swampy, rabbit infested corner of Surrey' (Gardner, 14). According to his own account the idea had come to Locke King at Brescia, in northern Italy, after the Coppa Florio motor race meeting in 1905, when he had spoken to some of the owners and drivers of the French, German, and Italian cars which had been competing. In reply to his question about why no English car was entered, he was told that the English had no practice in racing cars at speed. A month later, hearing it suggested that a circular track was needed where the cars could be watched over the whole course, Locke King realized that a suitable site lay on his own land. 
Motor racing on roads was against the law and, in conjunction with the Royal Automobile Club, Hugh and Ethel Locke King founded the British Automobile Racing Club. The cost of the enterprise escalated and Hugh's health suffered under the strain of meeting demands for more and more money to pay for the project. When they were faced with bankruptcy in 1907 the task was largely taken over by Ethel, who was supported by her brother Francis, their long-standing friend Baron de Rodakowski, and other members of the family. It is doubtful if the circuit ever made a profit, but an industrial estate was later developed on adjacent land. 
The Brooklands track was officially opened on 17 June 1907 and a celebratory circuit of the track was headed by Ethel driving her Itala car 'Bambo', which she subsequently raced, notably in the Ladies' Bracelet Handicap of 1908. It was felt that women drivers should not wear smocks like the men, so they sported coloured scarves instead. Ethel was also interested in flying, and Brooklands became one of the pioneering centres for powered flight. On 29 October 1909 she made a flight of ten minutes' duration and reached a height of 200 feet in the Gnome-engined pusher-biplane 'la Gypaete', piloted by the French aviator Louis Paulhan. 
In November 1912 Ethel became vice-president of the north Surrey division of the British Red Cross, and she commenced her war service with that organization on the outbreak of the First World War. A spectacular field day was held by the army, at Brooklands in June 1914, to publicize Voluntary Aid Detachments. The event was organized by Ethel and attended by Queen Alexandra and her sister the empress Maria Feodrovna of Russia. Subsequently, Ethel received a letter of thanks and congratulations from the queen. 
During the course of the First World War, Ethel Locke King established fourteen auxiliary hospitals in the county, some of which were in houses owned by her husband. One of these, Vigo House, was given to Weybridge in 1923 for use as its cottage hospital. Ethel became assistant county director of the British Red Cross for Surrey, and later she was honorary commandant for Surrey (Weybridge). For her war service she was made DBE on 1 January 1918, and she also received the order of St John. 
The War Office took over Brooklands in 1914 and the Royal Flying Corps established its headquarters there. Having started a flying school at Brooklands in 1912, Vickers began building aeroplanes at the site three years later. It was not until 1920 that the motor track reopened. During the following two decades the circuit at Brooklands became renowned, especially for its steeped, banked turn. Motor-racing events at Brooklands became not only great social events, but the circuit also played a key role in British motor-racing history. A number of leading drivers, including Malcolm Campbell, George Eyston, Raymond Mays, Kay Petre, and John Cobb, first came to prominence by winning races at Brooklands. 
Hugh Locke King died in 1926, leaving his entire estate to his widow, who was then sixty-one years old. As well as becoming managing director and chief shareholder of the Brooklands Estate Company, Dame Ethel also ran the motor track and the aerodrome. In 1936 she transferred the undertaking to a new company, Byfleet Estates Ltd; and later that year Brooklands (Weybridge) Ltd was formed to acquire the track and aerodrome. Ethel subsequently moved to a house at Caen's Hill on the right of the 'Shell Way' entrance road. Motor racing finally ceased in 1939, and most of the site was sold off for development purposes after the Second World War. Part of the track survived, however, including the famous banked turn, and a Brooklands Museum was opened there. 
Dame Ethel died at her home, Caen's Hill, Weybridge, Surrey, on 5 August 1956, at the age of ninety-two. In an obituary in 'The Times' the earl of Portsmouth paid tribute to her trenchant wit and courageous nature, adding that 'She had a carriage that had no need of pride yet added inches to her slight, gallant figure' ('The Times', 14 August 1956). 


@@@@@


doc= 52023


Jekyll, Dame Agnes (1861-1937), philanthropist and political hostess, was born on 12 October 1861 in Largs, Ayrshire, the sixth daughter of William Graham (1817-1885), Liberal MP and art collector, and his wife, Jane Catherine (1819/20-1899), daughter of John Loundes of Arthurlie, Renfrewshire. From her parents she acquired many of the attributes she was to perfect later in life, notably the gift of hospitality. Her father was a patron of the Pre-Raphaelite painters and this led to her interest in the arts. She inherited his deep political convictions and Christian faith. From her mother, an accomplished pianist, she inherited a great appreciation of music. She was educated at home by governesses, and stated that she had attended classes at King's College, London; these were probably the early lectures for ladies organized by King's College in Kensington from 1878 onwards. 
On 29 December 1881 Agnes married Sir Herbert Jekyll (1846-1932), a captain (later colonel) in the Royal Engineers; he was a brother of the artist and garden designer Gertrude Jekyll. Marriage brought her new spheres in which to practise her hostessing skills. She always travelled with her husband on his postings, including to Dublin, where he was private secretary to two lords lieutenant (the earl of Carnarvon, 1885-6, and Lord Houghton, 1892-5), Paris, where he was commissioner for the British section of the Paris Exhibition in 1900, and Gibraltar for the War Office. Such was her devotion to her husband that she left her one-year-old first-born with her parents while she accompanied him during his inspections of fortifications in Ceylon and Singapore. Their daughters, Barbara and Pamela, married Bernard Cyril Freyberg, first Baron Freyberg, and Reginald McKenna respectively. 
Agnes Jekyll's husband was assistant secretary at the Board of Trade from 1901 to 1911, and they entertained at their home, Munstead House, Busbridge, Godalming, Surrey. The Asquiths (who knew her as Aggie) were among their guests. During the First World War, as chairman of St John of Jerusalem's warehouse for hospital supplies, Clerkenwell, she worked unstintingly in organizing and maintaining supplies to numerous hospitals and convalescent homes. She prided herself on answering every demand for supplies promptly. She was also one of the first to volunteer to provide an ambulance service when London was subject to air raids. In recognition of her war work she was created DBE on 1 January 1918. 
Agnes Jekyll also brought her considerable organizational skills to the public sphere particularly for the benefit of those of her own sex who were in some sort of trouble. For ten years she was chair of the visiting committee of the Borstal Institution for Girls at Aylesbury and would often serve on juries in order to do her best for girls and women who stood in the dock. In 1925 she was made a magistrate on the Guildford bench and sat regularly on the panel of the children's court. She also served from 1884 to the time of her death as a member of the East End maternity hospital committee. A 'mistress of all domestic lore' ('The Times', 29 Jan 1937, 16), she promoted housekeeping skills. Her 'Kitchen Essays' (1922) brought together a series of articles she had written for 'The Times' through which she initiated many into the secrets of successful domestic management. 
Agnes Jekyll's life of public service was typical of many of the women of her class and generation. While not professionally trained to run public institutions she was able to apply many of the skills and values commonly associated with the private domestic sphere to the problems of society. While she was hailed as an exceptionally able amateur, it was remarked that had she been a man she would have been 'a great public servant' ('The Times', 3 Feb 1937, 16). She outlived her husband by five years, dying in her sleep at Munstead House on 28 January 1937. Her funeral took place at Busbridge church on 1 February 1937. 


@@@@@


doc= 52024


Hall, Sydney Prior (1842-1922), artist, was born at All Saints, Newmarket, Suffolk, on 18 October 1842, the eldest son of Harry (Henry) Hall ('c'.1814-1882), artist, of Newmarket, who painted racehorses and other sporting subjects, and his wife, Ellen Ann Payne. He was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, and at Pembroke College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship and in 1865 gained a first class in 'literae humaniores'. He also attended the Royal Academy Schools in London. 'A gifted draughtsman able to capture natural attitudes and postures with great skill' (Stewart and Cutten, 226), Hall produced a series of 100 'Oxford sketches' (1864-6) illustrating topical events in the life of the university. The caricatures, which circulated in photographic copies, displayed 'a keen sense of the outlook and prejudices' of the primarily undergraduate audience (Brock and Curthoys, xxi). 
Although he was a talented painter in oils and in watercolours, it was as an illustrator that Hall became best-known. With the likes of Luke Fildes and Hubert von Herkomer, he was one of the principal contributors to William Luson Thomas's illustrated weekly 'The Graphic', which became renowned for its pictorial coverage of world events. Hall was special artist of 'The Graphic' during the Franco-Prussian War (1870-71): his drawings of Paris during the German siege and the commune were dispatched to London by balloon post. A selection of his work from France was published in 'Sketches from an Artist's Portfolio' (1875), which was dedicated 'by special permission' to the prince of Wales. 
Hall first met the prince of Wales during a bear-hunt in Russia in February 1874, which he sketched, and after summoning up the courage to approach the prince he was peremptorily cut short: 'Hush! for God's sake; we expect the bear' (Hall, 'Sketches', 30). The prince later invited Hall to join his suite on his voyage to India in 1875-6; many of the resulting Indian sketches are now at Osborne on the Isle of Wight. Hall also accompanied the marquess of Lorne when he went to Canada as governor-general in 1879. He returned in 1881, as special artist of 'The Graphic', accompanying the marquess on a journey to the north-west territories to promote settlement of the country and raise capital for the completion of the Canadian Pacific Railway. 'To the Great North-West with the Marquis of Lorne', illustrated with over 100 drawings, ran in 'The Graphic' from August 1881 to February 1882. 
Hall's domestic arrangements were unconventional: for much of the 1870s he lived out of wedlock with Emma Dinah (1846/7-1894), daughter of John Holland, cellarman, at 39 Birkbeck Road, Islington, London. On 30 September 1873 a son was born, Reginald Holland (Harry) Hall, later assistant keeper of Egyptian and Assyrian antiquities at the British Museum. The couple later married at Islington register office, on 14 January 1877, when they were living at 3 Pyrland Villas, Calverley Grove. With Arthur Hughes, Hall illustrated an edition of 'Tom Brown's School-Days' (1882), and he was the sole illustrator of an edition of the sequel, 'Tom Brown at Oxford' (1886). He also produced a large number of life studies of public figures, many made in parliament and the law courts, and he was 'a penetrating observer' of the notable legal encounters of the day (Hogarth, 66). 'His biggest triumph was a chronicle of over two hundred brilliant off-the-cuff pencil drawings of the Parnell Commission' (1888-9), which appeared as a fifty-page special number of 'The Graphic' (ibid.). 
Among Hall's many pencil drawings in the National Portrait Gallery are studies of Charles Bradlaugh, John Bright, Joseph Chamberlain, Michael Davitt, William Ewart Gladstone, Charles Stewart Parnell, and Oscar Wilde. There are also a number of his oil paintings in the gallery, including 'The Duke and Duchess of Teck Receiving Officers of the Indian Contingent, 1882' (1883), 'The Three Daughters of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra' (1883), and a study of Joseph Chamberlain and Arthur James Balfour ('c'.1895), depicted on the benches of the House of Commons. Hall exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1875: his works included portraits of Indian officers, a portrait of the prince of Wales at Baroda, 'The Marriage of HRH the Duke of Connaught KG', and 'Mr Gladstone Playing his Evening Game of Backgammon'. His sensitive oil study of an Oxford viva voce, 'We Pause for a Reply', was originally given the title 'Dominus illuminatio mea' when exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1895. Hall also exhibited fourteen works at the Grosvenor Gallery. A watercolour of the progress of the 'Education Bill' in the House of Lords was reproduced in 'The Graphic' of 13 December 1902. Hall is pictured in the group portrait 'Primrose Hill School' (1893), by an unknown artist, alongside, among others, Sir Ernest Albert Waterlow and Arthur Hopkins. 
In 1901 Hall was a member of the suite of the duke and duchess of York, and special artist of 'The Graphic', on board HMS 'Ophir'. He was created MVO that year. After the death of his first wife he married second, on 4 August 1906, Mary Lightbody (1851-1929), the daughter of James Gow, painter. The artist Andrew Carrick Gow (1848-1920) was her brother. Mary Gow too was a painter, mostly producing figures and genre in watercolours, and she exhibited widely, principally at Suffolk Street, where she sent eighteen works between 1869 and 1880. She was represented at the Royal Academy from 1873, and her 'Marie-Antoinette' was purchased under the Chantrey bequest in 1908. She was elected a member of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1875. Sydney Prior Hall died at his London home, 36 Grove End Road, St John's Wood, on 15 December 1922. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 52025


William (II) Paynel (d. 1184). William married Eleanor de Vitre, who brought him additional lands in Normandy and Suffolk, and was a benefactor of the abbeys of Hambye and Longues. Some idea of the value of the Paynel honour in England in the 1180s is provided by the exchequer accounts of the royal custodians to whom the lands were granted after the deaths of William and Peter Paynel (died 1184), son and heir of Hugh (I) Paynel of West Rasen, when their under-age heirs were in the king's custody. With regard to William Paynel's lands, at Michaelmas 1186, 1187, and 1188 William Vavassor rendered account of $108 6's'. 11died for the farm of the lands, which appear to have amounted to five and a half knights' fees, owing an additional 20 marks in 1186 for the stock of the manor of Broughton, Lincolnshire. As for Peter's lands in West Rasen, these were stated in 1185 to be worth $42 a year if fully stocked, but at Michaelmas 1185 the sheriff of Lincolnshire paid in $54 12's'. of the issues of Rasen, and in the following three years rendered account of $43 6's'. 8died per year for the farm of Rasen. 
William Paynel's heir appears to have died in infancy and his lands passed to his brother 


@@@@@


doc= 52026


Lyall, Dame Beatrix Margaret (1873-1948), social worker and local politician, was born on 27 October 1873 in Beddington Lane, Beddington, Surrey, the third of eight children of Simpson Rostron, barrister, and his wife, Christina Jane Riley. Educated at home, her parents' Christian faith, as expressed through various political and philanthropic activities, formed her as a 'Christian citizen' (Lyall MS DD/289/3/1). Her father was a churchwarden, magistrate, and the chairman of the local Conservative Party. Her mother ministered to the poor. As a child she readily helped with mothers' meetings and taught at Sunday school. 
On 15 June 1899 Beatrix married a childhood friend, George Henry Hudson Pile (1872-1938), a solicitor. He assumed his mother's name, Lyall, by deed poll in 1914. They settled in Chelsea, London. Desiring to be of public service but considered too young for great responsibilities, she visited workhouse inmates and the penurious lonely and sick. While feeling diffident about public life, her competence and growing faith in her vocation of Christian service led her first to become a local leader of the Mothers' Union and then to establish a reputation as a forceful public speaker, especially on the subject of infant welfare. 
During the First World War, Beatrix Lyall's gift of oratory was used by government departments to raise civilian morale. Her addresses to miners and munitions workers during night breaks were published by the British Women's Patriotic League. She was a member of the War Savings Committee from the end of the war to the committee's dissolution in 1921, and served as the only woman on the London appeal tribunal under the 'Profiteering Act'. Her high public profile after the war led her local Conservative Party to ask her to stand as a candidate for the London county council (LCC). In 1919 she was elected councillor for East Fulham. In 1920 she became a magistrate and was made a CBE. In 1924 she was created DBE. 
When Beatrix Lyall first entered the LCC women had to be content as back-benchers but her political career illustrates how far attitudes to women in public life changed after 1918. She served on several committees, and was chair of the parliamentary committee before being elected the first female vice-chairman of the LCC in 1932. During her years on the council she was 'a hard fighter' ('Fulham Chronicle', 21 May 1948, 6) not only in representing her constituents' interests but also in espousing her own strongly held views. She was a member of the national council for the Conservative and Unionist Association, and of the executive of the Primrose League. 
Running parallel to her political career was Lyall's work for the Mothers' Union both as the diocesan president for London from 1921 to 1936 and as a member of the Mothers' Union's central council. A central vice-president for eleven years, she was granted the honour in 1937 of being made a life vice-president. She was a speaker much in demand because she left the impression 'of a vital personality which had its springs in a sure and certain faith in God' ('Workers' Paper', July 1948, 103). Through numerous newspaper articles and pamphlets she promoted the organization's view of Christian marriage and its condemnation of divorce. She played a constructive role on committees, although her enthusiasm for a cause made her sometimes too impulsive. Her undoubted talents and energy meant that she was twice nominated central president, an honour which she felt she could not accept because of domestic and other work commitments. 
Despite the great sorrow of the deaths of her daughter and husband within a year of each other in the late 1930s, Lyall continued to be 'a tireless social worker' ('The Times', 11 May 1948). During the Second World War she was the head of hospital supplies for south London, and sat on the executive of the National Council of Women. Latterly she lived at the Prince of Wales Hotel, De Vere Gardens, Kensington, London, where she died on 8 May 1948 having suffered a series of heart attacks. The bishop of Kensington officiated at her funeral, following which she was cremated at Golders Green, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 52028


Loughlin, Dame Anne (1894-1979), trade unionist, was born on 28 June 1894 in Leeds, the daughter of Thomas Loughlin, an Irish boot and shoe maker. Her mother died when Anne was twelve, and she subsequently took over the responsibility of looking after her younger brothers and sisters. Four years later, on the death of her father, she began working in a Leeds clothing factory to support the family. She soon became an active trade unionist and by 1915 was a full-time organizer, leading the Hebden Bridge strike of 6000 clothing workers in 1916. In 1920 she became national organizer of what became the National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers, charged with rebuilding the union after the First World War when membership was declining drastically. 
Anne Loughlin's post involved travel throughout the country, and her task was made difficult by falling wages, rising unemployment, and the hostility of the union men to women members. Union tactics were to hold limited strikes in order to establish union rates and conditions, town by town. It was alleged that when Anne Loughlin appeared in any town, employers immediately called a meeting to plan defensive action. They would be faced by all 5 feet of a severely but stylishly dressed woman with fair hair, innocent blue eyes, and a schoolgirl complexion, who would tell them in an incisive way exactly what she intended to do. She had the knack of inspiring loyalty and confidence among women; her explanations were lucid and she spoke their language. She was elected to the TUC general council in 1929 from the organization's women's group, and was one of those who pressed successfully for the establishment of the national women's advisory committee within the TUC. 
During the 1930s Anne Loughlin served on royal commissions and government committees on health and safety, industrial insurance, equal pay, and holidays with pay. She was a member of the Joint Committee of Working Women's Organizations and was also active in the International Labour Organisation and International Federation of Trade Unions. She was appointed OBE in 1935. 
During the Second World War, Anne Loughlin was frequently consulted by the government. Ernest Bevin, while still minister of labour, appointed her to a board advising on the working conditions and social problems encountered by thousands of women who switched from civilian to munitions industries. She was involved in the organization of clothing prices, utility production, austerity restrictions, and the output of 409 million uniforms and other garments for the armed forces. In recognition of her wartime work she was made a dame of the British empire in 1943. 
In 1942, as the longest serving TUC general council member, Anne Loughlin became its chairman and president of the 1943 congress. She was the first woman and first titled person to hold the post. She urged the TUC to plan for a future of social, economic, and industrial change in accordance with its socialist aims. She believed equal pay was the just reward for women's war effort. The post-war concern with exports and the shortage of both cloth and textile workers evoked her scathing criticism of the Dior 'new look' in 1947, with its long, full skirts. 
Dame Anne Loughlin became general secretary of the Garment Workers' Union in 1948, and the first woman to become a trade group member of the TUC general council. Early in 1950 she served on a wages council (formerly trade boards) for her industry and a development council looking at ways to increase efficiency, productivity, and working conditions in the clothing industry. The final report, presented with recommendations in 1952, was scrapped by the Conservative government of the day. 
In 1953 Anne Loughlin retired from her union post on grounds of ill health, probably caused by years of hard work. By then, she was seen as part of the union establishment in contrast to her youthful reputation as a radical firebrand. Nevertheless, her concern throughout her career that women should be treated in the same way as men in the workplace and union, and her service to the clothing industry as a whole, made her fully deserving of the accolade given by the National Union of Tailors and Garment Workers when the Anne Loughlin Room was opened at union headquarters in 1975: 'An International Women's Year tribute to an outstanding pioneer woman, member and leader' ('Appreciation', 1975). Anne Loughlin never married; she died at her home, 147 Trinity Road, Tooting, London, on 14 July 1979. 


@@@@@


doc= 52029


Livingstone, Dame Adelaide Lord (c.1881-1970), peace campaigner, was born in the United States, the daughter of Charles Daniel Stickney of Fall River, Massachusetts, and his wife, Mrs Sutherland Orr. Little is known of her early life but she was educated privately in America and Europe, variously in Italy, Germany, Switzerland, and France. On 14 May 1915, while an American citizen resident in London, she married William Henry Darley Livingstone ('b'. 1876), a landowner of Belclare, Westport, co. Mayo, Ireland, the son of Henry Darley Livingstone; she then acquired British nationality. At the time of their marriage her husband was a lieutenant in the motor machine-gun service. 
During the First World War Adelaide Livingstone worked for the Friends' Emergency Committee, set up in 1914 to counteract the mass hysteria surrounding 'enemy aliens' in England. She also worked for the International Women's Relief Committee from November 1914 to May 1915. While in Brussels she organized repatriation parties, escorting British citizens back to the UK. In May 1915 the British government appointed her a member of the committee on the treatment of British prisoners of war, of which she became honorary secretary later in 1915. She spent some time in Switzerland investigating the system of repatriating British prisoners of war from Germany. In 1917 and 1918 she was sent to Holland with the British delegation to investigate the treatment of prisoners. At the end of the war she was appointed the Army Council head of the War Office mission to trace British soldiers reported as 'missing' in France and Flanders. In this capacity she travelled widely in Europe, managing a staff of officials from both Germany and England. Between 1920 and April 1922 she was assistant director of Graves Registration and Enquiries in central Europe, with headquarters in Berlin and with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. For her wartime services she was among the first women to be created DBE in 1918. 
A prominent pacifist, Livingstone joined the staff of the League of Nations Union (LNU) in 1923 and became head of special activities from 1928 to 1933. In 1934 she was seconded by the LNU to the National Declaration on the League of Nations and Armaments, which organized the national peace ballot. Between November 1934 and June 1935 half a million volunteers were organized to deliver and collect ballot forms in which the public were asked to vote on issues such as international disarmament and collective security. Over 11 million people took part in this voluntary poll, whose results were published in 'The Peace Ballot: an Official History' (1935), written by Livingstone and her colleagues on the National Declaration Committee. They revealed overwhelming support for multilateral disarmament (90 per cent) and British membership of the League of Nations (nearly 96 per cent), but the ballot was soon rendered redundant by the collapse of collective security. 
From 1936 to 1940 Adelaide Livingstone was secretary of the International Peace Campaign and became a leader of the United Nations Association in 1945. She obtained a divorce from her husband in 1924; there were no children of the marriage. She died at her home, 80 Carlisle Mansions, Westminster, London, on 14 September 1970. 


@@@@@


doc= 52031


Talbot, Lavinia (1849-1939), promoter of women's education, was born on 4 January 1849 in London, the seventh of the twelve children of George William Lyttelton, fourth Baron Lyttelton (1817-1876), and his first wife, Mary (1813-1857), daughter of Sir Stephen Glynne, bt, of Hawarden and his wife, Mary. 
Lavinia Lyttelton grew up at Hagley Hall, the family seat in Worcestershire, governess-taught, but more deeply formed by her parents' Anglo-Catholic faith, and the happy family life that was threatened, but not broken, by her mother's death when she was eight. In 1864, aged fifteen, she succeeded her elder sisters in taking charge of the household at Hagley for her father, younger sister, and eight brothers. Lord Lyttelton remarried five years later; and in 1870, aged twenty-one, Lavinia married Edward Stuart Talbot (1844-1934), a friend from childhood, who had just been appointed warden of the new Keble College, Oxford. 
Lavinia Talbot plunged into a challenging married life. Edward's role as head of a college built in memory of John Keble made him at once a standard-bearer for the Anglo-Catholic wing of the church; the new college's religious bias was one reason why the old university snubbed it at every turn (though W. E. Gladstone frequently visited his niece by marriage in the warden's lodgings). But Edward went to war with a light heart, as he wrote later, and so did Lavinia. She identified thoroughly with his views and made the best of their cramped quarters, while her good looks, gaiety, and sympathetic interest softened the rawness of the place. She herself revelled in Oxford's beauty and took advantage of the ladies' lectures organized by a small committee on which she served with Louise Creighton, Mrs Humphry Ward, and other young dons' wives. (The university played no part.) Conscious of the defects of her own education, she took great pleasure in these lectures given by eminent Oxford men, and in writing such essays for their appraisal as 'The state of the papacy before Gregory VIII'. 
Over the next years Lavinia and Edward were prominent among Oxford progressives who took the women's education question further. In 1878 an Association for the Promotion of the Education of Women was formed, to organize lectures for girls preparing for the Oxford local examinations. The Talbots saw a chance for the church to lead in providing a hall of residence for them, but other reformers were opposed to an overweening Anglican influence. Eventually the progressives split, the non-sectarian element laying down the non-denominational roots of Somerville, while the Talbot party launched Lady Margaret Hall. Edward took charge of its main committee, appointing a suitably high-church principal, while Lavinia worked on subcommittees to find and furnish a useful house and advise on domestic matters from gifts of furniture to servants' wages. 
Both Edward and Lavinia served for many years on the council of Lady Margaret Hall, but they left Oxford in 1888 when Edward was appointed vicar of Leeds. In 1895 they moved to south London on his appointment as bishop of Rochester; in 1911 his translation to Winchester established them grandly in Farnham Castle. In all these places Lavinia displayed the poise and competence she had shown as the fifteen-year-old 'housewife' at Hagley and the bride who, after a five-year courtship, had accepted the role of 'Mother Keble'. 'What cannot be endured 'must' be cured' (apparently one of her favourite sayings) seems appropriate to Edward's work; and it was certainly with her backing that in 1913 he invited the Anglican feminist Maude Royden to address a male audience at the church congress on the subject of the white slave traffic. The initiative was characteristic. In the episcopate as at Keble he was one of those leading men who carried Anglo-Catholicism forward to develop a social gospel from its strong liturgical base. 
The Talbots had three sons (including Edward Keble Talbot and Neville Stuart Talbot) and two daughters, but their youngest son was killed in the First World War. In 1932 Edward consecrated the rising chapel at Lady Margaret Hall. He died in January 1934. Lavinia survived him, still good-looking but by then suffering from profound deafness. She died at The Blenheim, Wantage, Berkshire, on 10 October 1939, and was buried in Winchester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 52032


Gwyer, Barbara Elizabeth (1881-1974), college head, was born at 11 Dorchester Place, Marylebone, London, on 1 January 1881, the only daughter of John Edward Gwyer, secretary to the Provident Clerks' Life Assurance Association, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Linford. Sir Maurice Linford Gwyer, the lawyer and civil servant, was her brother. She was educated at the Grove School, Highgate, Middlesex. From 1900 to 1904 she was a scholar at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, where she gained seconds in classical moderations (1902) and in 'literae humaniores' (1904). She later graduated BA and MA in 1920, when Oxford degrees were finally opened to women. After completing her studies she spent two years doing secretarial work, after which, from 1906, she was educational organizer for the West Riding county council educational department. 
In her two subsequent positions Barbara Gwyer was responsible for women students in their university accommodation, overseeing their pastoral care and physical needs, and ensuring that their place of residence was comfortable and appropriate to the 'mores' of the period. Between 1910 and 1916 she was vice-warden of Ashburne Hall, University of Manchester, which had opened in 1900. In 1917 she was appointed warden of University Hall, Leeds, where she worked until 1924. The position of warden was an attractive one for a woman of Barbara Gwyer's level of education: 'After 1900, many of the new generation of university-educated women saw the wardenship of university hostels and halls of residence as a valuable career opening, offering scope for their talents, qualifications and experience. (Dyhouse, 108)' Barbara Gwyer's appointment as principal of St Hugh's College, Oxford (founded in 1886), came at the end of a stormy period for the college following the notorious 'row' between Eleanor Jourdain, principal of the college (1915-24), and a group of women tutors. In the wake of an inquiry by the university chancellor in 1924 which found for the St Hugh's tutors, Miss Jourdain died suddenly of a heart attack, leaving a college in turmoil and in need of sound guidance and leadership. 'At this moment Barbara Gwyer took over and to her the college undoubtedly owes its subsequent recovery' (Thornton, 10). Her 'quiet and healing influence which would allow confidence and trust to grow again' ('The Times', 19 Feb 1974) was universally praised. Dedicated and devout, she led the college with firm direction. Women had only recently been admitted to full membership of the university and she was aware of the need for tact. Her long tenure as principal -- twenty-two years -- helped to lay a firm foundation for the successful future of women's higher education in Oxford. She held the college together during the Second World War, a challenging task in that it was then housed in seven separate sites. In wartime she also represented Oxford University on the southern region tribunal for conscientious objectors. 
Barbara Gwyer's capable leadership was appreciated by Elizabeth Wordsworth, founder of St Hugh's and herself a former principal of Lady Margaret Hall. An existing friendship between the two women was deepened during the early years of Barbara Gwyer's principalship, and Miss Wordsworth welcomed the strengthening of a connection with St Hugh's which had been strained under Miss Gwyer's predecessors. Barbara Gwyer eschewed glamour and sophistication, preferring simplicity and dignity. Known to her students as 'the Gwyer', 'she had a magnificent Episcopal presence' (Pitt) and a strong individuality and determination which refused to be swayed by the opinions of others. Her Christian beliefs were deeply held and she described a college as being 'called into being by God... a society in which each member exists in unescapable ['sic'] responsibility to his fellows' (Gwyer, 'Elizabeth Wordsworth', 95). She was also imbued with a unique sense of humour which was appreciated by her students. 
Upon her retirement in 1946 Barbara Gwyer was made an honorary fellow of St Hugh's College. Looking back on her career, she described herself as 'the last of the amateur Principals' (Gwyer, 'Report of gaudy', 11). During a lengthy retirement, living in Stokenchurch, Buckinghamshire, she was, variously, a member of Buckinghamshire education committee, chairman of council, St Margaret's House Settlement, Bethnal Green, east London, and a founder of the Institute of Christian Education. Barbara Castle commented in her diary on her return to St Hugh's as an honorary fellow for a dinner in February 1970: 'there was the Gwyer, a frail, gentle figure in a wheelchair -- aeons away from the ogre I had known when she was principal' ('Diaries 1964-70', 766). She died at her home, New Patch, New Road, Stokenchurch, on 16 February 1974. 


@@@@@


doc= 52033


Phipps, Dame Jessie Percy Butler Wilton (1855-1934), educational administrator, was born on 9 February 1855 at 1 Fifth Avenue, New York, USA, the eldest child of William Butler Duncan and his wife, Jane Sargent. Her early years were spent in America where, on 9 November 1876, she married William Wilton Phipps (1847-1911), a company director of London and New York, second son of Charles Paul Phipps (1815-1880) of Chalcot and Dilton Court, Wiltshire, MP for Westbury from 1869 to 1874, and his wife, Emma Mary, daughter of Moses Benson of Liverpool. In 1880 William and Jessie Wilton Phipps moved to England, and in 1881 set up home at 3 Culford Gardens, Chelsea, with their family of two sons and two daughters. Jessie Phipps was regarded as both beautiful and charming, and a portrait of her as a young woman by John Singer Sargent, to whom she was related through her mother, was exhibited by him at Burlington House in January 1926. 
A friendship with Maude Lawrence led to Jessie Phipps becoming manager of a group of public elementary schools in Chelsea and also of 'special schools' under the London school board. In 1907 she was co-opted on the education committee of the London county council (LCC). In 1909 she became the first woman to chair a subcommittee -- the special schools subcommittee. After her husband's death in 1911 she was elected, as a tory, an alderman of London (13 March 1913). In 1920 she was appointed a justice of the peace for the City. On 16 March 1920 she was unanimously elected vice-chair of the LCC, the first woman to hold the office. On retirement from the office in 1921 she became an additional member of the public health committee. On 14 March 1923 she was elected the first female chair of the education committee, a position she held until 1926. She was also chair of several important subcommittees and represented the LCC on various external bodies. An excellent chair and able administrator, her good sense and sound judgement made for happy relations with both colleagues and opponents on the council. She was appointed DBE on 5 June 1926. From 1926 to 1931 she was chair of the Central Council for the London Blind. 
From her first arrival in London Jessie Phipps was a well-known society hostess. She was said to possess a simplicity and straightforwardness of character. Accustomed to do the thing before her as soon as she understood it, she made up her mind quickly, and was impatient of long discussions. Work for the LCC absorbed much of her natural energy; the failure of her eyesight in 1931 eventually compelled her to give up her public activities. 
Dame Jessie Phipps died from heart failure on 7 August 1934 at her cottage, the Two Gables, on Chorleywood Common, Hertfordshire. The flower garden which she made at Chorleywood was her main interest outside her public life. She was buried on 9 August at Chorleywood; the mourners included the chairman of the LCC education committee and the clerk to the council. She was survived by her sons, Paul Phipps (1880-1953), an architect, and William Duncan Phipps (1882-1967), captain RN and gentleman usher to George VI and Elizabeth II from 1937 to 1964, and by her eldest daughter Margaret Percy Phipps (died 1944), who had in 1906 married Sir Edmund Bampfylde Phipps, a civil servant in the Board of Education. Margaret Phipps was mayor of Chelsea from 1929 to 1931. Jessie Phipps's younger daughter, Rachel Mary Hele, who married in 1912 the diplomat Miles Wedderburn Lampson, first Baron Killearn, predeceased her in 1930. 


@@@@@


doc= 52035


Paget, Dame (Louise Margaret) Leila Wemyss (1881-1958), hospital administrator, was born at 3 Halkin Street West, Belgravia, London on 9 October 1881, the only daughter and second of four children of Sir Arthur Henry Fitzroy Paget (1851-1928), army officer, and his wife, Mary Fiske (Minnie) Stevens (died 1919). Her father, a grandson of the first marquess of Anglesey, rose to be general-officer-commanding the forces in Ireland (1911-17); as such, he sparked the Curragh 'mutiny' of 1914. Her American mother cut a figure in London society. They were friends of King Edward VII. 
Educated by governesses, Leila became a debutante, yet an air of diffidence seemed to preclude her absorption into the smart set. On 28 October 1907 she wed her third cousin once removed, Ralph Spencer Paget (1864-1940), a diplomat who was then British minister in Bangkok. His KCMG in 1909 made her Lady Paget. She delighted in Siam, found Bavaria dull (1909-10), and encouraged her husband to accept a transfer to Serbia in July 1910. 
Befriended by Mabel Grujic, American wife of the Serbian under-secretary for foreign affairs, Lady Paget volunteered to assist in the management of a military hospital in Belgrade during the First Balkan War (October 1912-May 1913). This experience had a profound effect on her; she worked so hard that her health gave way (temporarily) when the crisis was over. The Pagets returned to London, where Sir Ralph became an assistant under-secretary for foreign affairs in August 1913. Artists and musicians were often invited to their home at 32 York Terrace, Regent's Park. 
The outbreak of the First World War found Lady Paget on holiday in California, but she hastily came back and immersed herself in the lord mayor's Serbian Relief Fund (SRF), which took premises in Cromwell Road, South Kensington, and purchased equipment for a war hospital. On 29 October 1914, the first SRF unit (of four doctors and sixteen nurses) sailed from Southampton, with Leila Paget in charge. They were making for northern Serbia, near the front line, but, on reaching Skoplje (modern Skopje, then still known to some by its Turkish name of Uskub) on 17 November, the SRF was invited by the Serbian Red Cross to take over the third reserve hospital in the town (a converted secondary school with 330 beds). When the first 180 casualties arrived on 22 November, nurses perceived that Serbian standards of care resembled those found by Florence Nightingale in Turkey six decades before. Lady Paget as 'head SRF Skoplje' displayed dedication and leadership of a similar order. A slender, elegant young woman, she took on the most unpleasant tasks and never asked anyone to do what she would not do herself. Dysentery, sepsis, and gangrene were rife; the water supply proved unreliable; half the staff were usually off sick. Nevertheless the SRF hospital looked after not only Serbian wounded but also Austro-Hungarian prisoners. 
In February 1915 a typhus epidemic hit Skoplje. As the Serbian authorities did not seem to realize its seriousness Lady Paget took the initiative in setting up an isolation hospital outside the town. She contracted typhus herself on 8 March and appeared near to death when Ralph Paget arrived as chief commissioner of British relief units in Serbia (which included the Red Cross and Scottish Women's Hospitals as well as the SRF). She recovered, however, and the advent of a second SRF unit at Skoplje allowed her to go to England in May 1915 for recuperation. Hailed as a heroine, she received the grand cordon of the order of St Sava from King Peter I of Serbia and a street in Belgrade was named Ledi Pazet ulica. 
When Lady Paget resumed her duties in Macedonia in July 1915 the Balkan front was quiet, but all that changed when Austria-Hungary relaunched its invasion of Serbia in October and Bulgaria joined the central powers. Skoplje lay open to Bulgarian attack and Lady Paget appealed in vain for Anglo-French intervention. Instructed by her husband to evacuate the town, she judged the transport to be hopelessly inadequate for hundreds of gravely wounded men, so the SRF units decided to remain with their patients and be taken prisoner. The Bulgarians captured Skoplje on 22 October. Having nursed Bulgarians in the First Balkan War (and been received by Queen Eleanore of Bulgaria), Lady Paget seemed unafraid. Though shortages of food and fuel caused severe privation, she managed to keep the hospital open and to administer relief to thousands of refugees, while evading Bulgarian attempts to pressurize her into attesting to alleged Serbian atrocities. Her determination to supply humanitarian aid to all in need, wholly regardless of nationality, impressed the Bulgarians so much that they helped her ward off German plans to commandeer the hospital and intern the British staff, who did not leave until 17 February 1916, by which time Serbia had been overrun. The International Red Cross arranged their repatriation via Sofia, Bucharest, and Petrograd. 
Lady Paget reached England on 3 April 1916. Despite disapproval in 'jingo' circles of her co-operation with the Bulgarians, the king appointed her GBE in August 1917. Dame Leila Paget resided in Copenhagen (1916-18) and Rio de Janeiro (1919-20) during her husband's final postings. The couple, who had no children, then retired to Sittingbourne, Kent, before moving in 1929 to Warren House, her late father's mansion at Kingston Hill, Surrey. She had it turned into a convalescent home during the Second World War. She died at her final home, Soames House, Coombe Hill Road, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey, on 24 September 1958. 


@@@@@


doc= 52037


Oliver, Dame Beryl Carnegy (1882-1972), charity worker and administrator, was born Beryl Carnegy Joseph on 20 August 1882 in Australia. She was the only daughter of Francis Edward Joseph, gentleman, who later adopted the surname of his wife, Isabella Eliza Butter Carnegy ('b'. 1862), the daughter of Patrick Carnegy of Lour, Angus (Forfarshire), Scotland, after she succeeded to her father's estates in 1915. Very little is known about Beryl's early life, except that she was educated privately in England and France, as befitted a young lady in society. What is certain is that she embarked upon her lifetime of voluntary service in 1910, when, aged twenty-seven, she joined the St John Ambulance Brigade. By then the brigade was operating under the auspices of the Volunteer Aid Detachment (VAD) training scheme, established in 1909 soon after the passing of the 'Territorial and Reserve Forces Act' of 1907, and combined the resources of the order of St John of Jerusalem and the British Red Cross Society (BRCS). 
Bespectacled and small in stature, with organizational and training skills of particular note, Beryl quickly earned a reputation as a dedicated and hard-working volunteer. On 10 June 1914, in London, she married Sir Henry Francis Oliver (1865-1965), then a rear-admiral in the Royal Navy and later admiral of the fleet, the son of Robert Oliver, a landed proprietor of Lochside, Kelso. Her marriage barely interrupted her career: the couple had no children, and while her husband's naval duties regularly took him abroad, Beryl remained in London, devoting herself to her voluntary work. The outbreak of the First World War created a huge demand for trained volunteers to supplement nursing staff, and she was given responsibility for the military section of the joint VADs, organizing work in hospitals. In 1916 her contribution to the war effort was acknowledged when she was awarded the Royal Red Cross, first class -- the decoration instituted by Queen Victoria in 1883, in recognition of special services rendered in nursing the sick and wounded of the army and navy -- and St John's honoured her by making her a lady of justice. Further honours followed: she was created CBE in 1919 and DBE in March 1920. 
After the First World War, Dame Beryl continued working at VAD headquarters, but soon became embroiled in the debate concerning the proposed disbandment of the VADs. Her vehement opposition to this plan brought her into direct conflict with a number of her St John's colleagues on the War Office committee, and in 1922, when the War Office confirmed its decision to form a new scheme, she expressed her displeasure by resigning from St John's. Her subsequent affiliation to the BRCS was in some respects a defiant action, but, as she admitted, her work as head of the VAD department with responsibility for the promotion and training of detachments nationwide remained much the same; only the uniform changed. 
In 1938 Dame Beryl assisted with the planning and implementation of the International Red Cross Conference in London, and the following year, with the outbreak of the Second World War, she was once again able to demonstrate her organizational and supervisory skills. As a member of the war organization executive committee she was responsible for meeting the huge demand for Red Cross personnel overseas. Her membership of the selection committee also involved her in the first posting of service hospital welfare officers to north Africa and the Middle East in 1943. In recognition of her wartime service, in 1945 she received, among other awards, the silver medal of the French Red Cross and the voluntary medical service medal. In 1948 she was invested with the insignia of dame grand cross in the Order of the British Empire (civil division). 
After the war Dame Beryl took up the post of director of education to the Red Cross, and on her retirement in 1956 was appointed the society's archivist. Her comprehensive history of the BRCS from its inception, 'The British Red Cross in Action', was published in 1966, a year after the death of her husband. The BRCS considered the completion of this book to be a fitting moment to honour her with its highest award, the certificate of honour, class 1. Her other work, 'The Church of Saint Mary the Virgin, Aldermanbury', was published in 1969. Dame Beryl died at her home, 20 South Eaton Place, Westminster, London, on 13 July 1972. In her will she asked for a requiem mass to be held in her memory at the Anglican church of St Mary, Bourne Street, London, and for her ashes to be interred on the Hill of Lour, Angus. 


@@@@@


doc= 52041


Marsham, Dame (Muriel) Joan (1888-1972), philanthropist, was born at 19 Montague Street, Marylebone, London, on 4 January 1888, the daughter of William Taylor Warry (1836-1906), barrister and banker, and his wife, Elisa Jane, 'nee' Gosling. Little is known of her early life before her marriage on 2 February 1911 to Sydney Edward Marsham (1879-1952), a stockbroker, the youngest son of Charles Marsham, fourth earl of Romney. They had one son. 
Joan Marsham was a committed Anglican, and the primary arena for her life of public Christian service was the national women's auxiliary of the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA). The YMCA's desperate need for volunteers for war work during the First World War led it to turn to women to undertake the work formerly done only by men. Marsham founded with Princess Helena Victoria the women's auxiliary, which formally came into existence in 1918. Marsham's war work resulted in her being made an OBE but it was during the succeeding decades that she clearly became 'the driving force and inspiration' (private information) of the auxiliary. In 1931 she was elected its chairperson, a position she did not relinquish until her death in 1972. 
During the Second World War, Joan Marsham was responsible for the half-million women throughout the world working for the YMCA by providing canteens in army camps, air stations, and devastated areas. As R. E. Roberts, the general secretary of the national council of the YMCA, said at her funeral, 'her chairmanship was no sinecure for she was personally responsible for the recruitment of hundreds of women who served through the YMCA in every military zone overseas' (private information). She continued in this work after the war as the women's auxiliary staffed canteens for the armed forces throughout the world, most notably during the Berlin airlift. 
Marsham's energy and management skills were also deployed in the Girl Guide Association. After serving as the chairperson of its executive committee for ten years from 1938 she continued to apply her financial and organizational acumen to the association. She was one of the founders, in 1948, of the Girl Guide Club in Belgrave Square, and was involved in its administration until her death. She also chaired the Personal Service League and the British War Relief Committee of America. In 1945 she was created DBE. 
As Roberts observed, Marsham's public life was her way of living out St Paul's injunction 'that ye present your bodies as a living sacrifice, wholly acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service' ('Romans' 12: 1). Her devotion to her work arose out of her sensitivity to the suffering and needs of others which in turn was the fruit of her deep commitment to her Christian faith. While seen by her work colleagues as a formidable or forceful character, she was also noted for her personal charm and her kindly humour. She died at the Westminster Hospital, London, on 13 March 1972 after collapsing at the Girl Guide Club, which in her last few years she had made her home. Her life of service was celebrated at her funeral at St Michael and All Angels, Sunninghill, Berkshire, eight days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 52043


Simpson, Dame Florence Edith Victoria (1874-1956), controller of Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps, was born on 9 October 1874, possibly in London, the daughter of Colonel Wilfred Fitzalan Way. Virtually nothing is known about her early years except that her first husband was Captain Henry Edmond Burleigh Leach; they were later divorced. In her role as a military wife she felt compelled to assist the war effort and in 1915 became a prominent member of the Women's Legion. At this time senior military personnel were experiencing a severe shortage of cooks. The inability to ensure that British troops were adequately nourished presented a potential problem for Britain's fighting performance in battle. Lady Londonderry, as president of the Women's Legion, stepped into the breach and offered to provide additional cooks for military service. The first party of Women's Legion military cooks arrived at a convalescent base on 3 August 1915. As a member of this initial party Florence Leach readily accepted responsibility for the staffing of army cookhouses. Such was her organizational ability that she became commandant of the cookery section of the Women's Legion between 1915 and 1917. Furthermore, on the formation of the Women's Army Auxiliary Corps in 1917 she became controller of inspection for this organization and in 1918 was promoted to controller-in-chief. By this time the corps had received royal patronage and was given the new title of Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps. The corps contained approximately 57,000 women. 
In recognition of her services Florence was appointed CBE in 1918 and DBE in the new year honours list of 1919. In the aftermath of the First World War senior members of Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps lobbied War Office officials in an attempt to establish a permanent women's service within the British armed forces in peacetime. However, the war cabinet adhered to the 'ten year rule'. This maintained that a future conflict was unlikely to occur for at least a decade, the women's services (with the exception of the military nursing services) consequently being disbanded. 
On her retirement from military service in 1920 Florence assisted in the formation of the Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps Old Comrades Association. On 12 January 1922 she married a widower, Edward Percy Simpson (1865-1925), company director, the son of James Simpson, a civil engineer. Florence, as president of the Old Comrades Association, continued her work with the Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps. Following the Second World War this organization of old comrades was renamed the Women's Royal Army Corps Association. 
By this stage the War Office had decided to retain a permanent women's service, primarily because of a severe shortage of manpower within the armed forces overall. Florence continued to demonstrate an interest in the lives and welfare of servicewomen, particularly those with whom she had served during the First World War. Described by her good friend Dame Helen Gwynne-Vaughan (the first director of the WRAF) as beautiful, elegant, and charming, Florence was also renowned for her organizational qualities and independence of spirit. In later life she lived with her stepdaughters on Moyeni Farm, Orange Free State, South Africa. On becoming ill, however, Florence decided to spend her final months at Arlesheim, Switzerland, in a private clinic, the Klinisch-Therapeutisches Institut. She died there on 5 September 1956. 
As one of the first military dame commanders Florence Simpson nurtured the spirit of comradeship among those women who had served their country. More significantly, her involvement with the Queen Mary's Army Auxiliary Corps provided a concrete foundation for the countless future generations of women who chose to follow her path. 


@@@@@


doc= 52044


Shakespear, Dame Ethel Mary Reader (1871-1946), public servant and geologist, was born on 17 July 1871 at Biddenham, near Bedford, the daughter of the Revd Henry Wood ('c'.1829-1912). After attending Bedford high school, she entered Newnham College, Cambridge, in 1891 and took the natural sciences tripos (second class, part one, 1894; first class, part two, geology, 1895). Among the most prominent and noteworthy of the early Newnham students, she was a tennis champion, an active Liberal member of the Political Club, and a star pianist at college concerts. 
In 1896 Wood went to Mason College, Birmingham, as assistant to Charles Lapworth (1842-1920), and shortly thereafter began the collaborative work for which she is best known, the preparation, with her Newnham friend and fellow geologist Gertrude Elles, of the monumental monograph 'British Graptolites' (1901-18). Brought out under Lapworth's general editorship, it presented detailed and reliable descriptions of the members of this huge fossil group, critical in zonal demarcation, division, and correlation in Lower Palaeozoic rocks. It was perhaps the single most notable early contribution by women to British stratigraphic geology, and long remained the basis of research in the area. Elles wrote the text and Wood prepared the illustrations, which were particularly outstanding. She published a number of independent papers as well, those on the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of the Welsh borderlands (1900, 1906) being especially notable. A fellow of the Geological Society from 1919, she received the Murchison medal in 1920 for her contributions to the monograph. 
Shortly after taking her DSc at Birmingham (1906) Wood married physics lecturer Gilbert Arden Shakespear. Their only child, a daughter, died in infancy. Throughout the First World War she worked extensively to secure reasonable care and retraining for disabled soldiers, serving on pensions committees and civic associations; for nine years (1917-26) she sat on the special grants committee of the Ministry of Pensions. This public service was recognized with an MBE in 1918 and a DBE in 1920. A justice of the peace for Birmingham from 1922, she was much respected for her work on the bench. Care of children and working-class girls was her major concern. Along with Dame Elizabeth Mary Cadbury, she was closely involved in an early and very successful city of Birmingham plan for the boarding of children with foster parents; she herself was an official family visitor. Over the years she also helped poor women and girls, inviting many into her home for periods of rest. She was president of the Birmingham branch of the National Council of Women (1929-32) and for a time of the Birmingham and midland branch of the Federation of University Women. She died of cancer on 17 January 1946, at her home, Caldwell Hall, Upton Warren, Worcestershire, survived by her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 52047


Watt, Dame Katherine Christie (1886-1963), nurse and civil servant, was born at 40 Victoria Road, Govanhill, Glasgow, on 31 August 1886, the second daughter of James Christie Watt, a master butcher, and his wife, Margaret Leper Semple. Little is known of her life until she began to train as a nurse at the Western Infirmary, Glasgow, at the relatively late age of twenty-four. Having undertaken her general nurse training in Glasgow (1911-16), she took her midwifery training at the Middlesex Hospital, London. During the latter training she joined the Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service reserve and spent some time working in a field hospital in Flanders during the First World War. She joined the Princess Mary's Royal Air Force Nursing Service (PMRAFNS) in 1919 and remained in that service until 1938. While there she had various postings in Britain and abroad, and in 1930 she was appointed to the Air Ministry as matron-in-chief. That post, which she held until 1938, brought her into contact with the civil service, beginning an association that she maintained for the rest of her working life. 
In 1939 Katherine Watt was seconded to the Ministry of Health as principal matron of the civil nursing reserve. Initially she had two specific responsibilities: to advise on the nursing services that would be required to support the evacuation of mothers and children from the major cities, and to set up the civil nursing reserve for the emergency hospital service. Having fulfilled these two responsibilities, in 1941, when the problems of identifying an adequate supply of people with nursing qualifications and experience reached extreme proportions, the minister of health appointed her chief nursing officer of the newly created division to advise on nursing matters. She was then actively involved in discussions on the plans for the National Health Service (NHS), specifically in setting up inquiries that attempted to establish the size and composition of the workforce that would be required. She was also a key source of advice to the ministry as it attempted to resolve some of the problems associated with the recruitment and training of nurses, and of assistant nurses in particular. In addition she was the first nurse appointed to represent the minister of health on the General Nursing Council for England and Wales. 
Watt held the post of chief nursing officer until 1948. She then held the title of chief nursing adviser for another two years and travelled to India, Australia, and New Zealand as the government's representative, advising these Commonwealth countries on Britain's new NHS and on the position of nursing within the service. After retiring in 1950, she continued to travel widely as an adviser on nursing services. She was a governor of St George's Hospital, London, and a member of the grants committee of the RAF Benevolent Fund and of the Nations Fund for Nurses. She was also involved with a number of voluntary organizations, the St John Ambulance Brigade, the British Red Cross, and the Women's Voluntary Service. She received a number of honours for her nursing work: she was awarded the Royal Red Cross in 1930, was appointed CBE in 1935, was created a dame of the British empire in 1945, and was awarded the Florence Nightingale medal of the International Red Cross in 1949. 
Katherine Watt was the first nurse to be appointed to a permanent post within the British civil service to advise on nursing matters. In the post of chief nursing officer she had a unique opportunity to contribute a nursing perspective to policy debates on the health-care services in time of war and to plans for the new services of the NHS, both of which were dependent on a trained nursing service. Although the major part of her career was with the PMRAFNS, it is the records of the Ministry of Health that provide the most helpful insights into the person of Katherine Watt. The records of the Cabinet Office pre-war discussions on the organization of nursing services suggest that, as the senior matron for the armed services, she may have been intimidated by the position in which she found herself; that hesitancy was not a feature of her career in the Ministry of Health. A small, quiet, but quite determined woman, Katherine Watt never married. She died in St George's Hospital, London, on 1 November 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 52050


Wilkinson, Dame Louisa Jane (1889-1968), military nurse, was born Louisa Jane Lumsden on 11 December 1889 at 5 Peel Street, Sunderland. She was the daughter of James Lumsden, merchant seaman, and his wife, Louisa, 'nee' Benskin; she had at least one brother, Robert, but little else is known about her family or her early life. She was educated at Bede Collegiate School, Sunderland, and Thornbeck Collegiate School, Darlington, and she embarked upon her nursing career in 1911, aged twenty-two. 
Louisa had just completed her training at the Royal Infirmary, Sunderland, when the First World War was declared, and she immediately joined Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service (QAIMNS) as a reservist. Established by royal warrant in March 1902 under the patronage of Queen Alexandra, the QAIMNS combined the forces of army nurses and those of the Princess Christian's Army Nursing Service Reserve, and was responsible for the nursing of sick and wounded soldiers at home and abroad. Louisa's postings at military hospitals in the United Kingdom were followed by a tour of duty on Malta, but by late 1917 she had returned to Britain. On 20 December 1917 she married Robert John Wilkinson (1884-1918), an acting captain with Queen Victoria's first Royal Irish Fusiliers. The marriage, which took place at Fulham register office, was tragically short, for her husband was killed on active service on 2 June 1918. 
After the war, childless and widowed, Wilkinson joined the QAIMNS as a regular. She rose quickly through the ranks from staff nurse to sister, serving first in the United Kingdom and then, after 1926, as one of the pioneer nurses posted to India. Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War she returned to London as principal matron at the War Office, and for two years was involved in setting the army nursing services on a wartime footing. In 1942 she returned to India to take up what proved to be her most challenging post, that of chief principal matron. Her remit was to organize all the Indian military nursing services and auxiliary nursing centres -- a daunting task given the severe shortage of trained nurses in the country. In typical fashion, and with her usual efficiency, Wilkinson founded a nurses' training scheme for Indian women, and succeeded in making India one of the largest nursing commands in the world. She was also responsible for establishing the postgraduate school of nursing administration in the country, which ensured that the improved standards of training in Indian military hospitals was maintained. On her return to the United Kingdom in May 1944 she was appointed matron-in-chief of the QAIMNS at the War Office, a position she held with great dignity until her retirement in October 1948. 
Throughout her lifetime Wilkinson's vivid personality earned her the respect of her many friends and admirers. She was renowned for being cheerful and warm-hearted, practical as well as courageous. Her contribution to nursing services earned her a number of decorations. In 1919 she was awarded the British Empire Medal and the Royal Red Cross, second class; in 1941 she was awarded the Royal Red Cross, first class, in recognition of special services rendered in nursing the sick and wounded of the army and navy, and as a result of her exceptional work in India she was appointed OBE in 1943. After being appointed CBE in 1946 she was then made dame commander in the military division of the Order of the British Empire in 1948. 
In retirement Dame Louisa was elected president of the Royal College of Nursing in 1948, a unique honour for a service matron, and significant in that it maintained the link between military and civil nursing. In 1949 she was also deeply involved in the establishment of Queen Alexandra's Royal Army Nursing Corps (QARANC), which brought together the QAIMNS and the Territorial Army Nursing Service (the TANS, which dated from 1907), and she served as first controller commandant QARANC until 1954. The foundation and early running of the QARANC Association, in which Queen Mary took such an interest, was also the result of Dame Louisa's devotion and hard work. 
On 4 December 1968 Dame Louisa Wilkinson suffered a coronary thrombosis, and was pronounced dead on arrival at the War Memorial Hospital, Crowborough, Sussex. Her funeral took place at All Saints' Church, Crowborough, nine days later, and her remains were interred in the town's garden of remembrance, in Herne Road. A fitting tribute was made at the thanksgiving service held in her honour at Millbank, London, on 15 January 1969: 'her great love for the QA's and indeed of the nursing profession made her an outstanding figure in our time, and now at her passing we reflect on her as a person and are thankful for her example and work. ('QARANC Association Gazette', 3)' The beneficiaries of her estate, which amounted to $33,301, included members of her family, the Church of England Children's Society, London, Dr Barnardo's Homes, and the QARANC Association Benevolent Fund. 


@@@@@


doc= 52053


Keary, Eliza Harriett (bap. 1827, d. 1918), poet and children's writer, was born in Bilton rectory, near Wetherby, Yorkshire, and baptized at Sculcoates, Yorkshire, on 22 April 1827, one of the six surviving children of the five sons and three daughters born to William Keary (died 1856), rector of the parish, and his wife, Lucy (died 1869), daughter of Plumer Hall, of Bilton Hall. Her father originally hailed from Clough in co. Galway, Ireland, and emigrated to England after a loss of property. Eliza Keary lived in Nunnington, North Riding, and from 1845 to 1848 in Clifton, near Bristol. In her lifetime she was known chiefly for her collaborations with her older sister, novelist Anna Maria (Annie) Keary (1825-1879). Together they published popular children's literature such as 'The Heroes of Asgard' (1857), 'Early Egyptian History for the Young' (1861), and 'Little Wanderlin and other Fairy Tales' (1865). In 1882 Eliza Keary published a 'Memoir of Annie Keary' and in 1883 she edited Annie Keary's letters. The memoir suggests that Eliza accompanied her sister on sojourns to Egypt and Pegomas, near Cannes, to do research and care for the chronically ill Annie. For a time the two sisters were also involved in running a home for unemployed young female servants in Bessborough Gardens, Pimlico. 
In the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries Eliza Keary's poetry has received increasing critical attention from feminist scholars and cultural historians interested in Victorian women poets. Her collection 'Little Seal-Skin and other Poems' (1874) contains work in a multitude of forms ranging from the sonnet to verse drama to dramatic monologue. Isobel Armstrong and Joseph Bristow consider her breadth the mark of an iconoclast; they write: 'Most unusual for a woman writer of this period, many of the poems in 'Little Seal-Skin' approach free verse. Both rhyme and metrical scheme are unorthodox'. Keary's three volumes of 'Bible' selections, 'Rays of Light: a Textbook' (1884), 'The River of God' (1884), and 'A Casket of Pearls' (1884), and poems such as 'Christine and Mary: a Correspondence' from 'Little Seal-Skin' have rightly marked her religious fervour; however, the bulk of her work for adults and children addresses a wider range of subject matter. Her literature for children includes 'The Magic Valley, or, Patient Antoine' (1877), 'At Home Again' (1886), and 'Pets and Playmates' (1887). 'Enchanted Tulips and other Verses for Children', a collaboration by Eliza, Annie, and their niece Maud Keary, who also served as editor, was published in 1914. In 1901 Eliza Keary edited 'The Francis Letters by Sir Phillip Francis and other Members of the Family' with Beata Francis; her nephew Charles Francis Keary (1848-1917), also an author, provided a note to the edition. Keary died at Orwell Lodge, Grafton Road, Torquay, Devon, on 29 August 1918, aged ninety-one. 


@@@@@


doc= 52054


Mayall, John Jabez Edwin (1813-1901), photographer and local politician, was born on 17 September 1813 at Oldham, Lancashire, as Jabez Meal, the son of John Meal, a west Yorkshire manufacturing chemist, and his wife, Elizabeth. Virtually nothing is known of his early life. Although local tradition in his home town of Lingard, near Huddersfield, held that he followed his father into chemistry, the 1841 census listed him and his wife as flax spinners. Some time shortly after this he travelled to the United States, apparently then altering his name, which was probably of French origin. After a period in New York, he settled in Philadelphia, and it was there with the new art of daguerreotypy that Mayall made his reputation. 
Late in life Mayall recalled that his first handling of a daguerreotype was on 6 January 1840; the circumstances and the precision of the date cannot be confirmed. Whether or not he had some experience in the new art before moving to America is unknown, but he must have been well informed, for he promptly established a close working relationship with two University of Pennsylvania chemists active in perfecting the daguerreotype process, Professor Hans Martin Boye and Dr Paul Beck Goddard. In 1843-4 Mayall made a series of ten daguerreotypes illustrating the Lord's prayer, an allegorical excursion of a type previously almost unknown to the rough new art: these brought him wide acclaim for some years, but are now thought to be lost. Mayall joined another Englishman, Samuel Van Loan, in partnership in a Philadelphia daguerreotype studio, and by 1844 the Franklin Institute had awarded them a silver medal for their daguerreotype productions. In 1845 Mayall became the sole proprietor, using the name Professor Highschool, and on 20 June 1846 he sold the studio to Marcus A. Root (who was to become one of the most successful American daguerreotypists) and returned to England. There is some evidence that Mayall was facing legal difficulties over his method of hand colouring daguerreotypes and perhaps this prompted his departure. 
When Mayall moved to London he worked briefly for Antoine Claudet, another pioneering daguerreotypist, but by 1847 he had set up his own studio, the American Daguerreotype Institution, at 433 Strand. It was at the Great Exhibition in 1851 that Mayall's reputation was firmly established; he was popularly believed to be an American. His seventy-two daguerreotypes, many of them from his days in America, received an honourable mention from the jurors and attracted the attention of Prince Albert, an enthusiastic patron of photography. He invited Mayall to photograph the queen and other members of the royal family and the resulting cartes-de-visite were widely popular. The queen, too, mistook his nationality: on being photographed by him in 1855, she recorded in her journal that 'Mr. Mayall... is the oddest man I ever saw but an excellent photographer. He is an American and a tremendous enthusiast in his work' (H. Gernsheim and A. Gernsheim, 'Queen Victoria', 1959, 261). On being commanded to photograph the wedding of the prince and princess of Wales in 1863, Mayall erected a special glasshouse at Windsor for the purpose (he later moved it to Brighton and turned it into a conservatory). When the fledgeling Photographic Society started up in 1853, John Edwin Mayall (as he had come to be known) was already a portrait photographer of the highest reputation and he immediately became an active participant. He was beginning to demonstrate his leadership in other ways. In common with most photographers, Mayall had by then abandoned daguerreotypy for the wet collodion negative process freely introduced by Frederick Scott Archer. He recognized the professional photographic community's debt to Archer and led the efforts to secure Archer, and then his widow, financial independence; Mayall was the largest single contributor to the Archer Testimonial Fund. 
Although he continued his London studio, Mayall had become increasingly interested in Brighton, and in 1863 set up on its busy seafront another studio, which he operated personally. His sense of innovation remained active, and he was one of the first to specialize in enlarging, making spectacular life-size prints (a fine portrait of George Peabody is still preserved in the Peabody Institute in Baltimore). In 1869 Mayall became the first person to travel from London to Brighton on a velocipede. In 1881 his London studio began using electric light to illuminate its portraits. 
On 23 June 1834, while still in Yorkshire, Mayall had married Eliza Parkin (1816-1870); they had three sons and a daughter. The oldest son, Edwin, took over the London studio when his parents moved to Brighton. Another son, John, became increasingly important in the Brighton studio after 1865. The 1870s marked many changes for Mayall, in addition to gradually ceding control of his studios to his children. On 14 December 1871 -- a year after the death of his first wife -- he married a widow, Celia Victoria Hooper ('bap'. 1839), daughter of William Gardener, a surgeon, and with her had two more daughters and another son. In 1871 Mayall was made a fellow of the Chemical Society and in 1872 gave a paper before the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. 1871 also marked the start of his political career, when he was elected a councillor for Brighton. In 1875 he became an alderman and in 1877-8 he was mayor. 
In total, Mayall and his sons operated ten studios in London (the last closed in 1941), four in Brighton (until 1908), one in Kingston upon Thames, and three in Melbourne, Australia. To the confusion over his nationality was added that over the use of his name: it is often difficult, if not impossible, to determine in particular cases if John Edwin Mayall was actually the photographer or just the famous figure behind the studio name. The name of Mayall did not die with him at The Bures, Southwick, near Brighton, on 6 March 1901. 


@@@@@


doc= 52057


Frame, Sir Alexander Gilchrist (1929-1993), engineer and businessman, was born on 3 April 1929 at 16 Burns Street, Dalmuir, Dunbartonshire, Scotland, the eldest son in the family of four children of Alexander Frame, industrial chemist, and his wife, Mary Gilchrist, 'nee' Fraser. Known throughout his life as Alistair, he was educated at Broxburn high school, graduated from Glasgow Technical College with a first-class degree, and won a Shell scholarship to Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, to read chemical engineering. He graduated with an upper second-class degree in 1952. On 27 June 1953 he married Sheila Isabel Dingwall Mathieson ('b'. 1927/8), shorthand typist and daughter of Thomas Barclay Mathieson, electrical engineer; they had one daughter. 
Frame joined the UK Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) in 1954 in Risley, Cheshire, where Sir Christopher Hinton was head of the atomic energy production division. At this time the government decided to set up a fast-breeder research programme at Dounreay, on the north coast of Scotland, to see whether fast-breeder reactors were a suitable power source for generating electricity. The Dounreay fast reactor was functioning by 1959, and Frame became director of the UKAEA reactor and research group in 1964. He was in charge of building Britain's first prototype fast reactor at Dounreay, where work began in 1966: this was supplying electricity to the national grid from 1975. 
In 1968 Frame was appointed chief engineer of Rio Tinto-Zinc Corporation Ltd (RTZ), the international group of mining companies formed in 1962 out of the merger of the Rio Tinto Company and Consolidated Zinc. The chairman, Sir Val Duncan, put him in charge of the building of a nuclear power station linked to an aluminium smelter at Holyhead, Anglesey, a project approved and subsidized by the government, which wanted Britain to build up its own aluminium industry. Frame demonstrated his ability to pick a team of engineers and managers of the highest calibre, and showed that he could meet deadlines, and move a large-scale project forwards. The smelter was completed on time, and under cost. 
Frame's next project was the channel tunnel. He was appointed managing director of Rio Tinto-Zinc Development Enterprises Ltd (RTZ-DE), formed by RTZ to be responsible for the planning, financing, and construction of large-scale projects worldwide. RTZ-DE was appointed project manager by the British Channel Tunnel Company, in which RTZ held 20 per cent of the shares, in 1971, and was given the responsibility for carrying out new studies on the feasibility of constructing a tunnel under the English Channel. Frame took expert advice on tunnel design and construction, estimated the cost and time-scale of the project and its economic benefits, and proposed a new route for the tunnel on the British side, which would shorten its length by 2 miles, save $7 million in construction costs, and reduce the annual operating costs by $300,000. During the two years of the study Frame built up a close rapport with his French counterpart, Jean Gabriel, project director of the Societe Francaise du Tunnel sous la Manche. On the basis of his final report to the government in June 1973, the government decided to go ahead. By the end of the year a bill had passed through parliament; an agreement between the British and French governments and the tunnel companies had been signed (the English signatories were Frame and Lord Harcourt, chairman of the British Channel Tunnel Company) in which they agreed to construct the initial tunnel works, 2 kilometres of pilot tunnel from both the British and French coasts, to be completed by the middle of 1975; and the British foreign secretary and French foreign minister had signed a treaty. Work began on both sides of the channel at the end of 1973, with Frame, newly elected to the board of RTZ, in charge of the management of the channel tunnel project on the English side. Following the defeat of the Conservative government in the February 1974 general election, and the death of the French president, Georges Pompidou, in April of the same year, the channel tunnel project was cancelled by the new Labour government, as an unnecessary use of public money, in January 1975. It was revived by the Conservative government in 1982, and the tunnel that opened in 1994 followed the RTZ design. Frame joined the board of Eurotunnel in 1990. 
Frame was appointed RTZ's first technical director in 1975, and was chief executive and deputy chairman from 1978 to 1985. Knighted in 1981, he succeeded Sir Anthony Tuke as chairman of RTZ in 1985, at a time when the company was under fire for stripping valuable resources from Namibia, where it had been operating a uranium mine at Rossing since the late 1960s. As chairman Frame oversaw the company's expansion in other directions, including investment in the oil and gas industries, at the same time acquiring interests in many of the world's major mineral deposits. His greatest success was the acquisition in 1989 of British Petroleum's mineral interests, including Kennecott, the large American copper company. This made RTZ the world's largest mining company. Nevertheless he wanted it to be seen as a diversified industrial company rather than a mining finance house; this would have the added benefit of diverting attention from its involvement in politically sensitive areas. Frame resigned as chairman in 1991, but was asked to remain as a non-executive director. 
Frame was chairman of the Council of Mining and Metallurgical Industries from 1983; he was appointed an honorary fellow of Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge, in 1985, and awarded an honorary DSc from the University of Glasgow in 1990. He helped to found the Major Projects Organization for the development and exchange of ideas at Templeton College, Oxford. He became chairman of the CBI National Manufacturing Council in 1992, of Wellcome in 1992, and of British Steel in 1993, but had to resign after a few months because of ill health. He died of bronchopneumonia and aortic stenosis, at his home, Pine Cottage, Church Hill, Holmbury St Mary, Dorking, Surrey, on 26 December 1993. He was survived by his wife and daughter. His funeral was on 6 January 1994 at Holmbury St Mary parish church and a memorial service was held at St Paul's, Knightsbridge, on 25 March 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 52059


Frost, John Dutton (1912-1993), army officer, was born in Poona, India, on 31 December 1912, the son of Brigadier-General Frank Dutton Frost (died 1968), army officer and later missionary, and his wife, Elsie Dora, 'nee' Bright (died 1952). He was educated at Wellington College, Monkton Combe School, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, and was commissioned into the Cameronians (Scottish Rifles) in 1932. In September 1936 the regiment moved to Palestine, where the Arabs were rebelling against the growth in Jewish settlements and attacking the police and British troops. The Cameronians occasionally had brisk fights with terrorists, but also established friendly relationships by playing football matches against the younger Arabs. While there Frost wrote a Christmas pantomime which ran to four successful performances. At the end of this tour he returned to Hampshire before being posted in 1938 to Habbaniyyah, Iraq, where there was an RAF station. He was given command of a company of Kurds, who, as he recalled, 'despised the Arabs, distrusted the Assyrians, and took a rather poor view of the British' (Frost, 'Nearly There', 54). However, they approved of Frost. 
Frost returned to Britain in 1941 and was posted to the 10th Cameronians, then engaged in preparing beach defences on the Suffolk coast. Finding the work extremely boring, he volunteered to become a parachutist. Having qualified within three days, he was appointed adjutant of the 2nd Parachute battalion (2 Para), which was just being formed. He recalled that most of the battalion were Scots who had volunteered because they thought this the quickest way to see action. 'They weren't particular who they fought and if there was no one else available as an enemy, then the English would do' (Frost, 'A Drop Too Many', 26). In February 1942 2 Para was chosen to take part in a raid on the radar station at Bruneval, near Le Havre. The station was thought (rightly) to contain new equipment which was enabling the Germans to take a heavy toll on British bombers flying over the continent. In a successful mission the raiders removed vital equipment, and destroyed much else in order to disguise the main purpose of their mission. Frost was among those called to Downing Street to brief Churchill and the war cabinet on 3 March 1942. The Bruneval raid was instrumental in the war cabinet's subsequent decision to establish an airborne division. 
In November 1942 Frost and his battalion landed in Algiers, from where the First Army was planning to reach Tunis and trap the axis forces between themselves and the Eighth Army. On a reconnaissance flight Frost was shot down by Americans who mistook his aircraft for a German bomber: fortunately he was unhurt. The regiment then parachuted into Oudna, where they were heavily outnumbered. After three days' heavy fighting Frost reached the British lines at Medjez al-Bab, with only 160 of his men. Frost 'was understandably bitter about the waste of his battalion on this ill-conceived mission. It was little consolation to be told that his wild-goose-chase had diverted considerable German strength at a critical juncture' ('The Independent', 24 May 1993). Frost's battalion subsequently took part in much of the thickest fighting in the north African campaign, distinguishing itself in particular at Djebel Mansour, Tamera, and Sedjennane. After Tunisia 2 Para parachuted into Sicily and subsequently fought as a conventional infantry force. At the end of this campaign the battalion landed in Italy (from warships), but after some brisk fighting it was withdrawn to return to Britain, in order to prepare for the invasion of Normandy. 
In September 1944 the 1st airborne division (to which Frost's battalion belonged) was allotted the task of dropping at Arnhem and capturing the road and railway bridges over the Rhine. These were bridges which the allies needed to capture undamaged in their plans to outflank the German Siegfried line. Although the bridges over the Maas and the Waal were captured without too much difficulty, the Arnhem plan proved a disaster for the lightly armed 1st airborne division, which went in by parachute and glider. Unfortunately on the day of the drop General Model, commander-in-chief of the German forces, was lunching at Oosterbeek, 6 miles from Arnhem, and was able to concentrate 9th and 10th Panzer divisions (armed with tanks and self-propelled guns), four divisional battle groups, and an infantry division in the Arnhem area. This vast numerical superiority over the 10,000 members of 1st airborne division was matched by much heavier weaponry than the British division had been able to bring in by air. Desperate attempts were made by the British 30th corps to push through the Netherlands, where the roads were narrow, the dykes flooded, and the Germans making every effort to impede them, in order to reinforce the beleaguered airborne force, but the task proved impossible in the time. 
Frost, whose battalion had been dropped 8 miles from Arnhem on 18 September, had to fight through opposition to reach the road bridge (the railway bridge having been destroyed by the Germans just as Frost's men approached it), but then occupied the north end and nearby buildings. In the initial attacks on their position Frost's paratroopers managed to set on fire many of the enemy vehicles but were then assailed by shells, mortar bombs, machine-guns, and flame-throwers. To these were soon added huge Tiger tanks. The battle raged for three days and two nights. Half of the original airborne force were killed or badly wounded but as time went on they were joined by signals, sappers, and gunners who had been driven back from their original dropping zones and who now fought as infantry, inspired to heroism by Frost's encouragement and example. Snipers fired at them from the rooftops, the buildings were full of wounded or dead, and they were running short of water. Blood was everywhere but there was a clear resolve to fight to the death. Surprisingly, Frost recalled: 'We were content. Amid the din of continuous fire and crash of falling burning buildings, laughter was often heard' (Frost, 'A Drop Too Many', 220). When 1st airborne were eventually given orders to surrender or escape, they had had 1130 killed and 6450 (mostly wounded) captured. The Germans, who had themselves had 3300 killed and wounded, praised their opponents and treated them well. Frost, who had been wounded by a mortar bomb, only agreed to surrender when the Germans managed to set on fire the building in which the severely wounded were being sheltered. He spent the next six months in a German hospital, from which he was liberated by the American army in April 1945. 
After the war Frost went to Norway to run the battle school of 1st airborne division, from which he returned to command 2 Para again, this time in Palestine on internal security duty. In 1947 he attended the Staff College, Camberley, before becoming GSO2 on the staff of 52nd Lowland division. On his 35th birthday, 31 December 1947, he married Jean MacGregor Lyle ('b'. 1921/2), daughter of Philip Lyle, sugar refiner. They had a son and a daughter. From 1949 to 1952 Frost attended the senior officers' school; he then spent two years in Malaya during the emergency as GSO1 in 17th Gurkha division. From 1955 to 1957 he commanded the support weapons wing of the school of infantry at Netheravon; he then commanded the 44th Parachute brigade (TA) in London, before being appointed general officer commanding 52nd Lowland division. Finally he was general officer commanding troops in Malta and Libya and commander, Malta land forces, from 1964 to 1966. He retired from the army with the rank of major-general. He was awarded an MC in 1942, a DSO in 1943 and a bar to it in 1945, and appointed CB in 1964. On retiring from the army he bought a derelict farm in Milland, Hampshire, and with his wife worked hard for many years before making a success of it. 
Frost was a quiet, unassuming man, who described himself in 'Who's Who' as a farmer, but was one of the most effective and popular leaders of the Second World War. In his youth he had been a good oarsman who rowed at Henley regatta, was chosen for the Sandhurst modern pentathlon team, learned to fly, and played polo and golf. 
Frost thought the Sicily campaign was badly planned, that the Arnhem operation was a mistake, and that the allies should have captured Rotterdam instead. He was also critical of the planning of the 1982 Falklands campaign. His forthright opinions were not popular with diplomatists or politicians and were thought to have prevented his rise to a higher rank. In retirement he was active in church and Conservative Party matters. He was deputy lieutenant for Sussex in 1982. 
In the film 'A Bridge Too Far' (1976), about Arnhem, he was portrayed by Anthony Hopkins. In 1977 the Dutch officially renamed the road bridge at Arnhem the John Frostbrug. Frost wrote two volumes of autobiography, 'A Drop Too Many' (1980), and 'Nearly There' (1992), and an account of his old battalion's feats in the south Atlantic campaign of 1982, 'Two Para -- Falklands' (1983). He died of prostate cancer at his home, North End Farm, Milland, on 21 May 1993. He was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52061


Edisbury, Kenrick (d. 1638), naval administrator, was the son and heir of Robert Wilkinson, alias Edisbury (died 1610), of Marchwiel, Denbighshire, and Jane, daughter of Kenrick ap Robert ap Howel, also of Marchwiel, and his wife, Rose Stanley. No record of his birth or baptism survives, and though a deposition of 1608 suggests that he was born about 1577/8 another of 1626 indicates that the date may have been about 1584/5. By May 1604 he had entered the service of the corrupt surveyor of the navy Sir John Trevor, who, like Edisbury, hailed originally from Denbighshire. In that month he witnessed a bond on Trevor's behalf and by August 1606 he was acting as Trevor's chief clerk. In July 1608 he bought the keepership of Chatham's stores from the previous incumbent for $100. Close association with Trevor perhaps inevitably coloured Edisbury's behaviour, and during the course of the 1608-9 inquiry into the navy he was accused of misappropriating stores and receiving kickbacks. No action was taken against the malefactors exposed by the inquiry, however, and consequently he went unpunished. In November 1609 he was appointed a deputy governor of the Chatham Chest, a fund for disabled seamen, having previously served as its clerk, with responsibility for collecting rents. In the following April he became deputy governor of the Sir John Hawkins Hospital, Chatham, a position which required him to keep detailed accounts. He continued in naval administration despite Trevor's resignation in 1611, attaining the position of clerk of the survey by April 1616, and some time before 1619 he penned a little-known treatise on the navy, which has been misdated to 1630. Its underlying purpose was to establish its author's credentials as a reformer, even if this entailed condemning many of the practices, such as the buying and selling of offices, in which he himself had formerly indulged. The tract evidently served its function, for in May 1618 Edisbury resigned his position at the Hawkins' Hospital to become shortly thereafter paymaster of the navy under the newly appointed treasurer, Sir William Russell. In November Edisbury was also made an assistant to the admiralty, the last man ever to be appointed to this obsolete office, which carried with it an annual salary of $20 and no duties. He nevertheless remained ambitious for further promotion and unsuccessfully pursued a reversion to the clerkship of the navy, the most junior position on the navy board, despite having condemned the award of reversionary grants in his treatise. 
Edisbury's promising naval career was suddenly thrown into jeopardy in March 1627 by the resignation of Russell, whose successor as treasurer, Sir Sackville Crowe, installed one of his own servants as paymaster. Crowe's shortcomings, however, helped pave the way for Edisbury's return to naval administration. In June 1628 he was appointed deputy treasurer at Portsmouth after secretary of state Sir John Coke, who had been put in charge of naval preparations there for the relief of La Rochelle, complained that Crowe would not provide him with clerical support. Edisbury acquitted himself so well in this service that, when the fleet returned to Portsmouth from France in November, he was unofficially permitted to resume his former duties as paymaster. His stock was now rising fast, unlike that of the navy board, whose members were widely perceived to be indolent, ineffectual, and incompetent. In late November, for example, the admiralty secretary canvassed Edisbury's view after the navy's surveyor advised against grounding a particular ship. A few weeks earlier Edisbury had advertised his abilities by submitting on his own initiative a short paper on the work needed to prevent the navy's vessels from decaying over the remaining winter months. By January 1629 the admiralty commissioners were so impressed with Edisbury that they promoted him assistant to the navy board, with responsibility for paying off mariners, backdating his appointment to the previous June, and in this capacity he worked alongside the official paymaster, John Harpur. Edisbury was again called upon to fill an administrative gap after Sir Sackville Crowe was suspended for suspected malfeasance in June 1629. During the period of Crowe's suspension, Edisbury and the navy's comptroller were jointly authorized to perform the treasurer's functions. Although Crowe returned to active duty in July, his shortcomings were now too plain to ignore, and in the following January the treasurership was again conferred on Sir William Russell, who immediately reinstated Edisbury as paymaster. 
Edisbury's second term as paymaster was of short duration. In December 1632 he was appointed surveyor following the resignation of Sir Thomas Aylesbury, thereby achieving membership of the navy board, which he had long coveted. He undoubtedly owed his appointment in large part to Sir John Coke. Now an admiralty commissioner, Coke received glowing testimony of Edisbury's abilities in September 1632 from his protege Sir Kenelm Digby: 'he studyeth continually how to contrive and mould things for the King's best advantage, and his thoughts are ever upon this subject, and in a word he hath no other business or recreation'. Pronounced 'honest and upright' by Digby, Edisbury rapidly demonstrated a degree of energy and dedication to business unequalled by his colleagues on the navy board, which he proceeded to dominate, although as late as September 1633 he encountered distrust from the leading admiralty commissioner, Lord Treasurer Portland. Within months of taking office, he revealed that three of his fellow officers, plus a number of other dockyard officials, had sold junk rope without admiralty authorization, while in February 1634 he exposed the widespread practice of embezzling woodchips. His term as surveyor was also marked by the reinstitution of the practice of holding detailed, three-yearly inspections of the navy's stores and ships. Yet for all his energy and professionalism Edisbury, like his predecessors, was not a trained shipwright and so lacked the expertise to oversee shipbuilding and repair. In 1634 he failed to detect that the newly built 'Unicorn' was so badly designed that she would prove unseaworthy without substantial modification, while that same year he ignored the advice of several shipwrights to remove from the navy's ships all sheathing more than seven years old to allow their caulking to be renewed. In consequence, the 'Assurance', which had not been re-sheathed in twenty-five years, proved so leaky in 1636 that she had to be withdrawn from the second ship money fleet. These failings aside, however, Edisbury was unquestionably the most competent and dedicated member of the navy board in the 1630s. 
Edisbury's official salary was insufficient to meet the costs of his office, even allowing for his fee as an admiralty assistant. Nevertheless, throughout the 1620s and 1630s he bought up a substantial landed estate in north Wales. How he found the money to do so is unclear, but had he attempted to accrue a personal fortune by corrupt practice he would not long have escaped detection by his backer, the incorruptible and eagle-eyed Sir John Coke. His wealth was almost certainly derived from the property acquired at his marriage about 1605 to Marie Harding, or Peters, the daughter and heir of a Rochester innkeeper, Edward Harding, or Peters, and his wife, Cicely; from the lands he inherited from his father in 1610; from further property in Denbighshire acquired from 1613; from the profits of leases held of the Hawkins Hospital; and from his income as feodary, surveyor, and receiver of the court of wards for Denbighshire, an office he acquired in January 1628. 
Edisbury, whose residence alternated between Chatham, Deptford, and London, died in lodgings belonging to the navy at Chatham on 27 August 1638. His death was not preceded by a lengthy period of illness, though the effects of a fall from a ship in 1618 had proved long lasting. By the terms of his will, drawn up one week before his death, Edisbury appointed as his executors his wife, Marie, and their eldest son, John, to whom he bequeathed his landed estate. No provision was made in the will for Edisbury's younger son Richard. An inscription in Edisbury's memory stands near the west door of the former St Mary's, Chatham, where he was buried; a bust of Edisbury once surmounted the inscription but disappeared after 1915. There was no lack of competitors to succeed Edisbury as surveyor, despite the smallness of his official salary. The successful candidate was William Batten, who once teased Pepys with the story that Pepys's chamber in Chatham was haunted by Edisbury's ghost. 


@@@@@


doc= 52062


Tunnard, John Samuel (1900-1971), painter, was born on 7 May 1900 at Caesar's Camp, Sandy, Bedfordshire, the son of John Charles Tunnard (1873-1960), landowner and sporting artist, and Nina Isabel Christian, 'nee' Long (died 1950). He was educated at Horton School, Ickwellbury, Bedfordshire, and then at Charterhouse, Surrey (1913-18), where he won the Struan Robertson prize two summers in succession. From 1919 he attended the Royal College of Art in London, where he studied design until 1923. As a student he was the drummer in a four-piece dance band, and his enthusiasm for jazz and dance music lasted all his life. In 1924 he became a textile designer for Tootal, Broadhurst, Lee & Co., and left in 1927 to be art adviser to H. and M. Southwell, carpet manufacturers; in 1929-30 he was a selector for the John Lewis partnership. On 11 September 1926 he married a fellow student at the Royal College of Art, Mary May (Bob) Robertson (1901/2-1970), daughter of Peter Robertson; they had no children. In 1929 he taught design at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in London, having begun to paint seriously in the previous year. 
Tunnard showed three pictures at the Royal Academy for the first time in 1931, and one with the London group, which he joined in 1934 and where he exhibited regularly. In 1932 he had his first major exhibition (shared with Vere Temple) of landscapes, marines, and still lifes at the Redfern Gallery. In 1933 the Tunnards moved to Cadgwith, Cornwall, at first living in a Gypsy caravan and then in a cottage, where they started making hand-blocked printed silks. They also travelled abroad for the first time that year, visiting the Balearic Islands, and from this period date Tunnard's first abstractions and works influenced by the art of Miro and Klee; in 1936 his wife gave him a copy of Herbert Read's 'Surrealism', and he became on friendly terms with Julian Trevelyan and Henry Moore. Other close friendships were with John Betjeman and Humphrey Spender. From that time on Tunnard's work responded to the joint impulses of surrealism and constructivism, his strongly textured compositions, even when highly abstracted, usually evoking natural forms, space, and the sea. They are distinguished by strong, swinging, rhythmical lines and by curved elements which interpenetrate and melt into one another. In some respects his work has affinities with the engravings of his contemporaries Stanley Hayter and John Buckland-Wright. His colours are usually close in tone and harmonious. Later in life he was in part inspired by the exploration of outer space. He exhibited frequently all his life, and had a notable one-man show at Guggenheim Jeune in London in 1939. In the 1950s and 1960s he exhibited at the McRoberts and Tunnard Gallery, London, run in partnership by his cousin Peter. Many museums in Britain and abroad possess examples of his work: Leeds City Art Gallery, for example, has his superb 'Davy Jones' Locker' (1940), with its evocation of a sea bed populated with fantastic shapes; the collection of the Museum of Modern Art in New York includes 'Fugue' (1938), which has characteristically clear, sharp, geometric lines and a perfect circle inscribed on a field of floating organic shapes, some flatly painted, some textured; the Tate collection holds six works and an example of 'Holiday' (1947), a lithograph he executed for the School Prints scheme. 
In Cornwall, Tunnard became an auxiliary coastguard and, for a period in 1939, a fisherman, making crab pots. Although he caught fish, he detested hunting, and his relationship with his father broke down over his opposition to blood sports. As a conscientious objector he avoided directly helping the war effort during the Second World War (though he wrote an article for 'Picture Post', published in December 1940, about his life and look-out duties as a coastguard) but continued to paint prolifically. Often short of money at this period, from 1945 until 1965 he taught at the Penzance School of Art. He was commissioned by the Arts Council in 1951 to contribute a major painting, 'The Return', to the exhibition 'Sixty paintings for 51', and he also painted a large mural for the Regatta restaurant at the Festival of Britain. He inherited some money at the death of his mother in 1950 and bought a fair-sized house, Trethinick, in Lamorna, Cornwall, where at lively, alcoholic parties he would perform a top hat and cane routine for his guests. He was remembered by his friends as a buoyant, easy-going person, though to some people he could be reclusive and unwilling to be friendly, however; he ignored invitations to join the Penwith Society, but joined and supported the Newlyn Society of Artists. 
Tunnard began to exhibit at the Royal Academy again in 1960, and in 1967 was elected an ARA. He loved bird-watching, and his interest in entomology led him to collect rare specimens of seaweed and insects for the British Museum. As can be seen in his 'Self-Portrait' (1959, National Portrait Gallery, London), he wore spectacles, and he had a long face with deeply grooved cheeks, a thin nose and mouth, and receding hair. John Tunnard died on 18 December 1971 in Penzance and was buried alongside his wife in the churchyard in Zennor. 


@@@@@


doc= 52063


Serlo (d. 1104), abbot of Gloucester, was a canon at Avranches and a Benedictine monk at Mont-St Michel, in Normandy, before being appointed to the abbacy of St Peter's, Gloucester, in 1072. Before the conquest Gloucester Abbey would not have been singled out as one of the leading English monasteries, having only two monks and eight novices, but by the end of Serlo's life there were 100 monks and it stood out as a model house. As far as architectural history can be reconstructed from written sources, it seems that the extensions made to the Old Minster at Gloucester in 1058 by Ealdred, archbishop of York, had been intended to provide a suitable setting for royal crown-wearing ceremonies rather than for meeting the monks' needs. Ealdred had also been able to transfer some of the abbey's most valuable estates to the archbishopric of York because the abbot of Gloucester was his kinsman. 
The opportunity for a transformation in the abbey's fortunes came in 1088 when baronial rebels, intent on ensuring that William II would not be able to organize crown-wearing ceremonies at Gloucester after the example of his father, attacked and seriously damaged the abbey during the civil war of royal succession. The attack formed part of a wider aristocratic reaction against the church in western England. William II's response was to help Gloucester Abbey in every way possible during the rest of his reign. He and eighteen of his barons donated a substantial number of estates to the abbey, and the monks were never again the victims of aristocratic unrest during the Anglo-Norman period. In 1089 the bishop of Hereford laid the foundation stone of the great new church at Gloucester and became the abbey's patron. In 1095 the archbishop of York was forced to return the disputed estates which Ealdred had taken over, after resisting royal writs and orders of restitution for twenty-five years. William II granted Serlo and the monks of Gloucester a privilege that gave them the whole of each sturgeon caught in their fisheries across the realm. Serlo was once able to persuade Wulfstan, bishop of Worcester, to honour the brethren's refectory by staying for dinner, and the wealth of the food led one young layman to mock the gluttony of the bishop and his hosts. 
Under Serlo's leadership the abbey became a centre of spirituality and the scene of great ecclesiastical events. On 6 March 1093 Anselm was proclaimed as the new archbishop of Canterbury in Gloucester Abbey, and the bishop of Worcester and the abbot of Shrewsbury preached sermons and baptized people there. On these visits to Gloucester, Wulfstan performed two miracles and the abbot prophesied the demise of William II on the day before the latter's death. Miracles were performed more frequently at the abbey church than might be expected, perhaps because holy men in western England wanted regularly to visit Serlo and the new Norman-style church. The new building was eventually consecrated on 15 July 1100. 
William of Malmesbury commented that Serlo of Gloucester was one of the three great abbots whose spirituality and rule over their abbeys distinguished them from all other ecclesiastics in England after the conquest, and Godfrey of Winchester noted in a poem that Serlo 'pleased the very princes whom he reproved' (Wright, 2.154). Serlo died on 3 or 4 March 1104 after more than thirty years as abbot. His achievement was to provide Gloucester Abbey with monumental architecture and an impressive monastic reputation, which enabled it successfully to replace its earlier role as a royal ceremonial church. 




@@@@@


doc= 52064


Belzoni, Sarah (1783-1870), traveller, was born (probably Sarah Banne) in January 1783 in Bristol. Nothing is known of her before her marriage in 1803 to Giovanni Battista Belzoni (1778-1823), the actor, strongman, and, later, Egyptologist. She travelled, and possibly worked with him, all over the British Isles, and in 1815 accompanied him to Egypt. There she lived with him in tombs or temples and on small boats on the Nile, or alone with the local people. They had no family. 
Mrs Belzoni loyally followed her husband whenever she could, but she also had a life of her own. She spent many, often lonely, weeks, sometimes months, with the local women, writing of her life with them and of their way of life in 'Mrs Belzoni's trifling account of the women of Egypt, Nubia and Syria', published in her husband's 'Narrative of the Operations and Recent Discoveries... in Egypt and Nubia' (1820). Hers was the first such record, and covered a greater variety of people than Sophia Lane Poole's later, more erudite study in 'The Englishwoman in Egypt' (1844). 
In 1816 at Aswan and Abu Simbel, Sarah visited the women of the chiefs. The aga of Aswan, she said, like other Egyptian men, treated his women with the greatest contempt, although always behaving to her 'not only with respect, but even with humility' (Belzoni, 410). She described the women's relationships, rooms, possessions, and dress, finding the Nubian women more kind and civil with less of the 'invidious jealousy and covetousness the Arab women possess' (ibid., 413). On their return to Luxor, Belzoni left her in an Arab house on her own with 'about twenty Arab words in my mouth' (ibid., 416) and no interpreter. All the village women came to look at her and, when she suffered a long and severe attack of ophthalmia, to help her. In June 1817 she rejoined Belzoni at Philae as he was setting off to enter the temple at Abu Simbel. She wished to go too, but he insisted she remain on the island. 'Had I been there,' she said, 'I should have helped to remove the sand as well as them... and claimed as much merit' (ibid., 418). Instead she camped on top of the temple with their Irish servant. The village women came daily to look, talk, and trade antique beads for modern ones. 
In January 1818 Sarah persuaded Belzoni to let her visit the Holy Land. She arrived in Jerusalem in mid-March to witness the last days of Passion week. In May she joined the Jordan pilgrimage, rejecting other European travellers as she 'made it an invariable rule to be independent of everyone, that it might not be said, if it had not been for... 'us', she could not have gone on' (Belzoni, 424). However, she then travelled with Lord Belmore's party to Nazareth, but returned to Jerusalem on her own, staying in the shepherds' black tents and in a common caravanserai. She determined to enter the great Muslim temple -- barred to both Christians and women. Dressed as a man she achieved her purpose, in mid-June 1818, but quickly left Jerusalem lest the adventure be discovered and she be punished. 
In November 1818, back at Luxor, while Belzoni was at Philae collecting an obelisk for William Bankes, she lived in a tomb again and saved the famed Seti I's tomb from flood damage. Reunited with Belzoni, she settled at Rosetta while Belzoni went off to the Libyan desert. Here she amused herself with several pets, including chameleons, and by distributing 'Bibles'. The Belzonis left Egypt in 1819. 
On their return to London in 1820 after some months on the continent, Sarah helped Belzoni with his Egyptian exhibition (1820-21) and finally travelled to Morocco with him to bid him farewell as he set off south in 1823 for Benin and his death. She continued to promote his achievements, living on a meagre income for another forty-five years, in England and from 1833 in Brussels. She organized an exhibition in London of his models and drawings of Seti's tomb, but it was unsuccessful and closed in 1825. In 1828 she tried but failed to publish his lithographs of the tomb. In 1851 she was awarded a small civil-list pension in recognition of Belzoni's service to the nation. Although there was 'nothing remarkable in her person or manners', Sarah was said to have 'a sensible and intrepid cast of features' (Smith). She died in Bellozanne Road, Jersey, in the Channel Islands, on 12 January 1870, aged eighty-seven. Sarah Belzoni's account, while it is somewhat 'trifling', personal, and unorganized, reveals a valiant, enterprising woman who had exceptional experiences for her day. 


@@@@@


doc= 52069


Gardner, Martin John (1940-1993), medical statistician, was born on 25 July 1940 at 253 Coventry Road, Ilford, Essex, the eldest child in the family of two sons and two daughters of Thomas Murray Gardner, marine superintendent, and his wife, Nellie, 'nee' Jackson. Educated at Palmer's Boys' School, Grays, Essex, he graduated from the University of Durham in 1961 with a first-class degree in mathematics. In 1962, after a year at Cambridge University working for the diploma in mathematical statistics, he joined the social medicine unit of the Medical Research Council at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and spent a year teaching at the University of California from 1966 to 1967. While in California, in 1967 he married Linda Claire Fritz, daughter of Edward C. Fritz, lawyer, of Dallas, Texas; they had two sons and one daughter. He moved to the University of Southampton in 1972 as senior lecturer in medical statistics, and reader from 1979, and was appointed professor of medical statistics in 1985. He also held a post at the environmental epidemiology unit of the Medical Research Council at Southampton General Hospital from 1980. 
Gardner's research centred on the geographical distribution of major diseases, and he published an 'Atlas of Cancer Mortality in England and Wales, 1968-78' (1983) and an 'Atlas of Mortality from Selected Diseases in England and Wales, 1968-1978' (1984). Much of his time was spent teaching medical scientists the importance of a study's initial design, and his success in raising the quality of statistical methods used in medical studies led to his appointment in 1980 as the main statistical adviser for the 'British Medical Journal'. 
In November 1983 Gardner was asked to join the committee chaired by Sir Douglas Black examining cases of childhood leukaemia around British Nuclear Fuels' nuclear-fuel reprocessing plant at Sellafield, in west Cumbria. The committee had been set up by the government in response to the television documentary 'Windscale -- the Nuclear Laundry' (1983), which argued that the cluster of children's deaths from leukaemia in Seascale could be attributed to contamination from radioactive waste discharged from the plant into the Irish Sea. The programme caused much public concern about the safety of nuclear plants. The Black report (1984) concluded that while there did seem to be an excess of childhood leukaemia in the Sellafield area, this could not be explained by an excess of environmental radioactivity, since not enough radioactive material had been released, and recommended further study. Gardner directed the research commissioned by the Department of Health and Social Security, setting up a study of all children born or attending schools in Seascale between 1950 and 1983. This showed that leukaemia occurred only in children born in the village, and that these cases were statistically related to their fathers' exposure to radiation while working at Sellafield before the children's conception. These findings were published in the 'British Medical Journal' in 1990 in an article, 'Results of a case-control study of leukaemia and lymphoma among young people near Sellafield plant in west Cumbria'. In the same article Gardner stated his hypothesis that exposure to very low levels of radiation, previously thought safe, could have damaged the sperm of men working at Sellafield, introducing a mutation passed on to their children, who would have been born with a susceptibility to leukaemia. This became known as the Gardner hypothesis, and led to further studies both in England and abroad to see whether childhood cancer could be linked to fathers' exposure to radiation. Gardner's study was highly controversial, and leading medical scientists began to question his hypothesis, asking why, if childhood leukaemia was linked to fathers' employment in the nuclear industry, it should be confined to children born in Seascale and not elsewhere in Cumbria, and to develop the theory that infection could be a cause of childhood leukaemia. Nevertheless Gardner's work stimulated some of the most thorough investigations of childhood cancer ever undertaken, and expanded the understanding of its causes. In its report in 1996 the Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment found no evidence to support Gardner's hypothesis. 
Gardner died on 22 January 1993 in Countess Mountbatten House, Moorgreen Hospital, West End, Eastleigh, Hampshire. After his death 'Childhood Cancer and Nuclear Installations' (1993), a collection of papers, letters, and reports, edited by Valerie Beral, Eve Roman, and Martin Bobrow, was dedicated to his memory. He was survived by his wife, Linda, and their three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52073


Tripp, Kathleen (1923-1993), poet and writer, was born on 29 August 1923 in Bielefeld, northern Germany, the younger child of Paul Loewenthal, a Jewish architect, and his wife. 
Following Hitler's accession to power in 1933 and Nazi persecution of Jews, Kathe became aware of the religious heritage which her Liberal Jewish parents had largely shed. She and her sister also belonged to a Zionist youth club, which prepared them for agricultural life in British-mandated Palestine. 
With Jewish life growing ever more precarious, the older daughter left for a kibbutz in Palestine. But Kathe was below the minimum age of seventeen. Her desperate parents put her on a 'Kindertransport' train, under the British government approved programme of admitting 10,000 unaccompanied children from Germany. 
Kathe arrived in Harwich on the second children's transport on 19 December 1938, aged fifteen, and was sent to Whittingehame Farm School in East Lothian, Scotland, a temporary agricultural training centre on the family estate of the earls of Balfour. An unsettled period followed, including a short-lived marriage to Walter Dampf. Kathe embraced religion, Zionism (expecting to go to Palestine), and educational ambition when she gained a scholarship to Edinburgh University. 
In the event, Kathe worked in Leeds, in domestic service and office jobs, then as matron in progressive boarding-schools in Scotland, Kent, and Wales, where she met a gentile humanist art teacher, Cecil Valentine Marshall (Val) Tripp ('b'. 1919). They married on 6 March 1948 at Welton, Lincolnshire, and had two boys and two girls. Her marriage certificate records that she changed her name by deed poll to Kathleen. 
In the months following the end of the Second World War Kathleen Tripp learned that her parents had died in a camp in the Latvian capital of Riga. It was a blow from which she never recovered. 
In 1950 Kathleen Tripp settled in her husband's home area of Ilminster, Somerset, and started writing in English. Winning a local verse competition in 1950 gave her confidence in her adopted language. Her youthful poems had been published in a German-Jewish magazine, 'Die Judische Rundschau', but her despairing mother had asked her how she could 'make poems in the language in which we are being cursed' (Gershon, 'Introduction', 'Collected Poems'). Now, in a bleak but piercingly direct style, she wrote about the burden of bereavement, and the guilt of having survived her parents' fate. 
Kathleen Tripp was keenly aware of her disjointed background: German which she now rejected, Jewish where her knowledge was too superficial to sustain inner certitude, and English where she felt merely tolerated -- 'just another bloody Jew' (interview, 'Jewish Gazette', March 1990). The pen-name she chose, Gershon, meaning 'a stranger there', from the name given by Moses to his son born in exile, pinpointed her dilemma. She was forty when her work was published by the left-leaning Victor Gollancz. 
In December 1963, twenty-five years after fleeing Germany, Kathleen Tripp revisited Bielefeld. It was a pioneering pilgrimage in that era and an unnerving experience, as she slipped back immediately into feelings of rejection and helplessness. But she was shaken out of paralysis when she saw her father's name erased from the plaque on a building he had designed. Her complaints to the local newspaper led to a lengthy interview and stirred local interest in her, tempered -- as she noted -- by the townspeople's refusal to accept any responsibility for her family's fate. 
Determined to re-examine her formative experiences, Kathleen Tripp appealed in newspaper correspondence columns for others who had arrived similarly in England. From these contacts, she formed a book, 'We Came as Children' (1966), a collective autobiography with contributions from 234 anonymous former child refugees. The book opened an aspect of the war people were not yet ready to address and established Karen Gershon as a serious writer. 
Gershon's first poetry publication, 'Selected Poems', came out simultaneously. It displayed all her recurrent themes: loss, longing, a sense of incompleteness, and the need to recreate a family. Her grief at the loss of her parents is poignantly expressed in 'I was not there to comfort them', which encapsulates her insatiable thirst in the line 'I must atone because I live.' Revenge was absent. 
The two books won Karen Gershon the 1967 Jewish Chronicle book prize and led to an Arts Council bursary and study grants from Israel and America. In August 1966, following publication, she was invited to Israel for a writers' symposium, and discovered she was not alone either as a Jew or in her psychological scars. The effect was liberating. On her next trip, after visiting Yad Vashem, the Jerusalem memorial museum, the closest she felt she could come to her parents' grave, she came to terms with her background as if she 'had been healed of a sickness' ('Jewish Chronicle', 21 April 1967). 
Her increasing emotional involvement led Kathleen Tripp to move with her family to Israel in 1969. She lectured and researched in holocaust literature, while her husband taught art. But six years later they returned to England, leaving two married children in Israel. Another child later also married in Israel. 
Gershon was a prolific writer: her fifteen volumes included reportage ('Postscript', 1969), poetry ('My Daughters, my Sisters', 1975; 'Coming back from Babylon', 1979), semi-autobiography ('Bread of Exile', 1985), and fiction ('The Fifth Generation', 1987). She reviewed holocaust writers, gave poetry readings, including 'dial-a-poem' telephone recordings, and took part in radio and television programmes. 
Kathleen Tripp's unremitting focus on grief affected her family. Her husband (who survived her) resented her refusal to let go of the past and felt that his children had been alienated from their English heritage. Her children avoided her work which, in fact, lost some of its edge as her personality grew more integrated. She felt disappointment that her writing did not reach out to a wider audience but stayed confined to fellow sufferers. It was, however, her lifeline. She died in the London Chest Hospital, Bethnal Green, on 24 March 1993, aged sixty-nine. Her final poem, published as 'Grace Notes' nearly ten years after her death, showed a coming to terms with ageing and a reconciliation with the passions of youth. Its illustration by her daughter Stella Tripp also testified to easier family relations. 


@@@@@


doc= 52076


Gilliatt, Penelope Ann Douglass (1932-1993), journalist and novelist, was born at 16 Eldon Road, Kensington, London, on 25 March 1932, the elder daughter of Cyril Conner, barrister, and his wife, Mary Stephanie, 'nee' Douglass. Both parents came from Newcastle and were connected with shipping, her mother's family as owners and her father's on the artisan side; as a boy her father begged in the street for the money to take a train to Haileybury, where he was given a scholarship. After practising as a barrister he joined the BBC, and eventually became head of radio in Belfast. Later he was appointed a quarter session judge. He and his wife, Mary, divorced when Penelope was eleven and a half, abandoning the house in Studland, Dorset, which had been a haven for all the family. Penelope and her younger sister, Angela, moving from one place to another round the country, were at one point taught by their mother under the Parents' National Educational Union system. Penelope then spent brief periods in various schools before going to Queen's College, Harley Street, London, where she finished her secondary education. From there she went to New York to train at the Juilliard School of Music, but became anorexic; it was soon realized that the emotional strains of a concert pianist's life would be too much for her, and she went instead to Bennington College, Vermont. She returned to London as a winner of the 'Vogue' talent contest, which carried an automatic appointment to a job with Conde Nast (dogsbody to the needlework section, in her case). She quickly moved on to writing features for 'Vogue' itself. On 18 December 1954 she married Roger William Gilliatt (1922-1991), a distinguished neurologist, and son of Sir William Gilliatt, obstetrician. They set up house in a chic flat in Knightsbridge. 
From the late 1950s Penelope Gilliatt wrote for the 'New Statesman', 'The Guardian', 'The Spectator', 'Queen', 'Encounter', the 'London Review of Books', and many other newspapers, magazines, and journals. Chic, petite, almost pixie-like, with a wicked smile, vivid wit, and 'outstanding red-headedness' ('The Independent', 14 May 1993), she became a star of the media scene that was just emerging as 'swinging London'. She was a member of the Labour Party, and walked with her husband, Roger, for at least a short part of anti-nuclear marches. Nevertheless, by the early 1960s the marriage had cooled; she became involved with the playwright John Osborne (1929-1994), son of Thomas Godfrey Osborne, advertising copy writer; she moved with him into an old mill house in Hellingly, Sussex, and married him on 25 May 1963. This move came in for a good deal of public disapproval, apparently not so much because Osborne had abandoned his previous wife, the actress Mary Ure, without seeing their three-week-old son, as because Penelope had walked out on someone who had been best man at a royal wedding: that of Princess Margaret to Lord Snowdon in 1960. The gossip columnists made a meal of this, delighted to get back at her for a searing article entitled 'The friendless ones' she had written for 'Queen' in which she attacked them for the inaccuracy and scurrilous nature of their columns. The article had prompted Lord Rothermere, owner of the 'Daily Mail', to discontinue the Paul Tanfield column. 
The Osbornes did not stay in the country long, but moved into an impressive Georgian house in Chester Square, Belgravia, which Penelope's sister Angela, by then a celebrated sculptor, gutted and dramatized in true 1960s style: an immense refectory table dominated the ground floor, walls were removed, and shapes were changed. Meanwhile Penelope (as Penelope Gilliatt) continued her career in journalism, becoming features editor of 'Vogue' and alternating as film critic with Kenneth Tynan in 'The Observer' (1961-5 and 1966-7). She began to write novels and short stories: 'One by One' in 1965, and 'A State of Change' in 1967, getting up at five each morning to write. She was devoted to Osborne -- with whom she had a daughter, Nolan -- but marriages to him seldom lasted, and in 1968 he left her for the actress Jill Bennett. 
Gilliatt felt she could no longer continue in London and moved with Nolan to New York, where she wrote film reviews for the 'New Yorker', contributed to the magazine 'Grand Street' and other publications, and wrote a highly successful film script, 'Sunday Bloody Sunday' (1971, starring Peter Finch and Glenda Jackson). This was nominated for an Oscar for best original screenplay, and won awards for best original screenplay from the New York Film Critics' Circle and both British and American film critics. She made a glittering place for herself on the New York scene, as she had in London, occupying a large flat overlooking Central Park, cooking excellently for her friends, and writing prolifically: profiles, reviews, novels, a libretto, a play, short stories, and several further film scripts, though no more films were actually made. But increasingly she kept up the level of her vivacity with drink. After an occasion when, writing a profile of Graham Greene, she muddled his words with her own to a lamentable extent, the job with the 'New Yorker' came to an end -- though the editor, still a great friend, continued to print her writing under a different name. Increasingly, she relied on drink, denied that it was a problem, and failed at various attempts to give it up. She returned to Britain, where she died on 10 May 1993 at her home, 29 Burnham Court, Moscow Road, Westminster, of postural asphyxia and cirrhosis of the liver. She was survived by her daughter, Nolan. As a critic and journalist she was one of the most sparkling personalities of her time. 


@@@@@


doc= 52079


Golding, Sir William Gerald (1911-1993), novelist, was born on 19 September 1911 at his maternal grandmother's house, 47 Mountwise, Newquay, Cornwall, the second of two sons of Alec Albert Golding (1876-1957), schoolteacher, and Mildred Mary Agatha, 'nee' Curnoe ('b'. 'c'.1870), an enthusiastic supporter of the women's suffrage movement. Golding wrote of his great-grandparents that he knew 'nothing except that they were so quarrelsome that one part of the family changed the spelling of its name so as not to be confused with the others' (Gekowski and Grogan, iv). Golding's aunt and uncle both died of tuberculosis, as did their eldest child, a son, and their daughter was adopted by Alec and Mildred. Alec, born into a working-class Quaker family near Bristol, was an atheist, a socialist, and a rationalist. Mildred, by contrast, entertained the family with terrifying Cornish ghost stories. Both parents were enthusiastic musicians: Mildred played the organ in the church at St Day, near Truro, before her marriage, and Alec was a serious and accomplished musician, playing the violin, as well as other instruments, from boyhood. In the evenings Mildred would play the viola, Alec the violin, and the boys would contribute on violin and cello. As a child, Golding spent holidays with his grandmother in St Columb Minor, and with his father's parents, who lived in Kingswood, near Bristol. Alec's father was a shoemaker, making boots and shoes for the Kingswood miners. In 1902 Alec became science master at Marlborough grammar school, Wiltshire, where he spent virtually the whole of his teaching career, finally retiring in the 1940s. He took an external degree in 1916, gained qualifications in music and architecture, wrote textbooks on various scientific subjects, including astrophysical navigation, and was also appointed a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. In his autobiographical essay 'The ladder and the tree' (1965), William Golding acknowledged the overwhelming impact of his father on his life and work, describing him as 'incarnate omniscience', and it is clear that his father's enormous influence determined the son's initial choice of study at university, and also gave him an ambivalent attitude to both science and religion which was manifested throughout his lengthy writing career. However, given that most of Golding's finest writing exhibits a tension between the rational and the irrational, his mother's influence was almost certainly considerable. 
Golding lived, until a young man, in the family home at 29 The Green, Marlborough, a three-storey house of medieval origin next to the graveyard of St Mary's Church. It was a lower middle-class milieu, similar to the setting for his novel 'The Pyramid'. As a child Golding developed an abiding interest in Egypt and archaeology and found in Wiltshire's early Christian, Saxon, and Norman remains an architectural legacy to compare with Egypt. Although late in life he published a full-length travel book on Egypt, 'An Egyptian Journal' (1985), the unique hold that Egypt had on his imagination is best exemplified in the essays 'Egypt from my inside' (1965), and 'Egypt from my outside' (1982). 
Golding received his secondary education at Marlborough grammar school, where his father was now senior assistant master. In 1930 he entered Brasenose College, Oxford, to read natural science, which he studied for two years, and then, in 1932, he transferred to English literature, delaying because he feared that this abandonment of science would displease his father. But this decision marked a turning point in his career: in his essay 'On the crest of a wave' (1965) Golding emphasizes that the arts are a more important area of study than the sciences. Golding became interested in Anglo-Saxon, specifically in 'The Battle of Maldon', a tenth-century heroic poem depicting stoic resistance to the Danes, which ended in defeat. He took his degree, a good second, in 1935, when he also studied for a diploma in education. 
In 1934 Golding published a small volume of poetry in Macmillan's 'Contemporary Poets' series. His 'Poems' contained twenty-nine poems, and although in later life he was dismissive of this volume, and of his abilities as a poet, the collection anticipates some of the concerns that became central to his fiction. In 'Mr Pope', the best-known of these poems, Golding uses Alexander Pope as a spokesman for the age of reason and mocks the rationalist's desire for perfect order and control; this distrust of rationalism is a feature of virtually all Golding's novels. 'Poems' was not a critical or a commercial success, and when Golding offered further poems to his editor, Macmillan showed no interest. However, Golding's five years at Oxford marked a decisive break with his father's scientific rationalism, and set him on a career as an artist. 
After leaving Oxford in 1935, Golding moved to London, where he wrote, acted, and produced for a small, non-commercial theatre. He once played Danny, the unpleasant scholarship boy in Emlyn Williams's 'Night must Fall'. Golding clearly used his experiences in the theatre in his books 'Pincher Martin' and 'The Pyramid'. In 1939 Golding took up a teaching post at Maidstone grammar school for boys and subsequently met (Mabel) Ann Brookfield (1911/12-1995), daughter of Ernest William Brookfield, a grocer. Ann was dark-haired, and attractive, with great wit. She was one of ten children most of whom were involved in left-wing politics. Her brother Norman, thirteen months her junior, had recently been killed fighting for the International Brigade in the last few weeks of the Spanish Civil War. The Goldings married on 30 September 1939. They had two children, Judy and David. Shortly after the marriage, Golding took up a post as schoolmaster at Bishop Wordsworth's School, Salisbury, teaching English and Greek literature in translation. The couple lived in a small cottage, and Golding spent a great deal of time also involved in adult education, teaching in army camps and at Maidstone gaol. 
After the outbreak of the Second World War, Golding joined the Royal Navy, registering in 1940 as an ordinary seaman. In taking the examination to become an officer, he answered a question on the difference between a propellant and an explosive with such elaborate knowledge, including graphs, that he was sent to a secret research centre under the direction of Professor Lindemann, later Lord Cherwell, Churchill's scientific adviser. While at the research centre he was injured in an explosion, and, after hospitalization and recovery, he asked the admiralty 'to send me back to sea, for God's sake, where there's peace' (Biles, 26). He was sent to a mine-sweeper school in Scotland, then to New York to wait for a mine-sweeper being built on Long Island. By the time he returned, mine-sweepers were no longer seen as crucial and he was given command of a small rocket-launching craft. He was involved in the chase and the sinking of the 'Bismarck', and took part in the D-day assault on Fortress Europe in 1944. In one invasion, that of the small Dutch island of Walcheren, Golding's craft was assigned a difficult role without air support. Preparing to go through a small channel in which 'everybody was throwing stuff in every direction', Golding transfixed his face with a grin and his men assumed that the job could not be as dangerous as it looked because he seemed to be enjoying it so much. When orders were changed, assigning his craft a much safer function, Golding's 'grin fell off' and his face 'collapsed'. His crew said to each other, 'Do you see that old bastard up there? When he learnt we weren't going in, he was disappointed' (Gindin, 4). 
The war was one of Golding's most significant educative experiences. It forced him to query even more forcefully than at Oxford the scientific, rationalistic, and ultimately optimistic picture of the world that his father had offered him. As he wrote in his essay 'Fable' (1965): 'Before the second world war I believed in the perfectibility of social man; that a correct structure of society would produce goodwill; and that therefore you could remove all social ills by a reorganisation of society... but after the war I did not because I was unable to. I had discovered what one man could do to another... I must say that anyone who moved through those years without understanding that man produces evil as a bee produces honey must have been blind or wrong in the head.' These words could serve as an epigraph to virtually all the fiction Golding subsequently wrote. Although horrified by the Nazis' war crimes, Golding was adamant that little other than social sanctions and prohibitions prevented most people in the allied countries from acting with a similar brutality and disregard for humanity. 
The war not only changed Golding's moral and political outlook, but also broadened his intellectual perspective. To pass the dull hours on watch, he began to study Greek, and Greek myth played a significant role in shaping his literary imagination; Euripides's 'The Bacchae' is an obvious influence on 'Lord of the Flies', just as 'Ion' is on 'The Double Tongue', and as Aeschylus's 'Prometheus' is on 'Pincher Martin'. The importance of Greece and classic Greek literature for Golding, however, went further than specific textual influences. Greek art formed the basis for his own metaphorical statements about the nature of humanity, but he also used Greece as a contrast to the idea of Egypt, contrasting the rationality and light associated with the Greek tradition, with the mystery and darkness of the Egyptian tradition. 
In 1945 Golding returned to Bishop Wordsworth's School to teach English and classics. While teaching he wrote several novels, all of which were rejected, and, in his later opinion, deservedly so. The book that made him a household name, and the first of his seventeen published works, was itself rejected by twenty-one publishers, until in September 1953 Charles Monteith, a young editor at Faber, received a dog-eared manuscript entitled 'Strangers from Within'. Monteith recognized its potential but suggested several changes, which included eliminating lengthy scenes set prior to the boys' arrival on the island, compressing its ending, and reducing the novel's overtly theological aspects. Monteith also expressed dissatisfaction with the novel's title and while Golding offered several alternatives, including 'A Cry of Children' and 'Nightmare Island', it was another editor at Faber, Alan Pringle, who suggested 'Lord of the Flies'. The novel was published on 17 September 1954, exactly a year after it had been submitted. In the published novel a group of boys, the oldest of whom is twelve and the youngest six, is marooned on an idyllic desert island, and almost immediately a battle for supremacy takes place among the principal characters. Violence and death follow. 'Lord of the Flies' is one of the finest adventure stories of the second half of the twentieth century, impressively employing language which both provided narrative impetus while also evoking profounder, more theological implications. 'Lord of the Flies' 'rewrote' R. M. Ballantyne's 'The Coral Island' (1858), offering a grim rejoinder to its imperial, Christian optimism. Golding used the same names for his central characters as Ballantyne did for his trio of brave, clean, young Englishmen, which assists the comparison and eventual subversion of the beliefs central to 'The Coral Island'. While the depiction of evil in Ballantyne's book is strikingly simplistic, revolving around a Christian-pagan dichotomy, Golding makes his characters Christian from the novel's beginning, and yet it is the choir who become the most cruel and violent of all the boys on the island. One of the major reasons for the novel's enormous success in the post-war years was its ability to merge the didactic with the dramatic; 'Lord of the Flies' is not an examination of the idiosyncratic nature of a group of young English boys, but of the essential nature of humanity itself, its predisposition to violence and cruelty when removed from the restraining influences of civilization. The island becomes a microcosm of the adult world, which is also destroying itself. The grim account of murder and propitiation on the island, Golding suggests, is re-enacted in the greater, adult world, continuously. It is difficult to envisage a period in human history when 'Lord of the Flies' will not be relevant. 

'Lord of the Flies' was well received by the reviewers, and several very influential writers, including E. M. Forster and C. S. Lewis; T. S. Eliot described it as 'not only a splendid novel but morally and theologically impeccable' (Carey, 63). It began to sell well and was soon reprinted. In America it made little impression at first, but by 1957 the paperback edition had attracted a huge cult following among university students, and from there it moved rapidly into the mainstream. Over the next thirty years the novel became a 'set text', at secondary and tertiary level in America and Europe, and by the end of the twentieth century it had been translated into over thirty languages, including Russian, Icelandic, Japanese, Serbo-Croat, and Catalan, with worldwide sales estimated at over 10 million copies. 'Lord of the Flies' brought Golding fame and financial security, but he was deeply ambivalent about the book, often claiming the same irritated relationship with his first novel as Rachmaninoff had with his famous C'sharp' minor prelude, which, Golding often bleakly observed, his audience insisted on his playing throughout his career. The novel was made into a memorable film by Peter Brook in 1963, and was filmed again, less memorably, in 1990. 'Lord of the Flies' was adapted for the stage by the novelist Nigel Williams, and was first produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company at Stratford upon Avon in summer 1995. 

'Lord of the Flies' is usually read as Golding's commentary on human evil, and almost certainly it would not have been written had Belsen and Auschwitz never existed, or indeed had Dresden never been bombed by the allies, but a crucial aspect of the novel, and of the majority of its successors, was its indebtedness to an earlier literary source. Golding was always a 'literary' writer, with a somewhat austere and elevated sense of the writer's responsibilities, and he was unashamed about writing 'literature', a deeply unfashionable stance in literary studies from the late 1960s onwards. Just as 'Lord of the Flies' 'rewrote' 'The Coral Island', its successor 'The Inheritors' (1955), Golding's own favourite among his novels, written in twenty-eight days while he was still a teacher, rewrites H. G. Wells's 'The grisly folk' (1921). In 'The Inheritors' Golding employs an extraordinary combination of imaginative empathy and technical virtuosity to describe the extermination of a gentle tribe of Neanderthalers by a stronger, more ruthless and intelligent community of 'Homo sapiens', who are, Golding makes clear, humankind's predecessors. In 'Pincher Martin' (1956) Golding shifts his focus onto an individual and describes the rapacious protagonist's grim struggle for survival on a barren rock in the Atlantic. 'Free Fall' (1959) recounts the attempts of a painter, Samuel Mountjoy, to find a meaningful pattern to his chaotic life, and in 'The Spire' (1964), set in fourteenth-century England, Golding uses the construction of a cathedral spire to dramatize the tragic consequences of a disturbingly ambivalent religious vision. Golding's first five novels are all densely textured, fable-like narratives, employing brutally limited and strikingly unconventional narrative perspectives. He demonstrated throughout this period an unmatched ability to infuse pragmatic and minutely observed detail with a visionary significance. In these novels Golding depicted isolated man, stripped of social encumbrances, usually 'in extremis', while alluding throughout to, and usually subverting, his literary predecessors, who included Ambrose Bierce, Dante, and Ibsen. 
Golding's work was always out of step with that of other writers who were publishing novels in the early and middle 1950s. While Kingsley Amis, John Wain, and Iris Murdoch seemed to be describing parochial communities of considerable limitations, Golding was writing aggressively bold fables which claimed for themselves a universal applicability, underpinned by Greek myths and legends, echoing their harsh, primitive tone. Particularly during this period, Golding's was an art of essences; he strove to depict what lay beneath, or above, the observable surface of life. If contemporary society had no fictional interest for him, it was because, unfashionably, he made humanity's spiritual struggle, its craving for religious enlightenment, over its desire for social cohesion, his primary concern. 
Soon after 'Lord of the Flies' was published, the Goldings left their flat in Salisbury, and bought a cottage, Ebble Thatch, named after the little river which flows behind it, in Bowerchalke, a small, quiet village a few miles west of the city. Golding was made a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1955. His first and only play, 'The Brass Butterfly', received its first performance in Great Britain at the New Theatre, Oxford, on 24 February 1958, directed by the comic actor Alastair Sim, who also played one of the principals. In 1961 Golding resigned as a schoolteacher, a job he claimed never to have enjoyed, and after spending the academic year 1961-2 at Hollins College in Virginia, USA, left teaching for ever. He was made an honorary fellow of Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1966, an honorary DLitt by the University of Sussex in 1968, and a CBE in 1966. 
In the early 1960s Golding wrote numerous articles and book reviews for, in particular, 'The Spectator', 'Holiday Magazine', the 'Times Literary Supplement', and 'The Listener', many of which were published in the collection 'The Hot Gates' (1965). Golding was later a frequent visitor to Greece, particularly throughout the 1960s, and in the title essay of this collection he describes a visit to Lamia and the pass where, in 480 BC, Leonidas and his 300 Spartans defied the huge army of the Persian king Xerxes. The essay is entertainingly written and historically informative, but of value primarily for the dramatization of the singularity of Golding's perspective. The essay gradually reveals a pessimistic, deterministic, and deeply conservative view of human nature, similar to, but even more emphatic and unambiguous than that expressed in his fiction. Throughout his career, Golding had little sympathy with the pervasive twentieth-century view which saw human nature as culturally determined, created by social circumstances. Golding's essentialism is revealed clearly in this essay because there is no detached narrative perspective, just the voice of the writer responding to one of the most important events in western history. Golding acknowledges that Leonidas and his Spartans 'contributed to set us free' ('The Hot Gates', 20), and concludes by translating the stark simplicity of the Spartans' epitaph; it is an essay none of his peers could have written, and its sentiments run through everything he wrote. 
Having published five novels in ten years, Golding over the next fifteen years published only one novel, 'The Pyramid' (1967), a volume of short stories, 'The Scorpion God', and a collection of essays, the majority of which had been written earlier. It was generally believed during this period that Golding had taken his austere vision as far as it would go, and that he was a spent literary force. In 1979, however, he published the bleak and disturbing fantasy 'Darkness Visible', a novel about which the usually communicative Golding would say nothing at all. Unpredictable as ever, he immediately followed this with 'Rites of Passage' (1980), a lively and often comic novel, although not without a characteristically tragic dimension, which recounted the sea voyage of the arrogant young Edmund Talbot as he sailed to Australia in 1815. The novel was immensely successful with both the critics and the public, winning the Booker prize, and giving Golding the largest readership he had enjoyed since 'Lord of the Flies'. It gave rise to two sequels -- 'Close Quarters' and 'Fire Down Below' -- and all three novels were published in 1991 as the single volume 'To the Ends of the Earth'. In 1983 Golding was awarded the Nobel prize for literature, an unexpected, and even contentious choice, with most English critics and academics favouring Graham Greene or Anthony Burgess. He became one of only five British writers to have been thus honoured, Winston Churchill being the most recent, receiving it thirty years earlier. In 1988 he was knighted. 
Golding was short in stature, and over the years his neatly trimmed, brown naval beard gave way to a magnificently white and untamed growth, giving him an appearance which, unusually, combined sagacity with wildness, a look perfectly captured by Mark Gibson's celebrated photograph. Golding was a committed sailor, and in the early 1960s he owned a Whitstable oyster smack, 'Wild Rose', built in 1896. He spent a great deal of time during the 1960s on his boats, cruising through the English channel, the Dutch waterways, and ports along the North and Baltic seas. In 1967 his boat the 'Tenace' sank after a collision in the English Channel off the Isle of Wight, an episode which had a decisive impact on his life. As he informed an interviewer in 1985: 'I had to come to terms with the fact that I was never again going to be responsible for anybody else's life at sea' (Haffenden, 105). He enjoyed chess, cricket, and horse riding, and he retained an interest in natural sciences throughout his life, giving the scientist James Lovelock the word 'Gaia' for his theory that the Earth's biosphere is a self-regulating organism. He enjoyed alcohol, but gave up smoking in order to play the oboe. He was, indeed, particularly passionate about music throughout his life. He played the cello and piano from childhood, and was an exciting and effective pianist, talented and persistent: the night before his death he was playing Chopin studies, but he was also extremely fond of the work of Liszt and Bach. 
It was widely believed that Golding had met his wife when they were members of the same communist cell in the late 1930s, and Samuel Mountjoy's experiences in 'Free Fall' show considerable knowledge of the workings of such a cell, but Golding was publicly reticent about his politics. He was certainly somewhat to the left, but as his close friend Stephen Medcalf observed: 'On or off a horse he recalls William Cobbett -- a patriot, a radical patriot, a humorous indignant passionate grumbling mouth filling radical patriot' (Carey, 42). He was nothing like the gloomy pessimist of public legend, but rather an amusing and gifted conversationalist and raconteur when among his few close friends, although he could be waspish. He studiously avoided literary cliques, and while he was invariably polite when carrying out public duties, many journalists and academics who interviewed Golding found him irascible. He was very protective of his privacy. In 1985, partly to avoid the increasing numbers of tourists, academics, and journalists asking for some of his time, the Goldings moved to Tullimaar, in Perran Ar Worthal, Cornwall, a graceful Regency house surrounded by woods and gardens, where Eisenhower had lived during the allies' invasion of Europe. The house was 6 miles from Truro, where Golding's parents had been married in 1904, and where his mother had been baptized in the parish church of St Mary in 1870. 
Golding died suddenly of a heart attack, aged eighty-one, at Tullimaar on the morning of 19 June 1993. He was buried in the churchyard at Bowerchalke. At the funeral there were only his family and a few close friends, but the memorial service held in Salisbury Cathedral, in November 1993, was packed with friends and admirers. A boy from Bishop Wordsworth's School read the account of Simon's death from 'Lord of the Flies' and the poet laureate, Ted Hughes, declaimed passages from 'The Inheritors'. Two days after Golding's death, Ann Golding had a stroke from which she never properly recovered. She died on new year's day 1995, after many weeks in hospital, and was buried with her husband. In 1995 'The Double Tongue', set in Delphi during the first century BC, the second draft of which Golding had just completed at the time of his death, was posthumously published to generally favourable reviews. It was clear from the obituaries that Golding was considerably more highly regarded by his fellow novelists than by either educated general readers, most of whom were familiar only with 'Lord of the Flies' and 'Rites of Passage', or the large majority of academic critics. The general reader found the formal experimentation of novels such as 'The Inheritors' and 'The Spire' uncongenial, while academics, many of whom were irritated by Golding's satire on academia, 'The Paper Men' (1984), also found his pessimism, determinism, interest in religion, and, perhaps above all, his lack of interest in contemporary society, unforgivable. At the end of the twentieth century, Golding's reputation was at its highest in continental Europe, particularly in Belgium, Holland, Germany, and France. 


@@@@@


doc= 52082


Gormley, Joseph, Baron Gormley (1917-1993), miner and trade unionist, was born on 5 July 1917 at 10 Duke Street in 'very much the rough and tough end' (Gormley, 1) of Ashton in Makerfield, Lancashire, one of seven children of John Gormley, coalminer, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Williams. His father was Irish and had originally gone to England as a farm labourer. On leaving St Oswald's Roman Catholic School, Ashton, at the age of fourteen, Gormley followed his father down the pit, after a false start working in a greengrocer's. He was a lowly haulage worker underground, and when he collected his first week's pay of 10's'. 3died, his father immediately told him to 'go over to that window and get joined in the union', then the Miners' Federation of Lancashire (Gormley, 11). Gormley saw his first fatality a few years later, and his own father died underground. His mother, half-Welsh, half-Irish, who stood 'five feet and a bit' but ruled the home with a rod of iron -- actually, a wooden boiler-stick -- received $300 compensation for his father's death. She died a few years later. 'I'm certain it was of a broken heart,' he said later; 'I don't think she ever forgot' (Gormley, 17). 
Gormley went on to work in eleven collieries in Lancashire, picking up a reputation for what was later called militancy. He first acted as a spokesman for haulage lads, who worked on piece-rate, in a dispute with the colliers, winning them a 5's'. weekly share-out. By his own account he wanted to join up at the outbreak of war, but he was in a reserved occupation and not allowed to leave the pit. On 2 October 1937 he had married Sarah Ellen (Nellie) Mather ('b'. 1917/18), a silk spinner, and daughter of Levi Mather, a coalminer of Ashton in Makerfield. At about the same time he joined the Labour Party. 
Initially, politics was Gormley's abiding interest, rather than union work. He never attended union branch meetings 'simply because I always did my own negotiating' (Gormley, 34). In 1952, soon after being elected a district councillor in his home town, he applied to emigrate to Australia, but was turned down. Four years later he was elected to the key post of delegate at Bold colliery, representing a big pit in the councils of the Lancashire miners. In the following year he was chosen the coalfield's lay member of the national executive committee of the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM). At this stage his career could have gone either way. He showed interest in entering parliament, but failed by three votes to win the Labour Party nomination for the safe seat of Burnley -- blaming his defeat on hostility to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. His direction was settled in 1961 when he was elected general secretary of the Lancashire miners; thereafter he sat on the NUM executive as one of the powerful coalfield 'barons'. During this period the union leadership was a battleground for left and right political machines, with communists dominating the left. Gormley's combative style and strong populist instincts made him an attractive electoral proposition for the traditional 'moderates', who held the upper hand. In 1963 he was gifted the NUM seat on Labour's ruling national executive committee, and he swiftly became chairman of its powerful organization committee. 
In 1968 Will Paynter, a communist, retired as general secretary of the NUM, and Gormley was the natural candidate of the moderates. But this was a period of rising rank-and-file tension over Harold Wilson's plans to curb trade-union powers, and there was hostility to accelerating pit closures. Gormley's rival was Lawrence Daly, an ex-communist with brilliant powers of oratory, who promised a tough fight against job losses. Gormley lost by 10,000 votes in a poll of 220,000 members. He was 'pretty shattered' (Gormley, 73), but came back with a challenge for the NUM presidency in 1971, fighting the charismatic communist Mick McGahey. The industry was in turmoil, with unofficial walkouts over wages. Gormley ran on a promise to make miners the highest-paid industrial workers in Britain, and won comfortably with a majority of almost 25,000. 
As president Gormley was now chief negotiator for the miners. In his first year, the union changed its rules, reducing the majority required in a pithead ballot for a strike from 66 per cent to 55 per cent. Months later, 59 per cent of miners voted for the first national strike since 1926, and though he privately disapproved of the conflict Gormley led the strike to a successful conclusion in seven weeks, most notably through the use of 'flying pickets' at power stations. The second strike, in February 1974, was even shorter, and delivered Gormley's promise to make miners the best-paid industrial workers. However, the power cuts, which forced a three-day week in industry and a state of emergency, together with the immense social upheaval that accompanied these disputes, also served to bring about the long-term downfall of the miners and the trade union movement at large. Gormley collaborated happily with the Labour government of 1974-9, ensuring pay restraint in the pits. He also fought successfully for the introduction of local incentive schemes, which boosted production and cut absenteeism, while accentuating the problems of loss-making collieries. With the return of a Conservative government under Margaret Thatcher, Gormley played a canny game, holding back his hardliners while using their strike threats to win concessions for the state-owned industry. He headed off a strike in 1981, when the government did not feel strong enough to win an all-out conflict with the NUM, by securing $300 million in fresh operating subsidies to avert pit closures. This was probably the high-water mark of his leadership. In his final year he tried to secure a moderate succession to the presidency, but his diplomacy failed and Arthur Scargill, the ultra-left Yorkshire leader, took over in 1982. Gormley's hopes that the responsibility of office would restrain his revolutionary zeal proved unfounded, and the NUM under Scargill became the merest shadow of the mighty union that Gormley led. 
In retirement Gormley returned to his love of horse-racing. Having rejected a knighthood from Labour, he accepted a peerage under the Conservatives, in 1982, and as Baron Gormley, of Ashton in Makerfield, Lancashire, he urged the case for the coal industry. His lively and illuminating autobiography, 'Battered Cherub' (1982), the name invented for him by the 'Daily Express', was a best-seller. After suffering two strokes that left him partially paralysed, he and his wife returned to live near Wigan, where he died of prostate cancer at his home, 2 Princess Park, Shevington, on 27 May 1993. He was survived by his wife, a son, and a daughter. A memorial service was held at St Mary-at-Hill, Eastcheap, London, on 25 November 1993. 
In an era when leaders in the labour movement came to look like managers, Gormley stood out as a classic union boss of the old style: gruff, autocratic, and guileful. He was proud of his working-class origins and his easy kinship with his members. He was a moderate of traditional Labour stripe, but he led the NUM to success in two great national strikes, the second of which precipitated the downfall of Edward Heath's Conservative government. His real political legacy, however, was a strong, well-organized union for miners, which was destroyed by the strategic errors of his successor, Arthur Scargill. Had he still been in office, few in coalmining believed that the ruinous, year-long conflict of 1984-5, from which neither the coal industry nor the NUM recovered, would have taken place. Gormley was virtually the last of the self-taught, working-class figures who fought their way to the top of a trade-union movement that was the most influential in the Western world. Some of its decline may be traced to the loss of people like him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52086


Granger, Stewart (1913-1993), actor, was born on 6 May 1913 in Old Brompton Road, London, the second of the two children of Major James Stewart (1861-1938), of the Royal Engineers, and his wife, Frederica, 'nee' Lablache. His mother hoped that he would emulate her great-grandfather, the celebrated basso profondo Luigi Lablache, but a distinct lack of operatic ability resulted in his enrolment as a pre-medical student at Epsom College. At sixteen, however, a family financial crisis forced him to join the Bell Punch Company. In 1933 he accepted Michael Wilding's invitation to become a film extra in 'A Southern Maid'. After training at the Webber-Douglas Theatre School he made his stage debut in Hull in 'The Cardinal' (1935). On leaving Birmingham repertory he changed his name (adopting his grandmother's maiden name to avoid confusion with the American film star, James Stewart), and he garnered acclaim in the Old Vic's 'Serena Blandish' (1939). His full screen debut followed in 'So this is London' (1939). Meanwhile, on 10 September 1938, he married his regular co-star Jean Elspeth Mackenzie ('b'. 1912), whose stage name was Elspeth March; they had two children, Jamie ('b'. 1944) and Lindsay ('b'. 1946). 
In 1940 Granger enlisted in the Gordon Highlanders, transferring to the 6th battalion of the Black Watch after securing a commission as a second lieutenant. However, he was invalided out of the war with a stomach ulcer in 1942, shortly before his unit was wiped out in north Africa. Resuming his acting career he was cast as the Marquis of Rohan in Gainsborough Pictures' 'The Man in Grey' (1943); however, he swapped roles with James Mason and gained matinee idol status with his performance as Peter Rokeby. Signing a seven-year contract, he scored in 'Love Story' (1944) as a near-blind pilot, and as a spiv in 'Waterloo Road' (1945). But the public preferred him in costume and, either side of proving himself a man of action as Apollodorus in 'Caesar and Cleopatra' (1945), he headlined a string of Gainsborough costume dramas, including 'Fanny by Gaslight', 'Madonna of the Seven Moons' (both 1944), and 'Saraband for Dead Lovers' (1948). Not all of his films met with critical approval, however; his impersonation of the violinist Paganini in 'The Magic Bow' (1946) prompted the 'Daily Graphic' to opine that 'he appears to be sawing wood with one hand and milking a cow with the other' (Parrish and Starke, 366). 
Granger divorced in 1948 and began courting Jean Merilyn Simmons (1929-2010), his co-star in the comedy 'Adam and Evelyne' (1949). With Granger signed to MGM on a seven-year deal, following his success in 'King Solomon's Mines' (1950), the couple married in Tucson, Arizona, on 20 December 1950, with the help of Howard Hughes. However, they were compelled to sue the eccentric tycoon after he bought Simmons's contract against her wishes and, much to Hollywood's astonishment, they won an out-of-court settlement for $250,000, plus $35,000 costs. Unfortunately, the victory only reinforced Granger's burgeoning reputation as a 'difficult' actor. His refusal to play the media gossip game and his brusque on-set manner led one colleague to compare him to John Barrymore without the booze. Handsome, tall, and athletic, Granger acknowledged his ego, but he was also a hard-working perfectionist, frequently suffering injury while performing his own stunts. After his acrimonious parting from 'A Star is Born', director George Cukor dismissed him as 'just a movie star' (Parrish and Starke, 389). Yet he was offered (and refused) the leads in 'Quo vadis?' (1951), 'From Here to Eternity' (1953), and 'Ben Hur' (1959). Instead, he chose to carry on swashbuckling in the tradition of Douglas Fairbanks and Errol Flynn. He set the record for the longest screen fencing bout with Mel Ferrer in 'Scaramouche' (1952), their seven-minute duel requiring eighty-seven separate sword counts and twenty-eight stunts. Next he fought himself as he played both Rassendyll and Rudolf V in 'The Prisoner of Zenda' (1952), remaining at court for 'Young Bess' (1953), opposite Simmons, and 'Beau Brummell' (1954). But, following 'Moonfleet' (1955), his fortunes began to wane and only 'The Last Hunt' (1956), 'Bhowani Junction' (1956), and 'North to Alaska' (1960) were positively received. Interviewed in 1968, he confessed: 'I've seldom, if ever, made a film I have really liked or been proud of... To spend a life making even reasonable films is bad enough, but to spend one, as I have, making terrible ones tends to be a little dispiriting. ('The Times', 18 August 1993)' Granger's private life was also in turmoil. Although he and Simmons had become naturalized Americans in 1956 and had settled on a ranch in Arizona with their daughter, Tracy ('b'. 1956), their constant separations led to Simmons's filing for divorce on the grounds of 'outrageous cruelty' in 1960. Subsisting on Italian epics such as 'The Swordsman of Siena' (1961) and 'Sodom and Gomorrah' (1962) and a trilogy of Karl May sauerkraut Westerns, Granger married the former Miss Belgium, Viviane Lecerf, on 12 June 1964, only to divorce within a year of the birth of their daughter, Samantha ('b'. 1968). In 1967 he renounced his American citizenship, although he later returned to America for the television series 'The Men from Shiloh' (1970-71) and to play Sherlock Holmes in a television adaptation of 'The Hound of the Baskervilles' (1972). He ended a decade-long movie hiatus with 'The Wild Geese' in 1978, but following the removal of part of his lung in 1981 he worked only occasionally, notably as the duke of Edinburgh in the television-movie 'The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana' (1982), and on stage in 'The Circle' (1990). He died of cancer on 16 August 1993 in Santa Monica, California. 


@@@@@


doc= 52087


Gray, Gordon Joseph (1910-1993), cardinal and Roman Catholic archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh, was born on 10 August 1910 at 143 Leith Walk, Leith, the second son and third of the four children of Francis William Gray (1870-1950), mechanical engineer, and his wife, Angela Jane, 'nee' Oddy (1882/3-1970), teacher. His father, born in Banffshire, had come to Edinburgh in 1887, was apprenticed to an engineering firm and rose to be managing director. His mother, educated by Ursuline sisters in Edinburgh, taught in a Catholic primary school in the city. Gray was educated at Holy Cross Academy, near his home. Religious influences on him came from home and school and from his uncle, John Allan Gray, a priest in the diocese. Gray decided to be a priest but it was diocesan policy not to accept relatives of a priest already serving. Accordingly he entered St Joseph's junior seminary at Mark Cross, Sussex, in September 1927 and progressed two years later into the senior seminary, St John's College, Wonersh, near Guildford, where he remained for six years. Then, being accepted by the new archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh, he was ordained priest in Edinburgh Cathedral on 15 June 1935. 
Gray's first appointment was to assist his uncle, parish priest at St Andrews; while there he studied for a degree at the university. Four years later he graduated with honours in English language and literature. His archbishop wished him to acquire an educational qualification but the outbreak of war in September 1939 thwarted the plan. Instead he continued to work in the parish. In August 1941 he was appointed parish priest of Hawick. Pastoral work was complicated by wartime conditions and he also served German and Italian prisoner-of-war camps. He was appointed dean of the borders, served on Roxburgh education committee, and in 1944 published a booklet for the parish centenary. 
In 1947 the Scottish bishops appointed Gray rector of the national junior seminary, St Mary's College, Blairs, near Aberdeen. He was also headmaster and procurator, with an estate and two farms under his care, but his main concern was to feed 200 growing boys despite post-war shortages. Although he considered the college regime less spartan than at Mark Cross, he wondered later if he should have been more liberal. In June 1951, aged just forty, he was appointed archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh, one of the youngest archbishops in the whole Roman Catholic church. 
Gray received episcopal ordination in Edinburgh Cathedral on 21 September 1951. The tasks confronting him were enormous, for it was a far-flung diocese and, owing to the late archbishop's illness, there was an enormous backlog of confirmations due. At that time, too, people were being moved out from overcrowded city centres to housing estates on the outskirts, necessitating the establishment of new parishes. He worked flat out, until after eighteen months he suffered a complete breakdown, from which his recovery was slow. Two notable achievements marked his first years as archbishop. In 1953 he established a diocesan senior seminary at Drygrange, near Melrose, and he was one of the first bishops in the world to send priests to Africa in response to the papal appeal in 'Fidei donum' (1957). This led eventually, in 1964, to his assuming responsibility for staffing and financing the church in Bauchi province, Nigeria. His responsibilities in Scotland also grew: in 1963-4 he was apostolic administrator of Aberdeen diocese and from 1963 he was president of the Scottish bishops' conference. 
The Second Vatican Council took place in 1962-5. Gray sent in suggestions for the agenda but was unwilling to make any spoken intervention, as it had to be in Latin. Indeed he was very critical of this regulation, for it disadvantaged the 'pastoral' bishops and often prevented them from speaking. Extra difficulty was caused when at weekends he had to fly home to Edinburgh and Aberdeen. 
Right from its first meeting in October 1963, Gray was much involved in the International Commission for English in the Liturgy (ICEL). In 1965-71 he was its chairman and thereafter remained on its episcopal board. Not surprisingly, given his initiative in Bauchi, in late 1968 he became a member of the Sacred Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples. Already his long membership had begun on the Consilium (later upgraded to be the Sacred Congregation) for Divine Worship. 
Gray was severely critical of the Vatican's poor record in dealing with the media. He had assisted in setting up the National Catholic Radio and Television Centre at Hatch End, London, in 1955 and for many years sat on the Central Religious Advisory Council for the BBC. In 1970 he agreed to chair the Pontifical Commission for Social Communication, but only after it was agreed to install simultaneous translation for meetings; then as chairman he overruled the formal regulations and allowed free debate. The first agenda was to finalize the pastoral instruction on communications, which appeared in 1971 simultaneously with readable versions in the main languages. 
In April 1969 Gray was created a cardinal -- technically cardinal-priest of the title Santa Chiara a Vigna Clara -- which was perhaps unexpected but not surprising, given his work on the ICEL and Vatican bodies. He was also a personal friend of the pope, Paul VI. His elevation was welcomed almost unanimously by the media and the churches in Scotland. At Rome over 400 Scots attended the ceremonies, at one of which Pope Paul presented him with a relic of St Andrew. His duties as cardinal were to include taking part in the conclaves which elected John Paul I and John Paul II and accompanying the latter to Poland, France, and Ireland. Honours were bestowed on him in Scotland too: honorary degrees from St Andrews in 1967 and Heriot-Watt in 1981, and an honorary fellowship of the Educational Institute of Scotland in 1970. 
The highlight of Gray's career was undoubtedly the visit of Pope John Paul II to Scotland in June 1982. The visit was an unqualified success and not only because of the enthusiastic youth rally and the papal mass before 300,000 people. It was also an outstanding ecumenical success, with leaders of other churches taking part and crowds lining the streets wherever the pope went. The culmination was the pope and the moderator of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland shaking hands beneath the statue of John Knox: formal perhaps, but of enormous significance. 
In the early 1980s, as his health deteriorated, Gray offered to resign and finally retired in May 1985. He himself admitted that he found it hard to say 'No' or to delegate, which increased his workload. From his early youth he had worked with his hands; in fact he was skilled at woodwork and a very competent gardener. In his later years he rather unwisely continued to do heavy work in his garden despite trouble with his back, until increasingly he was confined to a wheelchair through arthritis and other ailments. Taken to Edinburgh Royal Infirmary with a failing heart, he died there on 19 July 1993 and was buried on 23 July in the crypt of his cathedral. 
Gray was essentially a simple man with simple tastes, kindly and hospitable, shrewd but cautious. Physically he was big, with craggy features and a natural dignified bearing. His voice, strong, deep, and warm, was an asset and his Scots accent never varied, perhaps because he was a very poor linguist. He was almost the epitome of a Scotsman and proud of his traditionally Catholic Banffshire ancestry. The combination of these qualities made him a sort of father figure, known for his gardening, his dog, and his pipe, rather than as a prince of the church. 
Great changes marked Gray's long episcopate. He was naturally cautious and, being a traditional Catholic, conservative as regards doctrinal and moral questions. Friendly by nature, he enjoyed increasingly warm relations with other churches, accepted invitations to speak or preach and sat on inter-church bodies. In 1966 he gave the imprimatur for the Catholic edition of the Revised Standard Version 'Bible', but theologically he went no further than stressing what Catholics and others held in common. His attitude to Rome was similar, combining veneration for the papacy as an institution with disapproval of some features of papal government. He twice protested strongly and successfully against what he considered interference in a diocesan matter by a Roman curial body. He appreciated the new vision of the Second Vatican Council and implemented the required changes, but with caution and in some matters with a certain scepticism. 
Gray established thirty new parishes and built thirty-seven churches, while the number of priests increased, reached a peak in 1965, and then declined, making it necessary to unite parishes. He was greatly distressed by men leaving the priesthood and, after his retirement, by the closure of Blairs College and his diocesan seminary. But along with this decline went a rise in prestige. The papal visit in 1982 -- or perhaps, rather, the reaction of Catholics and others to it -- showed that the Roman Catholic church was no longer on the sidelines but in the mainstream of Scottish life. Gray, the first resident Scottish cardinal since the Reformation, played an important part in this change. 


@@@@@


doc= 52088


Muir family (per. 1849-1992), textile, tea, and general merchants, was brought to prominence by 


@@@@@


doc= 52090


Griffith, Stewart Cathie (1914-1993), cricketer and cricket administrator, was born on 16 June 1914 at 51 Balham Park Road, Wandsworth, London, the elder son and elder child of Henry Leonard Adams Griffith, stockbroker, and his wife, Jean, 'nee' Cathie. A man of considerable charm, Billy Griffith (as he was always known) became one of the best-liked and most scrupulous figures in the cricket world. At Dulwich College he was head of the school and excelled at sport, being four years in the cricket eleven, as a batsman who took to wicket-keeping, and four years in the rugby fifteen, as a rumbustious centre three-quarter. In the early 1930s he and his contemporary and lifelong friend, Hugh (H. T.) Bartlett, a brilliant schoolboy cricketer, brought Dulwich outstanding success on the games field. After gaining a Cambridge cricket blue in 1935, his second year at Pembroke College, Griffith was chosen to tour Australasia in the winter of 1935-6 with a side sent out by Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) to try and heal the wounds inflicted during the bodyline tour three years earlier. 
Between going down from Cambridge and the outbreak of the Second World War, Griffith went back to teach at Dulwich. On 1 April 1939 he married Barbara Ethel Reynolds ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of Robert John Reynolds, a hotelier, and his wife, Ethel. They had a son, Mike, and a daughter, Pauline. Mike was named after one of his godfather P. G. Wodehouse's characters, Wodehouse having been a friend of Griffith's from Dulwich days. Griffith might well have abandoned his schoolmastering career whether or not the war had come. He kept wicket well enough for Sussex after the end of the school summer term of 1939 to be offered the job on a regular basis and to be selected to go with the MCC to India in 1939-40, a tour which was cancelled with the onset of war. Griffith found himself going instead to Normandy and then to Nijmegen as a pilot in the glider pilot regiment. Thickset, resolute, and seldom without a pipe in his mouth, he rose to the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel. As commander of his wing, he piloted the commander of the 6th airborne division, General Sir Richard Gale, to the Normandy landing, for which he won the DFC. He was able to keep his hand in with some wartime cricket and duly signed up with Sussex when the war ended, combining the secretaryship of the county with keeping wicket for them. This he did until 1949. 
The highlight of Griffith's playing career came in the first test match against the West Indies at Port of Spain, Trinidad, in January 1948, when, with England beset by injuries, he was pressed into service as an opening batsman. In his unaccustomed role, Griffith scored a heroic 140, thereby becoming one of only a handful of cricketers whose maiden first-class century has been in a test match. He played two more test matches, both against South Africa in South Africa, when, as a wicket-keeper, he was preferred to the great Godfrey Evans. Leaving Sussex in 1950, Griffith had two years writing about cricket and rugby football for the 'Sunday Times' and the 'Sporting Record' before joining the secretariat of the MCC at Lord's, where he stayed until his retirement in 1974. 
Griffith's first ten years at the MCC, as assistant to Ronny Aird, were relatively uneventful, unlike his last twelve, when he was in full charge, and English cricket, still largely controlled by the MCC, was under pressure both financially and politically. Griffith was of a conservative bent. 'For most Britishers' he once said, 'cricket has a unique image, quite different from any other sport... Nothing must be done to damage that' (private information). It was not so much that he was against change as that he was wary of it. He had the greatest affection for Lord's and all that it stood for. However, in 1963 he was obliged to supervise the abolition of the distinction between amateurs and professionals, as well as the introduction of one-day cricket played by the first-class counties. He made time to manage the MCC side to Australia and New Zealand in 1965-6, but was back in the thick of things at Lord's when, to enable the game in England to benefit from Sports Council funds, unavailable to a private club, the MCC relinquished its long-standing authority by establishing the Cricket Council and its subsidiary bodies, the Test and County Cricket Board (later the England and Wales Cricket Board) and the National Cricket Association. 
Next came the D'Oliveira affair, with its far-flung repercussions. This arose as a result of the MCC's first leaving Basil D'Oliveira, a 'Cape coloured' who had emigrated from Cape Town, out of their side to tour South Africa in 1968-9, and then bringing him in when injury forced T. W. Cartwright, an original selection, to withdraw. Having been privy to earlier informal discussions that had taken place in South Africa between B. J. Vorster, South Africa's prime minister, and Viscount Cobham, a former president of the MCC, in which Vorster strongly implied that if D'Oliveira were chosen there would be no tour, Griffith was in a cleft stick. In the event, he gave nothing away; Vorster made good his threat and the tour was abandoned. Griffith, who was known to favour the retention of sporting links with South Africa, offered to resign, and, although that was never seriously entertained, the club found themselves fighting off a vote of no confidence in their handling of the matter at a special general meeting at Church House, Westminster. So it came as something of a relief to Griffith when, at the age of sixty, he could retire honourably. 
Inflexible in his beliefs, sometimes disadvantageously so, Griffith was yet eminently companionable, and had a host of friends and a delightful sense of humour. To an unhappy extent his retirement was marred by ill health. He was appointed CBE in 1975 for services to cricket and stayed well long enough to be president of Sussex from 1975 to 1977 and of the MCC in 1979-80, and to recodify the laws of cricket in 1980; but complications following an operation for bowel cancer left him so heavily immobile that his last five years were spent in a nursing home, Hollymead House, Downview Road, Felpham, Sussex near the home at Middleton-on-Sea where he had lived since soon after the war. He died there, on 7 April 1993, of bronchopneumonia. He was survived by his wife, Barbara, his son, Mike (who captained Sussex from 1969 to 1972), and daughter, Pauline. 


@@@@@


doc= 52091


Griffiths, Alan Richard (1906-1993), Benedictine monk, was born on 17 December 1906 at Fritton, Rydens Road, Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, the youngest of four children of Walter Griffiths, a manufacturing chemist from Liverpool, and his wife, (Harriet) Lilian, 'nee' Day. He was brought up in straitened circumstances, his father having lost all his money when Griffiths was four years old. He was educated from 1919 at Christ's Hospital, a charitable foundation of the sixteenth century intended primarily for the poor. It was there that, aged seventeen, he had a mystical experience in which he glimpsed the unfathomable mystery behind creation. This changed his life, colouring his time as an undergraduate at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he made lifelong friends, among them C. S. Lewis, and from where he graduated with a second-class degree in English in 1929. He endured spiritual and psychological crises until in 1932 he became a Roman Catholic. He was baptized on Christmas eve 1932 and only weeks later, on 15 January 1933, was clothed as a postulant at the Benedictine abbey of Prinknash, where he found relative peace. 
For the next twenty-two years Griffiths led the normal life of a Benedictine monk. He was solemnly professed on 21 December 1937 and ordained priest on 9 March 1940. He was highly regarded as the guest master at Prinknash and was seen as a natural leader, so it was no surprise when in 1947 he was sent to St Michael's Abbey, Farnborough, as superior. This proved not to be a success, however, and after four years he was, as one of his fellow monks said, 'reduced to the ranks' and sent to Pluscarden, near Elgin, the most northerly Benedictine abbey in the world. There he was regarded as a holy man with outstanding pastoral gifts, and he became both novice master and master of studies. It was there too that his interest in eastern spirituality, which began when he read Yeats's translation of the 'Upanishads', led to a longing to go to India. 
Eventually Griffiths's dreams were realized and in 1955, a year after the publication of his autobiography 'The Golden String', having been given his abbot's permission and having obtained the necessary indult of exclaustration (permission to leave the abbey to which he had been assigned), he went to India. He felt something lacking in both the Western world and the Western church and wanted to experience 'the marriage of these two dimensions of human existence, the rational and intuitive, the conscious and unconscious, the masculine and feminine. I wanted to find the marriage of East and West'. He went to India, indeed, to 'find the other half of my soul' ('Marriage of East and West', 1-2). 
After an unsuccessful attempt to set up a monastic community near Bangalore with Father Alapatt, an Indian Benedictine, Griffiths moved to Kerala with Father Mahieu, a Cistercian monk who also wanted to make a foundation in India. On 20 March 1958 the two monks, together with two young aspirants, began life high on the holy mountain of Kurisumala. They lived a Cistercian interpretation of the Benedictine rule, practised the liturgy of the Syrian church, and honoured the tradition of the Indian sannyasi. It was a monastic experiment, and it was successful. During Griffiths's ten years there he became increasingly well known and respected through his writings and appearances at conferences. In 1963 he went to America, where he was awarded the gold medal of the Catholic Art Association for his work on the ecumenical approach to non-Christian cultures. From then on he travelled frequently, giving public talks and interviews on themes such as Christian-Hindu dialogue, the nature of consciousness, meditation, duality, and the integration of mind, body, and spirit. 
In 1968 Swami Abhishiktananda (Henri Le Saux, a Benedictine monk), who with the French priest Jules Monchanin had in 1950 founded Saccidananda ashram, also known as Shantivanam, in the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu, decided to retire to the Himalayas. He asked Father Mahieu if he could send some monks to run the ashram. In August 1968 Griffiths arrived with two novices, and took over the running of the ashram from Abhishiktananda. He was to stay there, as the monastic superior, for the last twenty-five years of his life. Under his aegis Shantivanam became a magnet to people of all ages and nationalities, but most of all it was the young who were drawn there, attracted by the emphasis on meditation, by the steady beat of the Benedictine day, and by the liturgy, based on the monastic office but incorporating Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, and Sufi texts and singing bhajans, often in the local Tamil. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s the ashram grew and flourished, with Griffiths's gifts as guest master giving the place great warmth and his wisdom as a spiritual counsellor being in constant demand. The way he bridged Hinduism and Christianity, experiencing all religions as complementary rather than in competition, made Shantivanam a place where people of different religious traditions could meet in an atmosphere of prayer. 
Early in 1990 Griffiths had a stroke which led to a profound spiritual experience of overwhelming love. He recovered enough to travel and give talks in America, Europe, and Australia, but by the beginning of 1993 he was again unwell and was unable to travel to England to receive the John Harriott memorial award for outstanding work in religious communication, sponsored by 'The Tablet'. He was a twentieth-century prophet who, like yeast, leavened the flour and water of institutional religion. He died at Shantivanam after a final stroke on 13 May 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52095


Hall, Adelaide Louise Estelle (1901-1993), jazz and cabaret singer, was born on 20 October 1901 in Brooklyn, New York, the elder daughter of William Arthur Hall, a piano and singing teacher at the Pratt Institute, New York, of African-American and Dutch descent, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Gerard, of African-American and North American Indian descent. Her father died when she was fourteen, and her younger sister, Evelyn, died in the flu epidemic of 1918. A self-taught tap dancer, Hall began her stage career in Noble Sissle's and Eubie Blake's Broadway musical 'Shuffle Along' (1921). This was the most successful musical created to date by African Americans, and demonstrated that there was a place for them in commercial musical theatre. In 1924 she married a merchant seaman, Bertram (Bert) Hicks. Born in Trinidad, he was a British subject, educated in London and Edinburgh. He gave up the sea to become her manager -- a role he kept until his death in 1963. There were no children of the marriage. 
Hall enjoyed another success on Broadway in 'Runnin' Wild' (1923) and toured Europe in the revue 'The Chocolate Kiddies' (1925), with a music score written by Duke Ellington and Jo Trent. Her association with Duke Ellington continued when he encouraged her to become one of the first scat vocalists in jazz. It happened, almost by chance, when she was appearing with Ellington in 'Jazzmania' at the Lafayette Theatre in Harlem. Her wordless vocal on 'Creole Love Call', which they subsequently recorded on 26 October 1927, was innovatory as a use of the voice as pure jazz instrument. However, most jazz critics and historians have undervalued her work as a jazz singer or, worse still, ignored her altogether. An exception is Gunther Schuller who, in 'The Swing Era: the Development of Jazz, 1930-1945' (1989), described her recording of 'Drop me off in Harlem' as 'totally original... Her singing is rich with delightful, pert inflections and impeccable diction. It virtually transforms [Duke] Ellington's opus into an American art song' (Schuller, 389). Adelaide's association with Duke Ellington continued throughout her career. In 1974 she performed at his memorial service at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. In 1928 she starred opposite the legendary dancer Bill Bojangles Robinson in another stage hit, 'Blackbirds of 1928' -- Broadway's longest-running black-cast revue. It was in this musical that she introduced Dorothy Fields's and Jimmy McHugh's standard 'I can't give you anything but love'. In 1931 she visited London for the first time and became one of the first black entertainers to top the bill at the London Palladium. On returning to the United States, she toured extensively using jazz musicians, such as Art Tatum and Joe Turner, as accompanists; in 1934 she headlined at New York's famous Cotton Club, where she introduced 'Ill Wind', written for her by Harold Arlen and Ted Koehler. 
After leaving the Cotton Club, Hall settled in Paris with her husband and together they opened their own nightclub, La Grosse Pomme (The Big Apple). While running the club, she performed in cabaret all along the French coast. In 1938 she accepted an offer to appear in 'The Sun Never Sets', a stage production at London's Drury Lane Theatre. After selling La Grosse Pomme, she and her husband made London their permanent home, and opened the Florida Club in Mayfair. Also in 1938 she recorded 'I can't give you anything but love' and 'That Old Feeling' with jazz legend Fats Waller at the HMV Studios in London. Between 1939 and 1945 she made over seventy recordings for Decca. In 1940 she made a brief appearance in the film classic 'The Thief of Bagdad'. After losing the Florida Club in an air-raid during the London blitz, she spent the remainder of the war broadcasting for the BBC, touring Britain's music-halls, and entertaining the troops for the Entertainments National Service Association. After the war, she appeared in cabaret and occasional West End musicals, including Cole Porter's 'Kiss me, Kate' (1951). In the same year she and her husband opened their third nightclub, the Calypso, in London's Regent Street. Also in 1951, for BBC radio, she made a rare acting appearance with Flora Robson and John Gielgud in 'Helena' by Evelyn Waugh and Christopher Sykes. In 1957, after an absence of twenty-seven years, she reappeared on the Broadway musical stage in 'Jamaica' with Lena Horne. It ran for over 500 performances. 
After the death of her husband in 1963, Hall's career lost direction, and for a while she supported herself by taking boarders into her South Kensington home. By the 1970s her career had reached such a low point that she could be found performing in town halls up and down Britain. There were also occasional guest appearances in pantomimes and revues such as 'Dick Whittington' and 'The Jolson Minstrel Show'. Things began to look up in 1980 when she returned to New York to take part in 'Black Broadway' -- a vaudeville-style song-and-dance salute to several surviving black Broadway legends of the 1920s. Five years later, when Francis Ford Coppola's film 'The Cotton Club' was released in Britain, the British press discovered they had a real-life Cotton Club legend in their midst. To her delight the release of the film gave Hall an unexpected career boost and she found herself in demand for press interviews, cabaret appearances, and two important television documentaries: 'Omnibus: the Cotton Club Comes to the Ritz' (BBC) and 'The South Bank Show: the Real Cotton Club' (London Weekend Television). In an interview with Clive Goodman in the 'Daily Mail', she said: 'Look, I'm way past seventy. Before the film, I'd been singing in town halls up and down the country, doing charity shows. People thought I was back in the States, that's how quiet things were. But ever since the movie came out my phone hasn't stopped ringing. It feels good to be a legend -- and still living. ('Daily Mail', 25 May 1985)' She continued performing in her one-woman show until her early nineties, and in 1986 Bruce Crowther and Mike Pinfold assessed her performing style in their book 'The Jazz Singers: from Ragtime to the New Wave': 'She has a light, flexible voice and her sense of style is perfectly balanced with a degree of sophistication and warmth rarely encountered in popular singing. She has the ability to project the feeling of a lyric with great finesse. Not always at ease with a fast tempo, her forte is the slow, meaningful ballad which she invariably portrays with rare skill and sensitivity. (Crowther and Pinfold, 76)' In October 1988 there was a triumphant, sell-out homecoming when Hall made an appearance in her one-woman show at the Weill recital room at New York's Carnegie Hall. Audiences voted her the artiste they most wanted to come back, and she obliged with another appearance in 1992. Meanwhile, in 1989, Adelaide's happy and joyful personality was successfully captured in 'Sophisticated Lady', a Channel 4 television documentary which included reminiscences by the star and excerpts from a concert filmed at the Riverside Studios. Also in 1989 she was given a special award from the BBC's Jazz Society for her 'outstanding contribution to music over the past sixty-two years'. This was followed in 1992 with a gold badge of merit from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors. In 1991 she celebrated her ninetieth birthday with an all-star tribute at the Queen Elizabeth Hall. She died in London's Charing Cross Hospital on 7 November 1993 and her funeral took place in New York at the cathedral of the Incarnation in Garden City. She was buried with her father, mother, and sister. 


@@@@@


doc= 52096


Hanbury, Harold Greville (1898-1993), jurist, was born on 19 June 1898 at Compton Verney, Wellesbourne, Warwickshire, the only child of Basil Hanbury (1862-1933), gentleman of independent means, and his wife, Patience, 'nee' Verney (1873/4-1965), younger daughter of Henry Verney, eighteenth Baron Willoughby de Broke. He was educated at Warren Hall, Eastbourne, and Charterhouse School, before going up to Brasenose College, Oxford, on a classical scholarship in 1915. During the First World War his father served as a major in the Warwickshire yeomanry, and was made honorary lieutenant-colonel. Hanbury himself enlisted in 1916, serving first in the Artists' Rifles and then (as a lieutenant) in his father's regiment. In 1939, on the outbreak of the Second World War, he re-enlisted, and served as a staff captain until 1942 when he was discharged to run courses for allied troops. It was not surprising that patriotism was an important element in his life. 
After the First World War Hanbury returned to Oxford, and took his degree in jurisprudence in 1920, being awarded the Vinerian scholarship. He then came top in the examination for bachelor of civil law in 1921. In that same year he was elected a fellow of Lincoln College. He remained there as a fellow for twenty-eight years, and was an honorary fellow thereafter. On 21 July 1927 he married Anna Margaret Geelmuyden Dreyer (died 1980), daughter of Hannibal Dreyer of Copenhagen, and niece of Georges Dreyer, professor of pathology at Oxford. 
At the time of Hanbury's election Lincoln College was less distinguished than it later became, and its poverty was renowned. Hanbury, however, became the archetypal Lincoln man, serving as dean, senior tutor, and sub-rector. His style fitted in well with the Oxford of the 'Brideshead' generation, with rather limited academic expectations of undergraduate commoners at a typical college. Expectations of college tutors were also modest, but this did not prevent Hanbury from publishing 'Essays in Equity' (1934), 'Modern Equity' (1935) -- a textbook which ran to thirteen editions by 1989 -- and a brief history, 'English Courts of Law' (1944; fifth edn, 1979). 
Hanbury was immensely popular with his undergraduates. He and his wife entertained warmly and generously. Having no children of his own he took an especially keen interest in the lives and successes of his former pupils. He loved cricket, and also liked cats and was vice-president of the Oxford Cat Club. He was the model of a college man of that era. He was active in university affairs, and served as senior proctor twice, in 1933-4 and 1944-5. 
Hanbury was a disciple (and literary executor) of Sir William Holdsworth, the leading academic lawyer of the inter-war years, at a time when academic law in England was in the doldrums. He and A. L. Goodhart edited the last four volumes of Holdsworth's 'History of English Law' (1952-66); the final volume was put together from boxes of notes found after Holdsworth's death. The newly created readership in equity was offered to Hanbury in 1948 and it seemed an appropriate reward for college and university service. When in the following year Hanbury was elected Vinerian professor and thus fellow of All Souls, there was considerable surprise, his success owing more to the dislike of more obvious candidates than to Hanbury's academic distinction. He held the chair until 1964 without producing any significant research, though he published the engaging 'Vinerian Chair and Legal Education' in 1958. He remained a popular figure: his rather discursive style of lecturing and writing was appreciated by a core of admirers. His tall, ambling, spare figure was a familiar Oxford sight. 
Hanbury served on a number of government committees inquiring into industrial disputes (such as the committee of inquiry into the provincial omnibus industry, 1954) and as chairman of inquiries in the West Indies (board of inquiry into West Indian Airways, 1958) and Gibraltar (tribunal for industrials, 1960). He was an honorary bencher of the Inner Temple, London, and was made an honorary QC in 1960. In 1962-3 he served as visiting professor and acting dean of the law faculty at the new University of Ife, Nigeria; and, following his retirement as Vinerian professor, he was dean of the law faculty at the University of Nigeria from 1964 to 1966. He was subsequently an advocate of the Biafran cause, publishing 'Biafra: a Challenge to the Conscience of Britain' in 1968. 
Following the death of his wife in 1980, Hanbury was consumed with grief and went to live with a god-daughter in South Africa, whence he bombarded friends and acquaintances with letters. He died in a nursing home in Pinetown, Natal, South Africa, on 12 March 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52107


Hepburn, Audrey (1929-1993), film actress, was born on 4 May 1929 at 48 rue Keyenveld, Ixelles, Brussels, the only child of Joseph Victor Anton Ruston, also known as (Joseph) Anthony Hepburn or Hepburn-Ruston (1889-1980), one-time honorary British consul in the Dutch East Indies, and his Dutch second wife, Baroness Ella van Heemstra (1900-1984), third child of Baron Aarnoud van Heemstra, colonial governor and first mayor of Arnhem in the Netherlands, and his wife, Elbrig. Her father, a British subject born in Austria, adopted Hepburn for its aristocratic resonance (he was descended from Hepburns on his grandmother's side). The marriage began to fail from 1935, when the family moved to Belgium, owing to Ruston's infidelities and 'adventurer' temperament. An active supporter of Leon Degrelle's Nazi party, Ruston settled in London following his divorce. His fascist activities there caught the attention of the British security services. Audrey was thus reared largely by her mother and educated in Arnhem, where they moved in 1939, and at periods at a local school in Elham, Kent, where her mother's new romance had taken the family. Caught in the Netherlands by the war, they suffered severe privations, despite which, Hepburn, at some personal risk, performed minor services for the Dutch resistance as an innocent-looking child courier. During this time she went by the name Edda, since her mother and grandmother feared that 'Audrey' might attract the suspicion of the German occupying forces. Her father had been interned in England in 1939 as a suspected enemy agent under regulation 18B. He spent the war years in a concentration camp on the Isle of Man, and upon release in May 1945 went to the Irish republic. Hepburn did not see her father, or even learn his whereabouts, for nearly twenty years. Her emotional and physical traumas, plus the ingrained optimism of her mother's Christian Science faith, had a positive effect on the child, rather than the reverse, contributing to a lifelong practical concern for those less fortunate than herself. 
In childhood Hepburn had shown an aptitude in ballet lessons -- maintained with difficulty under the occupation -- which helps explain the grace of movement and natural serenity that distinguished her film stardom. Her career-in-waiting was hinted at just before mother and daughter left the Netherlands for London about 1947. Then seventeen or eighteen, she secured a role as an air stewardess in a tourist film, 'Dutch in Seven Lessons' (1948), produced for the Dutch airline KLM. Her charming smile was the first of many on screen. In London she was accepted into the Ballet Rambert but her self-critical sense told her she lacked the precision (and possibly the physique) to succeed in that art. After trying other short-term outlets -- as a fashion model, and as a travel clerk -- she was hired for the chorus line of Jack Hylton's musical 'High Button Shoes', gaining promotion to solo spots in intimate revue. Her radiant personality won her minor roles in several British films (including 'Laughter in Paradise', 1951, and 'The Lavender Hill Mob', 1951). Though these were somewhat decorative parts, her photographic charm earned her a three-year contract (at $12 a week) with a major studio, Associated British Picture Corporation. Ironically, she never made a film for her employers. Throughout her career, they profited from lucrative 'loan-outs' for roles in other films, British and American, the first of which was 'The Secret People' (1952), a political thriller set in London, directed by Thorold Dickinson. Her vivacity as a young dancer ensnared in a bomb plot showed her to advantage: she stays alert even when doing nothing, poised like a bird ready to flit off its branch. 
While making her next film, an Anglo-French comedy called 'Nous irons a Monte Carlo' ('Monte Carlo Baby', 1951), Hepburn was spotted by Colette, the French author who was then seeking an actress suitable to play Gigi in the non-musical adaptation of her autobiographical novel on Broadway. Hepburn was 'borrowed' from Associated British, but before the play opened, in 1951, she was screen tested by Paramount for William Wyler's romantic comedy, 'Roman Holiday' (1952), to be filmed immediately after 'Gigi' had ended its successful run. The princess who discovers the simple joys of living like ordinary folk while incognito in the company of Gregory Peck's newspaperman, but who returns to her royal duties, was the role that defined Hepburn's personality and talents for the rest of her life: innocence and good sense, wide-eyed eagerness for life, a gift for happiness, a vulnerability that invited protection, but also an air of natural independence. Her liberated princess had her hair cut by a barber in the film, and the androgynous gamine style was set as the Hepburn look for a generation or more of female filmgoers. An even bolder visual signature was her encounter in 1953 with the French couturier Hubert de Givenchy, who had been engaged to design some of her dresses for her next film, Billy Wilder's modern Cinderella story, 'Sabrina' (1954). Givenchy's minimalist simplicity, worn on a figure that had no protuberances to interfere with his classical concept, conferred a dateless elegance on the film star on and off screen. Hepburn's engagement to the industrialist James Hanson was broken off owing to the conflicting claims of her new fame. She appeared on the cover of 'Time''s 7 September 1953 issue, even before 'Roman Holiday' had opened in America -- a rare tribute. 
Hepburn met Melchior (Mel) Gaston Ferrer ('b'. 1917) when both were starring in her next stage venture, Jean Giraudoux's 'Ondine' (1954), a medieval fable in which she played the eponymous water nymph. They were married in a civil ceremony on 24 September 1954, with a church wedding in Burgenstock, Switzerland, the next day; the marriage produced one son, Sean ('b'. 1960). Ferrer is usually credited with using his knowledge of the film industry's bargaining politics to shape Hepburn's career and considerably enhance her fees. For 'Sabrina' she received only $15,000; for her next film, 'War and Peace' (1956), she received at least $350,000. Cast as Tolstoy's heroine, she excelled as the young, exuberant Natasha, but had not quite acquired the maturity to personify the post-Napoleonic survivor. 'Funny Face' (1957), a musical with Fred Astaire, directed by Stanley Donen, showed her again as the youthful innocent on which she now almost owned the screen patent. Then came another comedy, 'Love in the Afternoon' (1957), which made a cheekily Wilderesque virtue of the thirty-year age gap between her pert and truant girl and Gary Cooper's amorous millionaire. Hepburn's gifts responded to the coaching of directors such as Wyler and Wilder, who shared her own European inheritance and tastes. Though she worked mostly in American films, she never belonged to the Hollywood 'system', and spent the periods between films in domestic seclusion in Europe. She and her husband had settled in Switzerland, where the discreet mode of living offered by small village life was more to her taste than cosmopolitan lifestyles; it was not so helpful to her husband's career, however. 
After Fred Zinnemann's 'The Nun's Story' (1959), Hepburn's most popular film was probably Blake Edwards's 'Breakfast at Tiffany's' (1961). As Holly Golightly, the up-scale call-girl in Truman Capote's metropolitan fairy tale, the first shot of her wandering up Fifth Avenue at dawn, a sophisticated apparition wearing pearls and a black Givenchy sheath and munching a breakfast pastry while advancing on the baubles in the eponymous jeweller's window, created one of the great iconic images of cinema. It easily competed in her fans' affections with the prestigious title role in 'My Fair Lady' (1964) opposite Rex Harrison, for which she received a million-dollar fee. She gave a precise but not transcendent rendering of Shaw's heroine, the flower-girl Eliza Doolittle who learns to be a lady by speaking 'proper'. Paradoxically, if understandably, Hepburn's character seemed already more at home in high society than on her Covent Garden pavement pitch. Her performance suffered a slight loss of spontaneity by being partially dubbed by a professional singer, Marni Nixon. About this time, through a Belgian cousin, Walter Ruston, she discovered her father living in Dublin, where he had married again, and a reconciliation took place. 
Hepburn's problems of finding mature roles -- Stanley Donen's time-juggling comedy, 'Two for the Road' (1967), contained love scenes in line with the new candour of the 'Swinging Sixties' -- were compounded by a collapsing marriage, which was dissolved amicably in 1968. On 18 January 1969 she married Dr Andrea Dotti ('b'. 1938), an Italian psychiatrist, with whom she had a son, Luca ('b'. 1970). This marriage was dissolved in 1982. Though she occasionally returned to the screen -- her last appearance was a cameo role as a heavenly angel in Steven Spielberg's 'Always' (1989) -- Hepburn found a second and more emotionally fulfilling career from 1988 on as a special ambassador for UNICEF, the United Nations humanitarian mission for children. She used her celebrity intelligently and unselfishly to draw attention to the need for economic and medical aid in lands ravaged by disease, famine, and civil war. She made more than fifty exhausting and sometimes dangerous field trips for UNICEF to Sudan, El Salvador, Bangladesh, Kenya, and Somalia. Her indefatigable efforts may have contributed to the cancer that caused her death on 20 January 1993, surrounded by her family and her new companion, the former actor Robert Wolders, at La Paisible, the manor house at Tolochenaz-sur-Morges, near Lausanne, Switzerland, which she had made her home since the mid-1960s. She was buried on 24 January under a simple wooden cross in the village graveyard. Famous, beautiful, and dutiful, Hepburn was one of the few stars who lived for others besides themselves -- and, many were left thinking, died for others, too. 


@@@@@


doc= 52110


Higgins, Sir John Patrick Basil (1927-1993), judge, was born on 14 June 1927 at Town Parks, Magherafelt, co. Londonderry, the eldest of the eight children of John Alphonsus Higgins, town clerk of Magherafelt, and his wife, Mary Philomena Keenan. He was educated at St Columb's College, Londonderry, and at Queen's University, Belfast, where he read law and graduated with an LLB. He was called to the bar of Northern Ireland in 1948. At that time the volume of work for junior counsel was small, but he steadily began to build up a practice in the county courts throughout the province and in the High Court in Belfast. The qualities which made him an outstanding judge were apparent from his early days at the bar: his unwavering integrity, his sense of duty, and his hard work. On 29 July 1960 he married Brigid O'Neill, a medical practitioner. They had five children, and he was a devoted husband and father. 
Eoin Higgins became a queen's counsel in 1967, just before the start of the troubles in Northern Ireland, which had a considerable impact on his own career. In 1969 serious rioting occurred in Belfast and in other parts of the province, and a tribunal of inquiry, chaired by Mr Justice Scarman, was appointed to inquire into the violence and civil disturbances. Higgins was appointed one of the two senior counsel to act for the tribunal, and for the next two years he was busily engaged in assisting the tribunal to carry out its task. In 1971 he was appointed a county court judge, and he served as county court judge for Armagh and Fermanagh from 1976 to 1979 and for South Antrim from 1979 to 1982, when he was appointed recorder of Belfast. He became a High Court judge in 1984. In every judicial position which he occupied he served with distinction and gained the respect of all who came before him. 
After his appointment to the High Court, Higgins was for a number of years the judge of the Family Division, seeking to resolve family disputes which often related to the welfare and happiness of children. It was work for which he was eminently suited because of his human gifts of sympathy, compassion, and good sense. As well as sitting in court hearing evidence and giving judgment, he spent many hours in his chambers talking informally to children and their parents and discussing the cases with counsel, solicitors, and social workers, seeking in difficult family conflicts to find a solution which would be in the interests of the children involved. The work he did in those years was of lasting benefit to many. In addition to his work in the Family Division he took a full part in the administration of criminal justice, including the trial of defendants charged with terrorist offences in the non-jury Diplock courts, and he also sat as a judge in the Court of Appeal to hear criminal appeals in many prominent cases. 
These were years when the judges in Northern Ireland were targets for terrorist attacks, and, as a Roman Catholic, Higgins was particularly singled out for assassination attempts by the IRA, all of which he survived. On one occasion an attack was made on his home in Belfast, when the police officer guarding the house was shot and wounded. On a second occasion, when he was driving home to Northern Ireland from Dublin airport with his wife and daughter, the IRA mistook the car in which he was travelling and detonated a bomb at the border between the republic and Northern Ireland, murdering a family in another car. A further attack was made on his home in Belfast when the IRA launched mortar bombs at it, again injuring two police officers on duty at the house. After this attack Higgins moved his home to a safer area outside Belfast. But these attacks in no way affected the scrupulous fairness with which he conducted criminal trials, and he continued to administer justice with unflinching courage and complete impartiality. 
Higgins had wide experience of the judicial system of Northern Ireland and of its needs, and he served on many committees and tribunals dealing with legal matters. He was also a member of the committee appointed in 1974 under the chairmanship of Lord Gardiner to consider measures to deal with terrorism in the province. He was knighted in 1988. 
Higgins was upright and devout. Away from his busy life as a judge, he gave much help to voluntary and charitable organizations, both in membership of committees and in personally visiting and helping those in trouble and in need. He was president of the Society of St Vincent de Paul, chairman of Voluntary Service for Belfast, and a member of the boards of management of St Joseph's College in Belfast and the Dominican College in Portstewart. 
Higgins was appointed a lord justice of appeal, but he died suddenly, on 2 September 1993, from a heart attack at his home, 1 Farmhill Lane, Holywood, co. Down, the day before he was due to be sworn in as a member of the Court of Appeal of Northern Ireland. He was mourned by his judicial colleagues and by the members of the legal profession of Northern Ireland as a judge of great integrity, great courage, and great humanity. 


@@@@@


doc= 52111


Higgins, Reynold Alleyne (1916-1993), archaeologist, was born on 26 November 1916 in Weybridge, Surrey, the son of Charles Alleyne Higgins (1887-1975), solicitor, and Margaret Edith, 'nee' Taylor (1882-1978), singer. He was educated as a foundation scholar at Sherborne School, and as an exhibitioner at Pembroke College, Cambridge. In 1937 he obtained first-class honours in the classical tripos, with special merit in the archaeological papers. His initial urge to pursue an archaeological career was temporarily postponed, at his father's wish, by employment in the civil service (the Coal Commission, later the National Coal Board), and further delayed by the Second World War, in which he served in the King's Royal Rifle Corps. During the retreat from France in 1940 he became a prisoner of war and he remained in captivity for the rest of the war. He kept up his own spirits, and raised those of his fellow prisoners, by giving lively and popular lectures on ancient Greek history; in those conditions he developed a talent for speaking to lay audiences with wit, verve, and clarity, for which he was much admired in many different contexts during his later years. 
In 1947 Higgins married Patricia Williams ('b'. 1925), a physiotherapist at St Thomas's Hospital; they were to enjoy forty-seven years of happy marriage, raising three sons and two daughters in whom they took great pride. In the same year Higgins was appointed assistant keeper in the British Museum's department of Greek and Roman antiquities. While taking a hand in preparing the temporary displays of the first post-war years under the leadership of the keeper, Bernard Ashmole, he also undertook the major task of producing an up-to-date catalogue of the museum's vast collection of miniature Greek sculptures in clay. He received international acclaim for his magisterial study of the terracottas, published in two volumes as 'Catalogue of the Terracottas in the British Museum' (1954 and 1959), which eventually earned him a DLitt degree at Cambridge (1964). His volumes were praised especially for his illuminating comments on ancient Greek dress and other aspects of daily life, made in the light of the figurines. 
During the 1950s Higgins also became deeply involved in what were to be his two other main fields of research. His early interest in the Aegean Bronze Age, fostered by the teaching of A. J. B. Wace at Cambridge, received a fresh stimulus from M. Ventris's decipherment (published in 1952) of the Minoan and Mycenaean texts in Linear B script as an early form of Greek. In his paper, 'The Archaeological Background of the Furniture Tablets of Pylos' (1956), Higgins pioneered an archaeological approach to the consequences of the decipherment. The following year, turning his attention to the British Museum's Aegina treasure, a collection of prehistoric gold ornaments which had hitherto defied convincing attribution, he made an unanswerable case for their origin in Minoan Crete; his final view, for the general reader, was presented as 'The Aegina Treasure: an Archaeological Mystery' (1979). Thereafter Higgins developed a broader commitment to the study of Greek and Roman jewellery from the early Bronze Age until late Roman times; his general book, 'Greek and Roman Jewellery' (1961, revised 1980), was greeted as the first full coverage of the subject in English. In 1967 he also published succinct and illuminating handbooks on his two other fields of expertise: 'Greek Terracottas', and 'Minoan and Mycenaean Art' (revised 1981). In recognition of wide-ranging scholarly achievement, the British Academy elected him a fellow in 1972. 
Higgins was promoted deputy keeper in 1965, and became acting keeper of his department in 1967. In that year he negotiated a loan exhibition of Thracian gold from Bulgaria, the first occasion when ancient gold had been allowed to cross the Iron Curtain. In 1977 he was elected the first president of the newly constituted Society of Jewellery Historians, which in 1991 published a volume of papers in his honour. Outside the museum, his most abiding association was with the British School of Archaeology at Athens, which called in his expertise to publish important finds from its current excavations: Greek terracottas from the Sanctuary of Demeter at Knossos (1973), and early Greek gold jewellery from Lefkandi in Euboea (1980). From 1975 to 1979 he served as chairman of the school's managing committee. 
After his retirement in 1977, Higgins's talent as a lively speaker continued to bring him numerous invitations to give lectures to specialist, student, and lay audiences. He delivered the prestigious series of Norton lectures in the USA and Canada in 1982-3, and was a frequent lecturer on Swan Hellenic cruises until 1991. During his last years he resumed work in the British Museum on the final volume of his terracotta 'Catalogue', devoted to the Hellenistic period. Although it was still incomplete when he died, he had prepared the way for this volume in his last published book, 'Tanagra and the Figurines' (1986), a charming and humane study of the best-known aspect of Hellenistic terracottas. 
Higgins possessed a rare combination of qualities: an intense striving after accurate scholarship coupled with a lively gift for communicating his expertise with wit and charm. For him, the British Museum was never an ivory tower; indeed, few museum scholars have reached such a worldwide readership and audience. The last year of his life was plagued by ill health, but cancer was diagnosed only three weeks before his death, in Dunsfold, Surrey, on 18 April 1993. He was cremated on 21 April at Guildford, and was survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52112


Hilder, Rowland Frederick (1905-1993), artist, was born at Great Neck, Long Island, New York, on 28 June 1905, the son of Roland Hilder ('b'. 'c'.1880) and his wife, Kitty, 'nee' Fissenden ('b'. 'c'.1885), both originally from Birling, Kent. The 'w' in his forename originated from a misspelling on his birth registration form. His parents had moved to America shortly after their marriage, his father working first as a butler and then as a tour organizer for Americans visiting Britain. After Hilder's birth they moved to an apartment in Manhattan, New York, off Central Park, before settling in Morristown, New Jersey, where Hilder went to school. They made annual visits home to see his grandparents at Birling, where a memorial plaque to the artist stands in the churchyard. In 1915 the family returned to England for good (his father enlisting in the Royal Horse Artillery), living above a tobacconist's shop in New Cross, London, which Hilder's father bought for his wife in case he did not return from the war. 
In 1921, aged sixteen, Hilder enrolled at Goldsmiths' College, London, where he was tutored by the noted illustrator Edmund J. Sullivan, to whom he was to acknowledge a lifelong debt as his own career developed as an illustrator and draughtsman. Commissions followed, ranging from Mary Webb's 'Precious Bane' (1930), to the cover wrapper for a new book by C. S. Forester, an Oxford University Press edition of 'Treasure Island' (1929), and various marine subjects and boys' adventure stories. On 17 December 1929 he married Edith Elizabeth Blenkiron (1903/4-1992), a fellow student and botanical artist, and daughter of Robert Henry Blenkiron, a boot and shoe buyer. They had one son, Anthony Rowland -- himself an artist, under the 'nom de brosse' Anthony Fleming -- and a daughter, Mary. 
The popularity of Hilder's work was a testimony to the place he held in people's affections -- not only in his beloved England but everywhere where 'the Englishness of English art' struck a reminiscent chord. It is hard to think of any landscape painter of his generation whose work was so widely accessible. He shared with John Constable the distinction of having seen, in his own lifetime, an entire region of England identified with his name and art. The description 'Rowland Hilder country' (attached primarily to the weald of Kent) evokes a landscape as distinctive and personal as 'Constable's country' along the Suffolk Stour. 
As an artist Hilder had two lifelong loves: the Thames, which he explored as a boy, and which prompted his early ambition to become a marine painter, and the Shoreham valley, that corner of Kent beloved of Samuel Palmer as his own 'valley of vision'. Hilder's drawings of moored sailing barges, his earliest exercises in documentary draughtsmanship, gave him a feeling for the great waterway that in those days was an artery of the empire. He immersed himself in the skills and crafts of the seaman, taught himself to sail, and worked happily amid the clatter and clamour of London's dockland, sketching scenes that few of his admirers ever set eyes on. All this gave his marine subjects the smack of authentic observation, as his exhibits at the Royal Society of Marine Artists testified. His Shoreham experience, on which his fame as a landscape painter came to be based, dated from his student days at Goldsmiths' College. As it happened, the Shoreham valley was the first stretch of undeveloped countryside, still a rich farming and hop-growing area, that Hilder and his fellow students could easily reach by train or bicycle. He himself was to return to it over and over again, walking its lanes, revisiting its farmsteads, studying its moods and the pastoral drama of the seasons. It remained a fixed point in his imaginative universe, the epicentre of his popularity as a landscape painter. 
More generally, Hilder found all he needed in the familiar middle-ground of English art, a territory identified in the hugely popular exhibition at London's Hayward Gallery, 'The British landscape, 1920-1950', as 'a constant negotiation between pastoral and modernising tendencies, with the pastoral usually in the ascendant' (Jeffrey, 7). That certainly holds for Hilder, except that modernizing tendencies were seldom apparent. He remained true to the instinctively natural images of his local painting: horses, corn stooks, hay wains -- not the mechanical uproar of a later age. John and Paul Nash, Eric Ravilious, Edward Bawden, and Graham Sutherland were among contemporaries of Hilder's who shared and promoted this distinctively English mood between the two world wars. Geoffrey Grigson, who supplied the text for Rowland and Edith Hilder's illustrations for 'The Shell Guide to Flowers of the Countryside' (1955), wrote of the latent emotion, for the English, of words such as 'hill' and 'tree' and 'green', sensing in them origins almost beyond recall. Hilder remained close to this tradition. His images still stay in the mind, half-remembered, yet still within ken. The typical 'Hilderscape' is for the most part a land of plenty, in an untroubled heartland, most often stripped of its summer graces and clad in the naked decency of winter. 
Distinguished as he was in oils, Hilder was at his most eloquent in watercolour -- 'the most wonderful medium of expression yet invented' (Thomas, 'Rowland Hilder Sketching Country', 8). He marvelled that he and his generation, when they started out to be artists, seemed totally unaware of the long line of creative achievement that stretches back in English art form to Cozens, Girtin, Turner, Cotman, and the Norwich men. Such names, he said, were never on his own teachers' lips, nor was he taught watercolour painting. Finding out for himself was a continuous process, both technical and artistic. One of his satisfactions was to notice how often his beloved predecessors in the English school broke away from orthodoxy, mixing media and methods, as Hilder himself liked to do in his own on-the-spot studies, whether impromptu notes or first thoughts towards more considered work to come. 
Hilder was elected a member of the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1938, becoming vice-president in 1959 and president in 1964, a post he held for ten years. He taught at Farnham School of Art, Surrey, and in London taught at Blackheath School of Art, and was professor of art at Goldsmiths' College. He was appointed OBE in 1986. In his latter years he was an active member of the Fellowship Party. He died of heart failure at the Greenwich District Hospital, Greenwich, London, on 21 April 1993, and was cremated at Sidcup crematorium. He was survived by his son and daughter, his wife having died nine months previously. The Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours honoured him by instituting an annual Rowland Hilder award in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 52114


Himsworth, Sir Harold Percival (1905-1993), physician, was born on 19 May 1905 in Huddersfield, the son of (Joseph) Arnold Himsworth (died 'c'.1959), a businessman, and his wife, Amy Eliza, 'nee' Barraclough ('c'.1880-1962). Harry, as he was always called, had a struggle to get a good education, but from Huddersfield board school he won a scholarship to King James's Grammar School, Almondbury, in 1916. From there his parents removed him, at the age of sixteen and a half, to work in a worsted mill. A year later they reluctantly agreed to allow him to continue his education. As an external student he matriculated at the University of London and obtained a first MB with distinction. In January 1924 he entered the medical sciences faculty of University College, London. After moving on to University College Hospital medical school he qualified, gaining the university medal, and in 1930 obtained his MD, again with a gold medal. On 3 August 1932 he married Charlotte (1907-1988), daughter of William Gray of Walmer, Kent. Theirs was a very happy marriage. There were two sons, John Ross ('b'. 1934) and Richard Lawrence ('b'. 1937). Himsworth joined the medical unit at University College Hospital in 1930, became its deputy director in 1936, and director and professor of medicine in 1939. He became a member of the Medical Research Council (MRC) in 1948 and its secretary in 1949. He became deputy chairman in 1967 and retired in 1968. He was appointed KCB in 1952 and elected FRS in 1955. From 1969 to 1976 he was chairman of the board of management of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. In 1974-6 he was prime warden of the Goldsmiths' Company. 
During his career Himsworth made major contributions in two fields. The first was research in clinical medicine, leading to sixty-one publications, in particular in relation to diabetes and liver disease. This work was done in the 1930s and 1940s at a time when there was a great deal of enthusiasm for such research, when the application of physiology and chemistry to clinical medicine was developing fast, when there was not an emotional distrust of science, and when professors were not plagued by a constant search for funding. He worked in an institution with a particularly strong background for such research. In his work on diabetes he gave one of the earliest and clearest descriptions of two types of diabetes and he developed a test to distinguish between them, one type being due to lack of insulin and controllable by the administration of insulin, the other not associated with lack of insulin and not responsive to its administration. The other major field in which he worked was that of experimental liver damage, whether due to malnutrition, to poisons such as trinitrotoluene or carbon tetrachloride, or to viral infections. The pattern of damage was not specific to particular causes: the severity of damage was related to the magnitude of the insult and whether it was repeated. Himsworth's work was important in understanding human disease, for example the massive necrosis of acute yellow atrophy or the diffuse fibrosis of cirrhosis of the liver sometimes seen as a sequel to the fatty infiltration of kwashiorkor. 
Himsworth's second major contribution was as secretary of the MRC. He held this post at a time when there was a great demand for money for medical research and the government was willing to provide it without any interference with the scientific policies of the council. For most of his time as secretary he reported to the lord president of the council, a minister of high standing without departmental responsibilities. Himsworth was a man with a strong personality, very able, very energetic, always bubbling with enthusiasm, and an immensely hard worker. He was able to grasp the importance of all kinds of research from fundamental areas such as molecular biology to the interface between medicine and the social sciences, and had a fair understanding of every field. He thus had a remarkable grasp of the work of the MRC and came to dominate the council as well as being respected and trusted in Whitehall, where he gained a reputation for using public money effectively and insisting on high standards of work. It is worth noting that twelve of those who were on the staff of the MRC during his period of office managed to win thirteen Nobel prizes at some stage in their careers. This was the result of his belief that the most important role of an organization such as the MRC was to choose the right people as leaders of research teams. He did use his influence to encourage certain areas of research. The National Health Service (NHS) had been established shortly before he was appointed as secretary. Shortly after that it was agreed with the Ministry of Health that the major part of the funding of clinical research should be by a clinical research board run by the MRC and consisting of nominees of both the MRC and the ministry. He was convinced of the need for clinical research units where clinicians could work in collaboration with laboratory scientists in a way not easy in conventional university departments, and the number of such units rose rapidly. 
Somewhat similar changes took place in regard to tropical medicine. When Himsworth became secretary he also became chairman of the colonial medical research committee. Before the end of the 1950s the arrangements were changed and the MRC took over the responsibility, establishing a tropical medicine research board with Himsworth as chairman and half the members nominated by the Colonial Office and its successors. He was very interested in this field, and during his time as secretary all the main centres of the MRC's research in the tropics were established. He visited them in the Gambia, in Uganda, and in the West Indies regularly. He made a special contribution to radiation medicine by chairing the MRC committee (1956), which, at the request of government, established levels at which individuals did not need to feel undue concern about developing any of the delayed effects. He made a major contribution to the development of the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology at Cambridge. 
After retirement Himsworth had more time for fishing and walking, but was often called on for advice. He was invited to inquire into the use of CS gas in Northern Ireland, and with colleagues he recruited he came to the conclusion that while it was a potent respiratory irritant it was not a systemic poison. He also wrote several books about research with a philosophical bias. The death of his wife in 1988 was a great blow to him. He died in London of a stroke on 1 November 1993, and was cremated. He was survived by his two sons and several grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 52116


Hogarth, Ann (1910-1993), puppet-master, was born on 19 July 1910 at Hazelgrove, Shottermill, Frensham, Surrey, the fourth of the five children of William Gildart Jackson (died 1937/8), a retired schoolmaster, and his wife, Olive Mary Howle. Her mother died when she was two, and she was brought up mainly by her stepmother. Encouraged by winning prizes for public speaking at St Catherine's School, Bramley, she resolved to become an actress and, after ensuring her future by obtaining secretarial qualifications, she studied at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. She then became stage manager at the experimental Players' Theatre, London. The producer there was 
The Bussells felt that it was the excellence of the acting that was unique to British puppetry; so having begun with circus and variety, they widened their repertory to include scenes from 'Macbeth', poetry, and operetta. They wrote and commissioned plays and ballets especially for puppets. A ballet based on the life of a rose was an early success. There were many musical items, including a whole burlesque orchestra, and shadow puppets were also introduced. Oscar Wilde's 'Happy Prince', cut in silhouette by their friend Lotte Reiniger, was particularly outstanding. Abstract figures were made and shown successfully, but it was the versatile voices of their puppets and their dramatic ability that made for a close rapport with their audiences. The shows always had panache, pace, and professionalism. 
At first puppets were just a 'paying hobby'. Jan was employed as the director of Sheffield Repertory Theatre and then joined the BBC in Manchester as a regional producer of radio programmes. He transferred to television at Alexandra Palace as a drama producer in 1936 -- pioneering times -- until the war came and he joined the navy. This was when he started to write; he eventually published three autobiographical books -- 'The Puppets and I' (1950), 'Puppet's Progress' (1953), and 'Through Wooden Eyes' (1956) -- as well as books about puppet theatre production and plays. 
On 4 August 1946 Muffin the Mule made his debut on 'For the Children' and became the first star made by British television. The fifteen-minute programmes, in black and white, were transmitted 'live' from Alexandra Palace and later from Lime Grove Studios at 5 p.m. on alternate Sundays for eight years. The marionette characters and their charming human partner, Annette Mills, delighted young and old. Muffin received an enormous fan mail and more carrots than anyone could eat. Ann worked all the puppets, devised the shows, and wrote the scripts and many of the books that spread his fame. Annette Mills, sister of Sir John Mills, was Muffin's presenter. She interpreted the puppets' mime and composed the special songs to which they danced while she sang and played the piano. The lid of her grand piano made their stage. Jan made Muffin's first friends: intelligent but cross Peregrine the Penguin, coy Louise the Lamb, and sweet, stupid Oswald the Ostrich. Eventually more friends were added. Tours in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa brought Katy the Kangaroo, Kirri the Kiwi, and Zebbie the Zebra, all made by Stanley Maile, a brilliant puppet designer first met at the London Marionette Theatre. Muffin was originally commissioned from Fred Tickner (a famous carver of Punch puppets) to be part of a circus act, but after Annette picked him and christened him, Ann invented a whole new life for him as a naughty schoolboy, and children, new to 'the magic of television', thought he was alive. Replicas of Muffin can be found in London, Moscow, and New York, and a Royal Mail stamp was issued in 1996. A new fan club, the Muffin the Mule Collectors' Club, was set up in 2000. Muffin himself passed to Sally, the Bussells' only child, who grew up with Muffin and must always have influenced his career more than she knew. When Annette Mills died in 1955, the BBC said goodbye to Muffin, but he continued his career in theatre, films, and books. His last appearance was as compere to a BBC documentary 'The Lime Grove Story' in 1991. Ann was then over eighty, but had lost none of her skills, and Muffin was as young and cheeky as ever. 
The Hogarth Puppets toured the world, playing West End theatres, the outback of Australia, and the ice caps of Canada. Jan served for two terms as president of the Union Internationale de la Marionnette, which unites the puppet companies of over eighty countries, and the Bussells welcomed many foreign puppeteers to their home. They taught two apprentices and gave generously of their time to help other puppeteers. In summer they toured the many parks of London with their caravan and tent theatres, giving pleasure to countless children. But their versatility was such that they could also provide the puppets and puppetry for Falla's opera 'Master Peter's Puppet Show' for festival audiences and gain excellent reviews. It was with the Glyndebourne production team that they produced a large-scale marionette version of 'The Water Babies', which was later restaged by the National Puppet Theatre of Australia. This was the show which inspired larger productions in Britain during the 1960s and 1970s, but only after annual grant aid was made available for other puppet theatres to follow in the pioneering footsteps of the Hogarth Puppets. 
When the Bussells retired from performing to Devon they set up an international exhibition of puppets, showing all the figures they had collected and been given during their travels. This is now owned by the Puppet Centre Trust in London and is regularly on display. Jan Bussell died on 23 April 1985, and Ann moved to Budleigh Salterton to be near her daughter and family. She found old age and living alone very frustrating, but was much loved and respected for her sensible criticisms of the next generation's puppet shows. She died at a nursing home, Links Pinewood House, Victoria Place, Budleigh Salterton, on 9 April 1993 and was cremated in Exeter on 17 April. 
Ann Hogarth and Jan Bussell were leaders of their profession. Their talent and friendship influenced puppeteers and audiences worldwide, and Muffin the Mule, just one of their many delightful puppets, became a national institution. 


@@@@@


doc= 52123


Alec Stewart Horsley (1902-1993), businessman and social activist, and his wife, Ida Seward (Susan), 'nee' Howitt (died 1994). He was educated at Keswick grammar school and Bootham School, York, and then studied philosophy, politics, and economics at Worcester College, Oxford. There he enjoyed student politics and fast living and graduated in 1957 with a third-class degree. 


@@@@@


doc= 52127


Hunt, James Simon Wallis (1947-1993), racing driver and commentator, was born in Sutton, Surrey, on 29 August 1947, the eldest son and second of six children of Wallis Glynn Gunthorpe Hunt, stockbroker, and his wife, Susan Noel Wentworth, 'nee' Davis. He was educated in Cheam and at Wellington College, where he excelled at a variety of sports, and represented the college at cross-country running and squash. He was also an accomplished tennis player, and progressed eventually to junior Wimbledon. He was intended by his parents for a career in medicine but opted instead for motor racing, a passion which developed after a friend took him to a meeting at Silverstone as an eighteenth-birthday treat. 
Hunt's career in motor sport began modestly in club racing, where he drove a stripped-down Mini before progressing to formula Ford with an Alexis, which he acquired on hire purchase, and then to formula 3. Money was tight in his period as an amateur driver so Hunt took a variety of jobs, including as a hospital porter and as an ice-cream salesman, to fund his tuition in motor racing at Brands Hatch. However, his success in formula 3 was such that for 1970 he acquired sponsorship to race a Lotus 59. Yet it was not until some two years later that Hunt moved up to formula 2, partly, perhaps, because of a number of accidents, most notably at Zandvoort, which led to his acquiring a reputation as Hunt-the-Shunt. Thereafter, progress into the highest level of motor sport was rapid, thanks principally to the patronage of Lord Hesketh, beneficiary of a grocery fortune, motor-racing enthusiast, and a man of similar temperament to Hunt. With Hesketh's support, Hunt soon consolidated his reputation as a skilful and highly competitive driver and, more importantly, began to accumulate points. He was given his first non-championship formula 1 race by Hesketh at Brands Hatch early in 1973, when he finished a highly creditable third in a secondhand Surtees TS9B. During his career in formula 1 motor sport, Hunt took part in 92 grand prix races, had 10 wins, took pole position 14 times, and accumulated a total of 179 points. 
Hunt's first victory in grand prix racing was achieved driving a Hesketh Ford at Zandvoort in 1975. However, Hesketh was unable to continue to meet the increasing financial outlay associated with formula 1 racing and so withdrew from the sport at the end of the 1975 season. As a driver of growing reputation -- he finished fourth in the 1975 championship -- Hunt was quickly taken up by McLaren, with sponsorship provided by Marlboro. The 1976 season began relatively well for Hunt. He achieved the fastest practice lap for the first race, the Brazilian grand prix, and in the actual event appeared to have secured at least second place to Niki Lauda until thwarted by a jammed throttle. After five races, however, Hunt had secured only 8 points to Lauda's 55. The next grand prix, which was in France, saw a change of fortune as Lauda's Ferrari failed to complete the circuit and Hunt drove to victory. This was quickly followed by his reinstatement as winner of the Spanish grand prix as an earlier technical infringement involving the car was overturned. Lauda's near-fatal accident in the German grand prix, which kept him off the circuit for the next two championship races, allowed Hunt the opportunity to retrieve his championship hopes, which he did with style by coming fourth in Austria and winning in the Netherlands. Lauda returned for the Italian grand prix at Monza, where Hunt came off the track. Hunt then won in Canada and the United States. The dash for the championship became so intense that by the final race of the season only three points separated Lauda from Hunt in second place. The race was held in Japan in very poor weather conditions, which led Lauda to withdraw from the race, but, despite two punctured tyres, Hunt managed to secure third place and enough points to become world champion. He was the sixth Briton to achieve this honour. This was the pinnacle of his racing career. Despite two further years with McLaren, Hunt was unable to repeat his earlier success and, following a short period with the Wolf team, he retired from active participation in motor sport in 1979. During his formula 1 career he was frequently in the public eye, as much for his high living as for his fast driving. He was associated with a series of beautiful women, one of whom, Susan Janet (Suzy) Miller ('b'. 1947/8), model, and daughter of Frederick Henry Miller, barrister, he married, on 19 October 1974. They were divorced in 1976. She then married the actor Richard Burton. There were no children of her marriage to Hunt. 
The reasons for Hunt's retirement from formula 1 racing remain unclear, though it has been speculated that his flamboyant lifestyle was incompatible with the demands of the sport. He also appears to have concluded that the technical aspects of motor vehicle design were degrading the importance of the driver's skills. From 1980 he found a new role as a commentator on motor sport, and developed a rapport with Murray Walker on the BBC grand prix programme, which proved highly popular with the viewing public. This also gave him a platform from which to articulate his often individual and entertaining perceptions of formula 1 racing, as did his magazine articles and newspaper columns. On 17 December 1983 he married, second, Saria Marian (Sarah) Lomax ('b'. 1957/8), interior decorator, the daughter of Ian Raymond Lomax, insurance broker. There were two sons of the marriage, which ended in divorce in 1990. 
Hunt was a brave and naturally gifted racing driver who was motivated by an overwhelming determination to succeed. Although less interested in the technical aspects of motor sport, his exploits and his encouragement of younger drivers, such as Damon Hill, helped to popularize and develop formula 1 racing in Britain. He was said to be a kind man with a social conscience, who returned the money he earned from sales of commentaries to the South African Broadcasting Commission to black-run development projects. Handsome, charismatic, and gregarious, he was remembered as an 'enfant terrible' of the motor racing world in his formula 1 days, but he 'matured into a great champion for the sport and a thoroughly likeable fellow' ('The Independent', 16 June 1993). Motor racing and journalism enabled him to accumulate considerable personal wealth, although much of it was dissipated in failed business ventures, such as the James Hunt Racing Centre at Milton Keynes, which collapsed with debts of $2 million. He died of a heart attack at his home, 4 Bathgate Road, Wimbledon, London, on 15 June 1993. A memorial service was held at St James's, Piccadilly, on 29 September 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52129


Inglis, Brian St John (1916-1993), journalist, was born on 31 July 1916 at 89 Lower Baggot Street, Dublin, the only child of Sir Claude Cavendish Inglis (1883-1974), civil engineer to the Bombay government, and his wife, Vera Margaret St John Blood (died 1972). He lived with his parents at Poona, India, from 1918 until 1921 but saw little of them thereafter; at the age of five he was sent to England to board at St Catharine's School, Bexhill-on-Sea, before passing to the Dragon School, Oxford (1925-9), which he liked far better than Shrewsbury School (1929-35). His holidays were spent with his grandmother Sophie Blood at Malahide, co. Dublin, in an old-fashioned Anglo-Irish milieu. 
In 1935 Inglis went to Magdalen College, Oxford. He obtained a second-class degree in history in 1939, by which time he had imbibed vaguely left-wing ideas. Studying Irish history made him cease to think of the English as his fellow countrymen, but he would always be aware of conflicting loyalties arising from an Irish Protestant background. He left for Dublin when the war began and reported local news for the 'Irish Times'. 
From June 1940 to January 1946 Inglis served voluntarily in the Royal Air Force, piloting flying boats for Coastal Command in west Africa and reaching the rank of squadron leader. The 'Irish Times' re-engaged him on his return to Dublin as Quidnunc of 'An Irishman's Diary'. Patrick Campbell, Conor Cruise O'Brien, and Erskine H. Childers were numbered among his friends. A supporter of the Irish Labour Party, Inglis went freelance for two years from 1948 while completing a doctoral thesis at Trinity College, Dublin, on the freedom of the press in Ireland (1784-1841). From 1951 to 1953 the 'Irish Times' carried his parliamentary sketches of the Dail. 
Inglis moved to London in June 1953 to work for the tabloid 'Daily Sketch'. Highly sociable, he appeared at home in Fleet Street bars and clubs. There was nothing loud or pushy about Brian; standing quietly at the side of parties, he let other people come to him for lively talk, which spiced scholarly syntax with swear words. He never had an Irish accent. After a year he gave up his job, intending to write a novel, but in September 1954 he was asked to be assistant editor of 'The Spectator', a prestigious weekly. This placed him third within its hierarchy, rising to second in 1956. The editor-in-chief was the proprietor, Ian Gilmour. 
On 5 November 1956 Inglis appeared on television for the first time, as writer-presenter of Granada TV's press review 'What the Papers Say'. He reappeared on 160 editions over the next twenty years. Inglis in 1958 married Ruth (Boo) Woodeson ('b'. 1928), otherwise Ruth Langdon, an American journalist with a daughter from a previous marriage. They had a son in 1962. 
When Inglis thought about leaving 'The Spectator' in 1959, Gilmour responded by making him editor. Its circulation rose from 39,000 to 48,000 during his term. The journal boasted 'star' columnists in Bernard Levin (politics), Alan Brien (theatre), and Cyril Ray (wine). Often satirical in tone, it refrained from endorsing the Conservatives in the general election of 1959 and aired support for easier divorce, tolerance of homosexuality, and ending the death penalty. Gilmour began to complain that the content was becoming too lightweight -- which Inglis took to mean too liberal. When he heard that Gilmour aimed to be a Conservative MP he resigned as editor in February 1962, fearing that the political independence of 'The Spectator' would be compromised. He remained on its board, however, until November 1963, when he severed all ties in protest at the appointment as editor of tory politician Iain Macleod. 
To a wider public Brian Inglis became familiar as the presenter of 'All Our Yesterdays' (1962-73), Granada TV's weekly look at the events of twenty-five years earlier as shown in Pathe newsreels. He enjoyed the social life of a television celebrity but liked even more the short hours and high income which enabled him to devote most of his time to writing books. The industrial revolution, the First Opium War, and Roger Casement were among his historical subjects. Having himself coined the term 'fringe medicine' in 1960, he now wrote extensively on homoeopathy, acupuncture, and the like. When he separated from his wife in 1972 -- they divorced in 1974 -- his home ceased to be a large house in Paddington and became a small basement flat, full of books, at 23 Lambolle Road, Belsize Park. He was a founder member of the British-Irish Association (1972), an educational charity intended to promote better relations. 
Arthur Koestler encouraged Inglis to pursue research into supernatural and paranormal phenomena. His later books concern dreams, intuition, coincidence, trances, spontaneous combustion, dowsing, levitation, poltergeists, fire walking, and ghosts. He condemned scientists for overlooking these matters and privately regretted his own lack of psychic experience. He never forced his opinions on his friends, many of whom were young women. His reputation as a good-natured philanderer was deserved, but from 1984 he adored Margaret van Hattem (1948-1989), a Dutch-born Australian-educated journalist. Brian Inglis died of ischaemic heart disease at the Royal Free Hospital, Camden, on 11 February 1993 after collapsing in the street. The body was cremated. 


@@@@@


doc= 52132


Jacob, Sir (Edward) Ian Claud (1899-1993), army officer and broadcasting executive, was born in Quetta, Baluchistan, India, on 27 September 1899, the second of two children of Field Marshal Sir Claud William Jacob (1863-1948), and his wife, Clara Pauline Wyatt (1872-1959), daughter of the Revd Joseph Light Wyatt, a missionary in Trichinopoly. His elder sister, Aileen, died when she was eight. He was educated at Wellington College and the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, before joining the Royal Engineers as a second lieutenant in 1918. He subsequently read mechanical sciences at King's College, Cambridge, graduating with a second class degree in 1925. Meanwhile, on 27 August 1924, he married Cecil Bisset Treherne (1902-1991), daughter of Major-General Sir Francis Harper Treherne (1858-1955), of the Red House, Woodbridge, Suffolk. Treherne had been the senior medical officer in Jacob's father's division in France in the First World War, and Jacob had corresponded with Cecil since they were teenagers. He stayed with her family when he returned to Britain from India on his way to Cambridge, and they were married at the end of his first year. They were happily married for sixty-six years, and had two sons, John Claud and William Le Grand. 
Jacob was promoted captain in 1929, and in 1931 returned to England to attend the staff college, in an outstanding year which was to produce fifteen generals. From 1934 to 1936 he was a staff officer in the War Office (promoted brevet major in 1935), and from 1936 to 1938 was brigade major in the canal brigade in Egypt. In 1938 he was promoted full major, and appointed military assistant secretary to the committee of imperial defence. The following year he was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel and appointed assistant military secretary to the war cabinet. From May 1940 he worked closely with the minister of defence (and prime minister), Winston Churchill. Churchill liked and respected Jacob, who wrote the official record of all ten of his summit visits to Roosevelt, Chiang Kai-shek, and Stalin. He remained in this post until 1946; he was promoted colonel in 1943, and appointed CBE in 1942, CB in 1944, and KBE in 1946. His experience at the nerve-centre of the war gave him an invaluable insight into world affairs. At the same time it put an end to his professional career as a soldier. 'I knew I could look for no promotion', he said, 'because I had not commanded troops in the field in wartime' ('The Independent', 26 April 1993). Jacob had to find a civilian job. He retired from the army in 1946, with the rank of acting major-general (later honorary lieutenant-general). 
By VE-day the BBC's European service had reached the zenith of its reputation. It had grown into the largest and most trusted foreign-language radio operation in the world. Yet by 1946 it was disintegrating. European statesmen and broadcasters returned to their liberated homelands. Newspapers reclaimed their journalists and universities their dons. Some staff were sent abroad as the vanguard of the BBC's own corps of foreign correspondents. Others joined the United Nations radio department. Moreover, the European service needed a new controller to replace Ivone Kirkpatrick, who had been transferred to the Allied Control Commission for Germany. Kirkpatrick suggested Jacob as his successor. It proved to be an ideal choice. The BBC's director-general, Sir William Haley, needed to arrest the seepage from Bush House, and to restore its morale. He also wanted someone with sufficient authority in Whitehall to stave off further cuts in the grant-in-aid which funded foreign broadcasting. As the new controller of European services Jacob made himself visible and approachable, regularly going to newsrooms and studios to watch the polyglot operation in action. 
In 1947 Jacob was put in charge of all overseas broadcasting, with a seat on the newly established board of management, and a strong voice in the overall direction of the BBC. However, his civilian career was interrupted by Churchill's return to Downing Street in October 1951. The prime minister again claimed the defence portfolio for himself and persuaded the BBC to give Jacob leave of absence to become his chief staff officer and deputy military secretary to the cabinet, before setting off for a visit to Washington and Ottawa. On his return Churchill announced that Earl Alexander of Tunis, the retiring governor-general of Canada, would take over the Ministry of Defence. Jacob's enthusiasm was muted. 'Soldiers, however eminent, make bad ministers', he said ('The Independent', 26 April 1993). 
In June 1952 Haley announced that he was leaving the BBC to become editor of 'The Times', following the government's decision to introduce commercial television. Although he had been concerned solely with external broadcasting, Jacob was widely admired and, unlike some of the other contenders for Haley's succession, he had no enemies within the BBC. The governors appointed him director-general in October 1952. Jacob's regime at Broadcasting House (which lasted until 1960) covered a period in which television licences quadrupled, and radio ceased to be the dominant medium. He enlisted the support of the Independent Television Authority in a battle to remove the iniquitous fourteen-day rule. This prevented programmes from discussing any issue due to be debated in parliament during the coming fortnight. As director-general, Jacob cogently presented the case for the rule's abolition. Simultaneously he made sure that audiences were alerted each time the onerous rule had prevented a broadcast. By July 1957 reason, combined with ridicule, had won the battle. 
Jacob rejected the notion that items of news should be suppressed because they were 'inconvenient from a short-term political standpoint'. Nor, despite his Whitehall background, did he expect his senior staff meekly to accept governmental direction. When they visited the Foreign Office, he declared, 'They should seek to learn all they can, they should listen to the views expressed, but they should not act on guidance directly from Foreign Office officials without testing it by our long-term standards' ('The Independent', 26 April 1993). It was under Jacob's direction that the BBC survived the worst threat to its independence. During the Suez crisis of 1956 the prime minister, Sir Anthony Eden, tried to prevent the overseas service from reporting newspaper editorials critical of the bombardment of Egypt. Those who expected Jacob automatically to toe the government line were surprised by his forthright reaction. 'If the BBC is found for the first time to be suppressing significant items of news, its reputation would rapidly vanish', he declared (ibid.). He was summoned to the Foreign Office and told that as a punitive gesture the Bush House grant-in-aid would be cut by $1 million. Jacob and his chairman, Sir Alexander Cadogan, called on R. A. Butler, the lord privy seal, the next day, and managed to get the threatened cut reduced by half. At the time Eden was considering other ways of bringing the BBC to heel. However, during Jacob's absence abroad his stance was stoutly maintained by his deputies. After Eden's resignation that particular threat to BBC editorial independence was lifted. 
Jacob played a leading role in the founding of the British Commonwealth International Film Agency, and of the European Broadcasting Union, and was first president of the latter. He retired from the BBC at the end of 1960, having groomed Hugh Carleton Greene to be his successor. He had promoted Greene to the board of management as director of news and current affairs in preference to Tahu Hole, the New Zealander whose malign administration of the BBC news division was widely held to be one of the reasons for the early lead of Independent Television News. 
In 1963 Jacob was the principal author of the seminal Ismay-Jacob report on the central organization of defence. The report, commissioned by Harold Macmillan and Peter Thorneycroft and implemented by Earl Mountbatten, led to major changes in the defence establishment. Jacob regarded the production of this report as the most important single act of his career. He held many offices after leaving the BBC. He rescued the Army and Navy Club from oblivion, and subsequently was its chairman for seven years. He became chairman of the Suffolk Police Authority, county councillor for Woodbridge, Suffolk, and deputy lieutenant. He was also chairman of the Covent Garden Authority, a trustee of the Imperial War Museum, a director of Fisons and EMI, chairman of Matthews Holdings, regional director for inner London of Lloyds Bank, and chairman of Sherborne School. He was advanced to GBE in 1960. 
As director-general of the BBC, Jacob was overshadowed, metaphorically as well as physically, by those two titans Sir John Reith and Sir Hugh Greene. Yet he successfully piloted the BBC through stormier waters than Reith or Greene ever encountered. He was, in addition, the director-general who brought the BBC into the television age. His friend Sir Charles Richardson published a biography, 'From Churchill's Secret Circle to the BBC' (1991), which made substantial use of Jacob's fascinating private diaries. Jacob died of heart failure at his home, the Red House, Cumberland Street, Woodbridge, Suffolk, on 24 April 1993, and was cremated in Woodbridge the next day. A memorial service was held in St Margaret's Church, Westminster Abbey, on 13 October 1993. He was survived by his two sons, his wife, Cecil, having died on 1 January 1991. 


@@@@@


doc= 52135


Jeans, Susanne, Lady Jeans (1911-1993), organist and musicologist, was born on 25 January 1911 in Vienna, the eldest of the four children of Oskar Hock, the director of a paper mill in Bohemia, and his wife, Jekaterina, who came from a military family. She entered the Vienna Music Academy in 1925, studying the piano and theory with the composer Franz Schmidt, and in 1927 began to play the organ, taking lessons with Franz Schutz. Her interest in baroque organs began in 1929, when she heard the 1710 Silbermann organ in Freiburg Cathedral in Saxony, and was overwhelmed by the beauty of the sound and the clarity of the articulation. After gaining her diploma from the academy in 1931, she gave her first important organ recital in the Grosser Musikvereinssaal in Vienna in December 1931, giving the first performance of Franz Schmidt's prelude and fugue in G, before moving to Leipzig in 1932 to study at the Kirchenmusikalisches Institut with Karl Straube, cantor of the Thomaskirche. In 1933 Charles-Marie Widor, professor of organ at the Paris Conservatoire, invited her to study with him. 
Hock made her first recital tour of England in 1934, returning in 1935, when she was a soloist at the Handel festival in Cambridge, playing German baroque music on the organ of St John's College. After an invitation in July 1935 to play at a party at Cleveland Lodge, Westhumble, near Dorking, the home of the mathematician and astronomer Sir James Hopwood Jeans (1877-1946), whose first wife had died in 1934, she married Jeans on 30 September 1935; they had two sons and one daughter. Sir James Jeans was a very good organist himself, possessing a large three-manual Romantic organ of 1924, and after their marriage he added a new organ room and installed a 1936 Eule organ for Susi, the first neo-baroque organ in England: the two organ rooms were soundproofed so that they could play without disturbing each other. She built up a collection of keyboard instruments, including an English chamber organ of 1796, a two-manual and pedal harpsichord (for a long time the only one in England), and a working model of a seventeenth-century water organ. 
During the Second World War Cleveland Lodge was requisitioned and the family moved to Somerset; then in 1946 Susi Jeans's husband died. After this she resumed her solo career. While her authentic performances and broadcasts of English organ music of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were an important influence on organ building and playing in England, she did not confine herself to early music, and at the inauguration of the Royal Festival Hall organ in 1954 she played Max Reger's 'Was Gott tut, das ist wohlgetan'. She also introduced English audiences to works by twentieth-century Austrian composers, including Franz Schmidt, Walter Pach, and Augustinus Kropfreiter. She had first performed in the United States in 1937, and she continued to make concert tours of North America, Australia, and Europe, also giving masterclasses and seminars; in 1967 she was organist in residence at the University of Colorado. She was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Organists in 1966. 
Jeans's short piece 'In praise of tremulants' ('MT', 1950) was the first of many articles she contributed to English and German scholarly journals, mainly concerning seventeenth- and eighteenth-century keyboard music and its performance and ornamentation; her topics ranged from the pedal clavichord to seventeenth-century musicians mentioned in the Sackville papers, seventeenth-century water-blown organs, the Easter psalms of Christ's Hospital, and the painted organ case in Gloucester Cathedral. Her editions of keyboard music include the complete keyboard works of the Exeter organist John Lugge ('c'.1587- 'c'.1647), on which she collaborated with John Steele, published in 1990; 'Voluntary for Organ in C' by Benjamin Rogers (1613/14-1698), published in 1962; and 'Four Inventions' by H. N. Gerber (1702-1775), published in 1974. In 1972 she lectured at Cornell University on Sir Isaac Newton's studies in music theory. She became increasingly worried about the state of the few old organs remaining in English churches and historic houses, and in 1969 founded the Organ Preservation Society, which saved many organs which would otherwise have been destroyed or altered; the organs were then repaired without altering the pipework or the action, in order to preserve their tone and voicing. 
In 1954 Susi Jeans started the Mickleham and Westhumble festival, renamed the Boxhill festival in 1966: this took place in the music room at Cleveland Lodge every year until 1992, concentrating on works by neglected composers of the Renaissance and baroque periods and on newly discovered pieces by better-known composers. In 1978 she founded the annual Cleveland Lodge summer school for English organ music, which she directed. Before she died, she offered Cleveland Lodge to the Royal School of Church Music, although she had never been a church organist herself, and in 1996 the organization moved there. Her pupils included many who became leading organists, including Peter Hurford, David Lumsden, and George Guest. 
Despite living in England for nearly sixty years, Susi Jeans never lost her strong Austrian accent. Tall and elegant (she had trained as a fashion model in Austria), she loved skiing and mountaineering, and climbed the Matterhorn twice. She died at Cleveland Lodge on 7 January 1993. Her funeral service was held at Mickleham parish church on 16 January. In 1993 the Lady Susi Jeans Centre for Organ Historiography was founded at the University of Reading. 


@@@@@


doc= 52142


Millington, Edward (c.1636-1703), auctioneer and bookseller, was born about 1636 (assuming that he was near the average age of completion at the end of his apprenticeship), the son of Edward Millington, a yeoman from Nottingham. His mother's name is unknown. Millington was apprenticed to John Sherly, a London haberdasher; he completed his apprenticeship and was granted the freedom of the Haberdashers' Company on 28 June 1661 and became a citizen of London not long thereafter. Although free of the Haberdashers' Company, Millington like many other haberdashers quickly took on the trade of bookselling, very likely to the chagrin of the established Stationers' Company. He set up his first print shop at the Pelican on Duck Lane in Little Britain, and published John Wagstaffe's 'Question of Witchcraft Debated' (1669). Millington continued publishing and selling new books at least until 1679, although by then he had already embarked on his new-found career as an auction impresario. 
The first auction that definitely involved Millington was the major sale of the library of the Dutch theologian Gijsbert Voet (1589-1676) at the White Hart in St Bartholomew Close, Little Britain, on 25 November 1678, although he probably began his auctioning career well before this event. For the Voet sale, Millington collaborated with substantial London booksellers such as Moses Pitt and others to import scholarly works from the continent in order to offer them for sale in England. Millington seems to have learned about the practice of selling used books by auction from some friends who had seen similar auctions held in the Netherlands. His book auctions were so successful that he soon expanded his sales repertoire into both the art and the fashion markets, as he began to organize auctions of pictures as well as of cravats, neckcloths, and other fashionable dress. Although Millington came relatively late to auctioning artworks, not beginning to do so until his sale at Tunbridge Wells on 13 August 1689, he soon became the most energetic and renowned art auctioneer of his day. In January 1692 he set up regular art auctions at a salesroom he dubbed the 'Vendu' in Covent Garden. Millington's Vendu was perhaps the first established auction house in England independent of the outroper, an officer under the crown who nominally held a monopoly on all public sales by auction. 
Out of the eighty-four recorded auctions in which he took part, Millington conducted fifty sales of books, as opposed to twenty-eight sales of artworks, the remaining sales being auctions of various miscellaneous goods such as estate sales or, on one occasion, 'several lean grass horses and mares, fit for many purposes' ('LondG', 4 May 1699). It is not clear where Millington obtained the goods he offered for sale by auction. His book auctions seem to have been primarily secondhand sales, while his art auctions may well have been supplied by the growing London artistic community along with previously owned works imported from abroad. 
Millington's innovative sales techniques and his successful development of the auction market could prompt jealousy from his competitors as well as attempts to restrict his business. The Stationers' Company often complained about the harm to their trade done by the rise of secondhand book auctions. The outroper also resented Millington's incursion into his market. On 10 December 1689 the outroper made a formal complaint to the court of aldermen 'against Mr. Millington for making publick sales of bookes [and] pictures' (court of aldermen repertories, 95, fol. 82b). It seems that Millington never responded to this complaint, however, nor did it impede his sales efforts. As soon as 17 January 1690 he was once again presiding over a new auction of art at the Barbadoes Coffee House in Cornhill ('LondG', 16 Jan 1690). 
Millington travelled extensively to promote his auction sales. Although most were held in London (where, from 1695 until his death, he was based at St Bartholomew Close) he also conducted auctions in Cambridge, Tunbridge Wells, Norwich, Bury St Edmunds, Kings Lynn, Bath, Oxford, and Gloucester. He was a master of the fine art of flattery, and the prefaces to his sales catalogues frequently commend the judicious taste and learned erudition of his buyers. Dunton said of Millington that 'he had a quick wit, and a wonderful fluency of speech', and that 'there was usually as much comedy in his 'once, twice, thrice,' as can be met with in a modern play' ('Life and Errors', 1.235). Thomas Hearne was more critical: although Millington was 'certainly the best Auctioneer in the World, being a man of Great Wit and Fluency of Speech, & a thorough Master of his trade', he was 'at the same time very impudent and saucy, yet he was a rascal, & could not at the end of Auctions be brought to give an Account to the Persons that employ'd him, so that by that means he allow'd w[ha]t he pleased, & no more, & kept a great Number of Books that were not sold to himself. ('Remarks and Collections', 8.115-116)' Millington's religious and political views are for the most part unknown, although it may be significant that he was one among the many thousands who signed the London 'monster petition' in which the king was importuned to reconvene the prorogued parliament in January 1680 so that investigations of suspected popish plots might proceed. This petition was particularly popular among London radicals and dissenters, although there is no other evidence that Millington was either. Millington died on 27 September 1703 in Cambridge. Probate was granted on 29 November 1703 to his daughter Maria, wife of Thomas Searle. It is not known who her mother was, or whether she and Millington were married. Millington had the dubious honour of being immortalized in verse, along with other less well known wits, by the Grub Street poet Thomas Brown, in an elegy which strives to capture Millington's performance as an auctioneer. 


@@@@@


doc= 52143


Mearne, Samuel (1624-1683), publisher and bookbinder, was born at Reading at 11 a.m. on 20 April 1624, the son of Henry Mearne, yeoman. In 1637 he was apprenticed to Robert Bates, a member of the Stationers' Company, subsequently turned over to John Arnold, bookseller, and in July 1646 freed by both Arnold and Bates. In 1653 Mearne took the first of his twelve apprentices. Two years later, when he bound a book for one Cor: Pigeon, his address is given as 'Pellecan Courte, in Littill Brettin'. He lived in Little Britain, in the parish of St Botolph, Aldersgate, all his working life. 
In 1655 a pass was granted for Cornelius Bee, Samuel Mearne, and William Minshaw to go to the Netherlands. He may there have been of service to Charles II, who was at Middelburg. In any event, he was speedily rewarded at the Restoration by being granted, by letters patent of 20 June 1660, the office of bookbinder to the king at a fee -- which he seldom received -- of $6 per annum. Mearne was already referred to as a bookseller in 1655 and his first publication also dates from that year. Only two other books survive which he issued before 1670, but from then onwards until his death in 1683 he published regularly. He was not himself a printer, but he had a share in the king's printing house, as one of the assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker. His success as a businessman was partly due to keeping on good terms with the establishment as a zealous seeker-out of illegal presses, an activity which helped the government to suppress seditious pamphlets and helped the leading members of the book trade, such as Mearne himself, to suppress possible competitors. In 1668 the king requested the Stationers' Company to admit, as member of the court, among a number of other royal servants, 'Samuel Mearne, our bookbinder'. Mearne subsequently served as warden and master of the company and continued to be concerned about illegal printing for the rest of his life. 
Mearne is, however, best known as a bookbinder. His first surviving binding in blind-tooled brown calf was that made for Cor: Pigeon in 1655. At this time he married; his eldest child, Anne, named after her mother, was born on 3 January 1656, but she did not live long and her burial is recorded on 3 March of the same year. On 2 January 1657 his eldest son, Samuel, was born, followed by Charles ('b'. February 1658) and Anne ('b'. 26 May 1665). Another son, James, was buried on 29 May 1664. 
From 1660 onwards, Samuel Mearne the elder was much too important a figure in the book trade to have worked at the bench himself, but he did have a bookbinding shop on the premises of his bookselling business and the Mearne bindery was responsible for the most splendid gold-tooled and onlaid bindings produced during the reign of Charles II. Mearne also carried out all the standard binding for the royal library, mainly in red turkey leather, decorated with gold fillets, the royal arms block, a conventional flower, or, later and most frequently, with Charles II's cipher. More elaborate bindings were supplied for use in the various royal chapels, for members of the royal household, for presentation to ambassadors and plenipotentiaries, and for the ceremonies of the Order of the Garter. Several sets of 'Bibles' and prayer books survive, bound for the chapel and the closet at Whitehall, the set for the king's own use the most elaborate and costliest of all in red turkey leather, decorated with black paint, and lavishly tooled in gold to a cottage roof design with small massed floral and curling tools and the king's cipher, their foredges painted beneath the gold with the royal arms or ciphers. The Mearne bindery also supplied a considerable number of other 'Bibles' and prayer books for use in the royal chapels, the most elaborate of which, in gold-tooled and onlaid black, olive, or red turkey with painted foredges, may have been for the altar. Although Mearne's favourite style was the 'cottage roof', he occasionally produced a design based on the French 'fanfare' style, as well as simpler panel designs. He also supplied books to the dean of Windsor as register of the Order of the Garter, the registers bound in velvet, and the manuscript copies of the statutes for the newly installed knights in very dark blue turkey leather. 
In 1674, on the death of Francis Bowman, Mearne had become stationer in ordinary to the king and in May 1675 a new grant of the offices of bookbinder, bookseller, and stationer to the king was made to Samuel Mearne and his son Charles for their lives and the life of the survivor. Mearne died at Little Britain in May 1683 and was buried at St Botolph, Aldersgate, on 16 May of that year. On 9 July, Mr Secretary Jenkins wrote to the lord mayor: 'The late Mr Mearne was so zealous in the King's service that I think myself obliged to remember it on every opportunity of doing a good office to his son.' Charles Mearne, who was apprenticed to his father and freed by patrimony on 24 June 1682, but who had been working in partnership with his father since 1678, continued as royal bookbinder, bookseller, and stationer to supply the 'Bibles' and prayer books to the closet. He survived his father by only three years, when his elder brother, Samuel junior, was appointed royal bookbinder, an office he held until the revolution in 1688. 


@@@@@


doc= 52145


Anthony, Anthony (d. 1563), military administrator, was the son of William Anthony (died 1535), a Fleming who was made denizen in 1503, and his wife, Joan. William was a citizen and brewer of London; his premises, The Ship in East Smithfield, passed to Anthony, apparently his only son. William Anthony supplied Henry VIII's court and army with beer in the 1520s; among his partners was Henry Janssen or Johnson, who also had a career in the royal ordnance, and no doubt helped to find Anthony a place there. On 4 October 1517 Anthony married Anne, daughter of William Roy (another brewer) and his wife, Adrian; a daughter, Barbara, born May 1519 and dying the following September, is Anthony's only recorded child. 
Anthony was already a groom of the chamber when on 20 September 1530 he had the king's licence to export 200 tuns of beer annually. On 7 October 1533 he was appointed one of the gunners at the Tower, a post he retained for life. He must soon have ceased to exercise the duty in person as he rose in prominence in the ordnance office, also based at the Tower. It is uncertain when he first acquired a clerkship there, but by 1536 he was senior enough to deputize for the master, and following a reorganization in 1536/7 he emerged as clerk of the deliveries, one of two chief clerical posts. On 29 April 1537 he was named as one of the four founder masters of the body which came to be called the Honourable Artillery Company. He also began to deploy a graphic talent; one of several 'plats' now ascribed to him illustrates a proposed route for Anne of Cleves's journey to England in 1539. His business interests meanwhile extended to include the export of cheese, and in March 1545 he was licensed to retain four journeymen above the statutory limit. 
In summer 1545 Anthony's professional energies were stretched by urgent demands from the privy council for munitions to repel the threatened French invasion. Even then he may have been at work on his most ambitious composition: the three vellum rolls depicting the whole royal fleet and listing its ordnance (the Anthony roll, as it is confusingly called). The completed manuscript was presented to Henry VIII in 1546. On 23 January 1549 Edward VI advanced Anthony to the surveyorship of the ordnance, with his salary backdated to 1547. An early responsibility was the evacuation of weaponry from Boulogne when the town was returned to the French in 1550. In April 1552 Anthony was slightly hurt when one of the ammunition stores on Tower Hill exploded. His wife probably died on 11 April 1559; he subsequently married Alice, widow of John Norton. On 1 February 1560 he surrendered his patent of office, receiving a fortnight later a new grant in survivorship with Henry Iden. On 29 August 1562 he became a founding freeman of the Brewers' Company on its incorporation. The last months of his life were busy with the supply of munitions for the ill-fated Le Havre expedition. Anthony's will, made on 23 August 1563, was proved on 9 October; he was buried at St Botolph, Aldgate, London. His beneficiaries included fellow brewers and ordnance colleagues. His widow later married William Partridge, a gunmaker in the office. 
Anthony's illuminated manuscript of Henry VIII's navy remained in the Royal Collection until 1680, when Charles II gave two of the rolls to Pepys; he had them bound as the volume which passed with the rest of his library to Magdalene College, Cambridge. The other roll was given by William IV to his daughter Lady Mary Fox, and was sold by her to the British Museum in 1857. Anthony also wrote or compiled other works; of these, a chronicle of the years 1522-58 and an account of Elizabeth I's coronation alone survive, in copies made by the seventeenth-century collector Elias Ashmole. 


@@@@@


doc= 52150


How, John (d. 1571), organ builder, was probably the son of the John Hewe who in 1485 was paid 13's'. 9died for work relating to the organ in the lady chapel at York Minster, and who received the freedom of the city four years later. The younger John How, who also tuned and repaired the minster's instruments in 1531 and 1536, has been identified with the John 'Heweson' made free of the city in the 1540s, which has led to speculation that the family originated from York. The Hows' workshop was 'at the sign of the Organe Pype' in the London parish of St Stephen Walbrook, where John junior was churchwarden in 1535-6, as his father had been before him. After the latter's death in 1519, How appears to have entered into partnership with John Clynmowe, or Clymmowe, and in 1526 they contracted to build a new organ for Holy Trinity, Coventry, for $30. In 1531-2 Eton College acquired a new instrument from 'Clymmo and his brother', from which it may be inferred that one partner had married the sister of the other. 
When the London guild of organ makers was dissolved in 1531, the city gave How permission to transfer to the Skinners', an appropriate move given the use organ builders made of animal hides. It was as a member of this company that he signed a tuning contract with the church of St Andrew Hubbard in 1534, according to which he received an annuity of 12died for maintaining its instrument. How made similar agreements with other city churches, though his annual fee, which was presumably based on the number and size of the organs, varied enormously. Thus from 1539 to 1554 St Mary Woolnoth paid him just 4died a year, while at St Dunstan-in-the-West his charges increased from 12died to 2's'. to 3's'. 4died over the same period. Altogether he is known to have built or repaired over thirty organs, and there may have been others of which there is now no record. At the height of his career he exercised a virtual monopoly over his craft, and created the most extensive business of any organ builder in England before the Commonwealth. 
By 1548 How's son Thomas was assisting him in his work. However, the various Edwardian injunctions against the use of florid polyphony and organs in church spelt financial ruin for the family, and it may have been for this reason that in 1551 How sold his house to the parish, though he continued to live there as a tenant. This arrangement remained in effect until the death of his widow, Anne, in 1585. The Marian restoration of traditional religion may have revived How's fortunes, but several references to him in the 1560s, when London's organs were again dismantled, confirm his decline into poverty. From 1563 his parish paid him an annual stipend of 52's'., probably as sexton, and certain churches pensioned him off at his full fee for the last two or three years of his life. He is sometimes referred to as 'Goodman' or 'Father' How, doubtless in recognition of his age and to distinguish him from his son. How and his family may have harboured Catholic sympathies, for on 23 April 1561 Thomas was examined before the lord mayor of London on suspicion of recusancy, and admitted that he had not received communion since Queen Elizabeth's accession. How died apparently without leaving a will and was buried at St Stephen Walbrook on 20 March 1571. 


@@@@@


doc= 52151


Isham, John (1525-1596), merchant and gentleman, was born in August 1525, probably at Ringstead, Northamptonshire, the fourth surviving son of Euseby Isham (died 1546) and Ann, daughter of Giles Poulton, esquire. In spite of their father's modest circumstances (John received only $3 6's'. 8died by the terms of his father's will) the children were successful. Of John's brothers, Giles (died 1559) trained in the law and became steward to Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, while Robert (died 1564) entered the priesthood and became a chaplain to Mary I. Gregory (died 1558) and Henry (died after 1595), like John, were destined for commercial careers, all three being apprenticed in the Mercers' Company of London. 
John Isham was apprenticed to Otwell Hill, mercer and merchant adventurer, in 1542, but on the death of his master the following year he was transferred to Thomas Gigges to serve the rest of his nine-year term. He later recalled that he did not refuse 'servile works' such as 'caryinge the water tankard bockets to the Temes' (Ramsay, 170), but he was clearly properly trained in mercantile arts, and seems to have spent time in Antwerp working as a factor. He became free of the company in 1551, and very shortly afterwards, on 6 October 1552, married Elizabeth Barker (died 1594), the widow of Leonard Barker, a fellow merchant adventurer. The marriage was critical to the establishment of his fortunes, for he became trustee of the bulk of the Barker fortune (Barker's moveables had been valued at $1195 net on his death) on behalf of his wife's infant sons. John also benefited from the fact that his brother Gregory, who became free of the Mercers in 1546, and with whom John was probably in partnership, had already established a successful business and was in the process of acquiring an estate in land worth $400 p.a. 
The Ishams traded on the London-Antwerp axis, concentrating on the exchange of Suffolk, Somerset, and Wiltshire broadcloths and Yorkshire kerseys for silks and luxury cloths. They were among the middle-ranking exporters: in the year from Michaelmas 1553 John exported 386 cloths and Gregory 428; in 1556-7 John exported 556 cloths and Gregory 466. The business operations required John to make regular visits to the dealers in kerseys at Halifax, but the Antwerp end of the business seems to have been handled by a succession of factors. The 1560s were more difficult years for trading because of successive disruptions of the Antwerp mart arising from political problems, and Isham began to reduce the scale of his business. He also increased his investment in the wool trade, drawing on his Northamptonshire connections and selling wool to the clothiers in exchange for their cloths. These years brought him the beginnings of civic recognition, with his election as renter warden of the Mercers' Company in 1567, and the opportunities for liberal hospitality arising from the company's feast, for which he provided thirty-three bucks, many of them through his Northamptonshire connections. 'Not one man before his tyme nor sens... had the lyke by a great many' claimed his biographer (Ramsay, 171). 
Isham resided successively at Bow Lane and (from 1560) St Sithe's Lane in the London parish of St Antholin's, with a suburban retreat at Tottenham. But in 1560 he took a key decision in acquiring from Sir William Cecil the manor of Lamport in Northamptonshire for $610. The purchase had required financial help from his brother Robert, who seems to have been opposed to John's schemes for the enclosure of the estate, but he died in 1564, and John was able to buy out the executors' interest. In 1570 he began the process of enclosure by a series of agreements with the tenants, and the process accelerated with his decision to leave London and settle permanently at Lamport in 1572. As his biographer recalled, 'heer he aplyed him self to plantinge, buildinge, makinge of poales, includeinge of grounds and all other woorkes of good husbandry, as though he had been brought up in them from his infancy' (Ramsay, 171). In 1568 he had acquired the long lease of the profitable rectory, along with its parsonage house which he converted into a manor house. Although he was farming on a large scale (by August 1583 he had 1572 sheep) his gross annual income (at about $500 p.a.) was lower than that he had enjoyed as merchant. He had, however, made the effective transition from merchant to country gentleman, serving as justice of the peace for Northamptonshire from 1576, and as sheriff in 1581-2. 
Isham's last years were difficult. He refers in his will to losses by expensive litigation, dearth of cattle, and fire. His health was poor for the last twelve years or so of his life. According to his son's memoir he suffered from 'an issue of bloud running from his privy member' (Ramsay, 173-4), which first manifested itself after a fall from his horse. He died at Lamport on 17 March 1596, and was buried in the chancel of the parish church two days later. 
Isham was perhaps unusual in making the leap from mercantile to gentry status in one generation. He was determined that the estate should be transmitted intact to his eldest son, Thomas (1555-1605), who was blind from at least the age of twelve. The settlement of the estate in 1588 had ensured this, but left the younger sons, Henry (1561-1628) and Richard (1565-1618), dependent on small annuities and cash bequests. John Isham died as the well-established squire of Lamport, but he had not forgotten whence his fortune came. In his will he requested that his gravestone should be embellished at the corners with four brass plates bearing the coats of arms of the City of London, the Merchant Adventurers' Company, the Mercers' Company, and the Ishams, 'with suche other armes, superscriptions, verses and posies... to testifie to posteritie of what house I discend bothe of my father and my mothers side, that I was a Merchaunt Adventurer of the Cittie of London and free of the Company of Mercers and by that meanes with the blessing of God received my preferrement and was enhabled to purchase the mannor of Langporte and patronage of the churche therof.' There are few more powerful testimonies to the role of sixteenth-century London commerce as a social escalator. 


@@@@@


doc= 52152


Kranich, Burchard (d. 1578), physician and mining entrepreneur, came from southern Germany ('High Almain'); his name suggests that he was from Kronach, upper Franconia, near the mining area of the Erzgebirge. He is first heard of in 'The suit of Burghard touching the mines' ('CSP dom.', no. 826), on 3 June 1553. The following year Kranich was licensed to prospect for, mine, and smelt any kinds of minerals in England. After being involved in lead-smelting in Derbyshire, he moved to Cornwall, being commissioned 'to dig... such mines of gold, silver and copper as he hath already... tried out' ('APC', '1554-6', 211). He is credited with using the first water-wheel type hammers ('stampers') in England. However, his Cornish mines were taken over, and for the years 1557-9 he was granted protection from creditors, 'on account of certain causes... touching the king and queen and the realm' ('CPR', '1555-7'). 
On 14 June 1561 Kranich was granted denization, and during 1562 was paid 100 marks ($66 13's'. 4died), with no reason given. In August, John Somers wrote that 'My Lady Marquis [the marchioness of Northampton] is in great danger by the jaundice. The physicians half despair, but Burcot, the Dutchman, at a pinch is like to do some good' ('CSP for.'). In October, Queen Elizabeth was taken ill with smallpox: the story of the insulted Kranich being threatened with a dagger before he would attend her is a later invention. The physician William Bullein made good-natured references to 'Dr Tocrub', while Gervase Markham's 'The English Hus-Wife' (5) attributed unspecified prescriptions to a manuscript (unidentified) of Kranich and Eliseus Bomelius. 
Amid growing doubts, Kranich alone insisted that the ore brought home (1577-8) by Martin Frobisher contained gold, and demanded for extracting it a daily wage of $1, and $200 pension -- without success. Kranich designed a new hearth, and -- someone said -- 'doctored' the melt with gold and silver coins. In the event, the influential investors lost their money, and his reputation suffered. 
In 1568 Kranich was said to adhere to the English church; the report, ten years later, that he had heard mass at a private house was probably untrue, and his will is in the protestant form. Kranich lived in St Clement's churchyard, just outside Temple Bar, in Westminster. On 20 September 1578 a Susan Burcott 'from Doctor Burcotts' was buried at St Clement Danes: 'the death of a child of his' hastened Kranich's end, William Fleetwood believed (Hatfield House, Salisbury (Cecil) MSS, no. 660). 
On 7 October 1578 Kranich, suffering from gout and infirmity, made his will, leaving his dwelling-house to his wife, who was to receive the proceeds from the sale of his Holborn properties, after payment of his debts. Following legacies to his servants and the poor, the residue, likewise, would go to his widow and executrix. By a codicil (19 October), his servant William Deane would have any proceeds over $700 from the sale, and also his (unspecified) medical books and instruments; Kranich promised a silver-gilt bowl with a cover, given him by 'my Lord', to a friend. 
Kranich died later that month, and was buried at St Clement Danes on 22 October 1578; probate was granted on 21 November to his widow, Agnes. 


@@@@@


doc= 52153


Penn, Julian (d. 1592), moneylender, was apparently a daughter of William Arthur of 'Clapham' (Clapton in Gordano), Somerset, but nothing is known of her early life. She married Robert Hicks, whose family lived near her, in the Bristol area, but the date and place of the marriage are unknown. 
After their marriage, Robert Hicks went on to keep the White Bear mercer's shop, on the southern side of Cheapside, London; he was assessed for subsidy in St Pancras parish in 1541. Robert and Julian Hicks had six sons, including Sir Michael Hickes, who became prominent as secretary to Lord Burghley and a personal and political friend to Burghley's youngest son, Robert Cecil. By his will, made on 21 November 1557, Robert Hicks, by then an ironmonger, left lands in Bristol and elsewhere in Gloucestershire to his wife, who was to pay his mother $10 per annum; his property in St Katharine Coleman, London, was to go to his brother Richard, then to Julian. 
Julian continued to manage her late husband's shop with the help of their sons, dealing with John and Gregory Isham, mercers; and she also became a prominent moneylender. Although her writing and spelling remained poor, even by the standards of the day, important clients usually treated her with respect. A letter written by William Cecil requests a loan of $50, for 'a great occasion I have to use it' (BL, Lansdowne MS 103, fol. 268): this was written after she had married Anthony Penn (probably in 1559) but perhaps was never sent. 
By his will of 12 December 1570, Anthony Penn also bequeathed his goods to his wife. He was buried at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, on 16 July 1572, and probate was granted on the following day. In August 1573 Julian's prospective third marriage, to a Mr Twitty, did not materialize. 
In an undated letter to a Mr Hardwick, Julian explained her financial situation: she was 'daily driven to pawn my plate to supply ordinary charges' (BL, Lansdowne MS 108, fol. 31'r'- 'v'), but the debt remained unpaid. During 1576-7 Mrs Penn listed her assets: 'I have in writings I think be good debts the sum of xviijC 'li'['bri'].' As well, she had plate, jewels, tapestry, linen, furniture, and: 'my lease of the White Bear in Cheapside and my house that I now dwell in [on St Peter's Hill, in the parish of St Peter, Paul's Wharf: purchased in 1559]... I have lost since that time by... ill debts and furniture of the White Bear... vjC 'li'['bri']... I [ac]knowledge myself from the first day of my birth I never deserved penny or piece of bread... God hath done it all, giving and taking. (BL, Lansdowne MS 108, fol. 30)' In 1591 Edward de Vere, earl of Oxford, rented rooms in Mrs Penn's house at $100 per annum, but flitted without paying. Thomas Churchyard, who had stood surety for him, wrote to Mrs Penn that 'for fear of [ar]resting I lie in the sanctuary' (BL, Lansdowne MS 68, fol. 257). To Henry Fitzgerald, earl of Kildare, she wrote that 'But for the love I bear to my Lord Admiral [Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham] and my lady your wife [Effingham's daughter] I had ended my suit[,] for... the queen... hath promised me that I shall take no wrong at man's hand'. Kildare replied, on 23 June 1591, 'I desire you now to bear with me but till my man return with money out of Ireland which will be within this fortnight at which time I will pay you with great thanks' (BL, Lansdowne MS 68, fols. 207, 209). 
Julian Penn died on 14 November 1592, and administration of her goods was granted to her son Michael on 22 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 52154


Portinari, Sir Giovanni (b. c.1502xc.1508, d. in or after 1572), military engineer, was probably born in Florence, to unknown parents. By 1526 he was living in England, being recorded in that year as one of the king's gentlemen pensioners; he retained this position until at least 1547. He married an English wife, and letters of denization issued on 14 February 1537 granted him many of the privileges of English-born subjects. In the following year he was employed in the dissolution of the monasteries, being placed by Thomas Cromwell in charge of the destruction of Lewes Priory, Sussex, which had been granted to Cromwell himself. Portinari sent his employer a detailed description (written in Italian) of the abbey church, and the means used to pull it down. The only evidence for his own religious allegiance derives from a piece of Spanish intelligence dated 1572, which describes him as a 'great Catholic', and gives his age as seventy. However, a law suit from June of the same year identified him as being 'aged sixty-four years or thereabouts' ('Blackfriars Records', 52). 
As a member of the royal household Portinari was employed on a number of commissions between 1539 and 1547. In 1539, for instance, he was asked to interpret for a Florentine merchant who was imprisoned in the Tower, and in 1540 he attended the ceremony welcoming Anne of Cleves on her arrival in England. In 1544 he served at the siege of Boulogne, and in the following year he was appointed keeper of Sandown Castle on the Isle of Wight, a post that brought him an income of $100 per annum. As a gentleman pensioner he attended the funeral of Henry VIII in 1547 and the coronation of Edward VI; he was also made superintendent of the tomb of Henry VIII, receiving an annual salary of $24. His career in England was temporarily halted during Edward's reign when he was deprived of his keepership of Sandown Castle and superintendency of Henry VIII's tomb by the duke of Somerset. The loss of these offices, and of the income they brought, forced Portinari to seek employment in France, where he was evidently well respected. There he worked on the fortifications of Piedmont, for which he appears to have been generously paid. Yet Portinari was keen to move back to England -- by 1554 he was in contact with the English government soliciting employment. In a testimonial to Mary in 1554 he explained that he had been forced to work for the French government for financial reasons. He reiterated his loyalty to the English crown and hoped some employment might be found for him, especially as he feared that the French might send him to Scotland to serve against the English. 
It was not until 1559, however, that Sir William Cecil began negotiations through Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to procure Portinari's service for Elizabeth I. He faced considerable competition from the French, who were unhappy about losing their engineer and offered to double Portinari's pension if he went to work for them in Scotland. Cecil's negotiations were ultimately successful, however, and Portinari arrived in England some time in 1560. It was probably about this time that he was knighted. Between March and April he arrived in Berwick, where he was employed intermittently until 1566. 
The significance of Berwick lay in its strategic position on the Scottish-English border, making it a common target for Scottish attacks; as a result the Elizabethan fortifications there were highly innovative, constituting one of the finest surviving examples of a fortress in the Italianate style, and cost ten times more than any other military building of the reign. Partly because of this, the works (devised and supervised by Sir Richard Lee) had come under considerable criticism by 1560. It was therefore decided that Lee's defences should be investigated by a specialist, namely Portinari. He not only criticized key parts of Lee's plans (including the dimensions of the bulwarks and the exposure of the base town) but also produced a series of counter-proposals. Lee evidently took offence -- when some of Portinari's plans disappeared from a locked coffer, Portinari implied that Lee had stolen them and was trying to discredit him. Portinari left Berwick in July but was to return in 1564, by when his differences with Lee had apparently been resolved. By then the Berwick works were again causing concern: while work was in progress, an entire wall had had to be demolished, causing a breach in the defences. Elizabeth set up a commission consisting of William Pelham, Lee, Portinari, and another Italian, Jacopo Aconcio, to confer on the works. The conference appears to have proceeded smoothly, although the two Italians disagreed with some of the plans for the layout of the fortifications, and endorsed drastic changes. They also differed between themselves as to the nature of the changes required, but nevertheless, recent excavations show that their proposals helped to shape the fortifications, which still survive almost intact. 
Portinari also worked on a number of other projects in these years. In 1560 he advised at Portsmouth, and in 1562 he was sent to Le Havre to inspect Lee's attempts to refortify that town. He remained there as the surveyor of works until 1563, frequently complaining to the English government about the lack of supplies and money and the problems of disease and disobedience among his labourers. In December 1562 he presented plans concerning fortifications on Jersey and Guernsey. The last surviving reference to Portinari dates from 1572, when he was directed by the queen to go to Flushing in the Netherlands to report on the fortifications there, but was later exempted from the commission. His salary in 1572 was put at $200 per annum. There is no record of when Portinari died or where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 52156


Spinola, Benedict (1519/20-1580), merchant, was one of the six children, the second son, of Battista Spinola of Genoa and his wife, Elisabetta, daughter of Giacomo Spinola. The Spinolas had long been prominent in Genoa (in 1556 Battista would decline the dogeship), and Benedict was born there. His early history is unknown but he appears in London in 1541, employed by Bastian Bony, postmaster, as a clerk at $2 a year: working for the postal service of London's foreign merchants gave Spinola ready access to the world of commerce and finance. He resided in St Gabriel Fenchurch parish (where he remained until he died) with his nephews Hannibal and Ascaneo Spinola. His property in Shoreditch, Middlesex, was popularly known as 'Spinola's pleasure'. During 1544-52, at least, he was associated with Acelin Salvago, a Genoese merchant. 
Unusually, Spinola was granted full denization in 1552, a privilege allowing him to pay taxes and customs dues at the Englishman's rates. By 1559 he was exporting woollen cloth at customs dues up to $200, and importing sweet wines to $40, a year. Illegally, he exported another's goods on his own licence (1561), and his signed confession survives; but his 1566 grant permitted this, and raised his limits to $2000 and $400 over a longer period. He had shipped his full quota of 4800 cloths by the end of 1569 but imported only 3845 -- out of 5342 -- butts of wine by Michaelmas 1570. Moreover, important communities of Italian merchants had been established in Antwerp and London, largely because of the luxury textiles and other wares carried from Italy overland to 'Flanders' (mostly Brabant), often for trans-shipment: hence, while his brothers Francisco, Pasquale, and Giacomo resided in Antwerp, Spinola himself lived in London, where he was in the very top rank of merchants. Requiring hangings for the dining chamber at Kenilworth Castle, the earl of Leicester told his man to 'deal with Mr Spinola', who was 'able to get such stuff better cheap than any man' (Jackson, 92). In 1572 Leicester asked Francis Walsingham, then in France, to favour Spinola in his (unspecified) 'great cause', as 'he is my dear friend and the best Italian I know in England' (BL, Harley MS 260, fol. 363). 
Spinola objected when, about 1550, Michael Angelo Florio, the minister of the (Calvinist) Italian church, preached against 'Popish' doctrines; but in 1566 the Spanish ambassador reported to Philip II that Spinola was now confirmed in his Anglicanism. Inclusion of his name in a list of suspected 'papists' (1578) was doubtless an error. By 1568 he and his household, inclusive of the French cook, were attending their parish church. Spinola's growing affluence is evident from his assessments for subsidy: in 1544, on $5; 1549, $20; in 1559, Spinola 'and his company' were assessed on $500; in 1564, $200; and in 1576, $100. The later reductions hint at his improved, favoured, status as an adviser to the government, gathering intelligence through his foreign correspondents and as an important negotiator in political and financial matters, as in the settlement of the Antwerp embargo, 1564-5. By virtue of his state and business interests, he often handled immense sums, so that, on 24 June 1574, he was owed amounts totalling $27, 879 9's'. 8died 
In 1568 the ships carrying the money for paying the duke of Alva's troops were forced into English ports by Huguenot raiders. For safety, the silver was conveyed ashore, whereupon Alva denounced this as an English plot for stealing the money, at Spinola's suggestion. When the government repaid the Genoese lenders, Spinola acted for it. In 1578 Spinola, with Horatio Palavicino, was an agent for arranging the loan to the Union of Brussels. On his eventual return from the Netherlands he made his Italian will on 6 July 1580. He was then somewhat infirm, 'alquanto indisposto del corpo': in fact he died of plague, and was buried in the choir -- a mark of his high standing locally -- of St Gabriel's Church on 15 August 1580. He had never married, and probate was granted to his nephew, Giacomo Spinola, on 29 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 52157


Verzelini, Jacob (1522-1607), glass maker, was born in Venice, probably into a family already engaged in the glass trade; a brother, Nicholas (died 1604), was active in Liege and London; another brother, Jasper, remained in Venice. Verzelini went to Antwerp about 1549. His marriage there in September 1556 to Elizabeth van Buren, daughter of a rich merchant, brought six children, and with this family he arrived in London in 1565, residing thereafter in the parish of St Olave, Hart Street. In 1571 Verzelini was recorded as a broker, probably trading with Antwerp, but in December 1574 he received a licence to set up a glasshouse and to manufacture drinking glasses as made in Murano. The glass, known as 'crystal', or 'facon de venise', was made from crushed flint and soda in the form of ashes imported from Spain, decoloured by the addition of manganese. A group of Venetians had arrived from Antwerp in 1549 to set up a crystal drinking-glass manufactory near Belsize Palace, north of London, but within a year or two all had left England. The import from Venice of vessels and mirrors of crystal for the luxury market represented for the government an unwelcome outflow of capital, and Verzelini's grant included the monopoly of manufacture for twenty-one years, with a general prohibition of imports of crystal wares. 
The glasshouse was constructed within the premises formerly occupied by the Crutched Friars, in Hart Street, and manned by Italians and some Englishmen, to whom Verzelini's grant obliged him to teach this new craft. The shopkeepers who had hitherto imported glassware opposed Verzelini's monopoly, but to no avail; however, it may not have been coincidence that in the morning of 4 September 1575 his glasshouse was devastated by fire, fed by his adjacent store of firewood. Fortunately the fire was prevented from spreading by the outer stone walls. Verzelini operated a temporary glasshouse at Newgate, and rebuilt the Crutched Friars glasshouse, together with a spacious house for his family. He was granted denization on 26 November 1576, and shortly afterwards, in consideration of the damage at Crutched Friars, was granted a twenty-one-year lease allowing him to cut firewood on the royal estate of Kingswood, in Hampshire. 
A succession of problems hit Verzelini in 1579. During the summer one of his servants brought charges that after three years of sexual abuse she had become pregnant by him. Having confessed, he was ordered to give 200 ells of canvas to the Bridewell Hospital poor and to have the child raised at his expense. Then Verzelini, who was not a freeman of the City and therefore prevented from trading with other 'foreigners', was penalized for selling to a trader from Leicester. He was ordered to demolish the glasshouse at Newgate when that at Crutched Friars was rebuilt, and he was ordered to shut down his furnaces in the winter, so as to spare some firewood for the citizenry. A demise of the Crutched Friars premises to Verzelini by Lord and Lady Lumley in 1586, for twenty-one years for a consideration of $200 and annual rent of $33 10's'., mentions the great room enclosing the glasshouse, a hall or shop, with parlour and kitchen, a garden with further buildings, a house, a tennis court, and other buildings occupied by a third party. 
It is often impossible to distinguish between crystalware produced in England and in the Low Countries at this time, but twelve pieces originating in England are ascribed to Verzelini, on the grounds that he had the monopoly at the time. Most are diamond-point engraved commemorative goblets created to celebrate a marriage or baptism. The British Museum has a clear cylindrical tankard, with decorated silver-gilt lid and base, made for Lord Burghley about 1572-4, and a goblet, inscribed '1577', the earliest dated example of any English glass. Two goblets, engraved respectively 'John Dier 1581' and 'RP MP', '1586 GOD SAVE QUYNE ELISABETH', are in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Others are in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, the Birmingham Museum, and in the USA. The diamond-point engraved decoration, with foliage and animals, initials, and dates, is in a linear style with hatching, an Italian style which was then copied in England. The engraver was possibly Anthony de Lysle, a Frenchman resident in London who worked independently of Verzelini's workshop. Verzelini's output must have been considerable. He kept his glassworks in operation for over twenty-one years, creating a flourishing industry and a body of craftsmen trained in the Venetian tradition. It was also profitable, for he acquired property in nearby Mark Lane, and, over the years, estates in and around Downe, Kent, where he became lord of the manor. 
Verzelini probably retired about 1590; his wife was naturalized that year, which would enable her to inherit land. The glasshouse was handed over to his sons Francis and Jacob. Meanwhile, however, a patent to make crystal was granted in February 1592 to Sir Jerome Bowers, soldier and courtier, as a reward for loyalty, to take effect on the termination of Verzelini's grant in 1595. Bowers had no knowledge of glass making, but he built a glasshouse in the former Blackfriars monastery and endeavoured to recruit Verzelini's Italian craftsmen. The feud between the Verzelinis and Bowers carried over into the courts with a victory for Bowers. The Crutched Friars glasshouse closed down, although Jacob and Elizabeth Verzelini continued to live there. Francis was imprisoned for ten years from 1598, his brother Jacob for a lesser period: the exact nature of their offences is not known. 
Verzelini died at his house in Crutched Friars on 20 January 1607, and was buried, as he desired, at Downe Chapel on 3 February. His will, drawn up in 1604, benefited the poor in Christ's, St Bartholomew's, and St Thomas's hospitals, and his parishes of St Olave and Downe. One of his children had probably died young, but his daughters, Katherine (now dead), Elizabeth, and Mary, had all made good marriages; they and their children, and his sons, inherited the properties in Kent. His wife was chief beneficiary and executor, but before the will was proved she died, on 26 October 1607, and was likewise buried at Downe. 


@@@@@


doc= 52160


Barantyn, Drew (c.1350-1415), goldsmith and mayor of London, was the younger son of Thomas Barantyn, lord of Chalgrove in Oxfordshire (he had an older brother, Thomas, who died in 1400). Barantyn's talents as a craftsman rather than his family connections were to be the key to his success in the world. He was apprenticed to Robert Oxenford in 1363, and became a freeman of the city of London and member of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1370, taking apprentices himself from 1379. He was twice warden of the company: in 1380 and 1385. Thereafter it was as a court supplier, financier, and one of the rulers of London that he was most prominent. Among Barantyn's many commissions for the royal household in the later years of Richard II's reign were two collars and a brooch set with rubies, pearls, and diamonds made 'for the king's own person' in 1393. In association with Hans Doubler, an immigrant goldsmith and diamond merchant, Barantyn established a reputation for work in precious stones. 
Barantyn was introduced to court circles by Sir Nicholas Twyford. He worked for Twyford before establishing his own business, became one of his executors, and Twyford's patronage was a determining factor in his career. Twyford died in 1390, and Barantyn's first wife, Margery (died 'c'.1414), was Twyford's widow as well as being the granddaughter of Simon Burgh, another goldsmith. Barantyn followed his patron in pursuing a middle course through the turbulent politics of Richard II's reign. In the quarrel which erupted between Richard and the city of London in 1392 Barantyn, as a newly elected alderman, was one of those summoned to appear before the king and council on 25 June 1392 to answer for defaults in the government of the city. But he was confirmed in his aldermanry by the king on 22 July, and elected sheriff in the following year and mayor in 1398 -- appointments which, at a time when the city's liberties remained conditional upon royal favour, epitomize the career of one whose expertise in his craft commended him to the crown, but who had the confidence of his fellow citizens as well. That confidence was further expressed in Barantyn's election to the parliaments of 1395, 1397 (September), 1404 (January), 1410, 1413 (February), and 1413 (May), and as mayor once again in 1408. 
On 7 May 1393 Barantyn was one of three leading goldsmiths to whom the king granted licence to alienate lands and rents held in mortmain, in aid of the implementation of the company's new charter. Behind the comparatively modest sum of 20 marks paid by the goldsmiths for this grant on 6 February 1393 lay an altogether more substantial exaction. In the same month, as the price of pardons to the Londoners, Richard II acknowledged the receipt of $10,000, a sum that was accompanied by gifts of jewels and plate to an equivalent amount. No doubt the alienations of Goldsmiths' property were intended to finance that company's share of the city's composition with the king. In the relationship between the crown and the wealthy London capitalists during this period, the patronage disposed of by the former was of paramount importance. Henry IV's charter of 1404, granting extended powers to the Goldsmiths, owed much to Barantyn's standing and influence with the king. 
Even as Twyford's customers had included not only Richard II but Edward, the Black Prince, and John of Gaunt, so Barantyn's association with Henry of Lancaster antedated the latter's accession to the throne. In 1394 Henry's new year gifts included two gold rings set with diamonds purchased from Barantyn. The mayor who headed the procession which welcomed Lancaster to the city on 1 September 1399 was well known to the duke; for the rest of Henry IV's life Barantyn was to serve him just as he had served Richard. Payments to him by the king in 1408 included $550 for a gold collar garnished with pearls, 1000 marks for a brooch, and $99 12's'. for silver vessels given to the French ambassadors. The most outstanding of the jewels pledged by Henry V before Agincourt was 'the Michael', purchased from Barantyn in the previous reign. Loans by Barantyn to Henry IV varied from comparatively small amounts of $27 (1408) and 100 marks (1410) to $150 (1402) and $1500 (1410). 
If Barantyn's skill as a craftsman and prestige as a retailer were the bases of his wealth, his marriage to Twyford's widow raised him to the top rank of London's property owners. To the estate acquired through this marriage Barantyn added further investments in land. In the city the most notable of his purchases was the Jewengarden, with adjacent shops and houses, in the parish of St Giles without Cripplegate, a property which, together with houses in Gutter Lane, he left to the Goldsmiths' Company in his will. In the lay subsidy of 1412 Barantyn's assessment of $55 16's'. 11died exceeded that of the wealthy mercer Richard Whittington (died 1423), and even that of the Goldsmiths' Company itself. Outside London, Barantyn again added to Twyford's holdings, principally in Oxfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Suffolk, and Buckinghamshire. In his later years Barantyn's varied credit operations and commercial interests, including Mediterranean trade in cloth and wool, contributed to his working capital. 
Barantyn died on 14 December 1415, survived by his second wife, Christine, whom he had married not long before. There were no children of either of his marriages. In his will he made provision for his burial in the church of St John Zachary, and for a chantry there for the souls of himself, his first wife, Margery, and Nicholas Twyford, the charges to be met from the property left to the Goldsmiths' Company. 100 marks were to be distributed to 'poor and needy men and women of the goldsmiths' craft in the city of London' to pray for his soul, an obligation which the goldsmiths' ordinances show to have been incumbent twice weekly upon the company's almsmen. Barantyn's bequests amounted to over $1000 and included legacies to his servants in both town and country, and also $60 for 'the poor kinsfolk of Nicholas Twyford' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/2B, sig. 31). His widow's dower was confiscated by the crown in 1419 after she married John Manning, coroner of Wiltshire, without royal licence. Recovered by fine, the dower was the subject of extensive litigation when, after Manning's death, Christine married the heir to the greater part of Barantyn's estates, his nephew, Reynold Barantyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 52161


Bosan, Bartholomew (d. 1400), merchant, was a native of Lucca in Italy who had established a business in London by the early 1370s. He makes numerous appearances in the city records during the following three decades, mostly as a mainpernor, guarantor, and litigant, and often alongside fellow Italians. Accused at different times of involvement in both usury and forgery, on one occasion he was imprisoned as the result of an action by his fellow Lucchese Francis Vincheguerre. It was with another Lucchese, Thomas Serland, that in 1371 he traded to Bruges, a common centre for commercial activity by Italian merchants living in London at this time. The pattern thus established would appear to have continued, for customs accounts from twenty years later show Bosan frequently receiving consignments from ships captained by north European masters, and the mixture of Italian goods and local European manufactures carried by these ships suggests strongly that they had in their turn come from Bruges. He imported a wide variety of items, mostly Flemish and Brabant linen thread together with the luxury fabrics for which his native city was well known -- rakemas, satins, silk baldachins, Cyprus gold brocades, velvets, taffetas, kerchiefs, and sarsenet -- as well as raw silks and small amounts of drugs and spices such as wormseed, rhubarb, and pepper. At his death he owed the wardens of the Mercers' Company $10, perhaps in unpaid quarterage, and was subsequently described as having been a citizen and mercer of London. 
Bosan's imports, while finding a natural outlet in sales to London mercers, would have guaranteed him an entree to aristocratic and clerical households in London. Lucchese fabrics were very popular at Edward III's court, where they were used for royal wedding garments and as gifts to retiring ambassadors, as well as at funerals and obits and for donations to religious houses. Bosan may well have been the Bett Lumbard who supplied eleven lengths of cloth of gold each costing $6 and four lengths of silk worth $2 each that were presented to Waleran de Luxembourg, count of St Pol, and his company when they left England in 1389, having come to swear to the truce between England and France. He sold Cyprus gold baldachins, coloured baldachins, different coloured silk velvets, and satins to the future Henry IV's wardrobe in London during 1391/2; he supplied Henry again in 1397/8, this time with rakemas and silk baldachins. His exports consisted largely of worsted and undyed cloth, tin and tin wares, and old wines. He appears as a debtor to the value of $5 18's'. in the account book of Gilbert Maghfeld (died 1397), perhaps in connection with a payment owing for customs, as the book contains rough jottings for particulars of customs accounts, and Maghfeld was collector for petty custom and tunnage and poundage in London in 1390. 
Bosan was granted letters of denization in 1391 for $50, on condition that he neither belonged to any company of alien merchants nor took advantage of his new nationality by lending his name to cover the passage of alien merchandise through customs. By 1400, when he surrendered letters patent which had granted him the proceeds from property which had belonged to John Export in the parish of St Mary Aldermary, he held the position of king's esquire. In the same year he was named in a grant to Elizabeth, dowager duchess of Norfolk, of the goods and debts due to the king from her late husband, Thomas (I) Mowbray. Although it was said in 1403 that he had fallen sick and made a will at Newark, while accompanying the king on his return from Scotland in 1400, the only surviving record associated with Bosan's death is an enrolment of letters of administration, by which his goods were committed to Peter Burton and William Sowthous in September 1400. However, an action for $200 brought by the mercer Thomas Aleyn in 1403, against Bosan's widow, Joan, and the two administrators, named Joan as his executor along with John Duffeld, John Corne, John Bilte, and John Taillour. Joan had strong English connections. In 1428 the mercer John Shadworth bequeathed property in the parish of St Bartholomew-the-Less to the order of Minoresses outside Aldgate, on condition that they should offer prayers for his own soul and for the souls of Bosan, his wife, Joan, and their daughter Philippa, and in addition the Minoresses were particularly instructed to observe Joan's obit. It is possible that Joan was a blood relative of Shadworth, or perhaps she married him after Bosan's death, bringing their daughter Philippa into Shadworth's household. 


@@@@@


doc= 52162


Canigiani, Gherardo (1424-1484), merchant, was born in Florence, the son of Bernardo di Gherardo Canigiani and his wife, Papera di messer Tommaso Sacchetti. In 1457 he stated that he had a daughter aged twelve named Piera, but nothing is known of his wife. He came to England in 1446 as a factor of the Medici company and probably never returned to Florence. After 1460 he became prominent in the Medici's commercial affairs in England. From 1461 he appears as a lender to the crown and a supplier of textiles to the court. These connections explain why he was used by Edward IV in 1464 as an agent to visit Scotland and distribute bribes to the nobility there. In 1465 the Medici branch in London was reformed by an 'accomandita' designating Canigiani and Giovanni de' Bardi as the managers in London. Canigiani contributed $300 to the capital of the branch. From this time he became increasingly independent and prominent in London business. 
A series of large loans were made to Edward IV in Canigiani's name. It is impossible to be certain on each occasion whether he was lending Medici money or his own, but the probability is that he was doing business for the Medici. The main loans were $5354 19's'. 10died in November 1466, $8468 18's'. 8died in November 1467, $1000 in August 1468, $2610 9's'. in December 1468, $3225 6's'. 8died in January 1469, $6600 in July 1471, and $4566 1's'. 8died in March 1474. Between 1466 and 1471 they totalled over $26,000. These loans were at least partially repaid. In 1468 Canigiani received an elaborate jewel in pawn. He was also at the same time involved in more ordinary trading activities, again presumably doing business on behalf of the Medici. Licences to make substantial exports of wool, cloth, and metal to the Mediterranean at this time were doubtless also intended to repay royal debts. There are documents which show him exporting wool and tin and importing pepper and madder. In 1468 Canigiani advanced money for the payment of the dowry of Margaret of York when she was married to Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy. It is therefore uncertain whether he was making an overall profit for the Medici, and whether the loans to Edward IV were necessary in order to secure privileges for trade and further business. Lorenzo de' Medici took over control of the Medici position at Florence and its banks elsewhere in Europe in 1469. In 1468 another Medici representative, Angelo Tani, had been sent to London by Piero de' Medici, Lorenzo's father, and had expressed disquiet at the large sums lent to the crown and the slow repayment of them. Lorenzo expressed disquiet himself in 1470, and two years later sent Cristofano Spini to London with instructions to encourage Tommaso Portinari, the Medici manager in Bruges, to keep control of the London business. 
Canigiani was probably removed from the Medici branch in 1473. The main cause of the sacking may have been Spini's hostile criticism; it is clear that the two men became bitter enemies. Another consideration may have been the disaster which occurred in April 1473, when a galley loaded with Medici goods on its way from Zeeland to Southampton and Pisa was captured by pirates from Danzig. Canigiani attempted to reduce the damage by sending large numbers of cloths to be exported in the accompanying galley, which managed to reach Southampton. But he was replaced as Medici representative in London by Tommaso Guidetti. 
Perhaps in response to Medici disapproval, Canigiani secured denization on 3 November 1473. By January 1474 he was already married to Elizabeth, widow of Sir John Stockton, with whom he had a son in 1476. He evidently retained the approval of the king. In December 1473 he was granted the position of keeper of the exchange at Calais, jointly with William Hatteclyffe (died 1480), the king's secretary, for seven years, and this was renewed for four years in 1480. In July 1474 he was granted the manor of Great Linford, Buckinghamshire, and custody of the lands of Alice Lovel. Lorenzo de' Medici's 'Promemoria' of 1478, a statement about the finances of his company, stated that the losses of his London branch amounted to 78,000 ducats (about $14,000 sterling), but still the Medici continued to do business in London. It is not clear how far Canigiani was responsible for the losses. He died in 1484. 


@@@@@


doc= 52163


Cely family (per. c.1450-c.1500), merchants, of London, are famous particularly because of the unique collection of letters written by family members (preserved in the Public Record Office, London) as a result of the case in chancery between the younger Richard Cely and the widow of his brother George; these provide an exceptionally intimate picture of late fifteenth-century family and business life. The Celys were typical staplers, carrying on a business of moderate size, though they were among the larger rather than smaller exporters of wool. Most of their exports were Cotswold fleeces or fells, brought on pack-horses or wagons to London, and then shipped overseas to Calais. There they were sold to visiting buyers from the Low Countries, preferably for cash, often for delayed payments. The trade at Calais, which was their main concern, also involved the Celys in visits to Bruges and the marts at Antwerp and Bergen op Zoom, which were frequented by English mercers acting as importers, and where it was possible to buy foreign goods and also to carry out exchanges between English and Netherlandish currencies. The Celys were therefore involved in a good deal of travel on the other side of the channel, and in a very complicated international trading system, which required expert knowledge of types of wool and currency values, as well as attention to the rules of the Calais staple. They themselves were commonly divided between London, from where business was controlled, and Calais, where the wool was received and sold to foreign buyers. 
The elder 


@@@@@


doc= 52164


Beck, Henry Charles (1902-1974), graphic artist and map designer, was born on 4 June 1902 at 14 Wesley Road, Leyton, Essex, the second child and only son of Joshua Try Beck, variously described as a commercial traveller, and an artist and monumental mason, and Eleanor Louisa Crouch. He had an elder sister, Winifred, and two younger sisters, Dorothy and Millicent. The Becks were a close-knit family. They moved to Highgate village, Middlesex, about 1910 and Harry was educated at Grove House School, a boys' private school in Highgate. After having left school he was sent to Italy to study marble, presumably with a view to his following in his father's footsteps as a monumental mason. He also went to art classes in Highgate. There he met Nora (1906/7-1993), daughter of Bryan Millington, of independent means, and they married on 16 September 1933 at St Michael and All Angels' parish church, Mill Hill, Middlesex. They had no children. 
Beck found it difficult to find work as a graphic artist but in 1925 was taken on as a temporary junior draughtsman with London Underground in the signal engineers' office. He was made redundant twice during the next five years and remained a temporary staff member until 1937; but he maintained contact with London Underground in and out of employment and began to develop his ideas for what became the definitive map of the underground. London Underground showed no interest in his map when Beck first showed it to the management in 1931 but he continued to develop it and the following year the management agreed to give it a trial. The public, who were asked for their views, responded favourably. 
Various maps of the underground railways had already been printed but all were unsatisfactory. Most tried to preserve both angle and area and thus were difficult to follow, particularly in the central area where the rail lines were densest. It was in just this area where most passengers travelled and therefore where the need for clear information was greatest. Most maps also showed the rail lines in relation to surface features, notably roads. Beck's map was topologically correct but topographically distorted -- that is, neither angle nor area was preserved but the stations and interchanges stood in correct relation one to another. This enabled Beck to show on one map central areas at far larger scales than peripheral ones, and to route his lines both to give an aesthetically pleasing result and to allow all station names to be legibly displayed. The aesthetic unity of the map was enhanced by his use only of vertical and horizontal lines and those at 45 degree. Beck's map, or diagram as it is sometimes called, quickly established itself as the definitive map. 
Beck continued to maintain, update, and improve his map in his own time, responding also to demands from the underground railways management for alterations, of many of which he rightly disapproved. In November 1937 he agreed to transfer copyright of the design to the management of the railways. He claimed that at the time a gentleman's understanding was reached that all alterations were to be made or edited by Beck himself, Beck to be paid a fee and to be considered a freelance artist for this work. The first alleged violation of this agreement came in 1938 when Zero (Hans Schleger) designed a variant which was printed and circulated. Beck protested, and subsequent changes were made by him as he claimed the agreement stipulated. Further dispute occurred in 1946, and in 1960 the agreement broke down when London Underground published an amateurish variant of his map designed by Harold F. Hutchinson. A bitter correspondence ensued between Beck and the railways management but it was clear that London Transport did not want to use his work further. Colleagues have suggested that his obsession with the map perhaps led him to be rather intransigent over its maintenance and this was perhaps behind the decision of the management; but it seems clear that Beck was shabbily treated by the management, which ended up with markedly poorer maps at a greater cost to itself as a result of having broken off dealings with Beck. 
During the Second World War Beck was seconded to the War Office on secret work and afterwards returned to what was then London Transport. In 1947 he resigned to become a lecturer at the London School of Printing and Kindred Trades (later the London School of Printing and Graphic Arts). When Beck retired he and his wife moved to High Barnet and later to The Eyrie, Frogham, Fordingbridge, Hampshire. He died on 18 September 1974 at the Royal South Hampshire Hospital, Southampton, having suffered from bladder cancer. He was survived by his wife, who continued to live at Frogham until her death in 1993. 
Beck is remembered as a gentle pleasant man with a great sense of humour, though disputes over copyright left him bitter and his map was clearly an obsession with him, dominating both his professional and private life. In appearance Beck was thick set and round-shouldered, as befits a draughtsman. In his youth he was a keen swimmer and oarsman and he retained his interest in singing (he had a fine baritone voice) and in photography. 
Beck's map has remained the basis for London's underground railway map and has shown itself extremely flexible and able to accommodate additional lines and additional information. Its success in London, which has one of the most complex underground railway systems in the world, has ensured the adoption of the topologically correct map for depicting transport systems in many other parts of the world. He was not the first to use such a map (and he probably knew the similar work of such designers as George Dow) but his use of the concept to combine so many lines and his execution of it were remarkable and enduring achievements. His reputation led to his being invited in the late 1930s to design a similar map for the Paris Metro, though the project was never completed. A gallery is named after him in London's Transport Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 52165


Chiriton, Walter (fl. 1340-1358), merchant and financier, was probably a member of a family of small landowners in Warwickshire, bearing a name derived from Cherrington in that county -- he held a life interest in the manor of Weston by Cherrington for a while in the 1340s. He attained national prominence, however, as a wool merchant involved in international trade. In 1340 he is recorded as a merchant who had bought substantial quantities of the king's wool (that is, wool which had come into the king's possession as a result of parliamentary grant), and who was exporting it to Flanders. In July 1341 and afterwards he was described as 'king's merchant', though also as 'merchant of London'. In January 1342 he was required to appear before the council, and order was given that his lands should be seized, on the ground that he had not paid for wool delivered to him. The king appears to have relented in March. In July 1343 he and William Melchebourne were attorneys for merchants who had been granted the farm of the customs from midsummer of that year until Michaelmas 1346; deeds relating to the affairs of that group were sealed at his house in London in 1344. In August 1344 he was in a consortium which had lent the king $5000. In the early 1340s, therefore, Chiriton had become deeply involved -- as a wool exporter, a farmer, and a lender -- in the crown's effort to use the wool export trade as a source of war finance. 
In May 1346 Chiriton was raised to still greater prominence by his appointment, with Thomas Swanland, as farmer of the customs for three years, with the obligation to provide the king with $50,000 per annum. This turned out, however, to be a disastrous enterprise, largely because of two external events over which the farmers had no control. The first was the siege of Calais which involved very large expenditure by the crown. It was claimed that Chiriton advanced 100,000 marks for that purpose. The second was the black death, whose ravages between the autumn of 1348 and the spring of 1349 led to a temporary interruption of the wool export, and therefore a cessation of the payments of customs which supplied the farmers. Full details of the finances of these years are not available, but it is known that Chiriton paid the king at least $126,000 during his tenure of the farm and had to borrow more than $53,000. Other merchants advanced money to Chiriton to help him over difficult periods, including Tideman Lemberg (died 1386) of Dortmund, Henry Goldbeter of York, who advanced $20,000, and a group of merchants of Bruges, who lent $5333. 6's'. 8died at the ruinous rate of 60 per cent interest per annum. There were various other attempts to relieve necessity. Chiriton and Wesenham handled a forced loan of 20,000 sacks of wool in 1347, and in 1347-8 the export of wool by other merchants was halted to provide the farmers with favourable circumstances for recovering money by their export. In May 1348 they attempted to put off the evil day by prolonging the farm until 1351. In 1349, however, Chiriton and his associates were finally bankrupted. 
The affairs of Chiriton and Swanland were entrusted to a group led by John Malwayn. They were imprisoned in June 1349 and their landed property seized by the king. Various trials concerned with alleged debts of the farmers, and with the latter's own attempts to recover money, took place in the early 1350s. Occasional mentions of Chiriton in the chancery enrolments continue until 1358, but then cease. Chiriton's misfortune was, however, remembered by London merchants, since it was cited in the parliament of 1382, together with the experiences of William de la Pole (died 1366), John Wesenham, and John Malwayn, as a reason for refusing a request by the crown for a loan. 


@@@@@


doc= 52166


Chigwell, Hamo (d. 1332), merchant and mayor of London, was born Hamond Dene, the son of Thomas and Cecilia Dene; like Richard Chigwell, from whom he inherited a life interest in some property and whose surname he took, he became a fishmonger, thus entering one of the most successful and best-organized trades in Edward II's London. He was in Great Yarmouth when he was elected sheriff on 21 September 1314 and he may, like his fellow fish merchants, have had shipping and sheds for salting herring there. He traded in wine and some grain as well as in fish: a cargo in one of his own ships included oils and spices along with the wine. Chigwell served from 1315 to 1329 as alderman of Queenhithe ward where he and his wife, Maud, lived, in the parish of St Mary Mounthaw, and where he was well placed at the hub of the market in fish and grain. 
Throughout the decade following 28 October 1319, when he was first elected mayor, until his arrest in February 1329, Chigwell was the dominating figure in London politics. Despite his mounting difficulties, and notwithstanding the grant of a charter to London in 1319, Edward II, with the help of Hugh Despenser the younger, was then determined to assert control over his turbulent capital, while the Londoners were eager to take advantage of the king's problems to secure their own interests. By force of personality and diplomatic skills, as well as by less acceptable means, Chigwell retained, for much of the time, both royal favour and the support of many Londoners. One chronicler, commenting on the support he received from both men and women, voiced contemporary doubts about him: 'Many said, he is a good man; but others, no, no, he deceives the people' (Stubbs, 346). In 1321 Edward openly attacked London's rights when he sent royal justices to hold an eyre in the city, which from 13 January to 20 May challenged privileges and investigated grievances. On 23 February Chigwell's successor as mayor was replaced by a royal warden. He and his allies survived suspicions of conspiracy but Chigwell had to defend wholesale fishmongers against critics of the ordinances agreed in their court, which was itself challenged. But Chigwell's influence in London led Edward to make use of him: he became mayor, nominally elected but in effect at the king's will, from 26 May 1321 until 4 April 1323, and again, after an interval when he and three of his supporters were virtually prisoners at court, from 6 December 1323 until November 1326, when the city was once more allowed freely to elect its own mayor. 
Chigwell, with the backing of a key group of leading merchants, proved able for several years to manipulate the shifting interests which faced him. The king entrusted various responsibilities to him: after the execution of Thomas of Lancaster in March 1322, he was appointed one of the commissioners who pronounced judgment on other rebels and who in July tried and condemned to death Roger Mortimer, soon to be spirited from the Tower of London with the help of two of Chigwell's opponents. But under his leadership the city's council resisted royal requests for more men and money, and sought the restoration of the mayoralty. While London citizens were united in their determination to protect their privileges, particularly control of admission to the freedom, the city merchants represented conflicting commercial interests. Royal support of alien merchants, and the reimposition in 1322 of the 'Carta mercatoria' (Edward I's grant of 1303, giving protection and privileges to alien merchants), suspended since 1311, checked the fiscal advantages which had encouraged some London merchants to extend their overseas trade. Attempts by the Bardi, the Italian royal financiers, to evade taxation and the wool staple alienated others. The staple, an arrangement whereby all exports of wool had to be channelled through a particular town in the Low Countries, divided leading merchants, since different towns favoured different traders. Pressure mounted for the choice of home staples, finally achieved in May 1326, when Hugh Despenser made a belated attempt to pacify an increasingly hostile city. 
Mob violence in London in October 1326 doomed the unpopular king and his favourite, and London eventually welcomed Queen Isabella with Mortimer and the young prince, Edward. Chigwell himself, 'crying mercy with clasped hands' (Riley, 262), finally agreed to popular demands that he and the city's council support the prince. Yet his position was strong enough for him to be freely elected mayor on 28 October 1327, and only pressure for compromise prevented his election in October 1328. But he was soon openly backing Mortimer's enemies and his involvement in the dispute between the town and abbey of Bury St Edmunds led to his conviction as a felon on 13 February 1329. Benefit of clergy saved him from the death penalty, but he spent the next year in the care of the bishop of London. He returned to London in January 1330 to be welcomed by aldermen and citizens who escorted him to his home. He died in 1332, leaving, in the part of his will that was dated 16 June 1332 and enrolled before the court of husting on 22 February 1333, a bequest to St Paul's, where he was buried and remembered by a monument. He was survived by his wife but not apparently by any children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52167


Corbet, Gabriel (fl. 1427-1454), merchant, was a Venetian mariner, perhaps originally called Gabriele Corbizzi, who was already established as a trader in Southampton by 1427. In 1431, after petitioning parliament, he was granted letters of denization by the crown, ostensibly because of the service he had done for Henry V and Henry VI upon the seas, but he also paid 40's'. into the hanaper for the privilege. He spent the rest of his life in Southampton, and evidently became a modestly successful merchant and respected citizen of the town. Some time before 1440 he married Mabilla, but there is no record of whether she, too, was of Italian birth. They do not appear to have had any children; a Thomas Corbet who was living and trading in Southampton at the same time as Gabriel, but who was probably not a burgess of the town, may possibly have been a brother or a cousin. 
Corbet's business as a merchant shows little evidence of specialization in either commodities or markets. In the earliest surviving Southampton port book, that for 1427/8, he appears as mainly concerned with the coastwise trade in wheat, although he also imported some five tuns of wine in a Genoese carrack. His interest in the wine trade continued into the 1430s but he can also be found trading in oil, pepper, kerseys, salt herring, and other fish. On occasion he also acted as pledge for the customs and other dues of some of the Genoese visiting Southampton. His inland customers were spread out over the south of England, from Wells to London, but were most commonly located in Salisbury or Alton. 
In 1440 Corbet and his wife were jointly granted by John Fyssmark and his wife, Isabella, a large property called The Cheynes in Coleye Lane in Southampton; this was, in fact, a stone warehouse with cellars beneath, adjacent to the Town Quay on the Southampton waterfront, a good location for a merchant. It was also very near the shop over the Watergate belonging to William Soper (died 1459), a leading citizen and keeper of the king's ships (1420-42). Corbet himself lived in a house rented from Soper in English Street, not far from the Franciscan church, even though he owned in his own right two small houses further up English Street near St Lawrence's Church. It was perhaps Corbet's association with Soper and his friends and associates, Robert Aylward and Walter Fetplace, that ensured his election to office in the corporation of Southampton. He was first a collector of the subsidy in the parish of the Holy Rood in 1434-5, and later town steward in 1441 and 1442 and water bailiff (collector of the local customs and port dues) in 1443. 
Corbet's rise to prosperity in the years around 1440 should probably be associated with the determination of the Southampton merchants at that time to capture the Italian trade at London's expense. And his most important office, that of sheriff, to which he was elected in 1453, when Aylward was mayor, needs to be seen in a similar context. A. A. Ruddock has connected Aylward's mayoralty with a struggle which seems to have gone on in the 1450s within the ruling oligarchy of Southampton merchants, between those who shared the anti-alien feelings then sweeping through merchant circles in London, and those who wished to remain on good terms with the Italian community. Aylward and Fetplace (who was mayor when Corbet was water bailiff) had unusually close connections with the foreign merchants, and would have seen Corbet as a natural supporter of their party in the town. 
Corbet was unusual among the Italians living and working in Southampton at this period in taking out letters of denization and becoming involved in the public life of the town. This may have been because in his early life as a mariner he had become involved with Soper in the affairs of the king's ships, and, encouraged by a group of powerful friends in the town, had subsequently taken the decision to settle permanently in England. In the Southampton terrier of 1454 Corbet was recorded as living on English Street, Southampton. It is not known when or where he died. 


@@@@@


doc= 52168


Cornhill, Gervase of (c.1110-1183/4), royal official, was probably the son and heir of the Roger, nephew of Hubert, who was sheriff of London in 1125, perhaps also in 1114-15, and who died in 1130 or shortly before, probably on pilgrimage to Jerusalem; Roger's widow was Ingenolda. A thirteenth-century pedigree makes Gervase the son of one Hubert of Caen, but this seems less likely, in view of successive royal grants of the manor of Chalk, Kent, to Roger and to Gervase; however, it may well have been Hubert of Caen who was Roger's uncle. Gervase derived his surname, with, presumably, substantial property in London, from the family of his wife, Agnes, daughter of Edward of Cornhill, who had been a member of London's 'cnihtengild', an early association of eminent citizens. Though there is no direct evidence, there seems little doubt that Gervase himself, as well as his father and father-in-law, was a successful and rich London merchant, and the activities of his son Henry ['see below'] suggest that he traded in cloth. William of Canterbury describes Gervase as 'thinking of his usurious two-thirds and hundredths rather than of what was good and right' (Robertson and Sheppard, 1.100); this is a hostile source, but his acquisition of lands in Gamlingay, Cambridgeshire, through a mortgage is also evidence that he did business as a moneylender. 
Gervase was named as justice of London on a charter of between 1136 and 1147 and on the seal he was still using in the 1170s. In 1155-7 and 1160-61, and perhaps also 1159-60, he was one of London's two sheriffs, and he was probably the Gervase who in 1174 presented a loyal address from the citizens to Henry II. He was sheriff of Surrey from 1163 until his death, and also of Kent from 1167 to 1174. In the latter role he was involved in the attempt to prevent Thomas Becket from landing at Sandwich in December 1170, allegedly at the instance of the archbishop of York and the bishops of London and Salisbury. From 1169 or 1170 to his death Gervase regularly served as an itinerant justice, in Devon as well as in Kent and Surrey. 
Besides the properties in London, Chalk, and Gamlingay, Gervase acquired lands in Langham, Essex, and in Berkesden, Hertfordshire, both probably in the 1140s, and later held lands in East Horndon, Essex, and in Ashtead and elsewhere in Surrey. He quitclaimed property at Greenwich and Lewisham to St Peter's Abbey, Ghent, between 1161 and 1168, and granted his lands at Berkesden to Holy Trinity Priory, Aldgate, before 1154. He died between Michaelmas 1183 and Michaelmas 1184, leaving at least three sons: Henry; Ralph, sheriff of Kent (1191-2) and Surrey (1191-4), who married Alice, daughter and heir of Robert of Hastings, in or before 1191 and died in 1199 or 1200; and Reginald ['see below']. 






@@@@@


doc= 52169


Henry of Cornhill (c.1135-1192/3), royal official, was the eldest son of Gervase, and inherited his lands and, presumably, his business interests. By his marriage to Alice, daughter of William de Courcy, he acquired the barony of Stogursey and twenty-five and a quarter knights' fees mostly in Somerset, Dorset, Oxfordshire, and Northamptonshire. From 1175 at the latest he was employed by the king's household as an agent for buying cloth and other goods. He had custody of the escheated honours of Rayleigh (1181) and Boulogne (1183) and succeeded his father as sheriff of Surrey; he was also a sheriff of London in 1187-9. Present at Henry II's death at Chinon, he was confirmed in his offices by Richard I and, in close attendance on the king in 1189-90, had charge of preparing his fleet for the crusade, for which a special account was rendered in the exchequer. In 1190 he became sheriff of Kent, on paying 100 marks, and keeper of the exchange for all England except Winchester. Closely associated with the chancellor, William de Longchamp, he shared his downfall in October 1191 and was deprived of his offices. He died between Michaelmas 1192 and Michaelmas 1193, when his brothers answered for his debts in the exchequer. His daughter Joan, who married Hugh de Neville (died 1234) in 1195 or soon after, was his sole heir; his widow married Warin Fitzgerald in or soon after 1193. 


@@@@@


doc= 52170


Deorman (fl. 1119-1141), moneyer and merchant, was a member of the first London family of moneyers for whom biographical details can be assembled, and his importance lies in what they reveal about the prominent but largely unknown class of men responsible for organizing and running the Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-Norman mints. The name of Deorman appears on the coins of London struck in the reigns of AEthelred II, Harold I, and Edward the Confessor, and it is likely that the family held the royal office of moneyer by long descent. The repeated use by successive generations of the names Deorman and Theoderic, long after Saxon names had become unfashionable, hints at the pride they took in their descent. It would appear from the family's connections with the church of St Antonin in Watling Street, most probably built by Deorman's grandfather at the end of the eleventh century, that the church was close to their mint. If this was so, the mint was situated on what seems to have been the main street of King Alfred's London. 
The first documentary references to Deorman's family occur in 'Domesday Book', and show that his grandfather, also Deorman, held land in Islington, Essex, and Hertfordshire as a tenant-in-chief -- some of it by petty serjeanty -- apparently as remuneration for his important office of supervising the mints. He was also one of the knights of the archbishop of Canterbury's fee, no doubt because of the financial services which he could render. Four of the elder Deorman's sons were also London moneyers and were prominent among the aldermanic families in the city. One of them, Theoderic, had at least four sons of his own. They included Walter (an alderman in 1132), and the second Deorman. 
This Deorman first appears in the documents in 1119, when he claimed the church of St Antonin by hereditary right. He was described elsewhere as a moneyer, and his name, like those of three of his brothers, appears on coins of the London mint -- in his case between 1134 and 1141. It seems clear, though, from the family's high social standing that its members were not actively engaged in the work of striking and exchanging coins, work which was probably supervised by goldsmiths. But moneyers were well placed to accumulate trading capital, as they were exempt from royal taxation and could also make use of the deposits of bullion temporarily left in their charge. Moreover they had close contact with foreign merchants, who were obliged to exchange their own coin and bullion at the mints for English coins. Moneyers had the capital to provide hostels for alien merchants, and inevitably these contacts encouraged them to make their own ventures in foreign trade. The unusual dedication of St Antonin's Church suggests that the family of Deorman had trading links with the Castilian town of Palencia, of which St Antonin was patron; here they could profitably acquire gold. It is also likely that they were the founders of the group of London pepperers who by 1180 had their own guild and specialized in selling spices and other luxury goods imported from the Mediterranean. 
Confirmation that Deorman dealt in imported luxuries comes from a book of miracles written by Osbert de Clare, the mid-twelfth-century prior of Westminster Abbey, which included a story about a very rich merchant of London called Deorman. This was undoubtedly the London moneyer, whose family the prior must have known well since Deorman's three aunts had given lands to Westminster Abbey in return for rights of burial and confraternity. Abbeys were also used as storehouses of bullion and valuables, and there is considerable evidence for close links between them and moneyers. A later version of the same story by Abbot Samson of Bury (died 1211), who must also have known Deorman, says that he dealt in expensive spices, silks, and rich fabrics which he took to the fair at Bury St Edmunds. On one occasion, while Deorman was praying in the abbey church, a bag containing jewels and gold was stolen from him. By a miracle he recovered his valuables, and out of compassion for the penitent thief he let her go unpunished. According to the story it was this experience which led Deorman (presumably after 1141, when his name last appears on London coins) to abandon his successful life as a moneyer and merchant to become a monk at Bury, where he lived to a good old age. 
Deorman's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 52171


Theoderic Fitzdeorman (d. in or before 1162), carried on the family mint from 1141 until 1158, when Henry II closed down all the established London mints, dismissed the hereditary moneyers, and apparently established a central workshop in their place. But before then Theoderic had raised his family to even greater heights by his marriage to Matilda, a relation of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke (died 1148), one of the most powerful barons in England. The earl was one of Stephen's supporters until 1147, and he held Montfichet Castle in London during the civil war. It would seem that the marriage was Theoderic's reward for assisting Stephen, and this would account for his appointment as justiciar of London between 1143 and 1152. Theoderic died in or before 1162, by when his son Bertram had granted 80 acres of lands at Stoke Newington to St Mary's, Clerkenwell, for the soul of his father. Bertram's son Thomas confirmed the grant shortly before 1187. After this the family's links with London became tenuous and soon untraceable. 


@@@@@


doc= 52172


Eastfield, Sir William (d. 1446), merchant and mayor of London, first appears in the records in 1419 as a mercer. He was probably the son of William Eastfield of Tickhill, Yorkshire, since in 1435 he acquired from Joan, widow of William Eastfield of Tickhill, the lands of her husband in Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and Derbyshire. On 28 September 1420 he was appointed one of the collectors of tunnage and poundage at London (a position he held until at least 1427), and in the same year he was one of those nominated to hear differences which had arisen within the London Cutlers' Company. In 1422 he was elected sheriff of London, and already in that year was the object of complaints of harassment by Hanseatic merchants, which earned him a royal order to desist. In 1425 he became one of the wardens of the Mercers' Company, and in the following year was appointed one of the collectors of the wool subsidy at London. An alderman from 1423 until his death, by 1429, when he was elected mayor, he can be regarded as having reached the summit of London society. Eastfield was married twice: Juliana, presumably his first wife, was living in October 1437; his second wife was Alice. 
Eastfield's greatest prominence, however, resulted from his position as a stapler -- a wool exporter -- which brought him into connection with royal finance. On 20 December 1430 he was promised repayment from clerical subsidies as one of a group of staplers, he being the only one named, who had lent the crown $2333 6's'. 8died On 24 April 1431 he was promised repayment from clerical subsidies as one of a consortium of eight men who had lent the crown 4000 marks. In 1435, together with Hamo Sutton and Hugh Dyke, he was promised repayment of a loan of 8000 marks, with preference as an exporter over others. This was an important instance of the crown's trying to break through the restrictive arrangements of the staple, and presumably Eastfield's participation made him a favourite with court and exchequer. He was responsible for loans of $1000 in 1440-41, $1000 in 1443, $500 in 1444-5, and $4800 in 1445. He was in fact the biggest individual lender to the crown during the 1440s. He was appointed one of the collectors of the tax imposed on landed property in January 1436. Less is known about him in the period 1436-9, but he then leapt back into prominence, to be regarded in his later years as someone to be favoured: member of parliament for London in 1439 and again in 1441, he was knighted in 1439. He was granted $40 a year from the issues of London and Middlesex in March 1443, and $10 a year from Lincolnshire in May 1444. In July 1443 he received a licence to hunt in the royal parks in Essex and Middlesex. In 1442 and 1444 he was mentioned as mayor of the staple of Westminster. Between 1442 and 1444 he was one of the royal emissaries who negotiated with representatives of Holland, Zeeland, and Friesland over trade disputes. In 1445 there is mention of a necklace which the king had bought from him. 
Eastfield died shortly before 13 May 1446; both his wives were deceased by July 1444. His will mentions a daughter Margaret, married to John Bohun. It also contains very considerable bequests to the London poor, to several religious orders, and to the repair of the bridge at Wallingford, and also a bequest of $100 towards the maintenance of London highways. It shows him concerned to contribute to water conduits, especially at Aldermanbury, and in this respect he was remembered by Stow, particularly for piping water into the city from as far away as Paddington. He was also an important patron of the church of St Mary Aldermanbury, partially rebuilding it, adding a steeple, and founding a chantry at the altar of St George. He also gave a chalice to the church, and was himself buried there. The 'chapelayn for Maister Estfelde' was mentioned in the acts of court of the Mercers' Company as late as 1525. 


@@@@@


doc= 52173


Exton, Nicholas (d. 1402), mayor of London, was a member of the fishmongers' guild, for whom, and for the other city victualling guilds, he was to be an active spokesman in the early 1380s. He had served, rather precociously, as MP for Middlesex in 1369. In 1382 he began the first of his eight terms as alderman for Billingsgate -- then, as later, the London ward most closely associated with the fish trade. John Northampton (died 1398) was then in the middle of his tumultuous two-year mayoralty. Northampton's mildly populist programme -- demanding increased electoral influence for crafts rather than wards, and a reduction of food prices to encourage price competition -- was regarded as extreme and unsettling by the powerful grocers and fishmongers, and by other established interests. Exton, who gravitated naturally to the following of Northampton's leading opponent, the grocer Nicholas Brembre (died 1388), quickly established himself as an ardent advocate of the fishmongers and related groups. 
On 10 August 1382 pro-Northampton aldermen and others called for his resignation as alderman 'for opprobrious words used to the aforesaid mayor' (Sharpe, 'Calendar of Letter-Books', H, 196), and Exton, claiming a personal wish to be discharged of office, was in fact removed five days later. Yet in September 1382 he addressed parliament on behalf of the fishmongers, evidently arguing with some satiric force that if current measures on the sale of fish were approved, then any non-citizen should be able to sell any merchandise he chose in the city. During this period of heightened debate one group of fishmongers was hauled into court, one of their number reputedly having said that 'he and all the other fishmongers of London were bound to put their hands under the feet of Nicholas Extone for his good deeds and words on behalf of the mistery' (Sharpe, 'Calendar of Letter-Books', H, 203). 
Exton's political fortunes improved with the election of Nicholas Brembre as mayor, an office he held from 1383 to 1386. He was among Brembre's supporters present at Northampton's conviction on 15 August 1384, and shortly thereafter was elected sheriff by the commonalty in 1384, and returned to his aldermanry in 1385. Elected mayor in his own right from 1386 to 1388, he continued to co-operate closely with his predecessor Brembre. In pursuance of Brembre's programme he arranged a meeting of the common council on 12 March 1387, with a selectively augmented membership, at which agreement was reached to burn the jubilee book of city ordinances, first compiled in 1377 (the jubilee of Edward III), and containing regulations for the victualling trades and other reformist material sponsored by John Northampton and others. 
Certain equivocations may be seen in Exton's conduct as mayor during the difficult period in 1386-8, when the lords appellant sought to limit Richard II's power. The king sought by varied means to secure London's support, and on 5 October 1387 Exton tried to induce the craft guilds to subscribe to a pro-Ricardian oath of loyalty. Knighton claims that he sought, unsuccessfully, to raise troops in London in defence of the king's prerogative. But Knighton also represents Exton as blocking an anti-parliamentary scheme by Richard in 1386, and as saving London from forcible entry in December 1387 by opening the city's gates to the lords appellant once their victory had become certain. During the Merciless Parliament of 1388 Brembre was condemned to death along with other Ricardian loyalists, with Exton evidently assenting to the view that his sometime ally had been guilty of the treasons with which he was charged. On 13 October 1388 the more moderate Nicholas Twyford (died 1390/91) was elected mayor. 
A strongly partisan figure, Exton nevertheless belonged to a ruling oligarchy whose shared interests often made it a force for stability in London's affairs, and especially in the city's dealings with the crown. Moreover, some of his offices, such as that of mayor of the staple of Westminster, helped to align him with interests outside the oligarchy, a consideration that may have helped him to weather a difficult period unscathed. He received royal preferment throughout the unsettled years from 1387 to 1389. At the Cambridge parliament of October 1388 he received a pardon for all treasons and felonies, and on the same occasion notification was made prohibiting citizens from spreading rumours that he had sought the derogation of city liberties. He sued successfully for moneys owed him by Nicholas Brembre, lost in forfeit, receiving from the king a Spanish sword and other items in pawn, and he later purchased many of Brembre's forfeited possessions. In 1392 he stood with a broad political cross-section of elected officials in bearing Richard II's wrath during the latter's celebrated 'quarrel with the city'. 
Exton appears to have lived in retirement during the last decade of his life. No children are recorded of either of his two marriages, to Katherine and ('c'.1382) to Johanna. In his will, made in 1393 but not proved until 20 February 1402, he left properties in the London parish of All Hallows Gracechurch to his brother John Curteys, and other rents to the rector, Henry Cokeham, for anniversaries and prayers. 


@@@@@


doc= 52174


Falleron, James (fl. 1439-1463), merchant, was a native of Venice, who settled in London, being first attested in the capital in 1439. During the year from October 1440 to October 1441 he was assigned to the supervision of the English host Richard Quatremains; although no view of his own trade survives, he is known to have brokered the sale of English cloth worth $145 to the Venetian galley patron James Corner by a provincial draper in January 1442. Falleron's career as a merchant reached its peak in the 1450s, although direct evidence for his activity in London is slim. He exported English cloth worth just over $244 on the Venetian galleys in 1449/50, and imported ginger, mace, and pepper worth almost $40 in 1450, as well as forty butts of sweet wine from a Genoese carrack in February 1457. Originally a householder in Broad Street ward in 1441, he was still resident in the Broad Street and Bishopsgate area in September 1449 and in Bishopsgate in August 1451, being recorded as a Venetian merchant stranger on both the latter occasions. He was granted letters of denization by 27 May 1452, and took the freedom of London by redemption on 27 January 1453 on the surety of four of his fellow drapers. This did not, however, stop the grocer John Payne seizing a consignment of wood and wine belonging to Falleron at Southampton in 1457, as part of a campaign against Italian merchants by the London grocers. By 1463 Falleron was alleged to be in the service of the earl of Warwick (died 1471), captain of Calais and the marches, but his protection on that account was withdrawn because he was still in London. 
However, it seems likely that at least some of Falleron's business interests were based outside the capital. For instance, in partnership with the Venetian Francesco de Nicholo and the Londoners Richard Acreman and Robert Glover, he farmed the old shafts of a mine called Higesbale, at Lockridge Hill, Bere Ferrers, in Devon. The site appears to have been just to the north of Plymouth, and north-west of Bere Ferrers, closer in fact to Bere Alston. The mine was one of a group of three royal silver mines at Bere Alston, Bere Ferrers, and Combe Martin which had been pledged to the Frescobaldi in 1299. These mines had a chequered history, having yielded quite well during the period 1290-1340, except apparently during the period when they were held by the Frescobaldi. The indentures drawn up between Falleron and the German clerk Adrian Sprynker, warden of the gold and silver mines of Devon and Cornwall, were dated 20 March 1453, and were to run for twelve years. The lease was taken up from 3 June 1452, which may have been the underlying reason for Falleron's acquisition of denizen status just beforehand. This and his citizenship, some eight months after the date of the indentures, would have helped him greatly in the project, giving him liberty to trade without English supervision and to move goods through the country without payment of toll. According to the usual rules, he and his partners paid the king one-tenth of the ore produced, the slags and deadwork being purified at their own expense. But the venture proved less successful than Falleron might have hoped. In his account of the workings of the mine, prepared for royal officials after four and a half years, he claimed to have spent over $250 on pumping alone as the mine was subject to continual flooding, quite apart from other sums laid out to cover essential works. There was no profit. Falleron's lease was one of several to be granted during the fifteenth century, most of which were unproductive, and the workings were abandoned by 1500. 


@@@@@


doc= 52175


Fastolf, Hugh (d. 1392), merchant, was the son of Alexander Fastolf, a member of a rich mercantile family which had dominated the trade and politics of medieval Great Yarmouth since at least 1280. Through his wealth, royal service, and his eventual removal to London he was involved in some of the major political and commercial developments of his age. His family, one of the two richest in Yarmouth, were shipowners, exporters of fish and corn, and importers of wine, and they led the tight mercantile oligarchy that controlled the town. He came to own more than 1000 acres of land in sixteen villages, was bailiff of Great Yarmouth nine times, and its member of parliament in 1361, 1366, 1373, and 1377. He and the rest of the oligarchy were none too scrupulous about how they maintained their wealth and power. With his brother John he was twice in the 1350s indicted for serious assaults and in 1357 for forestalling goods. He was sentenced to outlawry by royal justices two years later. 
However, Fastolf's wealth, extensive connections with the local gentry, and above all, his ships and naval expertise, made him indispensable to the royal government. From 1354 he was constantly employed on royal commissions in East Anglia and in royal naval service. By 1362 he was deputy admiral of the north. He conveyed Robert Knolles's expedition to France that year, and in 1372 he escorted the wine fleet to Gascony, importing 80 tuns of wine himself in return. In 1377 he raised his own indentured crews for naval service. He was rewarded by numerous royal grants and appointments, such as that of collector of the customs for Great Yarmouth in the 1360s, wardships, grants of alien priories, the mayoralty of the Yarmouth staple, and the farm of Lowestoft in 1387. He enjoyed business connections with the countess of Pembroke and the duke of Norfolk, and his brother John became squire to the earl of Warwick. 
Fastolf's promotion of his own fortunes, and possibly the unpopularity he earned in East Anglia by raising naval contributions for the crown, again threatened his career in the 1370s, when Yarmouth's prosperity suffered from the effects of war on its shipping, from the decline of the herring industry, and the silting-up of its port. The consequence was a bitter conflict between the poorer burgesses and the richer members of the oligarchy who used their partnerships with London merchants to secure an even greater share of the town's trade. Fastolf was a partner of the London fishmonger Walter Sibyl, who in 1375 complained that he had been driven out of Yarmouth by lesser burgesses who had seized the corn he was about to export. The hostility which Fastolf and his associate, William Ellis, excited led to their impeachment by the poorer burgesses in the Good Parliament of 1376 for extortion, maintenance, and oppression. Fastolf claimed that the accusations were malicious, and he was subsequently cleared by an inquisition in East Anglia. None the less, his property in Yarmouth was attacked in a local uprising which was part of the peasant's revolt in 1381. 
The effect of the naval war in concentrating foreign trade in London, because of the need to convoy merchant ships, encouraged Fastolf to settle in the capital, where he already had extensive mercantile connections with fishmongers and grocers, although he did not neglect his interests in East Anglia. He was admitted to citizenship apparently as a fishmonger, but after the death of his first wife, Agnes, in 1370, he married Joan, daughter of John (III) Gisors (d. 1351) ['see under 'Gisors, John (I) de], and granddaughter and heir of the pepperer Simon Dolseley and the widow of another pepperer, Thomas Hampstead. This brought him closer to the grocers, who by 1373 had reorganized and expanded their company (originally based upon the fraternity of the pepperers) primarily to protect the wool trade to Calais. Fastolf's naval experience made his membership desirable and he joined the Grocers' Company that year. He was elected as an alderman of London in 1381 and in the same year as one of its members of parliament. In the peasants' revolt he was the victim of a family feud which led his wife's kinsman, Paul Salisbury, to descend with a band of armed ruffians on his house in Thames Street where they ill-treated Joan Fastolf and seized the indenture by which Salisbury's father had leased the house to Fastolf. 
Fastolf served on diplomatic trade missions to the Low Countries in 1385 and 1387. He resigned his aldermanry in 1385, but his financial involvement from 1382 with Sir Simon Burley, the tutor and friend of Richard II, made him a natural ally of his fellow grocer Sir Nicholas Brembre, who tried to control London for Richard II in his struggle against the lords appellant. It was undoubtedly Brembre who was responsible for Fastolf's election as sheriff in 1387. After the victory of the appellants a false rumour was spread that Fastolf had been imprisoned in the Tower of London by their order, but he was obliged to purchase a pardon. However, when Richard II regained his authority Fastolf was appointed a justice of the peace and sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk before he was elected to parliament in 1390. He arranged for the disposal of his property in 1391-2 and died intestate in 1392. With his two wives he had six sons. His eldest son, John, was his heir. His widow, Joan, survived until 1417. 


@@@@@


doc= 52176


Fraunceys, Adam (c.1310-1375), merchant and mayor of London, is of uncertain origin. His parents were called Adam and Constance, but who they were and where they lived is unknown. It is unlikely that the family came from London, and possible that Adam was born in Yorkshire, in view of his close relationship with Simon Fraunceys ['see below'], and of the precautions which he took in 1369 to avoid identification with two felons from that region who shared his name. His exact date of birth is not known, but it must have been during or about the first decade of the fourteenth century, and in youth he was probably sent to London to be apprenticed. By 1339 he was already a merchant of some means, operating in Bruges, and able to offer the king the substantial loan of $100. Details of his business dealings are sparse, but like most wealthy merchants of the period he exported wool, and by the 1340s had become a supporter of the various syndicates of customs farmers which prevailed for most of that decade. At the same time Fraunceys lent large sums of money to the nobility and gentry, military men embarking on service overseas, fellow citizens, religious houses, and not least the crown and members of the royal family. 
So successful had Fraunceys become as a merchant and financier that in 1352 he was elected in quick succession alderman of Queenhithe ward (removing in 1356 to Lime Street) and then mayor, holding office for two consecutive years. In November 1352 he was appointed, possibly 'ex officio', to investigate alleged corruption by collectors of the fifteenth granted in 1348 and 1352. Between 1357 and 1359 he sat on a commission to inquire into the failure to enforce the 'Statute of Labourers' in London, and in February 1364 both he and his close associate John Pyel were among those sent on a mission to Calais to deal with complaints by the staplers against the government, which resulted in the reorganization of the administration there. He represented London in parliament at least six times, more than most citizens of his day, and his career seems to reflect a clear sense of civic pride and responsibility. He was co-founder of a college of chantry priests at Guildhall in 1356, and in his will he established two chantries in the church of St Helen, Bishopsgate, in whose precinct he had lived for a number of years and where he chose to be buried. If he was not a Londoner by birth, he certainly devoted his energies wholeheartedly to his adoptive city, showing little interest in his native town, wherever it may have been. By 31 May 1359 he had married Agnes, whose surname is unknown. 
In common with other members of London's mercantile elite Fraunceys was an assiduous purchaser of land. A high proportion of his acquisitions were in London itself, but he also busied himself creating estates outside the city, mostly in the neighbouring counties of Essex and Middlesex. In February 1349, at the height of the plague, he bought the manor of Wyke in Middlesex, comprising lands in Hackney Wick, Old Ford, and Stepney, from his fellow mercer John Causton, and later added to this collection, apparently through local clerical agents who bought small parcels of land on Fraunceys's behalf. In 1357 he bought the manor of Chobhams in West Ham, and in 1359 that of Ruckholts in Leyton. Meanwhile he was buying up lands in North Middlesex, in Enfield, Tottenham, and Edmonton, mostly in partnership with Peter Favelor, a retainer of William de Bohun, earl of Northampton. In 1361 he acquired the manor, and shortly afterwards, probably around 1363, the lordship, of Edmonton, which was to be the centrepiece of his estates. It was at this time, and no doubt to mark this important occasion, that he had an impressive cartulary of his properties drawn up, and it was on the manor of Edmonton that his descendants were settled. 
Adam Fraunceys died in London on 4 May 1375 and was buried at St Helen's, Bishopsgate. He was survived by his widow, Agnes, who was still living in 1394, his son, Adam, knight of the shire (died 1417), and daughter, Maud, later countess of Salisbury (died 1424) ['see 'Montagu, Maud]. 




@@@@@


doc= 52177


Simon Fraunceys (d. 1358), merchant and mayor of London, was born in the late thirteenth century. He appears to have come from Pontefract, Yorkshire, and, like Adam Fraunceys, may have come to London as a boy apprentice. In 1311 his son, John, was apprenticed to Simon Paris, mercer, for seven years. His civic career began when, though not yet an alderman, he was elected sheriff in 1328. In 1336 he was made alderman of Langbourn ward, and in 1339 alderman of Cheap. Fraunceys was chosen to succeed John Oxenford as mayor when the latter died in office in June 1342, and was re-elected the following October. He served as mayor once again for the year 1355-6, towards the end of his life. He was summoned to represent the king's council and parliament six times between 1339 and 1352, and served on other royal commissions. A wealthy merchant and financier he died holding lands in Essex, Middlesex, Bedfordshire, and Kent. He was closely associated with both Adam and Ellis Fraunceys, executors of his will, although it cannot be said with any certainty that a blood tie existed between them. He died on 4 July 1358, leaving a widow, Maud, and a son, Thomas. 


@@@@@


doc= 52178


Garner, Richard (d. in or after 1415), merchant and master of the mint, was born in Piedmont, Italy, but had migrated to London by 1400-01 where he began an eventful career as a resident alien merchant. He exported wool, for instance, on the Venetian Peter Meany's galley in 1404, and petitioned Henry IV for a seven-year monopoly of exports of block and piece tin outside the staple. Membership of the Vintners' Company enabled him to deal in Gascon wine, which he sometimes sold to the royal wardrobe; he also imported from La Rochelle, where he was represented by his brother. Extending beyond the English foothold on the continent into Spain and Portugal, his import business also included iron, Seville oil and white soap, and Portuguese fruit, wines, oxhides, and wax. These additional interests abroad were looked after by fellow Piedmontese. 
His habitual use of Spanish boats to bring these imports north meant that Garner's goods were often intercepted by west-country and Calais-based shipmasters, even when sailing under English safe conduct. However, his royal connections enabled him to invoke the king's protection, permitting him to reclaim his belongings and bring his antagonists before the council. Notably, he petitioned with the Florentine Filippo Alberti concerning four Spanish ships which had been seized and taken to Plymouth in October 1403; Garner and Alberti were able to obtain restitution by indicating the merchants' marks to be found on their goods. But such incidents were not always resolved to Garner's satisfaction, and altogether he alleged losses worth over $2000 at the hands of various English shipmasters. Even less happily, two of his employees were held to ransom at Calais; another, Peter King of London, was imprisoned and his money and goods confiscated while he was on business at Dartmouth. It may have given Garner some small satisfaction in 1404 to have brought a case in the mayor's court to recover a $12 debt against Richard Spicer, MP for Portsmouth and a well-known pirate. 
Garner was granted letters of denization, at a cost of $20, on 4 March 1409, perhaps in anticipation of his appointment as keeper of the king's exchange and master of the mint in London and Calais in July of that year. However, his adoption of English nationality soon proved an unforeseen disadvantage: having sent merchandise worth $4000 to Italy, he could obtain neither a return cargo nor financial compensation because of his changed allegiance, while other Italians joined forces to sue him for debt 'on account of the odium against him for becoming the king's liege man' ('CPR', '1408-13', 212-13). Consequently, in July 1410, he sought and gained royal protection for seven years. He may also have attempted to find a short-term solution to his business problems by exploiting his position as master of the mint; a commission for his arrest was issued in March 1413 on the grounds that he had made money contrary to ordinance, and in April his offices were granted to Louis John. By May he had taken sanctuary at Westminster, apparently somewhat hastily as he left behind some of his personal property, including wine, at the Tower of London. He was pardoned two years later. 
Garner made his will on 14 October 1415, when, as a citizen and vintner of London, he was living in the parish of St Benet Fink. Although he did not specify a place of burial, he left $20 to pay for masses to be said for him at Westminster Abbey. His only other particular bequests were for masses and prayers in the city, where he gave $5 to the Augustinian friars -- increasingly popular among the resident Italian community -- and $2 to each of the other orders of friars. He divided the residue of his estate into third shares, according to London custom: one third went to his executors, the mercers Laurence Hampton and Thomas Bataille; one third was devoted to pious works for the welfare of his soul and those of his Italian relatives and benefactors; the remaining third was set aside to buy lands to support a perpetual chantry at Westminster Abbey, although he instructed his executors to distribute this sum in charitable works if it proved insufficient for his original purpose. Garner's will, which covered only his possessions in England, made no provision for a wife or children. His death is not recorded. 


@@@@@


doc= 52179


Gedney, John (d. 1449), draper and mayor of London, is of unknown origins. In a petition to parliament in 1419 he styled himself John Brodyng, alias Gedney. He may have been related to two other John Gedneys recorded in early fifteenth-century London, one a clothworker, the other a grocer. 
Gedney was trading in London by 1407, when he was already a man of substance. He sold cloth worth $417 to the Grocers' Company for livery gowns and hoods between 1412 and 1422, and by 1420 supplied the royal wardrobe, often on long credit. By 1440 he was owed nearly $490 for cloth by Henry VI. Gedney never plunged deeply into crown finance. In 1417 he lent $20 for the French war. His later loans were mainly on this scale, but in 1431 he was one of four prominent citizens guaranteeing a loan of $2000 on the security of the clerical subsidy. Gedney traded in Calais as well as in London, had links with Venetians and Genoese over the luxury trade in mercery, and imported woad through Southampton. Already a leading member of his livery by 1408, when he helped to acquire land for the new Drapers' Hall, he pledged $20, the second largest amount, for the new building in 1419. In 1427-8 he served as a warden, and, after the company received its charter in 1439, Gedney was the first master; he was again master in 1447-8. Gedney arbitrated in many commercial disputes, but seems to have been drawn into the drapers' quarrel with the tailors in the 1440s to only a limited extent. 
Gedney was returned to parliament in 1414 and 1432. His rise in city politics began in 1415. Elected alderman of the ward of Farringdon Without, Gedney took the oath only on threat of penalties, but remained an alderman until his death, for Coleman Street ward (1416-35), and for Cornhill ward (1435-49). He was a tax collector in 1416 and 1421, and auditor of London in 1419-20. Gedney was elected sheriff in 1417-18, and mayor for the first time in 1427-8. He was one of only nine men to serve twice as mayor before 1545, his second term of office being in 1447-8. Evidently an accomplished committee man with an interest in public works, he often attended the court of aldermen, and was present at eight parliamentary elections. In the 1440s he was an auditor of London Bridge's finances, and an adviser on the new granary being built in Leadenhall market. In 1445 he pledged a legacy of 200 marks ($133 6's'. 8died) for the new conduit. 
Most of Gedney's London property lay in the parish of St Christopher-le-Stocks in Cornhill and Broadstreet wards. By 1407 he held a reversionary interest in a messuage in Cornhill. In 1415 he obtained the Leaden Porch in Cornhill, described by John Stow in the sixteenth century as a fair, large house, together with shops. The purchase of a tavern, the Cock and Star on the Hoop, with six other messuages, shops, solars, and cellars, and an alley in the same parish, was finalized in 1437, but Gedney and his son, another John Gedney, who predeceased his father, were already enjoying the profits in 1436, when the income from Gedney's properties in London and Middlesex was assessed at the handsome sum of $120. 
Gedney's great prize in Middlesex was Tottenham Manor. He acquired the first of four sub-manors in 1427. By the 1440s he held the whole and ran the estate at a profit, consolidating the demesne, increasing rents, building two fulling mills, and founding a brickworks. Surpluses of over $100 per annum are recorded in all surviving accounts for the manor between 1443 and 1449, showing its declared annual value of nearly $60 at Gedney's death to have been a considerable underestimate. Gedney often acted as a trustee for Cardinal Beaufort and others, and this probably explains his interest in manors in Essex and property in Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire. 
Gedney was married three times, first to Alice (surname unknown), second to Elizabeth, sister of John Clopton, esquire, of Long Melford, Suffolk, and third, by 1444, to Joan Large (died 1462). Joan was three times a widow. Her third husband, Robert Large, mercer, mayor of London and William Caxton's master, died in 1441. Gedney was a friend and business associate of Large, and one of his executors. The scandal caused by the marriage is recorded in a London chronicle under the year 1443-4, in a version followed by Stow. Joan Large, perhaps for sound financial reasons, had broken her vow of chastity (no doubt undertaken to protect her late husband's inheritance) to marry Gedney; for this they were 'put to penance both he and she' by the church authorities (Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby Roll 2). Gedney's undertaking in 1445, to the bishop of London to fund four poor scholars at Oxford and Cambridge for nineteen and a half years, may be related to the marriage. 
Gedney died on 12 February 1449. He was buried in the newly built lady chapel on the north side of St Christopher-le-Stocks, and Joan Large beside him. His will is lost, but some provisions are known. Besides money for the conduit, Gedney left 100 marks for glazing the west window of Guildhall chapel. The lavish perpetual chantry he wished to found in St Christopher's for himself, his three wives, and his dead son, was not yet in existence in 1483. John Clopton, one of Gedney's executors, included Gedney's portrait in stained glass among those he commissioned in Long Melford church, where it still survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 52180


John (III) Gisors (d. 1351), mayor of London. Of this John's four brothers and four sisters, Anketin, alderman (1312-36) and six times MP, was the most prominent. John (III) married twice, first Isabella, who was dead by 1350, and second Alice. Possibly knighted, he inherited valuable properties in and near London; part of Gisors Hall, built by his father in the parish of St Mildred, Bread Street, was to survive until the mid-nineteenth century. A vintner and rentier, not a pepperer, he probably lived in the parish of St Martin Vintry. 


@@@@@


doc= 52181


Gisors, John (I) de (d. 1282), merchant and mayor of London, laid the foundations for the success of a family, probably of Norman origin, who can be traced in London for nearly three hundred years. The son of Peter de Gisors, John married a sister of Arnold Fitzthedmar, alderman and chronicler. He was sheriff in 1240-41 and 1245, and alderman of the ward of Vintry from 1243 to 'c'.1263. He lived on the riverside in the parish of St Martin Vintry, and acquired extensive property elsewhere in the city and nearby counties. 
Gisors traded chiefly in wines, often transported in his own ships. His sales, and his purchases of wines as butler for the royal household, as well as other services, led to a profitable association with Henry III. The king entrusted the shrievalty of London to him in December 1245, and the custody of the city in 1254. The royalist group among the aldermen was strong enough to elect Gisors as mayor from January to October 1246 and again for the year from 28 October 1258, and 'that, too, even in his absence' wrote the chronicler (Riley, 42). But by that time the king's position had deteriorated, and the city's approval of the provisions issued by the Oxford parliament was required by the baronial reformers. Although the king was again in control by 1261 -- he appointed Gisors master of the exchange in 1262 -- rioting in London and a populist mayor in office allowed Simon de Montfort to establish himself at the Tower of London in 1263, despite an attempt by Gisors and his friends to trap him. Gisors headed a list of men the rebels planned to kill, but he was saved by the news of the royalist victory at Evesham in August 1265. In poor health in 1263, he died in 1282. A will, enrolled before the court of husting on 27 April 1282, conveys little impression of his wealth. 
Gisors's eldest son, John (II) de Gisors (died 1296), alderman of the ward of Vintry in 1282-96, was in turn the father of 
Gisors was alderman from 1306, from 1310 for the ward of Vintry, when conflicting personalities and shifting interests both in London and the kingdom seriously threatened Edward II's control of his turbulent capital. He held the mayoralty from 28 October 1311, soon after the king had been forced to accept reforms proposed by the lords ordainer, until October 1313, and again from 1314 to 1315. He maintained the traditional protection of London's liberties, defending the franchise, and resisting both levies of tallage and investigation by royal justices of misdeeds of officials. 
Gisors's family interests in the wine trade, harmed by royal favour to Gascon importers, drew him at first into opposition to the king. But while all citizens were agreed on protection of their monopoly of retail trade, not all supported Gisors's vigorous anti-alien policy, which in the spring of 1312 he pressed through in assemblies to which representatives of wards had been added. Conflicting objectives divided both leading merchants and retailers within trades. A year later an assembly, which included representatives from each trade, decreed that craft regulations, then implicitly recognized, should be publicized and enforced. All became alarmed by the city's growing lawlessness, of which Gisors had personal knowledge when in September 1312 unruly crowds surrounded the Guildhall and insisted on seeing for themselves that he was not under arrest. By the summer of 1313 Gisors and his friends were ready to co-operate with more conservative aldermen whose leader, William Leyre, was, with Gisors, elected on 10 August 1314 to represent the city at the York parliament. Attempts were made to check the uproar that had accompanied civic elections by a decree of 1313, repeated in 1315, that only 'the more discreet and powerful citizens' should take part (Sharpe, 'Calendar of Letter Book D', 25). 
By 1320, when Edward and Hugh Despenser the younger moved to tighten control of London, Gisors was coming under attack. When royal justices sat at the Tower of London from 13 January to 20 May 1321 to challenge privileges and investigate grievances, Gisors was found guilty of having in 1312 predated the grant of the freedom to a committed felon so that he could release him on bail, a privilege restricted to freemen. Such use of his powers as an elected mayor, and other complaints against him, provided the king with the pretext he needed to suspend the mayoralty and appoint a royal warden. Gisors was arrested, fined, and removed from his aldermanry. 
By 1323 Gisors was supporting Roger Mortimer, whose escape from the Tower he assisted, and in November 1326, when Queen Isabella with her son and Mortimer were welcomed in London after violent scenes, the Tower was surrendered to him. He led the city's delegation to see the king at Kenilworth in January 1327. But by March 1327 Gisors was no longer constable of the Tower, and he played no part in public life in later years. He died in 1351, leaving three sons and one daughter and his widow, Alice; his will, dated 5 January 1351, was enrolled before the court of husting on 19 January 1351. He left bequests for a chantry to be set up in the church of St Martin Vintry, where he and other members of the family were buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 52182


Goldbeter, John (fl. 1337-1364), merchant, was probably the son of another John Goldbeter, of York. His career is of interest because he became involved on the margins of royal finance during the 1340s as the combined result of family connections and wartime opportunities. In the summer of 1337 he was imprisoned in Bruges in the course of a general seizure of English merchants and their goods. On that occasion he was described as servant and cousin of Henry Goldbeter (bailiff of York in 1333 and mayor in 1346), which implies that he was still a young man. From about this period, however, he began trading on his own account. When, in 1337, Edward III organized a monopolistic company to handle English wool exports, Goldbeter had a small share in it. In late 1337 or early 1338 he defied the royal seizure of wool at Dordrecht and Middelburg by withdrawing surreptitiously his consignment of 9 sacks and 6 stones and disposing of them to Flemish buyers, an offence for which he was fined $200. From this time until at least 1361 he was engaged in overseas trade, chiefly as an exporter of wool, sometimes as a smuggler. On several occasions he contrived to escape punishment for trading offences because of his services to the crown. 
From 1341 Goldbeter was one of the English merchants who benefited from Edward III's reliance upon English merchants to fund his campaigns abroad. This was the time when, in return for commercial privileges, English merchants were taking over services to the crown previously performed by Italian merchant companies. Goldbeter was involved with other York merchants in eight separate loans to the crown between December 1338 and the autumn of 1340, mostly in exchange for freedom from customs duties. Between 1340 and 1342 he also sold wool abroad for the king, as well as trading on his own account, mainly through northern ports. 
Goldbeter did not participate directly in any of the syndicates that undertook to collect customs duties for the king between July 1343 and September 1351. However, between May 1346 and April 1349 the customs were leased by Walter Cheriton and his partners in return for loans to the king, and in order to supply loans at the times the king wanted them Cheriton and Company had to borrow. A consortium of York merchants headed by Goldbeter, while avoiding any direct obligations to the crown, was one of the groups that supplied the necessary funds. Between March 1347 and August 1348 they advanced at least $20,649 8's'. 4died (nearly a sixth of the amount that Cheriton and Company are known to have lent the king) to be repaid out of the customs. In addition Cheriton and Company allowed Goldbeter and his partners freedom to export large amounts of wool without paying customs -- this during a period of partial embargo on wool exports. It was presumably, too, in recognition of his financial services that the king gave Goldbeter some messuages in Calais, following its capture on 3 August 1347. The assets of Cheriton and Company were seized by the king in March 1349. Documents that Goldbeter surrendered to the king on that occasion constitute the most important source of information concerning Cheriton's activities. In 1352 Cheriton and Company prosecuted Goldbeter for debt, but Goldbeter was able to establish that in fact the balance of outstanding obligation was the other way round. 
Goldbeter never held civic office in York, and it may not have been his normal place of residence after his youth. He spent time in Flanders from his early years in the wool trade, and often worked closely with Flemish merchants. In the spring of 1341 he had licence to export wool in partnership with John Cokelare, 'echevin' (municipal magistrate) of Bruges. He lived in Bruges during the siege of Calais, acting with others on behalf of Cheriton and Company and bailing them out of difficulties. In the late summer of 1348 he was again in Bruges, trading through agents in English ports along the east coast. Frequent (or even normal) residence in Bruges perhaps accounts for the paucity of information concerning his career after 1349. He was later said to have collaborated with Flemish merchants illegally in the export of English wool to Flanders between 1353 and 1356. In 1361 he was governor of the English merchants at Bruges. In that year he, with another English merchant and a Fleming, had shares in a ship trading to Nantes under the command of a Flemish skipper. Though outlawed in England in 1362, at the suit of his old rival William de la Pole, for failing to answer charges relating to his illegal activities in 1353-6, Goldbeter was eventually pardoned on 20 November 1364 at the request of Louis de Male, count of Flanders. Nothing is known of him after that date. 


