@@@@@


doc= 6079


Conington, John (1825-1869), classical scholar, was born at Boston, Lincolnshire, on 10 August 1825, the eldest son of the Revd Richard Conington and his wife, Jane, daughter of F. Thirkhill. In 1836 he was sent to Beverley grammar school and two years later to Rugby School, where his housemaster was G. E. L. Cotton and the headmaster was Thomas Arnold. 
Conington was a precocious child, who was able to recite 1000 lines of Virgil to his father before the age of eight, and his near-sightedness and preference for the company of adults made him unhappy in what his biographer describes as the 'primaeval roughness' of Rugby. In his later years there he won the praise of Arnold and was, for a time, head of his house. 
On 30 June 1843 Conington matriculated at University College, Oxford, but almost immediately obtained a demyship at Magdalen. He went up in October 1843 and became the pupil of the Revd William Linwood of Christ Church. In the Hilary term of 1844 he won the two most prestigious undergraduate classical prizes: the Hertford and the Ireland scholarships. His main interests lay in ancient literature and language, but although he did not find the study of ancient history or philosophy particularly stimulating he nevertheless obtained a first class in 'literae humaniores' in December 1846. He had by then returned to University College (with a scholarship in March 1846), having decided against taking holy orders and realizing that he would be unlikely to obtain a lay fellowship at Magdalen. He won the Chancellor's prizes for Latin verse (1847), for an English essay (1848), and for a Latin essay (1849). In February 1848 he was elected to a fellowship at University College, and in the same year, at the age of only twenty-three, produced an edition of Aeschylus's 'Agamemnon' which gained Fraenkel's approbation a century later for its 'fine interpretations and... instinctive grasp of certain delicate shades of poetry which is characteristic of [his] later work' (Fraenkel, 1.51). His much praised conjecture in line 717 does not appear in this edition, but in 'Terminalia' (1851). 
Since virtually all academic preferment in Oxford was still restricted to those in holy orders, Conington decided to read for the bar. He had been prominent in the union as an undergraduate, becoming secretary in 1845, president in 1846, and librarian in 1847. He obtained the Eldon law scholarship in 1849, but, disliking London and the study of law, he returned to Oxford after six months. In the union some had seen him as a political radical and his biographer describes him as showing 'a warm sympathy with the spirit of free enquiry in theology' (Smith, xxxiii). Not everyone agreed about his radicalism. 'Conington', someone is reported to have exclaimed, 'write about the working classes! They are only a large generalisation from his scout' ('DNB'). Conington was interested in the continental revolutions of 1848, and became prominent in the movement for university reform which resulted in a royal commission and the act of 1854. He was a member of a liberal group which included Goldwin Smith (his original collaborator in editing Virgil whose appointment as secretary to the commission caused him to abandon the project), H. J. S. Smith, A. P. Stanley, Benjamin Jowett, and H. H. Vaughan. In 1849-50 he wrote a series of articles on university reform for the 'Morning Chronicle', and produced several pamphlets at Oxford. He advocated many of the changes which were brought about by the act of 1854, especially the opening of fellowships to competition, the restriction of the number of fellowships limited to clergymen, and the establishment of professorships. 
Conington was himself the first holder of the Corpus professorship of Latin, to which he was elected in 1854. (He had been an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of Greek at Edinburgh in 1852.) In the long vacation of 1854 he appears to have suffered some sort of spiritual crisis in which, according to his biographer, H. J. S. Smith, 'for some weeks he was agitated and unstrung by [an] overwhelming consciousness of the immediate presence of the terrors of the unseen world'. The result was 'the fixed determination to make the obligations of religion... the sole governing principle of his life' (Smith, xxxiii). 
Mark Pattison, in a famously acid passage in his 'Memoirs', writes of Conington's being ''converted'... by the terrors of hell. He attended chapel assiduously, refused to read anything but religious books on Sunday... or to dine out on that day... he began to broach Conservative sentiments, as well in politics as in University affairs, and very soon ranged himself with the followers of Dr Pusey' (Pattison, 249). Pattison's venom may have infected some other accounts; this change of political and theological stance is mentioned but not given such prominence in the writings of Conington's friends such as his pupil and successor but one in the Corpus chair, Henry Nettleship, and H. J. S. Smith. 
Conington was perhaps a somewhat surprising choice as first holder of the Corpus chair. At the time of his election he had not published any edition of a Latin work, and a contemporary noted with surprise his limited grasp of German. He showed little interest in the recent advances made in classical scholarship on the continent or in the developing study of ancient history, and his understanding of the importance of earlier English classical scholars (such as Richard Bentley) was limited. Apart from a handful of reviews and essays and the important editions of Virgil and Persius, his chief publications were translations, readings from which often formed the basis of his public lectures. Within Latin literature his interest was limited to a very few authors, and he showed little interest in the history or practice of textual criticism, as is shown by his excessively conservative attitude to the text of Virgil. 
Conington's translations have not stood the test of time, and include some strange choices of medium: he turned the 'Aeneid' into ballad form (1866), a continuation of P. S. Worsley's Homer into Spenserian stanzas (1868), and Horace's 'Satires' and 'Epistles' into heroic couplets (1869). Nevertheless, Conington's critics were unfair in judging his production of translations as mere laziness: a genuine interest in attending to 'each word, not merely to the general force of an expression, but to the various constituents which make up the effect produced by it on a thoroughly intelligent reader' ('Miscellaneous Writings', 1.220) is the most important characteristic which informs his translations, essays, reviews, and editions. 
Conington is best remembered for the commentary on Virgil which he began in 1852 and continued to revise throughout his life. The last of its three volumes was partly written by Nettleship, who later revised the first two volumes and added useful essays. Other revisions were undertaken by F. Haverfield. It is the fullest commentary on the whole of Virgil in English, and remains very valuable (especially on the 'Aeneid') for its clear explanatory notes and citations of parallel passages. Conington's edition of Aeschylus's 'Choephoroe' (1857) drew warm praise from Fraenkel (52) for the 'quiet and noble language' of its notes; more important was his edition and translation of Persius, which was completed by Nettleship and published in 1872. This contains detailed notes on the subject matter and remained the standard English work on the poet for over a century. 
Despite his cadaverous appearance -- he was known as the 'sick vulture', and Tuckwell (104) recalls his 'extraordinary visage with its green-cheese hue, gleaming spectacles [and] quivering, protrusive lips' -- Conington was a noted conversationalist, an assiduous letter-writer, and an important influence on the small groups of undergraduates whom he cultivated, who included T. H. Green, Nettleship, and J. A. Symonds. Although he had no interest in scenery, he took a daily walk during term (giving favoured undergraduates a regular day on which to accompany him) and led a reading party each summer. Many of his former pupils expressed deep gratitude for his friendship, but Nettleship noted 'his intense craving for human sympathy as an impulse which materially injured his mental development, and diverted his powers from objects more worthy of them' (Nettleship, 1.xxii). In later life he spent the vacations looking after his aged mother in Boston, his father having died in 1861, and his brothers in 1863 and 1868. Conington died at Boston, Lincolnshire, on 23 October 1869 after a short illness caused by a malignant pustule on the lip, and was buried three days later at Fishtoft, Lincolnshire. The Conington prize for a classical dissertation was founded in his memory in 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 6080


Conn Cetchathach (supp. d. 157), legendary high-king of Ireland, flourished, if he existed at all, many generations before the beginning of documentation in medieval Ireland, and he therefore cannot be dated with any hope of accuracy. The genealogies show him as one of seven sons of Feidlimid Rechtaid, king of Tara (the title of the high-kings of Ireland), and his mother was said anachronistically to be the daughter of the king of Scandinavia. He was claimed as ancestor by three prominent peoples in the northern half of Ireland: the Connachta (whence the name of the later province of Connacht), the Airgialla of Ulster, and the Ui Neill, the most powerful dynasty in Ireland between the sixth and tenth centuries. It is not surprising that when medieval scholars began to think of Ireland in terms of a division between north and south, they called the former 'Conn's Half'. The notion of this dichotomy seems to reflect the politics of the eighth century. One tale explains it thus: Eogan Mor (otherwise Mug Nuadat, supposed ancestor of the Eoganachta dynasties of southern Ireland) seized the province of Munster from the three kings who had formerly held it. One of the dispossessed kings was given troops by Conn, but was defeated. Conn himself then fought with Eogan, but was defeated in ten battles. The result was the division of Ireland from Galway Bay to Dublin Bay. 
Conn was said to have been born at Tara, a site with pagan associations, the symbolic seat of those who claimed the kingship of Ireland in the middle ages. At his birth three great rivers sprang up, and three lakes (Lough Neagh, Lough Rea, and Lough Leane), and three famous trees. This may be connected with the concept that the king was the bringer of fertility. However, it has been suggested -- notably by T. F. O'Rahilly -- that Conn was originally a god. One meaning of his name is 'sense, wisdom', and there is a prominent figure in Welsh mythology called Pwyll, whose name means the same. If this is not coincidence, it would appear that both heroes have their source in a single pre-Christian, pan-Celtic personage. Conn seems to have a divine role in what is perhaps the earliest text to mention him, the late seventh-century 'Baile Chuinn Chetchathaig' ('The frenzy (or vision) of Conn Cetchathach'), a series of obscure and poetic utterances prophesying the kings of Tara who would come after him. 
However, an updated version of this text written some centuries later shows Conn as human, not divine. The prophecy is given by Lug (who was undoubtedly a Celtic deity), although Conn is the one to whom it is spoken. Of Conn himself, Lug prophesied that he would participate in a hundred battles; this is evidently an attempt to explain his epithet (which may be translated as 'Hundred-Battler'). Lug listed these battles, but the total is well short of the target. However, the early modern historian Geoffrey Keating quotes a stanza which says that Conn fought a hundred battles against the Munstermen, a hundred against the Ulstermen, and sixty against the Leinstermen. 
The genealogies disagree on the number and names of Conn's children. The most significant of his progeny was Art Oenfher, high-king of Ireland, his son with the daughter of the king of Scotland Aife ingen Alpin. Among his other wives was Lenabair, the daughter of Cathaer Mar, ancestor of the ruling dynasties of Leinster. A Leinster genealogical source claims that while Cathaer ruled at Tara, Conn ruled at nearby Kells, and that there was complete peace between them. 
There is a brief tale about Conn's death, reputedly in 157. He was in a state of enmity with his brother, Eochaid, who had fled to the Ulstermen. Conn sent envoys to the kings of Ulster to get assurances from them about his brother. However, the envoys found Eochaid alone, and took the opportunity to murder him, which was regarded as an outrage by his hosts. A peace was made, but one of the kings, Tipraite, did not accept it and fled to Scotland. He and his men returned after three years, veiled and in women's garb. They came across Conn alone at Tara and Tipraite slew him. 


@@@@@


doc= 6081


Conn na mBocht (d. 1060), ecclesiastical leader, was 'head of the Ceili De [Culdees, literally 'servants of God'] and anchorites of Clonmacnoise', though he is sometimes mistakenly called bishop of Clonmacnoise on the basis of a misinterpretation of an entry in 'Chronicum Scotorum' for the year 948. His death is likewise sometimes given as 1031, on the basis of an entry in the annals of the four masters, mistakenly assumed to be an obit. His name is the eponym of the Meic Cuinn na mBocht family, one of the best documented in early medieval Ireland below the top ranks of royalty, though two versions of their dynastic origin are recorded, one linking them with Ui Chellaig, the royal family of Brega, the other, perhaps more likely, with the Mugdorna Maigen of Airgialla. They are occasionally called Muinter Gormain, after the abbot of Louth who died on pilgrimage in Clonmacnoise in 758, or Cenel Torbaig, after the latter's famous son, Torbach (died 808), abbot of Armagh and the person for whom the 'Book of Armagh' was written. 
Torbach's son Aedacan was abbot of Louth but died in Clonmacnoise in 835, and the family were thereafter firmly fixed at Clonmacnoise, Aedacan's grandson Luchairen being the first member of Conn na mBocht's ancestry specifically recorded as one of its scribes. Successive members of the family held prominent posts there, Conn's great-grandfather Dunadach (died 955) being bishop, and his grandfather Dunchad being 'lector of Clonmacnoise, and its anchorite afterwards, head of its rule and history' ('AFM', s.a. 1005). Although Conn's own father, Ioseph (died 1024), was described simply as 'anmchara Cluana mic Nois' ('confessor [literally 'soul-friend'] of Clonmacnoise'; 'AFM', s.a. 1022), there is more than enough evidence to demonstrate that the family had a long tradition as scribes and historians, a tradition that extended beyond Conn. The latter's grandson, for instance, was the principal scribe of 'Lebor na hUidre', containing the oldest text of the Tain, where an entry requests 'a prayer for Mael Muire mac Ceilechair, grandson of Conn na mBocht, who copied and searched out this book from various books' ('Lebor na hUidre', fol. 37b). The family probably also maintained the annals at Clonmacnoise, which would account for the detailed and flattering entries about them recorded through the ages. 
Conn himself was head of the Ceili De, who, when they first appeared in the eighth century, were individuals or groups subject to a monastic rule, apparently with observances stricter than those of others; but by the eleventh century the term is synonymous, or nearly so, with the monastic poor, 'na boicht', individuals inhabiting monastic lands who may or may not have taken vows of poverty. In Armagh, the person charged with looking after the poor was called 'cenn bocht', 'head of the poor' ('Ann. Ulster', s.a. 1074, 1077), a title also given to Conn's son and successor at Clonmacnoise, from which it may be assumed that Conn had served the same function. 
The Four Masters state that 'the reason he was called Conn na mBocht is because of the number of poor that he used to feed habitually' ('AFM', 807), and the evidence suggests that he enjoyed considerable wealth since the annals of the four masters records for 1031 that he was 'the first to assemble a herd for the poor of Clonmacnoise' (though O'Donovan oddly translates this as 'the first that invited a party of the poor'), and presented twenty cows of his own to it. They were maintained at Isel Chiarain (Twyford, Westmeath), a church situated quite some distance north of Clonmacnoise, which had been in its possession for many generations and was by tradition the location of St Ciaran's first settlement in the area. It became the possession of Conn's family in the eleventh century: a verse couplet in the annals of the four masters for 1031, on the subject of Conn, seems to have Isel Chiarain in mind when it refers to 'do chill', 'your church', while the same source for 1089 records that it 'was purchased for ever by Cormac Mac Cuinn na mBocht' (Conn's grandson) from the abbot of Clonmacnoise and the king of Mide. The annals of Clonmacnoise, in describing an event that belongs to 1072, likewise mention 'the family of Moylekyeran mc Con ne mboght in Isillkyeran and the poore of that house'. The same source calls it 'Isill Kieran or the hospitall of St. Queran', which is perhaps an indication of one of the functions the family served there. 
These notices seem to confirm that, under the stewardship of Conn and his immediate successors, Isel Chiarain, once an important possession of Clonmacnoise, was transformed into an independent church, run by a hereditary ecclesiastical family, and, by virtue of its 'purchase' from both king and abbot, exempted from secular and ecclesiastical authority and taxation. This must have been largely Conn's achievement since, although the annalists are almost totally silent about him, they view him as an apical figure and are very anxious to link others to him by either ancestry or descent. The verse couplet commemorating him gives some idea of his status: 'O Conn of Cluain, thou wert heard from Ireland in Scotland; O head of dignity, it will not be easy to plunder thy church' ('AFM', s.a. 1031). He died, as 'the glory and dignity of Clonmacnoise', in 1060 'at an advanced age' ('AFM', s.a. 1060). A tombstone with the inscription 'Or[oit] do Chuinn' ('a prayer for Conn') was still visible when George Petrie visited Clonmacnoise in the mid-nineteenth century. 
Conn had at least five sons: Celechair Mugdornach, who died as bishop of Clonmacnoise in 1067; Mael Chiarain (died 1079), abbot of Clonmacnoise, who paved two roads there and whose inscribed gravestone Petrie also recorded; Mael Finnen, who predeceased his father in 1056 but who was deemed important enough for his obit to record his genealogy, whose son Cormac later held the abbacy or vice-abbacy, and whose gravestone Petrie also noted; Gilla Crist, 'the best cleric's son that was in Ireland in his time, the glory and ornament of Clonmacnoise' ('AFM', s.a. 1085); and Mael Isu (died 1103). 


@@@@@


doc= 6082


Conn, George (d. 1640), diplomat, was the son of Patrick Conn of Auchry, near Turriff, Aberdeenshire, and Isabella Chyn of Esselmont. He was raised as a Catholic and educated at Douai, the Scots College at Paris, and in Rome before entering the University of Bologna. He served as tutor to the son of the duke of Mirandola before joining the household of Cardinal Montalto in Rome in the summer of 1623. Montalto left him a substantial legacy six months later. Conn then entered the service of Cardinal Francesco Barberini, nephew to Urban VIII, accompanying him on diplomatic missions to France and Spain. He joined the Franciscan order and became a canon of St Lawrence in Damaso and secretary to the congregation of rites. 
In 1624 Conn published 'Vita Mariae Stuartae Scotiae reginae', which he dedicated to the pope. This hagiographic biography became the main source for Lope de Vega's 'Corona tragica' (Madrid, 1627) and also inspired Giovanni Battista Ciampoli's 'Poesia in lode dell'inchiostro dedicata al Signior Georgio Coneo' (Rome, 1626). Encouraged by his success Conn published 'De duplici religionis apud Scotos' with the Vatican Press in 1628. The first book of this work traced the history of Christianity in Scotland from the Roman period down to the beginnings of the Reformation, while the second narrated the contest between Scottish Catholicism and heresy from the 1540s until the early seventeenth century. It closed with a flattering reference to the book's dedicatee, Cardinal Barberini, as a patron and protector of Scottish Catholics. 
In 1633 Queen Henrietta Maria nominated Conn to the College of Cardinals in a letter to Barberini transmitted by Sir Robert Douglas. Charles I knew about and tacitly supported the proposal as a means of reopening communications with the Vatican. Barberini foresaw difficulties with the nomination and it was decided to defer action while dispatching an agent to England to assess the situation there, including the prospects that Charles himself might convert. Gregorio Panzani, who was chosen for this assignment, sent back encouraging reports of the desires of the king and other leading figures at the English court for reunion with Rome. The Vatican decided to send a more senior representative and in late spring 1636 selected Conn, largely thanks to active lobbying by Henrietta Maria's favourite, Wat Montagu, who was visiting Rome at the time after converting to Catholicism. 
Conn arrived in England on 17 July 1636. Like Panzani he was accredited to the queen rather than the king, to whom he presented himself on 24 July. But he was also immediately welcomed by other leading personalities of the court, including the protestant earls of Pembroke and Holland. He quickly established a close relationship with the king, whom he often encountered in the queen's apartments. Charles confided in Conn his belief that the French were trying to use his wife to serve their own interests, quizzed him about Catholic doctrines, and engaged him in genial arguments over points of theology. 
The intimacy between the king and the papal agent aroused jealousies but also enhanced Conn's influence with both protestant and Catholic courtiers. Conn adroitly used his position not only to probe English attitudes and lobby for concessions but to build a Catholic party. He soon became less sanguine than Panzani over the immediate prospects for reunification, since he realized that Charles and Archbishop William Laud would demand concessions that the Vatican was unwilling to grant. He therefore concentrated on softening enforcement of the penal laws and negotiating changes in the wording of the oath of allegiance to make it less objectionable to Catholics. He was largely successful in the first goal and obtained substantial concessions with respect to the oath, although these failed to satisfy the Vatican. Meanwhile he attempted to discover the religious attitudes of English bishops and leading members of the court and to persuade any who seemed well disposed to Rome to convert. 
Panzani had commented before Conn's arrival that a successful papal agent to the English court must be especially adept at working through women, and this proved prophetic. Although Conn was assisted in his proselytizing by the queen's confessor, Father Philip of Sanquhar, and the indefatigable Montagu, whose return to royal favour he helped arrange, his most effective allies were the queen and the countess of Arundel. In 1637-8 several other prominent women at court converted and joined his campaign, among them Olivia Porter, the wife of Charles's pro-Spanish bedchamber servant Endymion Porter, and the formerly puritan Lady Newport. These 'Amazons who... day and night employ their uttermost endeavours for the dignity of the apostolic see', as Barberini appreciatively described them ('Various Collections', 5.121), were further reinforced in 1639 by the arrival of the pro-Spanish French duchess of Chevreuse and the queen's mother, Marie de' Medici. The growth of Catholicism at court caused considerable scandal, as did the increasingly ostentatious worship by English subjects at chapels maintained by the queen and the ambassadors of Catholic states, and in Conn's own Long Acre house, where eight masses were celebrated daily. 
Conn regarded the crisis provoked by the new Scottish prayer book of 1637 as an opportunity to make Charles reliant on Catholic support against puritan opponents. He took every opportunity to contrast Catholic loyalty with puritan disobedience, urged the king to lift restrictions on Catholics owning arms so they would be in a better position to defend him, and hinted that the pope's friendship might restrain France and Spain from trying to profit from Britain's internal problems. He helped to organize the collection of a voluntary 'contribution' by Catholics to aid the king in the first bishops' war and encouraged Scottish Catholic nobles at the English court to organize military resistance to the covenanters. He became involved as well in discussions of a possible loan from the pope and military assistance from Spain. 
These efforts provoked a fierce reaction. Rumours circulated that Conn had brought the new Scottish prayer book from Rome and that he was hearing the confessions of the king. He was also the victim of internal rancour within the English Catholic community. Moderate Catholics with unrealistic expectations of the concessions Rome would offer to achieve reunification with England blamed him for taking a rigid stance. Many secular priests regarded him as an ally of the Jesuits. Damaging leaks of information and false accusations from disgruntled Catholics further inflamed English opinion. Conn's failure to win the coveted promotion to the cardinalate also undermined his prestige within the British Catholic community and with the king. 
By spring 1639 Conn's health was failing and his doctors concluded that he would not survive another winter in England. Barberini therefore reluctantly recalled him to Rome. Conn left England in late summer, shortly after the arrival of his successor, Rossetti, with renewed hope that he would shortly be made a cardinal, but he died on 10 January 1640 without the coveted prize; he was buried in Rome and a monument to him was erected in the church of St Lawrence, Damaso. Henrietta Maria and her allies continued his efforts to build a Catholic party at Whitehall and exploit the Scots crisis to win religious concessions from Charles. Conn played a significant, if indirect, role in creating the climate of religious polarization and fierce suspicion of popery at court that made civil war possible. 


@@@@@


doc= 6083


Connell, Sir John (1765-1831), lawyer and judge, was born in Glasgow on 4 September 1765, son of Arthur Connell, merchant in Glasgow and lord provost of that city, and his wife, Magdalen Wallace. Educated at Glasgow University, he was admitted a member of the Faculty of Advocates in 1788. He married a daughter of Sir Ilay Campbell of Succoth, baronet, lord president of the court of session. In 1795 he was appointed sheriff-depute of Renfrewshire, and in 1805-6 he was procurator, or law adviser, for the Church of Scotland; he enjoyed an extensive practice in church causes. In 1816 he was appointed judge of the court of Admiralty, an office which he held until 1830, when that court was abolished. Some time before 1821 he was knighted. Connell was the author of two books, on the tithes and stipends of the Scottish parochial clergy (1815), and on Scottish law and the parish (1818). Connell died suddenly on 13 April 1831 at Garscube, the seat of his brother-in-law, Sir Archibald Campbell. 


@@@@@


doc= 6084


Connellan, Owen (1800-1869), Irish scholar, was born in co. Sligo, the son of a farmer who claimed descent from the chiefs of Bunnyconnellan in Mayo, and through them from Laoghaire MacNeill, king of Ireland. He studied Irish literature, and worked for more than twenty years as a scribe in the Royal Irish Academy, where he copied a great part of the large collections of Irish writings known as the books of 'Lecan' and of 'Ballymote'. After the visit of George IV to Ireland in 1821, Connellan was appointed Irish historiographer to the king, a post which he also held throughout the reign of William IV. In 1849, shortly after its establishment, Connellan was made professor of Irish at Queen's College, Cork, where he remained until his death in Dublin in 1869. 
Connellan wrote a number of grammatical analyses of the gospels and a dissertation on the Irish language. His views on its evolution were somewhat eccentric; he admired Sir William Betham, whose 'Etruria Celtica' he believed had proved that the Irish and Etruscan languages were identical. In 1844 he published a 'Practical Grammar of the Irish Language', which is of value as a record of the idiom and pronunciation of Irish in the north of Connaught. His edition of 'The Annals of Ireland, Translated from the Original Irish of the Four Masters' (1846) was superseded by that of John O'Donovan (1860). His most important work was a translation of the 'Imtheacht na tromdhaimhe, or, The Proceedings of the Great Bardic Institutions' (1860). 


@@@@@


doc= 6085


Connellan, Thaddaeus (d. 1854), lexicographer, was the author of a number of successful works on the Irish language, including 'An Irish and English Spelling Book', which had reached a nineteenth edition by 1848; 'An English-Irish Dictionary, Intended for the Use of Schools' had originally appeared in 1814. He also produced translations of parts of the 'Bible' into Irish, and was a Hebrew scholar: his 1823 edition of 'The Proverbs of Solomon' contained English, Irish, and Hebrew versions, as well as a Hebrew grammar. Connellan, about whom nothing otherwise is known, died at Sligo on 25 July 1854. 


@@@@@


doc= 6086


Connor, Bernard (c.1666-1698), physician and writer on Poland, the son of Bernard O'Connor, born in co. Kerry, Ireland, was descended from the O'Connor Kerry family, lords of Kerry. As a Roman Catholic, he was prohibited from attending school or university, and was therefore taught privately by tutors. Of his life in Ireland almost nothing is known, but 'c'.1686, when he was about twenty years old, he went abroad to further his education. He is said to have studied medicine about 1690 at the universities of Montpellier and Paris (N. F. J. Eloy, 'Dictionnaire historique'), but no confirmation of this has been found in the records of those institutions. There is, however, evidence that he attended the University of Rheims and took the degree of doctor of medicine there on 18 September 1693. (The date 18 September 1691, given in the records of the Royal College of Physicians, is less likely.) While in France, he published in 1693 in Paris a paper describing a spondylitic skeleton, entitled 'Lettre ecrite a Monsieur le Chevalier Guillaume de Waldegrave, premier medecin de sa majeste britannique'. 
Through contact with the French royal court, O'Connor was entrusted with the care of the sons of Jan Wielopolski, crown chancellor of Poland, who had died in 1688. With them he set out late in 1693 on a journey to Italy, where he visited Rome and, on about 13 December 1693, ascended Vesuvius. He met several prominent Italian physicians. He and his Polish companions then passed through Venice, Padua, Innsbruck, and Vienna, on their way to Warsaw, where, following their arrival in mid-1694, King Jan III Sobieski appointed O'Connor his personal physician. Being commanded to confer with certain other physicians concerning a disease of the king's sister, O'Connor immediately diagnosed an abscess of the liver and said she could not live long, whatever her treatment. The others made light of her condition, but within a month she was dead and confirmation of the diagnosis by post-mortem enhanced his reputation. However, since the king was sixty-four years old and in poor health, O'Connor's situation was uncertain. It was therefore with relief that he accepted the task of attending Princess Teresa Kunegunda, the king's daughter, on her journey to Brussels to join her husband, the elector of Bavaria. Soon after the arrival of the royal equipage in Brussels on 12 January 1695 the care of the electress's health was taken over by her husband's physician and O'Connor set sail for England, where he landed in February 1695. He became a member of the Church of England, changed his name to Connor, and soon had friends in high places, including Hans Sloane. At a meeting of the Royal Society on 6 March 1695 Connor presented several natural curiosities, including seeds and minerals collected in Poland and a specimen of 'plica polonica' (a matted condition of the hair). He then moved to Oxford, where he stayed for about three months, lecturing to members of the university on anatomy and related matters and attending to the publication of four scientific papers under the collective title 'Dissertationes medico-physicae' (1695), including a Latin version of his account of a spondylitic skeleton, now addressed to John Radcliffe. By 20 June he was back in London and attending a meeting of the Royal Society, where he presented a copy of his newly printed 'Dissertationes'. While in Oxford he had attracted the attention of Robert Gorge (or Gorges) of St John's College, who reported to Sir William Trumbull, member of parliament for the university and a privy councillor, first that Connor, having pretended to be a Pole, had revealed himself to be an Irishman hostile to the English cause in Ireland; and later, that he was believed to be a French spy. However, this did not hinder Connor's admission on 27 November 1695 as a fellow of the Royal Society and, on 6 April 1696, as a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. From January to March 1696 he lectured three times a week in the library of St Martin-in-the-Fields on the fabric and operations of the human body, and that summer he repeated these lectures in Cambridge. 
Public interest in Polish affairs resulting from the death of King Jan III Sobieski (17 June 1696) and the election of his successor provided the stimulus for the publication of Connor's 'History of Poland', which he had begun while still in Poland. His medical activities left him little spare time, however, and it was only with the assistance of his friend John Savage (1673-1747) that he managed to prepare this book for the press. The second volume was, in fact, composed by Savage from Connor's notes. 'The History of Poland, in Several Letters to Persons of Quality' (2 vols., 1698) is an imposing work of over seven hundred pages, based strictly on identified sources and embodying a valuable eyewitness account of Poland in the late seventeenth century. Connor's most controversial work, however, was his 'Evangelium medici, seu, Medicina mystica: de suspensis naturae legibus, sive, De miraculis' (1697), which set out to explain miracles by the principles of medical knowledge. 
In October 1698 Connor, who was now living in Brownlow Street, in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex, fell ill with a fever. On 27 October he made his will and the next day sent for the rector, William Hayley, who, accepting that he was a true penitent member of the Church of England, gave him communion. But Connor was later visited by an Irish Roman Catholic priest, who spoke to him in Irish and, it appears, gave him extreme unction. 
Connor died on 30 October 1698 and was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields on 3 November. Judging that in his dealings with the Catholic priest Connor had no longer known what he was doing, Hayley gave him burial as a member of the Church of England. Connor's will directed that his property, including his house and furniture, be sold and the proceeds paid to his nearest relatives. It mentions, in particular, a diamond ring, which was to be sold and the proceeds given to his youngest sister. Not having been witnessed, the will had to be proved before a judge, at which point the executors Charles Connor (the doctor's cousin) and William Lilley renounced their rights in favour of Connor's father, who on 6 October 1699 was given administration. 


@@@@@


doc= 6087


Connor, Charles (c.1788-1826), actor, was born in co. Cork, the son of James Connor. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he was admitted in 1805 at the age of seventeen. He is believed to have played Euphrasia in 'The Grecian Daughter' while still at school, and to have acquired some popularity at the Dublin theatre before travelling to England. There he made his debut as an actor at Bath about 1807, as Fitzharding in 'The Curfew'. Connor's first appearance in London did not take place until 18 September 1816, in the character of Sir Patrick McGuire in Oulton's 'The Sleep Walker'. From this period until 14 June 1826, when as Kenrick in Colman's 'The Heir-at-Law' he took a benefit and made his last recorded appearance, he played a round of characters at Covent Garden. These consisted of Irish types, servants, villains, and similar roles, the most prominent being Sir Callaghan in Charles Macklin's 'Love a la Mode', Foigard in Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', Sir William Davison in an adaptation of Schiller's 'Mary Stuart', Julio in Barry Cornwall's 'Mirandola', Dennis Brulgruddery in the younger Colman's 'John Bull', and Filch in 'The Beggar's Opera'. He also played characters in various adaptations of Scott's novels. The original parts assigned him included Terry O'Rourke, otherwise Dr O'Toole, in 'The Irish Tutor', written expressly for him, at Cheltenham and Covent Garden in 1822; and Dr O'Rafferty in 'Cent per Cent', in 1823. He also played Sir Lucius O'Trigger in 'The Rivals'. 
Connor's wife (whose name is unknown) was also on the stage and is said to have acted at the Haymarket as Grace Gaylove in Colman's 'The Review'. She performed at Covent Garden, taking the roles of Manse Hedrigge in 'The Battle of Bothwell Brigg' (May 1820), in which Connor was Graham of Claverhouse; the Duchess of York in 'Richard III' (March 1821); and Servia in Sheridan Knowles's 'Virginius' (December 1821), to her husband's Appius. A benefit was given for her at the English Opera House (Lyceum) after her husband's death. Connor died suddenly of heart disease on 7 October 1826 while crossing St James's Park to his home in Pimlico, and was buried on 13 October 1826 at the New Church, Chelsea. A Roman Catholic, he was survived by his wife and two children. Connor had a good face, figure, and voice, and, while his career in London cannot be regarded as a great success, he was fairly popular in the roles he performed. 


@@@@@


doc= 6088


Connor, George Henry (1822-1883), dean of Windsor, eldest son of George Connor, master in chancery in Ireland, was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1845 and proceeded MA in 1851. He was ordained deacon in 1846 and priest in the following year. After officiating for some time at St Thomas's Chapel, Newport, Isle of Wight, he was curate at St Jude's, Southsea, and subsequently at Wareham, Dorset. He married in 1852 Maude Worthington, eldest daughter of John Worthington of Kent House, Southsea, with whom he had two sons and several daughters. His daughter Emily Henrietta married Ernest Wilberforce, successively bishop of Newcastle and Chichester. 
Connor was appointed vicar of Newport, Isle of Wight, in 1852. Here it was due to his initiative and energy that the parish church was rebuilt at a cost of $22,000. The foundation stone was laid by the prince consort. He also built a vicarage and some almshouses, and effected improvements in the schools. He became acquainted with Queen Victoria, then living chiefly on the Isle of Wight, and he was for years honorary chaplain and chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen, chaplain to the governor of the Isle of Wight, and official and commissary of the archdeaconry of Wight. Following the death of G. V. Wellesley, dean of Windsor and an important conduit between the queen and her prime minister, W. E. Gladstone, the queen appointed Connor to the vacant deanery in October 1882, without consulting Gladstone. This was a serious, if characteristic, error. Connor left Newport amid the general regret of his parishioners. He had no sooner entered on his new duties than his health broke down. He was not, in fact, suited to the pressures of so prominent a deanery. He preached once in St George's Chapel, and several times in the private chapel. It taxed his strength severely to be present on the occasion of the christening of Princess Alice of Albany on 26 March. He died on 1 May 1883 at the deanery, Windsor. 


@@@@@


doc= 6089


Conny, Robert (c.1645-1713), physician, son of John Conny, surgeon, and twice mayor of Rochester, was a member of Magdalen College, Oxford, and proceeded BA on 8 June 1676, MA on 3 May 1679, BM on 2 May 1682, and DM on 9 July 1685, on which occasion he 'denied and protested', because the vice-chancellor caused one Bullard, of New College, to be presented LLB before him. After being made a candidate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1692, he was employed by the Admiralty as physician to the sick and wounded landed at Deal. He was admitted as a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1693. Conny married Frances, daughter of Richard Manley. He contributed a paper, 'On a shower of fishes', in the form of a letter to Robert Plot, to 'Philosophical Transactions', vol. 20, and is said to have been a successful physician, and to have improved the practice of lithotomy. He died on 25 May 1713 and was buried in Rochester Cathedral, where a monument was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 6090


Conolly, Arthur (1807-1842?), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 2 July 1807, third of the six sons of Valentine Conolly (died 2 Dec 1819) of 37 Portland Place, London, who made a rapid fortune in India at the close of the eighteenth century, and his wife, Matilda (died 29 Nov 1819). He was educated at Rugby School (1820-22). A shy and sensitive boy, Conolly was not suited to public-school life, and he suffered there. After leaving Rugby he entered Addiscombe College on 3 May 1822, but resigned on receiving a cavalry cadetship. He travelled to Bengal the same year. Reginald Heber, newly consecrated bishop of Calcutta, was a fellow passenger, and had a profound influence on the young Conolly, who in January 1824 was made cornet in the 6th Bengal native light cavalry, to which his brother Edward Barry Conolly ['see below'] was appointed later. Arthur became lieutenant in the regiment on 13 May 1825 and captain on 30 July 1838. 
Being in England on sick leave in 1829, Conolly obtained leave to return to India through central Asia. He left London on 10 August 1829, travelled through France and Germany to Hamburg, then continued by sea to St Petersburg, where he stayed a month, and then travelled via Tiflis and Tehran to Asterabad. There he disguised himself as an Asian merchant, with a stock of furs and shawls, hoping to reach Khiva. He left Asterabad for the Turkoman steppes on 26 April 1830, but when the little caravan to which he attached himself was about halfway between Krasnovodsk and Kizil Arvat he was seized by nomads and robbed. The Turkomans were undecided whether to kill him or sell him into slavery. Tribal jealousies in the end secured his release, and he returned to Asterabad on 22 May 1830, from where he travelled to India by way of Mashhad, Herat, and Kandahar, visiting Sind, and finally crossing the Indian frontier in January 1831. He published a lively narrative of the journey -- reflecting his bright, hopeful temperament -- 'A Journey to Northern India' (1834). He also contributed papers entitled 'The overland journey to India' to 'Gleanings in Science' (1831). After an interview with Lord William Bentinck at Delhi, Conolly rejoined his regiment, and when stationed at Cawnpore appears to have acquired the lasting friendship of the eccentric Jewish convert Dr Joseph Wolff, then travelling as a missionary in India. 
In 1834 Conolly joined the political department and was appointed assistant to the government agent in Rajputana, and in 1838 returned home on furlough, hoping to marry. Disappointed, he sought relief in further professional activity. Russian movements in central Asia were causing anxiety in England, and Conolly proposed to the home government to remove the pretext for Russian advances by negotiating with the principal Uzbek chiefs in order to stop the carrying off of Russian and Persian subjects into slavery. He was provided with letters of recommendation to Lord Auckland, then governor-general of India, by the Board of Control in London, together with $500 for an overland journey. Conolly left London on 11 February 1839, visited Vienna (where he had an interview with Prince Metternich), Constantinople, and Baghdad, where he first met Major Henry Rawlinson, and reached Bombay in November 1839, proceeding from there to Calcutta. The time appeared favourable, and Conolly was sent on to Kabul, where in the spring of 1840 he joined the staff of Sir William Macnaghten, the British envoy with Shah Shuja. One of Macnaghten's brothers had married Conolly's sister. 
Passionately religious and enthusiastic, and supporting the abolition of central Asian slavery, Conolly held hopes, which he admitted were somewhat 'visionary', for the political regeneration of central Asia and the ultimate conversion of its people to Christianity. Macnaghten and Conolly in April 1840 planned -- the initiative apparently largely Conolly's -- that Conolly should go to Turkestan on an ill-defined mission to urge the Uzbek states to combine against Russia, under the leadership of Kokand; initially there was no plan to visit Bukhara. The plan was modified, and in September 1840 Conolly went to Khiva, and in 1841 to Kokand. In Bukhara the amir, Nasrullah, had since December 1838 kept prisoner a British envoy, Colonel Charles Stoddart. The amir, apparently suspicious of Conolly's activities in Kokand, invited him to Bukhara. Conolly, as this apparently fitted his hopes of an Uzbek confederation, went to Bukhara, arriving in October 1841. 
In December 1841 the amir, suspicious of British policy and presumably encouraged by British failure in Afghanistan, imprisoned Conolly with Stoddart. Disillusioned, Conolly's views changed, and he came to favour Anglo-Russian co-operation in Turkestan, in the interests of civilization. Conolly was a voluminous and rapid writer. On his travels he noted all he said and did in his journal, a practice he continued even in his dungeon at Bukhara. Five letters, all written in February and March 1842, forming the main portion of Conolly's prison journal, survived his captivity. The last direct news of him alive was in a letter he sent to his brother, then a hostage at Kabul, early in 1842, in which he described the sufferings of Stoddart and himself. For four months they had no change of clothing; their dungeon was foul, insanitary, and infested with vermin. Stoddart was reduced to a skeleton. They had with difficulty persuaded one of their guards to represent their wretched condition to the amir, and were at that time awaiting his reply, having committed themselves to God in the full belief that unless quickly released death must soon end their sufferings. Nevertheless, he wrote, 'We are resolved to wear our English honesty and dignity to the last' (Yapp, 413). The amir had them murdered, probably in June 1842. 
The British government being apparently unwilling to act, a committee was formed in London in 1842, on the initiative of Captain John Grover, to obtain the release of the Bukhara captives, and a sum of $500 so collected supplied the funds to dispatch Dr Wolff on a mission to Bukhara. Wolff, after perilous investigations there, concluded that Conolly, with Stoddart and other victims, after enduring fearful agonies in prison, had been cruelly killed some time in 1843, and that the instigator of this was the pretended friend of the English, Abdul Samut Khan, 'naib' or prime minister of Nasir Allah Bahadur, amir of Bukhara. 
Although Conolly had undoubted courage and a sense of duty, some of his contemporaries considered him over-enthusiastic and lacking in balance. Sir Alexander Burnes, for example, considered him flighty. Many years later Conolly's prayer book, in which he had written a last record of his sufferings and aspirations when a prisoner, was left at his sister's house in London by a mysterious foreigner, who simply said that he came from Russia. The details were published in Sir John Kaye's account of Conolly in 'Lives of Indian Officers' (1867). 
Three of Conolly's brothers lost their lives in the Indian service. 








@@@@@


doc= 6091


Edward Barry Conolly (1808-1840) was captain, 6th Bengal light cavalry, and at the time of his death was in command of the escort of the British envoy at Kabul. He was shot at Tootundurrah, in Kohistan, north of Kabul, while a volunteer with Sir Robert Sale, in the attack on the fort there on 29 September 1840. He had made many contributions to the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6092


Conolly, Erskine (1796-1843), poet, was born at Crail, Fife, on 12 June 1796, the son of Daniel Conolly and Janet Fowler. He was educated at the burgh school of his native town, and was afterwards apprenticed to a bookseller at Anstruther. Subsequently he began business on his own account in Colinsburgh, but not succeeding to his satisfaction, he went to Edinburgh. There, after serving for some time as clerk to a writer to the signet, he obtained a partnership with a solicitor, and after his partner's death succeeded to the whole business. 
Conolly wrote many poems and songs, including 'Mary Macneil', his best-known song, which appeared in the 'Edinburgh Intelligencer' on 23 December 1840. No edition of his collected works was ever published. He died at Edinburgh on 7 January 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 6093


Henry Valentine Conolly (1806-1855), of the Madras civil service, entered Rugby School in the same year as his brother Arthur, and was appointed a writer on the Madras establishment on 19 May 1824. He became assistant to the principal collector at Bellary in 1826, and after holding various posts -- including deputy secretary to the military department, Canarese translator to the government, cashier of the government bank, and additional government commissioner for the settlement of Carnatic claims -- he was appointed magistrate and collector at Malabar, a post he held for many years. Conolly, who was married, was murdered in his house on 11 September 1855 by some Mopla fanatics in revenge for his role in outlawing their 'thungai', or saint, a religious leader who had been deported to Jiddah a few years before for sedition. Shortly before his death Conolly was made a provisional member of the council of the Madras government. 


@@@@@


doc= 6094


Conolly, John (1794-1866), physician and alienist, was born at his grandmother's house in Market Rasen, Lincolnshire, on 27 May 1794, the second of three sons of Jonathon Conolly, an impecunious Anglo-Irish gentleman of no fixed pursuits, and of his wife, Dorothy Tennyson (1761-1816), a distant relative of the family of the future poet laureate. After his father's premature death about 1799 John was separated from his brothers and boarded out 'like an inconvenient superfluity' (Leigh, 211-15) with an elderly relative in Hedon, Yorkshire. Here he passed a barren and wretched childhood, receiving a Dickensian education at the local grammar school. His mother moved to Kingston upon Hull in 1803, supporting herself by opening a boarding-school for young ladies, and married a French emigre who taught languages, a Mr Stirling. In 1807 young John came to live with them, learning French and acquiring a rudimentary general education from his stepfather. At eighteen he secured an ensign's commission in the Cambridgeshire militia, and he spent the closing years of the Napoleonic wars in Scotland and Ireland. 
Conolly's military career ended with Napoleon's defeat and he returned to Hull shortly before his mother's death in 1816. There, on 6 March 1817, he married Elizabeth Collins (1784-1866), the impoverished daughter of the recently deceased Sir John Collins, a naval captain. They left immediately for a cottage near Tours on the Loire, where his older brother, William, was already engaged in the practice of medicine. A year later, with a young daughter, Eliza ('b'. 1818), and with his own meagre capital rapidly diminishing, Conolly urgently needed a stable source of income. Like many middle-class men of his generation he chose a career in medicine. He is said to have matriculated at Glasgow University in 1818, although there is no mention of him in the 'Matriculation Albums', and did so at Edinburgh University in 1819, from where he graduated MD in 1821, having written a thesis 'De statu mentis in insania et melancholia'. At Edinburgh he was strongly influenced by Dugald Stewart, and served as one of the four annual presidents of the Royal Medical Society. 
Lacking the social and intellectual capital essential for metropolitan practice, Conolly moved to Lewes and then Chichester, but was unable to establish himself in what was by now an increasingly overcrowded and competitive profession. His vivacity and charm made him a favourite of the local notables as a social companion, but his lack of faith in his own remedies and his deficiencies as a clinician meant that when ill his well-to-do acquaintances preferred to consult his friend and rival, John Forbes. Shortly after the birth of his second child, his son Edward Tennyson (1822-1908), Conolly therefore moved again, this time to the small town of Stratford upon Avon. Here he enjoyed moderate success, taking a leading role in establishing a dispensary for the sick poor, being elected to the town council, and twice serving as mayor -- a well-worn path for a young practitioner trying to make his way. He also assisted James Copland in editing the 'London Medical Repository'. Reflecting his earlier interest in insanity, and as a supplement to his still meagre income, he obtained an appointment as inspecting physician to the lunatic houses for the county of Warwick, a position that required only that he accompany two justices of the peace on their annual inspection of the county's half dozen madhouses. Still, in his best year his income did not exceed $400, barely sufficient to sustain a professional man with a growing family, now including another daughter, Sophia Jane (1826-1888). Suddenly, however, the intervention of two patrons from Conolly's Edinburgh days, George Birkbeck and Lord Henry Brougham, offered him the chance to substitute the rewards of a London teaching and consulting practice for the dull routines of provincial general practice. His sponsors, among the prime movers in establishing the new University of London, and, like Conolly, members of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, secured Conolly's appointment as professor of the nature and treatment of diseases, a position he took up in October 1828. 
In its early years the medical school at the new university was on a shaky financial footing. There were, besides, recurrent clashes between the medical staff and the new warden, Leonard Horner, for whom Conolly developed a particular antipathy. In this uncertain environment he proved incapable of succeeding, turning out to be a poor lecturer and showing himself once again incapable of attracting upper-class patients to his private practice. Conolly's attempts to pioneer clinical instruction in the treatment of mental disorders at a London asylum were repeatedly rebuffed. Nor was his book on the subject, 'An Inquiry into the Indications of Insanity' (1830), a critical success, perhaps in part because he broke with emerging orthodoxy to argue that asylum treatment was actively harmful in most instances, and where absolutely unavoidable should be provided only in publicly funded institutions whose governors would not be tempted to put their own financial interests before the needs of their patients. Increasingly in debt, and now with a fourth child, Anne Caroline (1830-1911), Conolly evidently despaired of his prospects in London. On 4 December 1830 he abruptly and impetuously resigned his professorship, retreating once more to the provinces. Quickly finding that he could not resume his Stratford practice he was forced to move to Warwick, where for the next seven years he struggled to make his way, joining the new Provincial Medical and Surgical Association (later the British Medical Association) and co-editing, with John Forbes, the 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine'. Again he had little success as a clinician, and again he responded by impulsively seeking a radical change, applying in 1838 (much to the consternation of his friends) for the vacant post of superintendent of the Hanwell County Asylum in Middlesex. His progressive politics and active espousal of working-class education offended conservative members of the Middlesex bench, however, and he narrowly lost the election to an army surgeon, J. R. Millingen. 
Little to this point suggested that Conolly would become more than an obscure historical footnote, let alone the most famous alienist of his generation. Within a year, however, Millingen's regime at Hanwell had proved a catastrophic failure, and when the magistrates demanded his resignation, Conolly secured the post that had previously eluded him. Within months of his arrival in the autumn of 1839 he became the focus of national and even international attention, following his announcement that all forms of mechanical restraint -- chains, manacles, strait-jackets, and the like -- had been destroyed, and replaced by a purely moral suasion and discipline. The new system of non-restraint was initially controversial. Many of Conolly's fellow alienists insisted that restraint was essential in the therapeutics of mental disorder. Others rallied to the abolitionist cause, however, notably 'The Times' and Thomas Wakley, the crusading editor of 'The Lancet'. When Lord Ashley (leader of the parliamentary forces pressing for lunacy reform) was also won over, success was assured -- as was Conolly's own position at the head of the newly emerging group of experts in the treatment of the mad. Elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1844, he was subsequently the recipient of an honorary DCL from Oxford University, and was feted at the annual gathering of the Provincial Medical and Surgical Association in 1850. 
Such extraordinary praise and recognition suggest that Conolly's achievement had a symbolic significance for the Victorian bourgeoisie that extended far beyond its contribution to the welfare of the mad. Confronted by the threats of Chartism and a militant working class, surrounded by the all but inescapable evidence of the devastating impact of industrial capitalism on the social and physical landscape, and themselves the authors of a new poor law assailed by its critics as the very embodiment of inhumanity and meanness of spirit, the Victorian governing classes could at least find a source of pride in the generous and kindly treatment now accorded to the lunatic. By demonstrating that even the irrational and raving could be reduced to docility, and without resort to force, Conolly appeared to have richly earned his audience's applause. 
Oddly enough, non-restraint was not Conolly's innovation at all. The approach had been pioneered in 1838 in a small provincial asylum in Lincoln by an obscure house surgeon, Robert Gardiner Hill. Conolly visited Lincoln before taking up his appointment at Hanwell and noted his admiration of Hill's system in the visitors' book. In later years, however, he and his metropolitan allies systematically obscured Hill's claims as the originator of the system, arousing the latter's largely impotent fury. 
Despite his inability to manage his own financial affairs with even a modicum of skill, Conolly proved an able administrator of the huge pauper establishment at Hanwell, a ramshackle and overcrowded poor law asylum that prefigured the overgrown 'museums of madness' that were to constitute the Victorians' response to the problems posed by the lunatic. Despite its dismally low cure rate and continuous overcrowding, his asylum was widely regarded as a splendid advertisement for lunacy reform, and Conolly himself, once publicly opposed to segregating the insane into specialized institutions save as a last resort, now became one of the most vigorous advocates of an expanded network of asylums. 
Conolly's lectures in 'The Lancet', 'On the construction and government of lunatic asylums', were republished as a monograph in 1847. Even before their appearance, however, Conolly's connections with Hanwell had been sharply attenuated. In 1844 the Middlesex magistrates, always inclined to meddle in the administration of their asylum, decided to divide the task of running Hanwell, restricting Conolly's responsibilities to the medical treatment of the patients, and entrusting primary authority over the day-to-day administration of the asylum to a layman and retired army officer, John Godwin. Viewing these arrangements as an intolerable affront, Conolly had promptly resigned, accepting, as a face-saving gesture for both sides, a subsequent appointment as visiting physician (a position he would eventually relinquish in 1852). 
Forced to seek an alternative means of earning his livelihood, Conolly's situation was made the more desperate by pressing domestic worries. His wife, Elizabeth, had simply disappeared from public view at about the time he took up his initial appointment at Hanwell. There have been published suggestions, based on purely circumstantial evidence, that she may herself have become insane. Certainly, she lived apart from him for much of her life, her death occurring four months after his, on 19 July 1866, while being cared for in lodgings in Hill Street, Knightsbridge, London. Besides whatever financial and emotional strain his wife's circumstances may have represented, Conolly's children constituted a continuing and even a growing financial burden. Though his oldest daughter, Eliza, had married an impoverished missionary to China, William Goodall, in 1842, his other two daughters were still his dependants, as was his feckless son, Edward Tennyson. Sophia Jane married Conolly's fellow alienist, Thomas Harrington Tuke, in 1852, but her departure from the household was more than offset when her wayward brother fathered an illegitimate child, and then six more children after his marriage in 1855, all the while failing to find gainful employment and remaining essentially dependent upon paternal largess. 
Despite the fierce attacks Conolly had made as a young man on the practice of 'trading in lunacy', he thus had little alternative but to enter the mad-business. Securing a licence to open his Hanwell residence, The Lawn, as a private asylum for the reception of up to six 'insane ladies', he supplemented his income from this source with appearances as an expert witness, both in criminal cases where the insanity defence was raised, and in chancery court inquisitions in lunacy, where the sanity of sundry socially prominent people was litigated. Not always scrupulous about observing the technicalities of the lunacy laws, Conolly was on occasion successfully sued for damages for false imprisonment. Nor did he make an impressive expert witness, being excoriated as all too prone to consign the immoral or merely eccentric to the ranks of the insane. 
During his years in private practice, Conolly wrote a lengthy monograph on 'The Treatment of the Insane without Mechanical Restraints' (1856). His model of asylum practice had by this time become the ruling orthodoxy, particularly in the expanding county asylum system, and his standing as the doyen of alienists was recognized by his election in 1859 as president of their professional society, the Association of Medical Officers of Asylums and Hospitals for the Insane (a post he had previously held in 1844). By 1860 he had largely abandoned private practice for retirement. He worked intermittently on 'A Study of Hamlet' (1863) -- a book devoted to demonstrating that the prince was indeed mad -- and enjoyed the flattering attentions of a small group of ambitious young alienists who gathered regularly at his house. One of their number, Henry Maudsley (1835-1918), a cold and cynical man who would soon succeed Conolly as the leading English alienist, married his daughter Anne Caroline in January 1866. 
For several years Conolly's health had been deteriorating. It now worsened sharply. On 4 March 1866 he suffered a series of seizures, culminating in a massive stroke that led to his death the next day at The Lawn, Hanwell. He was buried at Kensington Hanwell cemetery, Ealing, Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 6095


John Balfour Conolly (d. 1842) was a cadet of 1833; he became lieutenant, 20th Bengal native infantry, and was afterwards attached to the Kabul embassy. He died of fever while a hostage in the Bala Hissar, Kabul, on 7 August 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 6096


Conolly, Thomas (1738-1803), politician, was born probably in Castletown, co. Kildare, Ireland, the second son of William James Conolly (died 1754), MP for Ballyshannon from 1727 until his death in 1753, and Lady Anne Wentworth (died 1797), eldest daughter of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford of the second creation. The fortunes of the Conolly family in Ireland had been founded by William Conolly (1662-1729), speaker of the Irish House of Commons. He left all his property to his nephew, Thomas Conolly's father. Thomas had seven sisters, Catherine, wife of Ralph Gore, earl of Rosse; Annie, who married George Byng, of Torrington; Harriet, who married John Staples; Frances, who married William Howe, fifth Viscount Howe; Caroline, who married John Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire; Lucy; and Jane, who married George Robert Fitzgerald. Conolly had an elder brother, William ('bap'. 5 December 1734) who died in childhood. 
After schooling at Westminster (1750-54), Conolly married on 30 December 1758 Louisa Augusta Lennox ['see 'Conolly, Lady Louisa Augusta (1743-1821)], third daughter of Charles Lennox, second duke of Richmond (1701-1750), and his wife, Sarah Cadogan (died 1751). She was the sister of Emily, duchess of Leinster, and Caroline Fox, Lady Holland. In 1759 Conolly was elected MP for Malmesbury in the British House of Commons, and in 1761 for Ballyshannon and for Londonderry County in the Irish House of Commons. He chose to sit for Londonderry, which seat he held until May 1800, resigning just before the union. He showed little ability in either house, but from his wealth and connections possessed influence in Ireland, where he was governor of the city and county of Londonderry from 1761 (jointly with Henry, Earl Conyngham, until 1781) and where he was sworn of the privy council in 1761. After sitting for Malmesbury until 1768, and for Chichester, through the influence of his father-in-law, from 1768 to 1780, in the British House of Commons, he gave up his seat in that house, and took up residence permanently at Castletown. 
Conolly declared himself to be a whig, but his whiggism was frequently put to the test. In 1774 the Presbyterians of co. Londonderry, including his tenants at Newtownlimavady, were incensed by his support of the 'Vestry Act', and threatened to oppose him in the 1776 election with an independent candidate. Conolly came to terms with the dissenters. The independent withdrew and he was re-elected for the county of Londonderry. In 1775 he had embraced the cause of the American colonists, but he remained ambivalent towards the Irish volunteer movement, supporting its reform programme in general but becoming nervous when it seemed to impinge on the interests of the Irish aristocracy. In 1789 he was prominent in the revolt of the Irish House of Commons against the ministry during the regency crisis and was one of the members deputed to offer the prince of Wales the regency without any restriction whatever. He was one of the ten chief persons in Ireland to whom Cornwallis broached the first idea of a legislative union with England in 1798. Cornwallis, in his dispatch of 27 November 1798, wrote that he had consulted seven leading peers, the attorney- and solicitor-general, and Conolly on the subject, and that 'Mr. Conolly had always been a decided friend to an union, and was ready to give it his best assistance' ('Correspondence of Charles, First Marquis Cornwallis', ed. C. Ross, 1859, 2.450). Conolly threw himself warmly into the debates on the question, doubtless under the influence of the chief secretary for Ireland, Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, who had married his niece Lady Amelia Anne Hobart, and several times spoke in favour of the measure, which, however, extinguished his own political importance. 
On the passing of the union Conolly decided to abandon politics, for, though he might easily have been returned for Londonderry to the united parliament, he preferred to hand over the seat to Colonel Charles Stewart, Castlereagh's half-brother. He retired to Castletown in 1800, where he began to suffer acute depression, partly a reaction to the events of the rebellion of 1798 and to a lawsuit with his sisters and Lord Howe, the executors of his mother's will, over settlements due to them out of his English estates. He left Castletown in the summer of 1801 and spent some time in Brighton and London in an attempt to recover his health. He died on 27 April 1803 at Castletown, where he was buried. He was succeeded by his great-nephew, Edward Michael Conolly Pakenham, who inherited the estates in Ireland and Castletown. His widow, Lady Louisa Conolly, lived until 1821, and helped to educate her nephews, the children of her sister Lady Sarah Napier, who resided near Castletown. 
Although his inheritance made Conolly the richest man in Ireland and the most influential in parliamentary terms, he never used these advantages effectively in politics. Almost alone among the great figures of the protestant ascendancy, he ended his life without a peerage, preferring to be respected as 'Squire Conolly', a conscientious landlord and master of foxhounds. He reformed the financial affairs of his estates, and spent $25,000 on improvements at Castletown. Jonah Barrington, in his 'Historic Anecdotes', devoted some pages to Conolly, in which he criticized his attitude to the union rather unfavourably, and thus analysed the causes of his influence: 'Mr. Conolly had the largest connection of any individual in the commons house. He fancied he was a whig because he was not professedly a tory; bad as a statesman, worse as an orator, he was as a sportsman pre-eminent.... He was nearly allied to the Irish minister [Castlereagh] at the time of the discussion of the union, and he followed his lordship's fortune, surrendered his country, lost his own importance, died in comparative obscurity, and in his person ended the pedigree of one of the most respectable English families ever resident in Ireland. (Barrington, 265-7)' 



@@@@@


doc= 6097


Conolly, William (1662-1729), speaker of the Irish House of Commons, was born in Ballyshannon, co. Donegal, Ireland, the eldest of the three children of Patrick Conolly and his wife, Jane, and brother of Patrick and Jane. Tradition has it that Conolly's father was either a publican or a blacksmith. This is unlikely, however, since William and his father are named on the list of Irish protestants whose land was declared forfeit by the Jacobite parliament of 1689. It is more likely that the Conollys were a minor Catholic gentry family who converted to Anglicanism some time before 1660. William Conolly studied law in Dublin, qualified as an attorney, was attached to the court of common pleas in 1685, and was land agent to Captain James Hamilton between 1692 and 1700. He was elected to the Irish House of Commons as MP for Donegal borough (1692-3 and 1695-9). In 1694 he married Katherine Conyngham, daughter of Sir Albert Conyngham and sister of Henry Conyngham of Mount Charles, co. Donegal. This marriage connected Conolly to the most important families in west Ulster. William and Katherine were childless but he was said to have had an illegitimate son who died in 1727, aged eight (TNA: PRO, C 110/46/528). 
Conolly's career was founded upon successful land speculation. He used Katherine's dowry of $2300 to buy his first estates in co. Meath, and made his fortune during the 1690s by buying and acting as agent for the sale of forfeited Jacobite estates. The acquisition of an estate in Limavady gave him a valuable electoral interest in co. Londonderry, where he was collector of the revenue (1697-1729) and sat as MP from 1703 until his death. He rose to national prominence during the party conflict of the early 1700s, when he emerged as a leading figure in the Irish whig party. The whig lord lieutenant, Thomas, earl of Wharton, appointed him a revenue commissioner and an Irish privy councillor in 1709. In 1710, however, he was dismissed by the tory duke of Ormond, and, he was removed from the privy council the following year. 
Following the return to power of the whigs in 1714 Conolly was restored to the privy council and revenue board and was persuaded to stand as the government's candidate for speaker of the Irish House of Commons. He was elected unanimously on 12 November 1715 and quickly became a leading figure in the management of the Commons. He formed close relationships with the duke of Grafton, lord justice in 1715-16, and chief secretaries, Charles Delafaye and Martin Bladen. His hitherto friendly relationship with the lord chancellor, Lord Brodrick, first Viscount Midleton, however, rapidly deteriorated. Previously regarded as leader of the Irish whig party, Brodrick resented Conolly's emergence as chief manager or 'undertaker' of the government's parliamentary business. Brodrick's fortunes temporarily recovered with the appointment of his ally, the duke of Bolton, as viceroy in 1717. Conolly, however, continued to support the court in parliament and was appointed as a lord justice when Bolton left for England. A dispute between Brodrick and the ministry over Sunderland's 'Peerage Bill' allowed Conolly to resume his position as chief undertaker when Bolton returned to Ireland in 1719. The speaker's position was strengthened with the appointment of the duke of Grafton as viceroy in 1720. Conolly's influence was so great during Grafton's viceroyalty that he was described as 'Prime Minister' (Wake MSS, 14, fol. 48). However, this viceroyalty witnessed the greatest crisis in Anglo-Irish relations in the first half of the eighteenth century when opposition to 'Wood's halfpence' made the normal means of managing the Irish parliament impracticable. The intensity of popular opposition to the copper halfpence forced the normally loyal Conolly to desert the government in order to retain his political credibility in Ireland. 
The replacement of Grafton by John, second Baron Carteret, in 1724 seriously threatened Conolly's position as chief undertaker. An ally of the Brodricks, Carteret was unlikely to place much faith in the speaker's loyalty and his investigations into the government's accounts provoked rumours that Conolly would soon be dismissed. For a year after his arrival in Ireland, Carteret remained aloof from both Conolly and Brodrick, and he provoked the latter's resignation as lord chancellor in April 1725. However, after having lost control of the House of Commons soon after the start of the parliamentary session of 1725 Carteret turned to Conolly to be his parliamentary manager. With Brodrick's resignation Conolly's position was stronger than ever and his dominant position in parliament was secure until his death. Re-elected as speaker in the first session of George II's parliament, he served until he collapsed in the Commons on 26 September 1729; he resigned as speaker on 13 October. A contemporary wrote on 25 October that Conolly 'has a great looseness that can't be stop'd has been twice blisterd for it. is something better this day, but its thought cannot live' (TNA: PRO, C 110/46/728-9). Conolly died at his house in Capel Street, Dublin, on 30 October 1729 and was buried at Celbridge, co. Kildare. After his wife's death Conolly was succeeded by his nephew, William Conolly. 
Conolly remains an elusive figure in terms of his personality. His rival, Brodrick, repeatedly accused him of sycophancy. Jonathan Swift was even more scathing: 'There was a fellow in Ireland called Conolly, who from a shoe-boy grew to be several times one of the chief Governors, wholly illiterate, and with hardly common sence. a Lord Lieutenant told the first K. George, that Conolly was the greatest subject he had in both Kingdoms, and truly this Character was gotten and preserved by Conolly's never appearing in England, which was the only wise thing he ever did except purchasing sixteen thousand pounds a year. ('Correspondence', 3.493-4)' Other contemporaries, normally government supporters, gave a more positive assessment. The English-born bishop of Derry, William Nicolson, described Conolly as 'a person of wonderful parts and temper' (BL, Add. MS 6116, fols. 91-2). Conolly was certainly adept at keeping in with those in power, realizing that political power in Ireland depended upon retaining the backing of the ministry in London. During the whig schism of the early years of George I's reign he kept close connections with the Townshend-Walpole faction while also maintaining a good relationship with the earl of Sunderland, who protected the speaker during Bolton's viceroyalty. Recognizing, but affecting to despise, Conolly's skill in this respect, Brodrick complained that he was 'a happy man who by wishing well to and acting for one set of men renders or keeps himself gracious with the other' (Midleton MSS, 4, fols. 92-4). 
The true significance of Conolly's career is that between 1715 and 1729 he established a precedent for the government of Ireland for most of the eighteenth century. The first of the great 'undertakers' who dominated Irish politics until the 1760s at least, he set the pattern for his successors. As speaker, chief revenue commissioner, and lord justice he normally controlled the proceedings of the Commons, had unrivalled access to revenue patronage, and directly communicated with the British ministry. His career illustrates the relatively open nature of the early eighteenth-century Irish elite. Of relatively humble origins, he single-handedly established an Anglo-Irish dynasty and was reputed on his death to be the wealthiest man in Ireland, allegedly worth $17,000 p.a. ('Letters... Boulter', 1.267). The physical manifestation of Conolly's career is his great house at Castletown, co. Kildare. 


@@@@@


doc= 6098


Conquest, John Tricker (bap. 1789, d. 1866), man-midwife, was baptized on 25 November 1789 at Clover Street Independent Chapel, Chatham, Kent, the son of a Dr Conquest of Chatham. He entered medical training at an early age, qualifying as MRCS at the age of eighteen. He was appointed assistant surgeon to the military medical depot, Chatham, and to the Royal Marines, Brompton. Conquest graduated MD at Edinburgh in September 1813, and became licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in December 1819. He commenced practice in London in 1814 and offered four courses of lectures on midwifery annually at his house, 4 Aldermanbury Postern, London, for a fee of 3 guineas. The lectures also covered the diseases of children and forensic medicine. In a few years he moved to 13 Finsbury Square, and in 1825 became lecturer on midwifery in the medical school of St Bartholomew's Hospital, succeeding Robert Gooch. Conquest was said to be an unpopular lecturer, and was persuaded to resign in 1834. Although holding several hospital posts, he was never appointed FRCP. He built up an extensive obstetric practice, and his posts included that of physician to the City of London Lying-in Hospital, the London Female Penitentiary, and the London Orphan Asylum, and consulting physician to the Stoke Newington and Stamford Hill Dispensary. 
In 1820 Conquest's 'Outlines of Midwifery', intended as a textbook for students, was published. By 1854 it had passed through six editions and had been translated into several languages. In 1848 he published his popular 'Letters to a Mother on the Management of Herself and her Children in Health and Disease', which reached a fourth edition by 1852. The book covered the care of women in pregnancy and infant rearing, and also strongly advocated the use of chloroform in childbirth. Conquest's diverse interests included homoeopathy and the subject of the abuse of money, and he produced a revised edition of the 'Bible'. Conquest was involved in the establishment of the City of London School and was honorary secretary to the Hunterian Society. In 1829 he presented a substantial collection of obstetrical preparations to the museum of St Bartholomew's Hospital. After retiring from practice, and following several years of deteriorating health and seclusion, he died, unmarried, at his home, The Oaks, Plumstead Common, Kent, on 24 October 1866. 


@@@@@


doc= 6099


Conry, Florence (d. 1629), Roman Catholic archbishop of Tuam, probably born in Cloonahee, co. Galway, was the son of Fithil O Maoil Chonaire and Onora. The O Maoil Chonaires appear frequently as poets, historians, and clergymen in the Irish annals; Flaithri's grandfather Muirgheas mac Paidin O Maoil Chonaire was a renowned scribe, antiquary, poet, and teacher. Apparently self-educated, Conry practised his forefathers' arts before leaving Ireland while still young to become one of the first students of the Irish College, founded in 1592, at the University of Salamanca in Spain. There, he developed a reputation for erudition. He could speak Gaelic, Latin, Italian, and Spanish, and perhaps also English. He joined the Franciscans during the 1590s. 
Conry was later said to have acted in Madrid in the 1590s on behalf of certain Irish chieftains led by Hugh Roe O'Donnell who hoped that Philip II of Spain would support their plans to rise against English rule in Ireland. In 1598 he may have gone to Ireland on behalf of Philip II to treat with the insurgents, and he is said to have made many journeys between Ireland and Spain at this time. In September 1601 he sailed to Ireland with the Spanish expeditionary force sent to support the insurgents, but following the disastrous battle of Kinsale he left with Hugh Roe O'Donnell, whose confessor he was, sailing from Castlehaven, co. Cork, on 6 January 1602. On reaching Spain, the two hastened to the royal court to plead unsuccessfully for further military and financial support. O'Donnell died a broken man at Simancas on 9 September with Conry at his side. Conry redoubled his efforts to secure Spanish aid, and eventually King Philip III agreed to send money and arms to the insurgents' leader Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone. In April 1603 Conry accompanied two ships carrying arms, supplies, and money to Ireland. However, on arrival he found that the insurgents had already surrendered, and he returned to Spain without even disembarking. 
Over the next three decades Conry was probably the single most influential figure within the hard-line Gaelic opposition to English rule in Ireland. In April 1604 he was appointed special adviser to the Spanish council of state for dealing with Irish refugees. This enabled him to channel Spanish patronage towards those Irish exiles who shared his views. He went to the Spanish Netherlands in 1605, probably to liaise with influential members of the growing Irish community there. An Irish regiment had been set up within the Spanish army at Flanders, and it was hoped that it would one day lead a Spanish invasion of Ireland. Conry was back in Spain by May 1606, when he spoke before the general chapter of the Franciscan order at Toledo of the plight of the Catholics in Ireland. The chapter members were sufficiently impressed to elect him head of the Irish Franciscans, a major breach of precedent as this post had hitherto been in the gift of the Irish chapter. He also persuaded the general chapter to assent to the establishment of a college for educating Irish Franciscans at Louvain in the Spanish Netherlands. He fully intended to return to Ireland to carry out his duties as Irish provincial, but was preoccupied for over a year with the new foundation, named St Anthony's College. After securing King Philip's support for the project, in 1607 he went to Louvain, where the college rented its first premises in May. Difficulties in securing enough financial support for the college led to further delays, but by August he was preparing to sail for Ireland. 
However, Conry was overtaken by events. Had he gone to Ireland he would almost certainly have relied on the protection of Tyrone, but in autumn 1607 the earl, fearing arrest for treason, fled the country. It was probably on hearing this that Conry changed his plans. On 22 October he met Tyrone and Rory O'Donnell, earl of Tyrconnell, at the Irish college at Douai. The following year he accompanied them to Rome, where Tyrone hoped to secure Spanish aid for an invasion of Ireland, but Spain was trying to improve its relations with England and refused him permission to even come to Spain. The earl's desperation grew when King James VI and I announced plans for a plantation of Ulster in 1609. There was little the pope could do about events in Ireland, but he did feel obliged to accede to Tyrone's pleas that his friends be advanced within the church. Hence on 30 March 1609, near Rome, Conry was consecrated archbishop of Tuam, in his native Galway. There was no question of Conry ever going to Ireland to take up this position because of the danger this would entail, but under his distant leadership the Counter-Reformation tightened its grip on Connaught. 
In June 1609 Tyrone sent Conry to Madrid with the terms of a proposed reconciliation with James. Conry arrived in October 1609, but found the Spanish unreceptive. They preferred to keep Tyrone in reserve, in case relations with England deteriorated at a future date. Only in June 1610 did Philip give Tyrone permission to attempt a reconciliation, but by then James's government was committed to a plantation of Ulster. Conry remained at Madrid, where he was granted a pension of 50 ducats a month in July 1610. That year the command of the Irish regiment in Flanders fell vacant, prompting a struggle between the Gaelic Irish and Old English factions within the regiment. Conry was determined to prevent an Old Englishman from gaining the command. Indeed, throughout his career, he bent his influence toward ensuring that only Gaelic Irish were promoted to key positions within the Spanish army and in the Catholic church. He regarded the Old English as too loyal to the English crown and spoke bitterly of how Old English priests had preached against Tyrone during his uprising. For their part, the Old English resented the manner in which a so-called northern clique of Gaelic clergy and soldiers drawn mostly from Connaught and Ulster monopolized the favour of the king of Spain and to a lesser extent that of the pope. The Old English regarded Conry as an extremist and had been outraged by his promotion to the archbishopric of Tuam. 
In May 1611 Philip appointed Eoghan Roe O'Neill, a nephew of Tyrone and Conry's protege, sergeant-major and effective head of the Irish regiment. Through his lobbying at Madrid, Conry was playing a crucial role in developing the next generation of Gaelic opposition to English rule in Ireland. Although Conry usually had his way with the Spanish in matters of patronage, he had less success with the pope. Here he faced formidable opposition in the form of the Old English archbishop of Armagh, Peter Lombard, who strongly advocated a policy of appeasing the English in the hope of better treatment for Catholics in Ireland. As theological adviser to the Holy See, Lombard always had the pope's ear and had a major influence on the appointment of bishops to Ireland in the 1610s and early 1620s. 
On 1 March 1614 Conry wrote an open letter to the Catholic members of the 1613-15 Irish parliament, berating them for their cowardice in voting for Tyrone's attainder. A year later, as relations between England and Spain momentarily soured, he pressed vigorously but unavailingly for a Spanish invasion of Ireland. He briefly visited Rome in summer 1616 to pay his respects to the fading Tyrone. That year he published 'Desiderius', a devotional work written in Irish. At some point he also produced two works on Irish history which remained in manuscript and a quatrium on a rather farcical dispute between the poets of the north and of the south of Ireland, but after his return to Madrid he decided to devote himself to the study of the works of St Augustine. He had first become interested in Augustinian theology in 1610, and during the course of his life he is said to have read all of St Augustine's works seven times, being particularly interested in those works pertaining to the Pelagian heresies and the doctrine of grace. Like many other advocates of the saint, he strongly supported the doctrine of the immaculate conception, which he discussed in his 'De S. Augustina sense circa Beatae Mariae Virgines conceptionem' (1619). His high-profile support for the then novel doctrine earned him the approbation of Philip III. 
In 1618 Conry was sent by the king to Brussels to advise on negotiations between Spain and England for a marriage between the prince of Wales and Philip's daughter. Before leaving Madrid, he presented a pamphlet to the king on the persecutions suffered by the Irish Catholics. Once the negotiations in Brussels had concluded, he settled in Louvain, where the Irish College was now prospering. In 1619 he persuaded the college to send a mission to the Hebrides in Scotland. At Louvain he continued his studies of Augustinian theology and became acquainted with Cornelius Jansen, then head of the Dutch College in Louvain. Given that they were neighbours and shared a common interest in Augustinian theology, it is unsurprising that they should have been on friendly terms. However, the claims often made that Conry had a major bearing on Jansen's subsequent theological development are untrue. Jansen had little regard for Conry's writings on the doctrine of grace and did not reveal his own highly controversial opinions on the matter to the Irishman. By late 1621 Conry had completed a work on the fate of infants who die before they can be baptized. The pope had banned the publication of any unlicensed works on the highly sensitive topic of the doctrine of grace, but eventually permission was forthcoming for 'De statu parvulorum', which appeared in 1624. It met with a favourable response, particularly from the universities of Louvain and Douai in the Spanish Netherlands. 
In autumn 1626 Conry left Louvain for Madrid as a representative of John O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, and Albert O'Donnell, earl of Tyrconnell. Spain and England had been at war since 1625 and hopes were high among the Irish that Spain would invade Ireland once again. In January 1627 Conry presented documents to King Philip IV of Spain proposing that the two earls jointly lead a Spanish expedition to liberate Ireland. The plan envisaged the division of Ireland between the two earls, who would act as captains-general of Ireland and create an interim republic administered in consultation with the Catholic nobility, including the Old English, until an agreed candidate for the kingship of Ireland could be found. Ireland would then become a monarchy under the protection of the Spanish crown. However, the invasion plans were ultimately shelved. While in Madrid, Conry also defended the University of Louvain from the criticisms of the Jesuits. 
Conry died at the convent of San Francisco in Madrid on 18 November 1629. Despite his request that he be buried in the Irish College at Louvain, his body was initially interred at San Lorenzo. However, in 1654 his remains were transferred to Louvain and were buried in the sanctuary of the Irish College on 23 March 1654. Eleven years after his death his theological works were dragged into the controversy surrounding the publication of Jansen's 'Augustinius'. In a bid to gain more credibility, the Jansenists tried to associate Conry with their own views by including 'De statu', which had not been censored by the pope, as a supplement to the 1640 and subsequent editions of 'Augustinius'. Conry's supporters responded by arranging the publication of his 'Peregrinus' (1641), 'De flagillis' (1644), and 'De gratia Christi' (1646). These theological works made clear that Conry would not have agreed with Jansen's doctrines. Conry's fascination with the works of St Augustine was quite typical for an Irish clergyman of his era. The strict, puritanical brand of Catholicism associated with St Augustine struck a chord with many of the Irish clergy. However, virtually all of them, Conry included, combined this puritanism with total obedience to the pope. 


@@@@@


doc= 6100


Const, Francis (1752-1839), legal writer, was born on 2 October 1752, the son of Francis Const ('fl'. 1721-1793) and Catherine Potticary, who married on 9 September 1753. He wrote some dramatic epilogues and prologues and had numerous theatrical acquaintances, including Frederick Reynolds, John Kemble, Stephen Storace, Thomas Harris, Charles Burney, and Richard Brinsley Sheridan. As executor of Ann Martindale he possessed, as a life interest, an eighth share in the Covent Garden Theatre. 
Const was called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 7 February 1783 and lived at 5 Pump Court in the Middle Temple from at least 1799 until his death. He edited several editions of Edmund Bott's 'Laws Relating to the Poor' and was chairman of the Middlesex magistrates and the Westminster sessions; the latter office he held until his death, in Rickmansworth, on 16 December 1839. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. Const acquired a fortune of $150,000 by speculation during his early life and left legacies to many of his friends and servants; his principal beneficiary was his nephew Henry Beaumont Coles. 


@@@@@


doc= 6101


Constable, Archibald (1774-1827), publisher, was born in the parish of Carnbee near Anstruther in Fife on 24 February 1774, one of the seven children of Thomas Constable (1736-1791) and Elizabeth Myles (1733-1819). Thomas Constable was a farmer who became noted for his interest in agricultural improvement and who came to manage the estates of the earl of Kellie. 
Constable was educated in the parish school of Carnbee, which he attended for about eight years. In his memoir Constable says that his interest in publishing began with the pleasure he took in a bookshop and stationer's which opened in nearby Pittenweem in 1786, and which led to his being apprenticed for six years from February 1788 to Peter Hill of Edinburgh, who had recently set up as a publisher. Hill's shop was initially in Parliament Close but about 1790 he moved to the High Street, at the Cross. The business was thus not just in the centre of Edinburgh, but at the centre of Edinburgh life, and through his work Constable became accustomed to meeting the literary figures who frequented the city, including Robert Burns. 
During Constable's time as an apprentice Hill began to sell old books as well as new. When part of the library of the earl of Moray was offered for sale, Constable proposed a catalogue; he was entrusted with the task, which involved pricing as well as listing. Thereafter he regularly produced catalogues of books for sale, and expanded his activities into cataloguing private libraries for their owners. These activities laid the foundation of Constable's knowledge of books as objects, and fostered his contacts with many private collectors. 
After the completion of his apprenticeship Constable stayed with Hill as his clerk for a further year, and on 16 January 1795, just before that year elapsed, he married Mary Willison (died 1814), the daughter of an Edinburgh printer. At twenty-one Constable was determined to establish his own business. He spent a month in February or March 1795 in London learning about London publishing, and met the pre-eminent London publishers Cadell and Longman. Using a loan of $150 from two friends and $300 worth of books from his father-in-law to exchange for others, he got a basic stock. He then undertook a tour of Fife and Perthshire visiting big houses in search of old books to purchase, and on his return to Edinburgh he opened his own shop on the north side of the High Street, erecting the notice 'Scarce Old Books' over the door. He published his first catalogue in May 1795, and this won him many customers. These included Thomas Thomson, who in 1806 became deputy clerk register; David Herd, the song collector; George Chalmers, the Scottish antiquary who was chief clerk to the Board of Trade in London; Richard Gough, the English antiquary; Andrew Plummer, sheriff of Selkirkshire; John Pinkerton; and Walter Scott, although the exact year when Scott began to buy from Constable is not known. A supplement to his first catalogue attracted John, third duke of Roxburghe, the celebrated book collector, who became one of Constable's most regular customers. In the following year, on the advice of Professor John Leslie, he began to import foreign books, and this extended his connections with the Scottish academic establishment. 'My great ambition', wrote Constable, 'was to pick up curious and valuable works relative to the history and literature of Scotland', and he considered himself to be the first in the book trade to take 'a deep interest in securing and preserving all books relating to Scottish literature' (T. Constable, 1.22). Constable was an antiquarian bookseller until 1815, when he retired from that line of business in order to concentrate on publishing. 
Constable's first works as a publisher, in the autumn of 1795, were religious and political pamphlets on current subjects such as the slave trade, but as the expenses were borne by the authors, he was able to learn about what did and did not sell without any risk to himself. The first publication commissioned by Constable was 'Fragments of Scottish History' (1798), which included Robert Birrel's diary of 1532-1605, and William Patten's account of Hertford's invasion of Scotland in 1544 and Somerset's in 1547; Constable paid the editor, John Graham Dalyell, between $20 and $30. Soon afterwards Dalyell became curator of the Advocates' Library, and bought many books and manuscripts from Constable. Constable's first copyright purchase was the 'Discourses' of the Revd Dr John Erskine, minister at Old Greyfriars, and at that time perhaps the best-known and best-loved inhabitant of Edinburgh. 
The basis for Constable's later success as a publisher was established in these early years: he was forming good connections with London publishers who would accept large quantities of stock at wholesale prices, and also with the retail booksellers who sold the books to individual buyers; he was cultivating wealthy collectors and purchasers of books; and he was looking for good authors. 
In his work as a book publisher Constable's staple output consisted largely of works of historical scholarship and modern editions of the kind of literature and history he sold as an antiquarian bookseller. In 1801, for instance, he published Dalyell's edition of 'Scottish Poems of the Sixteenth Century' in two volumes, and John Leyden's edition of 'The Complaynt of Scotland'; in 1802 he took a quarter-share in the first edition of Walter Scott's two-volume 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border', for which Cadell and Davies in London were the lead publishers; in 1804 he published Scott's edition of 'Sir Tristrem' and Alexander Murray's edition of James Bruce's 'Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile' (7 volumes), and had a fifth-share in the four volumes of Malcolm Laing's 'History of Scotland'; in 1806 he was lead publisher in Robert Jamieson's 'Popular Ballads and Songs' (2 volumes), and in 1814 of Scott's edition 'The Works of Jonathan Swift' (19 volumes). These are but some examples of a great output that continued over all the years that Constable was a publisher. 
Constable entered journal publishing in 1800 in setting up the 'Farmer's Magazine', and in 1801 he purchased the 'Scots Magazine', founded in 1739. He must soon have recognized that well-conducted journals would ensure a steady cash-flow, and so the list of journals under Constable's management is not surprising: in 1803 he became the publisher of the 'Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal'; he later added the 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal' and the publications of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Highland Society, the Caledonian Horticultural Society, and the Wernerian Society; in 1813 he became the publisher of the 'Edinburgh Annual Register'. 
Had Constable merely published works of scholarship and the journals of learned societies, he would have been a significant but not a great publisher. It was the establishment of the 'Edinburgh Review' in 1802 that made him a publisher who mattered. The original idea came from Sydney Smith, who put it to Francis Horner and Francis Jeffrey. Although Jeffrey later said that he could not remember when the project was first discussed, by January 1802 the 'founding fathers' of the 'Review' had chosen their publisher, Archibald Constable. Initially the 'Review' operated as a collective: most of the twenty-nine articles of the first number were written by the editorial team; there was no individual editor, the group discussing all contributions in Jeffrey's flat in Buccleuch Place or on the premises of the printer, Constable's father-in-law, David Willison. The first number of the 'Edinburgh Review' appeared on 10 October 1802. Early in 1803 Smith proposed to Constable that the 'Review' should be put on a permanent footing, with a salaried editor, and with all contributors being paid. From the fourth number Constable paid Jeffrey to be editor, and fixed contributors' rates at 'sixteen guineas per sheet' (T. Constable, 1.49) -- but according to Jeffrey many contributors received at least 20 or 25 guineas a sheet for their contributions. High fees attracted good contributors of a class who would not otherwise have been writing for reviews, but they also ensured the dominance of the editor. 
Constable had a good product, but the success of the 'Review' was dependent on sales. The book-buying public was concentrated in south-east England, and it was essential to have a London partner to push Constable's publications in the south: a normal division of responsibilities gave Scotland, the north of England, and all Ireland to Constable, and the rest of England (south of Leeds) and Wales to the London partner. The southern management of the 'Review' was regularly moved. The first number was handled in London by Joseph Mawman, but subsequent numbers were entrusted to Longmans, who in 1803 bought a half-share in the 'Review'. After issue 21 Constable bought back the half-share, and the London sales were then handled by John Murray, and from 1809 by Constable's own London 'branch', Constable, Hunter, Park, and Hunter. However, within a year Park died, necessitating the closure of Constable's London business in 1810. Sales of the 'Edinburgh Review' were next handled by White, Cochrane & Co. Longmans purchased a half-share in the publication in 1814, and purchased it outright following Constable's bankruptcy in 1826. The variety of partners in the one venture was unusual, but as Constable had no capital, a London partner was essential. The lead publisher in any venture was responsible for the manufacture of the books, but by having London partners Constable was assured of an initial bulk sale which brought immediate money back into his own business. 
In 1803 Constable took on a partner, Alexander Hunter, son of the owner of the large estate of Blackness in Forfarshire. The business was valued at $5000, and so Hunter put $2500 into what now became Archibald Constable & Co. Hunter had no publishing expertise. Nominally he was to act as the firm's accountant, but his real significance lay in his paying $2500 to Constable for a half-share in the business. It was the first time that Constable had had any money. 
The extant records do not show that Constable had a long-term strategy for growth, and yet when looking at his actions one must conclude that he had a very keen awareness of that goal and what could attain it. If the 'Review' changed Constable into one of the most important publishers of the age, his association with Scott was intended to make him the most successful. Walter Scott was already established as the best-selling author of the day. Longmans purchased the copyright of Scott's 'Minstrelsy' in 1802 for $500, and of 'The Lay of the Last Minstrel' in November 1805 for a further $500. Constable had a share in both, and knew the 'Lay' had gone through six editions and sold 6700 copies by the end of 1806. Constable offered Scott 1000 guineas for the copyright of his next poem, 'Marmion', an unprecedented offer for a work of imaginative literature, and one which Scott accepted on 31 January 1807. Constable retained a half-share in the work, and sold quarter-shares to John Murray and to William Miller in London. It was a bold stroke, intended to secure Scott for the Constable stable. As an investment 'Marmion' was overwhelmingly successful: the first edition of 2000 copies sold at $1 11's'. 6died, and the 6000 copies of the third and fourth editions, published within eleven months of the first, sold at the cheaper price of 12's'. But the strategic aim failed, not because of Constable, but because of his associates. In April 1808 Jeffrey published his hostile review of 'Marmion' in the 'Edinburgh Review'; he properly identified many issues for critical debate, but Scott found its manner and tone offensive, particularly when coming from a friend. In the October issue Jeffrey published an article against continuing the Peninsular War; Scott (like many others) cancelled his subscription. Then Hunter offended Scott who in January 1809 wrote 'Constable & I are quite broken owing to Mr. Hunters extreme incivility to which I will certainly never subject myself more' ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 2.146). 
Scott's break with Constable was disastrous for both parties. Indeed it can be argued that the seeds of their financial failure in 1826 were sown here, for Scott now established his own publishing company: on 19 July 1809 Scott and James and John Ballantyne signed a deed of co-partnery which set up the publishing business of John Ballantyne & Co. However, by 1812 John Ballantyne & Co. was in serious financial difficulties, in part because of a national financial crisis, and in part because Scott and the Ballantynes did not have Constable's instinct for marketable products. Their solution was to sell out to Constable. 
What Scott did not know was that Archibald Constable & Co. was itself in financial difficulties. Hunter left the partnership in 1811, and Constable later noted: 'Hunter advanced originally in 1804, $2500; in 1811 he had drawn that sum and about $4000 besides -- consequently, with the $17,000 paid to him, he gained fully $21,000 by being A. C.'s partner' (T. Constable, 1.160). On 1 May 1811 the business was valued at $35,930 and the incoming partners, Robert Cathcart and Cathcart's brother-in-law Robert Cadell, paid Hunter $17,000 for his share of the business. Cathcart did not put new money into the business: he bought out Hunter. In the following year, 1812, the firm purchased the copyright and stock of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' for a price in excess of $13,000. However, Cathcart died unexpectedly in November 1812, and the remaining partners, Archibald Constable and Robert Cadell, were required by the terms of the agreement to purchase Cathcart's three-eighths share in the business. And when Thomson Bonar, who held a third-share in 'Britannica', died in 1813 Constable and Cadell had to repay his advances of $6000 and to purchase his share in the copyright, which the complicated terms of their agreement valued at $11,000; in all another $10,000 was taken out of the business. 
Between 1803 and 1811 Archibald Constable & Co. achieved a phenomenal rate of growth, and the profits of $1350 paid to Cathcart in 1812 imply a prosperous company. But Constable's lack of working capital made him totally reliant on bank borrowing, and in the national financial crisis of 1812-14 Constable found it difficult to raise new loans to meet his obligations to buy Cathcart's and Bonar's shares in the business. In these circumstances Constable's negotiations with Scott were difficult and protracted. Eventually on 18 May 1813 Constable bought John Ballantyne stock valued at $1467 for $900, a discount of nearly 40 per cent, a quarter-share in Scott's poem 'Rokeby' for $700, and volumes of the 'Edinburgh Annual Register' valued at $2400 for $400, in all $2000 in bills payable in six, twelve, and eighteen months. A condition of the sale was that John Ballantyne & Co. ceased to be an active publisher. 
Constable had regained Scott, but at a cost, and the firm's financial problems continued into 1814. So severe were they that Constable spent October 1814 in London, although his wife was dying (and indeed did die on 28 October), while he was away trying to reduce the firm's indebtedness to the banks by selling a half-share in the 'Edinburgh Review' to Longmans, and stocks of books at discounted prices to whoever would buy. 
What saved them all was Scott's 'Waverley'. Constable offered $700 for the copyright of 'Waverley', but Scott refused, and instead granted what was effectively a licence to publish an edition of 1000 copies of 'Waverley' in return for receiving 'half profits'. These 'profits' were not profits in the modern sense of the term, but the publisher's receipts, less the cost of manufacturing and advertising. From this the publisher took half (and had to meet the costs of distribution and overheads from it), and paid the author half. By 1819 11,500 three-volume sets of 'Waverley' had been sold, and the positive contribution to the publisher's income must have approached $3000 from that novel alone. Longer print runs on later novels, and higher prices ('Waverley', 1814, was priced at $1 1's'.; 'The Antiquary', 1816, at $1 4's'.; and 'Kenilworth', 1821, at $1 11's'. 6died) increased their profitability. The first seven 'Waverley' novels must have brought Archibald Constable & Co. over $20,000 by 1820. 
Scott well knew the value of his literary property, and he knew the power given to him by the wealth his novels generated. But he did not use this power to increase his share of the income. Robert Cadell, Constable's partner, admitted that Scott might well have got better terms for himself, but Scott, through his agent John Ballantyne, offered titles to other publishers on the same or similar terms to ensure that he got money when he wanted it, and not when the publisher deigned to pay him. Thus his second novel, 'Guy Mannering', went to Longmans because, as a result of the precarious position of Constable & Co., Cadell delayed making an agreement in October 1814. The third, 'The Antiquary', came back to Constable. The fourth novel went to William Blackwood and his London partner John Murray to test their ability to sell fiction. But Scott came back to Constable, because he considered him to have a greater capacity to sell books than any other publisher. 
The letters between Constable and Cadell in 1814 show that they hated Scott's business practices, and considered John Ballantyne thoroughly dishonest. But although Cadell wanted to have no more to do with Scott and the Ballantynes, Constable and Scott needed each other. Constable needed Scott because Scott was the most successful writer of the age. He had to pay to retain Scott as a Constable author, and even in 1818 was not sure of him. To secure Scott he purchased Scott's existing copyrights in 1819, and in the 1820s signed contracts for as yet unwritten and unnamed works of fiction. In 1822, for instance, he agreed contracts for three new novels on 11 March, 3 May, and 8 October, and felt it safe to do this because he had, in 1818, taken out insurance on Scott's life. Constable promoted Scott by advertising heavily, and by keeping him in the public eye; away back in February 1814 Constable had remarked to Longman 'the necessity of keeping up Mr Scott's name by the greatest attention to the sale of his works increases every day' (NL Scot., MS 789, 22). He was rewarded with an unparalleled flow of literary work, but the letters between them show that the publisher was repeatedly trying to control the flow, by getting Scott to speed up or slow down, to suit his sense of the market and his own financial exigencies. Scott needed Constable because Constable was better at selling books than anyone else, and thus facilitated Scott's lavish expenditure on Abbotsford. 
The third of Constable's major projects was the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', which Constable purchased in 1812. When Constable commented on 8 May 1812 that it was 'the greatest speculation we ever made' (T. Constable, 2.302) he was right in both senses of the phrase, for he paid in excess of $13,000 for the copyright and remaining stock of the fifth edition, and proceeded to turn the work into the most distinguished compendium of knowledge of its day. The contents of the fifteen volumes of the fifth edition had already been determined before Constable made his purchase, but he at once commissioned Leslie and Dalyell to advise him on the defects of the fifth edition and what would be required to rectify them. On receiving their report Constable decided to publish a supplement. He commissioned new articles from eminent writers and scholars including Dugald Stewart the philosopher (whom he paid $1600), John Playfair the mathematician, and Walter Scott. He appointed Macvey Napier as editor of the supplement, paying him a fee of $1575, with an extra $735 if more than 7000 copies were sold, as well as expenses of $300. In 1819 Napier was employed as editor of the sixth edition, which was to extend to twenty-five volumes. 
Constable claimed that sales of the 'Encyclopaedia' between 1812 and 1821 brought in $60,000, that the profits to date could not have been less than $20,000 (T. Constable, 2.329) with $10,000 to come, and that the copyright was worth $12,000. But it is not the monetary value which most impresses the reader of Constable's (almost illegible) letters, nor even the immense generosity of his payments to contributors (by any standards so huge as to make the world of letters buzz with amazement), but the excitement he shows in planning the work, in commissioning articles, and in discussing the progress of the supplement with the editor. After the early numbers Constable left Jeffrey to get on with the 'Review'; he interfered with Scott's work only occasionally and with considerable caution; but the supplement to the 'Encyclopaedia' was his creation. 
If the three great projects of Constable's first twenty years as a publisher were the 'Edinburgh Review', the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and Walter Scott, his ambition in the 1820s was to revolutionize publishing. On 17 January 1819 he offered Scott $12,000 for the purchase of all his copyrights, in fiction, in poetry, and in prose; Scott was initially reluctant, but was talked into agreement. Part of the objective was, as argued above, to secure Scott as a Constable author; another was, no doubt, to escape the necessity of having to deal with the Ballantynes (that was certainly a prospect relished by Cadell, although he was only allowed to enjoy the prospect: the aim was not realized). But Constable had a longer-term strategy: he immediately ordered collected editions of Scott's fiction and poetry. 'Novels and Tales of the Author of Waverley' appeared in twelve volumes in 1819, and the set was republished four times between 1821 and 1825, in three different formats. The collected poems, also in twelve volumes, appeared in 1820; by 1825 the set had been republished five times in five separate formats. Constable purchased further copyrights in 1821 and 1823, and the collections 'Historical Romances' and 'Novels and Romances' followed in 1822 and 1824. Working with his new partner in London, Hurst, Robinson & Co., Constable was realizing the value of literary property in a way no previous publisher had attempted. As before, marketing was the key. The product was designed for different market sectors: the octavo version of 'Novels and Tales' sold at $7 4's'., the duodecimo at $6, and the 18mo at $4 4's'. Novels did not fit precisely into volumes, thus necessitating the purchase of complete sets. Advertising was again heavy, but the product was of higher value than sets of the individual novels, and so the unit costs were lower. The different formats were sold in different parts of the country: Hurst, Robinson & Co. was particularly adept at selling the cheaper 18mo, disposing of 5000 copies of 'Novels and Tales'. 
In 1823 Scott presented Constable with the manuscripts of all the novels, and this further raised Constable's ambitions, for on 25 March he proposed a new complete edition of the novels, in a handsome format, annotated by Scott himself: 'in my opinion', he wrote, 'it is the Author only who could do anything at all acceptable in the way of genuine illustration' ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 7.354). Constable's estimate of the profit was $20,000, which he was prepared to share with Scott. Scott initially demurred, but by late 1825 had accepted Constable's proposals, and was working on 'Waverley', when the crash took place in January 1826. 
Even bolder were Constable's plans for his 'Miscellany', and the mass publication of fiction and works of popular history. He laid his plans out to Scott at a meeting in Abbotsford in May 1825, which J. G. Lockhart reported in an exuberant and ample passage in his 'Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott, bart.': 'I have now settled my outline of operations -- a three shilling or half-crown volume every month, which must and shall sell, not by thousands, or tens of thousands, but by hundreds of thousands -- ay, by millions! Twelve volumes in the year... so good that millions will wish to have them, and so cheap that every butcher's callant may have them. (Lockhart, 6.31)' Constable was planning 'nothing less than a total revolution in the art and traffic of bookselling' (ibid., 6.28). Scott recognized that the plan was both daring and visionary, and told Constable that he would be known as 'the grand Napoleon of the realms of 'print'' (ibid., 6.31). The list was to include Scott's novels, but Hurst Robinson objected lest cheap reprints should harm sales of existing stock, and so on 30 August Constable told Scott that the series would consist of miscellaneous non-fiction works, some reprints of standard works, and other new titles commissioned for the series. The series was dedicated to the king, a privilege obtained by Scott, who wrote to George IV's secretary explaining: 'Our great publisher in Scotland has formed a plan which, though intended for his profit in the first instance, cannot, I think, but have the best possible effect in supplying this new and extended demand for literature among the lower classes, by reprinting at a moderate rate, and selling at a low profit, a great number of the most standard English works both in history, in the belles lettres, as well as in science, and in the department of voyages and travels, natural history, and so forth. ('Letters of Sir Walter Scott', 9.262-3)' 

The grand Napoleon of the realms of print did not see the fulfilment of his greatest scheme because of his bankruptcy in January 1826 (although a modified version began publication on 6 January 1827). According to Lockhart in his 'Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott, bart.' (1837-8) the failure of Archibald Constable & Co. and James Ballantyne & Co., and of Constable, Cadell, Ballantyne, and Scott as individuals (there was then no limited liability and the personal assets of partners in a business were at risk), was due to a complete failure in accounting, exacerbated by a 'maddening period of panic' (Lockhart, 6.118) in the last weeks of 1825. It is not now possible to review the financial position of Archibald Constable & Co., as the accounts of Constable's trustees are lost; one list of Constable's liabilities indicates debts of about $150,000 and another about $200,000, but neither gives usable information about when and for what purpose the debts were incurred. Even so, the accusations of financial incompetence made by Lockhart against them all (ibid., 6.113-20) are incompatible with the fact that Constable as publisher and Ballantyne as printer had conducted two extraordinarily successful businesses for twenty-five years. They also take no account of economic conditions in the winter of 1825-6: there was a national financial crisis. Depositors fearing that banks would fail withdrew their money; the banks called in loans as they became due in order to meet their own liabilities. The result was that Constable was unable to recycle his firm's borrowings. In January 1826 the firm and its partners were bankrupt. Their property was sequestrated, and was sold over the next few years for the benefit of the creditors, who, in the end, were paid a dividend of only 2's'. 9died in the pound. In his 'Journal' Scott commented: 'Constable's business seems unintelligible. No man thought the house worth less than $150,000 -- Constable told me when he was making his will that he was worth $80,000... No doubt trading almost entirely on accomodation ['sic'] is dreadfully expensive' (p. 71). Trading on accommodation, in other words relying on bank borrowings to finance the business, was expensive, but although it must have reduced the available profit it does not explain the enormous gap between assets and liabilities. It is probable that the firm overestimated the value of the stock; normally the value was reckoned to be what it would fetch if sold at advertised prices. More importantly, those responsible for selling the assets of Archibald Constable & Co. did not understand the value of copyrights: the 'Waverley' copyrights were sold at auction on 19 December 1827 to Scott's trustees for $8400, but sales of the novels in the 1830s suggest that the copyrights were worth ten times what Scott's trustees paid for them. Of course had Scott's trustees not got a bargain Scott's own edition of the 'Waverley' novels would never have proceeded, and would not have generated the enormous sums it did. None the less Constable knew the value of copyrights while his trustees did not, and his valuation of them may explain how he came to estimate his personal fortune at $80,000. In 1838 his eldest son, David, wrote: 'But had the bankers of London understood the value of an assignment of copyright by an author to his publisher, and of 'such' copyrights as those of the writings of the Author of 'Waverley' or the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', as well as they understand the value of a bill of lading of a cargo of hides or tallow from St. Petersburg, I feel perfectly assured that no loss would have been sustained in any quarter, so far as literature and the publications of Constable and Co. were concerned. (T. Constable, 3.469)' 

Soon after the failure of the business Constable and Cadell quarrelled, and parted company. Constable lost his fine house, and he and his family went to live in rented accommodation. He tried to re-create his life as a publisher but was deserted by Scott, who chose to work with Cadell. (The latter had seriously misrepresented Constable's negotiations with bankers in London in the weeks preceding the crash.) Constable's health had been in decline for some years: he suffered from 'dropsy', fluid retention possibly indicating partial heart failure. He died on 21 July 1827. 
By his first marriage to Mary Willison, Constable had at least eight children, including Elizabeth, who married Constable's partner Robert Cadell on 14 October 1817 but who died on 16 July the following year. He married Charlotte Neale on 12 February 1818 and had a second family. At death he was destitute, and was able to leave nothing to his first family, but his second was supported by the proceeds of an annuity. 
Constable's eldest son, David Constable (1795-1867), became a book collector, travelling on the continent in 1817 in search of old and valuable books, and assisting Scott and scholars such as Sir James Mackintosh (T. Constable, 2.521-7). He qualified as an advocate in 1819 and appears to have earned a modest income from the law. He inherited his grandfather's printing business, but his involvement with his father's financial affairs led to the sale of his collection and the loss of the printing business's most significant customer. This and his father's death in 1827 led to a breakdown. He married in 1828 and went to live in Brussels, had two sons and a daughter (who died in infancy), and became a widower in 1835. He had another serious breakdown, and retired to Ayrshire, before returning to Edinburgh and the protection of his brother Thomas ['see below'] and his family. He died on 4 January 1867. 


On 14 October 1837 Constable married Lucia Anna Cowan, daughter of the Penicuik papermaker Alexander Cowan, who had been his father's trustee. In 1839 he was appointed her majesty's printer and publisher in Edinburgh, and in 1853 the firm began to print for London publishers. In 1859 he was appointed printer to the University of Edinburgh. By 1861 Constable employed fifty compositors, making his firm the biggest in Edinburgh. He assumed his son Archibald as a partner in 1865, the firm changing its name to T. and A. Constable, the name under which it traded as the foremost Edinburgh printer until its demise in the 1980s. 
About 1847 Thomas Constable branched out into publishing under the name Thomas Constable & Co. when he purchased for $10,000 the copyright of the works of Thomas Chalmers, the economist and theologian who more than any other person had been responsible for the Disruption of 1843 and the establishment of the Free Church of Scotland. In 1854 he began the series of schoolbooks known as 'Constable's Educational Series', and he also published the first of the ten volumes of the complete works of Dugald Stewart edited by Sir William Hamilton. Constable gave up publishing in 1860 when he sold the business to Edmonston and Douglas. 
In his later years Thomas Constable wrote a few minor biographies and one major book, the three volumes of 'Archibald Constable and his Literary Correspondents' (1873). In this work Constable ably transforms into narrative the records of Archibald Constable & Co., which now constitute one of the great manuscript collections of the National Library of Scotland, comes to a wise and understated view of his father's career and achievement, and makes a fairer and better informed assessment of the financial disaster of 1826 than any that had previously been published. Thomas Constable died on 26 May 1881. 


@@@@@


doc= 6102


Constable, Cuthbert (c.1680-1747), antiquary, was the second son of Francis Tunstall (1638-1713), landowner, of Wycliffe Hall and Scargill Castle, and Cecily Constable ('c'.1657-1712), daughter of John Constable, second Viscount Dunbar, of Burton Constable. A Catholic, he was educated in the English college at Douai in France, which he entered in 1700, and afterwards took the degree of MD in the University of Montpellier. In 1718 he inherited from his uncle William Constable, fourth and last Viscount Dunbar, the estate of Burton Constable, near Hull, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, on condition that he assume the name of Constable. On 20 June 1719 he married Amey Clifford (1705-1731), the fifth daughter of Hugh, second Baron Clifford of Chudleigh (1663-1730), and Anne Preston (died 1734). In 1731 Amey died of smallpox when pregnant with their fifth child; she was buried at St Pancras in London. On 12 August 1735 he married Elizabeth Heneage (1709-1765), the daughter of George Heneage of Hainton in Lincolnshire, and from this marriage was born Marmaduke Tunstall, formerly Constable, later a distinguished naturalist. 
An accomplished scholar, Constable planned but did not complete a biography of the Catholic controversialist Abraham Woodhead (1609-1678). He did, however, compose the biographical account for his publication of Woodhead's 'Ancient Church Government, Part 3', in 1736. In addition, Constable, styled the 'Catholic Maecenas of his age' (Gillow, 'Lit. biog. hist.', 1.548), supported the scholarship of others. He provided Richard Challoner with the manuscript 'Suffering of the Catholics', by John Knaresborough, chaplain at Burton Constable, for the 'Memoirs of Missionary Priests' (1741-2), and he contributed to the cost of publishing Charles Dodd's 'Church History' (1737-42). He formed an extensive library at Burton Constable, enriched with valuable manuscripts, including the Woodhead manuscripts, obtained from Lisbon in 1728 from Francis Nicholson (1650-1731), a Catholic convert, formerly of University College, Oxford; Nicholson's biography of Woodhead; and his own correspondence with Nicholson and Thomas Hearne. Constable died at home at Burton Constable Hall on 14 March 1747; the cause of his death was not recorded. He was buried at Halsham on 20 March 1747. In 1802 his remains were deposited in the family mausoleum at Halsham. 


@@@@@


doc= 6103


Constable, Henry (1562-1613), polemicist and poet, was born in Newark-on-Trent, the only child of Sir Robert Constable (died 1591) and Christiana, daughter of John Dabridgecourt of Langdon Hall, Warwickshire, and widow of Anthony Forster. His family was distinguished: his grandfather Robert Constable married Katherine Manners, sister of Thomas, earl of Rutland; their second son, Henry's father, Robert, made a judicious marriage whose connections opened up a career of military service and public office -- he was knighted on the field of battle by Thomas, earl of Sussex, while serving in Scotland, acted as marshal of Berwick between 1576 and 1578, and became lieutenant-general of the queen's ordnance some time before 23 July 1588. Sir Robert died on 12 November 1591. 
Henry Constable matriculated as fellow-commoner at St John's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1578, and took his BA on 29 January 1580 by special grace, nominated first in the 'ordo senioritatis' (possibly because of his social standing). He is mentioned in the registers of Lincoln's Inn on 21 February 1583, but by 12 September was at St Johnston's (Perth), reporting to his father on the cool reception given to Walsingham by the Scottish court. The latter recommended him to the English ambassador in Paris, Sir Edward Stafford. Constable acted as gentleman-spokesman for the protestant cause in Paris between 14 December 1583 and April 1585; he impressed the ambassador, who told Walsingham on 30 May 1584 that he might be used to bolster the protestant fervour of Henri of Navarre. There are reports from this period of plans to journey to meet Beza in Geneva, and to Italy. In May 1585 Constable was at Heidelberg, where he answered an attack on the queen by a Roman Catholic exile, Thomas Throckmorton. There may have been other journeys, given a sonnet to the queen which mentioned his recent travels in Poland and a phrase in his funeral oration which talked of his having been a soldier in his youth. A commonplace book copy survives of Constable's answer to Cardinal William Allen's justification of Sir William Stanley's surrender of Deventer to Spanish troops, printed in 1587. 
Constable was probably at court during 1588-9: he attended the earl of Rutland's funeral in March 1588, wrote a sonnet to Penelope Rich on the birth of her daughter in that year, was described as familiar with Arabella Stuart by 1589, and was said by the secretary of the apostolic delegate to France to be a favourite of the queen. He was at Edinburgh in 1589, ostensibly to bring greetings from members of the English court on James VI's marriage; a coded report of the visit to Burghley, dated 20 October, indicates that members of the Essex circle were using Constable to assure James of their loyalty to him above Arabella. Constable was reported to show himself a protestant at the time, an impression confirmed by a text he published in September 1589, 'Examen pacifique de la doctrine des Huguenots' (London, with false Paris imprint; a second edition appeared in 1590). This answered Cardinal Bellarmine's 'Responsio ad praecipua capita apologiae'. Constable wrote as though a Roman Catholic, arguing that the divisions between the Reformed and Roman churches were so recent as must inspire moderation in claims for absolute truth; French Roman Catholics were urged to support the newly crowned Henri IV. The tract was translated by 'W. W.' as 'The Catholike Moderator, or, A Moderate Examination of the Doctrine of the Protestants' (1623) and answered by Lawrence Anderton and William Smith. 
Poetry also engaged Constable's attention at this time. There are three major extant collections of his works. A sequence of twenty-three sonnets, 'Diana', was published in London by Richard Smith in 1592 (Constable left with the Essex expedition to assist Henri IV in August 1591, and the preface describes the poems as 'by misfortune left as Orphans'). Elizabeth I, his cousin Mary, countess of Shrewsbury, and Penelope, Lady Rich, have been named as his 'mistress'. A second edition, with five new sonnets by Constable, eight from Sir Philip Sidney's 'Certaine Sonets', and a further unassigned forty-one sonnets, came out under Constable's name, probably in 1594, though it is likely that this was Smith's project. The Todd manuscript contains nine groups of seven Italian-form sonnets by Constable on the theme of love. Seventeen 'Spirituall sonnettes, to the honour of God: and hys saintes', in British Library, Harleian MS 7553, fols. 32-40, were not published in Constable's lifetime. His editor, Joan Grundy, speculates that the secular sonnets were written before Constable's conversion ('Poems', 59-60, 84-5); the date of the spiritual sonnets is in dispute. 
Between Constable's arrival in France and the death of his father he declared himself a Roman Catholic. Living on a small pension from Henri IV, he made Paris his base (at some time he lived at Mignon College), but was also at Rome before August 1595 and in 1600, Rouen on 8 January 1596, Scotland in 1599, Antwerp, and Brussels. However, his connections with the Essex circle continued until 1597, shown in a series of letters to Essex and Anthony Bacon which protested his loyalty to Elizabeth. As a corollary, he declared his support for James's claim to the English throne over that of the infanta, and acted to frustrate Jesuit actions in France (he was a friend of Christopher Bagshaw, the chief protagonist in the archpriest controversy, and in 1598 handed over to the French government letters from English Jesuits). His plans for securing the welfare of English Roman Catholics used his acquaintance with those in power: a college was to be set up in Paris, Henri was to lean on Elizabeth to tolerate recusants, and the conversions of Anne of Denmark, or even of James himself, were to be attempted. On 1 March 1599 Constable landed at Leith; James initially refused him an audience, and though he spoke with Anne, he was ordered by the sessions of the kirk to subscribe to the articles of religion or leave the country. Having regained the king's favour, hunting and conversing on poetry and divinity with him, Constable stayed until September, though he accounted the visit a failure on his return to Paris. Yet he continued to nurse hopes of a conversion, going to Rome in 1600 to ask the pope to support another mission to James. 
During this period Constable continued to write on theology: he sent to Bacon in January 1596 an unpublished manuscript on an encounter between French divines, and wrote another on English affairs before 1597 (neither extant). He answered a tract by R. Doleman (Robert Persons), 'A Conference about the Next Succession' of 1595, which put forward the claims of the infanta. Constable's 'Discoverye of a Counterfecte Conference... for Thadvancement of a Counterfecte Tytle' (Paris, 1600, under the false imprint of Cologne) was among a number of tracts which supported James's title. At this time, Constable was described as 'a litle man redd face pumpled gray heair and a smale beard' ('CSP dom.', Elizabeth, addenda, 34.41). 
On James's accession Constable cautiously wrote to certain Scottish friends, and then, on 11 June 1603, to the earl of Rutland and Robert Cecil asking them to intercede for permission for him to return to England. By December he was at court, apparently well received. A warrant of 8 February 1604 allowed him to take possession of his father's lands. He maintained contact with the papal nuncio in Paris, Del Bufalo, as he planned further ways to influence James on the issue of toleration, including an international conference of theologians to dispute differences between the faiths. Cecil was alerted to his schemes: Constable was imprisoned in the Tower from 14 April to 9 July 1604, then confined to his own house, deprived of his inheritance, and imprisoned at least twice (he was in the Fleet on 9 February 1608). He was allowed to leave England on 31 July 1610 and returned to Paris, where he was present at a theological disputation on 4 September 1612. He was sent to Liege by his friend, Cardinal Jacques Davy du Perron, to try to convert Dr Benjamin Carier, a protestant divine, and died there on 9 October 1613. 
Constable was highly regarded in his own time as a poet and polemicist; only since the 1950s has his latter role been reacknowledged. He was a notable Roman Catholic convert, who abandoned his home and inheritance to use his family's high standing and his own popularity at court to promote in tracts, disputations, and personal contact the controversial position that devout Roman Catholics could be loyal subjects of the English crown. He was also at the forefront of the development of the sonnet in English literature: the second English poet after Sidney to publish a sonnet sequence and the initiator of a Tridentine aesthetic in his 'Spirituall sonnettes'. His 'Ambrosiack Muse' was linked to Sidney's in Ben Jonson's praise ('Underwoods', 27, ll. 25-8), Sir John Harington claimed him as his 'very good friend' ('Orlando Furioso', 1591, sig. Bbiii'v'), 'The Return from Parnassus' and Gabriel Harvey put him with Edmund Spenser, and he was imitated by poets such as Michael Drayton, Sir William Alexander, and Barnabe Barnes. His most extended contemporary assessment was in Edmund Bolton's 'Hypercritica' (1618): 'a great Master in the English Tongue, nor had any Gentleman of our Nation a more pure, quick, or higher Delivery of Conceit' (J. Haslewood, 'Ancient Critical Essays upon English Poets and Poesy', 1815, 2.250). 


@@@@@


doc= 6104


Constable, Henry, first Viscount Dunbar (1588-1645), landowner and royalist army officer, was the eldest son of Sir Henry Constable ('c'.1559-1608) of Burton Constable and Halsham in Holderness, and Margaret Dormer (died 1637), daughter of Sir William Dormer of Wing, Buckinghamshire. Sir Henry Constable was elected MP for Hedon in 1584, 1586, and 1604, and for the county of Yorkshire in 1589, and was sheriff there in 1586-7. Although the Constables had become one of the richest families in the East Riding as a result of their acquisition of many former monastic properties, Henry Constable's mother and uncle Joseph Constable were two of the most obstinate recusants in Yorkshire; his father conformed outwardly but left legacies to students in foreign seminaries. Accompanied by his private tutor he entered Trinity College, Oxford, at the age of eight and spent three years there. He succeeded to the considerable family estate at the age of twenty. 
Constable was knighted on 14 March 1615 and created Baron Constable and Viscount Dunbar in the Scottish peerage on 14 November 1620. He was deputy justice in eyre for Galtres forest and deputy lieutenant in the East Riding, but was best-known as a hard-drinking, heavy-gambling papist. At one session alone he was said to have lost $3000. In 1630 he compounded for his recusancy and later received a letter from King Charles excusing him from church attendance. 
In 1639 Dunbar helped the king raise money for his Scottish war and in 1642 he was denounced in the Commons as 'a powerful papist' who had supplied Charles with 'great store of arms' (Coates, Young, and Snow, 240). Early in 1644 he subscribed to the Yorkshire engagement and took a colonel's commission in Newcastle's royalist army. All three of his sons fought on the king's side: John (1615-1668), the eldest, was eventually exiled to Amsterdam, and Matthew and Henry joined their father when he took refuge with Sir Hugh Cholmley at Scarborough. On 28 June 1645 Dunbar died of wounds received in the siege of the castle, where both his younger sons were injured. Burton Constable Hall was plundered, the estate sequestered by parliament, and John inherited debts of $17,550. On account of her recusancy John's widowed mother, Mary (died 1659), daughter of Sir John Tufton of Hothfield, Kent, lost all but one third of her portion of $200 a year. 


@@@@@


doc= 6105


Constable, John (fl. 1511-1520), Latin poet, son of Roger and Isabel Constable of London, studied under William Lily (presumably before he became master of St Paul's), and at Beam Hall, Oxford, proceeding BA in November 1511 and MA in July 1515; in June 1515 he was ordained priest. His later career is unknown. He describes himself as 'Londinensis et artium professor' ('a Londoner and master of arts') in his 'Epigrammata', printed by Pynson in November 1520, and pride in his native city and its varied trade shines in his epigram 'In Londinium'. This volume, containing twenty-six pages of mostly elegiac verse, appears to be the sole survivor of a reasonable literary output, including a work entitled 'Querela veritatis'. His contemporary reputation as rhetorician and poet was high (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.27-9); later critics are unkind, Charles Trice Martin calling the epigrams 'dull and pointless' ('DNB'), though admitting the versification to be correct, a judgement echoed by Leicester Bradner in 1940: 'a medieval type of mind... he has nothing to say as a poet. The volume merely serves to establish him as one who wished to be regarded as a humanist' (Bradner, 18). 
Constable's humanistic aspirations are indeed significant, and perhaps deserve a more sympathetic assessment. He was in the vanguard of the British Latin Renaissance; a letter from another printer, Berthelet, at the end of Constable's 'Epigrammata' praises him as a 'praestans vir' ('a distinguished man'), helping to drive out barbarous Latinity alongside William Horman. Constable has an epigram 'In Bossum Liliomastigem' (a year before Lily and Horman's 'Antibossicon'). He defends himself against the charge of levity. Many epigrams show genuine religious feeling, and occasional elegance. Oxford is praised, with 'aula Boemia' (Beam Hall), its master John Plaisted, and other notables; idle young noblemen are sharply castigated. Henry VIII is a Caesar, Solomon, and Maecenas; Katherine of Aragon a star of virtue, and Constable's longest poem, thirty-six lines to Thomas More, neatly turns some complimentary puns ('Morus conspicuus moribus est suis'). There are epitaphs for his parents, brother Richard, and sister Martha (apparently a precocious Minerva). He himself is neither genius nor buffoon, but a worthy precursor of the mid-century flowering of academic Latin verse. 


@@@@@


doc= 6106


Constable, John (1676/1678-1743), Jesuit, was born in Lincolnshire on 10 November 1676 or 1678. The names of his parents have not been found, but as he used the alias of Lacey that may have been his mother's family name; Lacy was also the name of a remote Constable ancestor. In 1690 he joined his elder brother, Joseph (or Marmaduke), at the English College at St Omer, and in 1695 followed him into the Society of Jesus. After his noviciate at Watten in Flanders and studies for the priesthood at Liege, he was ordained about 1704. From 1705 to 1711 he lectured in philosophy, scripture, and theology and taught Hebrew to the Jesuit students at Liege. After a few years on the staff of St Omer College and assisting in the training of Jesuit novices he crossed to England about 1723 and became chaplain to the Fitzherbert family at Swynnerton in Staffordshire. 
During the years he was at Swynnerton Constable wrote several works that were published and others that remained in manuscript. He always wrote under the pseudonym Clerophilus Alethes. In Oliver's opinion, 'unquestionably F. Constable is entitled to rank amongst the ablest and best informed men in the English [Jesuit] province' (Oliver, 57). His first published work was 'Remarks upon F. Le Courayer's Book in Defence of the English Ordinations &c' (n.d.). This was an answer to Le Courayer's dissertation on the validity of Anglican orders and of the succession of the bishops of the Church of England published in Brussels in 1723. In 1726 Le Courayer published a defence of his dissertation, and Constable replied with 'The stratagem discovered, or, An essay of an apology for F. Le Courayer's late work in 4 vols. entitled 'Defense de la dissertation &c' wherein strong instances are produced to show that he writes 'booty' and is only a sham defender of these ordinations, while he very much confirms the judgment of their invalidity' (1727). 
On 16 July 1735 Constable was made rector of the Jesuit 'district' of St Chad, the Jesuit priests working in Staffordshire. He continued to engage in controversy. Further publications included a justification of the antiquity of the eucharist and repudiations of deism and latitudinarianism. In 1741, in a vigorous reply to an attack on the Jesuits by Charles Dodd (H. Tootell), a Catholic priest who had published a three-volume history of the English church, he published 'A specimen of amendments candidly proposed to the compiler of the work which he calls 'The church history of England from the year 1500 to the year 1688''. Dodd replied with 'An Apology for the 'Church History of England'' (1742), a work 'angry, coarse and abusive' (Oliver, 58). Constable's answer, 'Advice to the author of the 'Church History of England'', was described as 'searching, smart and acute' (ibid.), but was never published because the author 'was not solicitous enough to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace' (ibid.). It remains in manuscript at Stonyhurst with other unpublished works. 
Among Constable's other publications were 'Reflections upon Accuracy of Style. In Five Dialogues' (1734) and 'The Conversation of Gentlemen Considered. In Six Dialogues' (1738). He died at Swynnerton, Staffordshire, on 27 March 1743, and was buried the next day in the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 6107


Constable, John (1776-1837), landscape painter and draughtsman, was born on 11 June 1776 at East Bergholt House, Church Street, East Bergholt, Suffolk, the fourth of six children of Golding Constable (1739-1816), merchant, mill owner, and gentleman farmer, and Ann (1748-1815), daughter of William Watts ('c'.1717-1773), cooper, and Jane Brickbeck (died 1771) of London. Golding was the sixth of ten children of John Constable (1705-1777), farmer and landowner in Bures St Mary, Suffolk, and Judith Garrad; in 1764 he inherited from a paternal uncle money, stocks, and substantial property including the copyhold of a watermill in Flatford on the River Stour where it divides the counties of Suffolk and Essex. His marriage in 1767, followed by the birth of three children, necessitated a move in 1774 from the house at Flatford mill to nearby East Bergholt, where he built an imposing residence with stables and coachhouse. It was here that John Constable was born two years later. The house and its grounds, indeed the entire village and surrounding landscape with views of the Stour valley in all directions, formed a principal feature of his art throughout his life. As he explained to a friend in 1821, 'I associate my 'careless boyhood' to all that lies on the banks of the 'Stour'. They made me a painter... I had often thought of pictures of them before I had ever touched a pencil' ('Correspondence', 6.78). Constable's highly original approach to landscape painting, fuelled by his desire to elevate the genre and shaped by his emotional and economic attachment to that part of East Anglia already known before his death as 'Constable's country', has ensured that his contribution to the development of landscape art in nineteenth-century Britain is rivalled only by that of his contemporary J. M. W. Turner. 
A frail infant hastily baptized on the night of his birth by the Revd W. W. Driffield, Constable nevertheless enjoyed a hearty childhood and 'c'.1783 was sent to boarding-school in Fordstreet, Essex, and then to Lavenham, Suffolk. Mistreated there by a brutal usher, Constable returned home and continued his education as a day boy at nearby Dedham grammar school whose headmaster, the Revd Thomas Grimwood, treated him with kindness and indulged his early interest in painting. Captivated by the possibility of becoming an artist and reputedly disinclined to scholarly pursuit, Constable resisted family pressure to prepare for a career in the church. When it became apparent, however, that the disabilities of his elder brother Golding would prevent his taking over from their father, Constable reluctantly began training in the family business at the age of sixteen. Although he would ultimately have had a managerial role in the diverse and substantial corn and coal trade established by Golding senior, Constable was exposed to the practical side of the milling business as well, working in his father's windmill on East Bergholt Heath, gauging the evanescent meteorological conditions, and familiarizing himself with the navigable River Stour, with its watermills, locks, barges, towpaths, and adjacent fields, all of which were crucial to the family's prosperity. The knowledge he gained in these years, coupled with what he later characterized as 'his over-weaning affection for these scenes' ('Discourses', 13), would subsequently inform the impassioned naturalism of his landscape art even when the scenery depicted was not East Anglian. 
While thus employed, Constable continued to paint and draw, not professionally, but as a gentlemanly pursuit. Practical advice concerning materials and technique was provided by an amateur landscape painter, the local plumber and glazier John Dunthorne, who was Constable's frequent painting companion. Access to tuition of a different sort, as well as entree into the higher echelons of the art world, were fortuitously managed by Constable's mother in 1795 when she arranged an introduction to Sir George Beaumont, then visiting his own mother in Dedham. A distinguished painter and patron, Beaumont encouraged the young artist, commending his copies of engravings after Raphael and perhaps giving him practical advice about drawing techniques. More relevant to Constable's future career, however, was the opportunity to examine closely Claude's 'Hagar and the Angel' (1646; National Gallery), a small landscape owned and highly valued by Beaumont. Constable would later look back on his first sight of this painting 'as an important epoch in his life' (Leslie, 1845, 6), triggering as it did a lifelong devotion to an artist thought to have painted directly from nature. Constable's youthful infatuation with painting was strengthened most significantly in 1796 when, engaged on family business outside London, he was introduced to two professional artists, John Cranch and J. T. (Antiquity) Smith, whose practical instruction improved his drawing skills and enriched his knowledge of the theoretical foundations of academic art; with their guidance he began to assemble what would become in the next forty years an impressive library and print collection ('Further Documents and Correspondence', 25-52). 
With an unwavering enthusiasm for art, Constable nevertheless dejectedly informed Smith in 1797 that he must 'attend to my Father's business... I certainly see it will be my lot to walk through life in a path contrary to that which my inclination would lead me' ('Correspondence', 2.10). In 1799, however, freed from family obligation when his younger brother Abram, now aged sixteen, was able to take his place, Constable left home with a sufficient allowance and parental consent to study art in London. 
In February 1799, armed with a letter of introduction from the author and philanthropist Priscilla Wakefield, Constable presented himself to Joseph Farington, an influential Royal Academician whose friendly intervention facilitated his entry into the London art world. In March he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools as a probationer, restricted to drawing in the antique academy until February 1800 when he was enrolled as a student in the life academy. Constable's transition from life in East Bergholt to London was eased by the presence in the city of several family members, including his elder sister Martha Whalley and his maternal uncle David Pike Watts, a wealthy connoisseur and collector who took an active interest in his nephew's career. Constable's 'kind monitor' Dr John Fisher, the rector of Langham and canon of Windsor when they first met in 1798, proved an influential friend in London, particularly after he became bishop of Salisbury and chaplain to the Royal Academy in 1807. While fellow students increased Constable's circle of friends, he continued to cultivate his connections with mentors such as Beaumont and Farington who gave him not only practical advice, but access to old master paintings, drawings, and prints which he was permitted to copy. Such copying, as Constable reported in a letter to Dunthorne in 1800, enabled him to 'acquire execution. The more facility of practice I get, the more pleasure I shall find in my art; without the power of execution I should be continually embarrassed' ('Correspondence', 2.24). Although his life was now essentially London-based, Constable returned to Suffolk frequently, maintaining close contact with family and friends there, but more importantly indulging his need to paint and draw from nature. Evidence that he was already beginning to formulate his personal vision of landscape art appears in a letter of May 1802 to Dunthorne: 'For these two years past I have been running after pictures and seeking the truth at second hand... I shall shortly return to Bergholt where I shall make some laborious studies from nature -- and I shall endeavour to get a pure and unaffected representation of the scenes that may employ me... There is room enough for a natural painture. (ibid., 2.32)' Several small oil sketches painted during his lengthy visit to Bergholt that year, including 'Dedham Vale' and 'Dedham Vale: Evening' (V&A), mark what is widely recognized as the starting point of a commitment to outdoor study that was to be the foundation of his art. This commitment, however, would always be tempered by his understanding of the theoretical precepts of Sir Joshua Reynolds and by his continued willingness to incorporate what he could learn from past artists, particularly Claude, Rembrandt, Rubens, Ruisdael, Wilson, and Gainsborough. 
Stimulated by parental pressure to achieve some degree of financial independence, Constable found it necessary to resort to portraiture, finding many of his sitters through family and friends. East Anglian connections also led to a few commissions for altarpieces, but 'Christ Blessing the Elements' (1810; St James's Church, Nayland), a rather saccharine, passionless painting, suggests that religious art did not engage Constable's creative capabilities; and an unwelcome offer of employment as a drawing instructor at a military school in 1802 was wisely turned down. As he confided to Dunthorne, 'it would have been a death blow to all my prospects of perfection in the Art I love' ('Correspondence', 2.31). Although he continued to attend the life academy as a student until at least 1808 -- producing competent, sensitively drawn nude studies -- he showed no inclination to pursue large-scale figural painting, thereby forfeiting what his parents would have seen as a more lucrative and prestigious career. The training he received in anatomy lectures and life classes, however, no doubt improved his understanding of the human form and augmented the early advice about figure placement which he attributed to J. T. Smith and frequently repeated in later life: 'Do not set about inventing figures for a landscape taken from nature; for you cannot remain an hour in any spot, however solitary, without the appearance of some living thing that will in all probability accord better with the scene and time of day than will any invention of your own. (Leslie, 1845, 7)' Constable's parents were justified in their concern for his future. By 1809 they were still supplementing his meagre income and worried about his continued devotion to landscape painting. Even the three tours he made to expand his repertoire of picturesque scenery -- the Peak District in 1801, a month-long voyage down the Thames and along the Kentish coast in 1803, and the Lake District in 1806 -- had been subsidized by family or friends. After ten years in London, however bleak his prospects may have looked and however small his impact in the public arena, he was none the less making progress: he had exhibited works at the Royal Academy and British Institution; he was beginning to explore promising techniques in watercolour and oil sketching that would lead to significant developments; and he was producing a remarkable number of drawings (two to three hundred in 1806 alone) that tested his compositional skills and kindled a lifelong experimental approach to graphic techniques and media. Bold enough to consider putting his name forward as an associate of the academy in 1807 (though he decided against it), he remained convinced that a career was possible. His perseverance intensified in 1809 when a friendship of several years blossomed into serious courtship and, realizing that marriage was impossible without financial security and professional recognition, he renewed his efforts with fervour. 
Constable probably first encountered Maria Elizabeth Bicknell (1788-1828) when, as a twelve-year-old child, she came to visit her maternal grandfather, Durand Rhudde, the wealthy rector of East Bergholt, chaplain-in-ordinary to George III, and one of the most influential residents of the village. She was the eldest of five children of Charles Bicknell, solicitor to the Admiralty and the prince regent, and his second wife, Maria Elizabeth Rhudde. Miss Bicknell may have aroused Constable's interest in 1806 during a visit to Bergholt when she was eighteen and he thirty. It was not until she came of age in 1809, however, that they declared their mutual affection, only to be met with family resistance led by the implacable Dr Rhudde, but dutifully implemented by her parents. Why Rhudde objected remains a mystery, but his threat to disinherit not only his granddaughter but all her siblings suggests a dislike of Constable that stemmed from something more personal than the struggling artist's precarious financial situation or his family's connections to trade. Some past offence, real or imagined (and possibly committed by Constable's father rather than himself), may have triggered Rhudde's absolute refusal to sanction the alliance; but whatever the cause, his relentless intervention plagued the couple's seven-year courtship which was marked by clandestine meetings and secret correspondence. The letters they exchanged throughout these years, as they move from polite decorum to heartfelt devotion, are a poignant chronicle of their relationship, but they also provide the emotional background for Constable's vigorous and anxious campaign to prove himself. 
Constable's mother, astute about the vagaries of village life, interceded with maternal shrewdness when she could. She intercepted gossip from the rectory and encouraged her son to present Rhudde with a watercolour drawing of his church, complete with respectful inscription (1811; Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight). Her letters, displaying what has been perceptively characterized as 'a consistent mercantile protestantism' (Rosenthal, 10), urged him to pursue his goals with Christian fortitude, patience, and diligence since only by these would he reap the benefits of his industry and earn the money without which he could never contemplate marriage. Bolstered by her support, and by a conviction that he was destined to inaugurate a genre of landscape that was not only original but 'moral', he redoubled his efforts to make his mark and his living. 
Constable had painted few outdoor oil sketches since his intensive period of activity in 1802; and those, such as 'The Rectory, East Bergholt' (1808; FM Cam.) or 'View at Epsom' (1809; Tate collection) are, though marked by a fresh spontaneity, subdued both in handling and colour. From 1810, however, a greater boldness in his palette and urgency in his brushwork appear. Two dated sketches from that year, 'The Rectory from East Bergholt House' and 'View on the Stour' (Philadelphia Museum of Art), and several undated ones of Dedham Vale looking west from the Suffolk side of the Stour reveal a renewed desire to capture the varied look of the natural landscape in a form that, in conjunction with numerous drawings, might be used in his London studio to construct paintings for exhibition. This working method produced the panoramic 'Dedham Vale: Morning' (priv. coll.), shown at the academy in 1811. Arcadian in mood, but utterly faithful to the local topography, its originality confirms the progress Constable had made since his first academy exhibit of 1802, 'The Edge of a Wood' (Art Gallery of Ontario), with its heavy reliance on Gainsborough. Having sought election as an associate for the first time in 1810 without receiving a single vote, Constable was especially keen that 'Dedham Vale: Morning', the most ambitious painting he had yet produced, should prove his worth both to the academicians and to Maria's family. He later told his engraver David Lucas that no painting had ever caused him more anxiety and that 'he had even said his prayers before it' ('Further Documents and Correspondence', 55). 
For the next five years Constable continued to divide his time between London and Bergholt painting portraits for money but, for fame, devoting himself to the landscape. Despite worrying weight loss and depression, he filled his sketchbooks with hundreds of drawings and further explored the possibilities of outdoor sketching in oil. Working on canvas, board, and specially prepared papers, he experimented with even more innovative handling, making rapid and vibrant notations of the scenery and the changing weather. By painting the same sites from many different viewpoints, he tested the compositional variations that he hoped would, when amalgamated in his studio, contribute to the natural effect and verisimilitude of his finished works. By 1816 his studio -- and his memory -- would be stocked with images of Dedham Vale from both sides of the Stour. Although there was special emphasis on Flatford mill and lock, Willy Lott's house (later to be immortalized in 'The Hay Wain', 1821; National Gallery), and views of and from East Bergholt, he had amassed an almost encyclopaedic visual record of whatever caught his eye: animals and humans as they moved down lanes, through fields, or along the river; domestic buildings and churches as they nestled in the valley or rose on the horizon; and, of course, the sky. 
In 1812 Constable exhibited 'A Water-Mill' (priv. coll.) at the Royal Academy, a work whose genesis can be traced, like so many of his paintings, from a salmagundi of drawings, sketches, and studies. It features Flatford mill and lock, a site arguably associated in his mind at this time with Maria and one that had so fully absorbed him since 1810 that the mill 'had become as much Constable's business as his father's' (Bermingham, 105). Local scenery continued to provide the subject matter for his exhibited works during these years, but he was still unsettled about the process by which he could achieve the desired effect. As he told his uncle in 1814, in response to one of Watts's kindly but critical letters, 'I know I have great deficiencies and that I have not yet, in a single instance, realised my ideas of art' ('Correspondence', 4.38). At least one of his works exhibited in 1815, 'Boat-Building' (V&A), and perhaps a second, 'View of Dedham' (Boston Museum of Fine Arts), were painted entirely in the open air during his visits to Bergholt the previous year, the former occupying his afternoons, the latter his mornings. Yet despite these various efforts to find an original manner of painting his native scenery -- that 'natural painture' he had been pursuing since 1802 -- Constable was still struggling to gain a foothold. Encouraged by the voiced support of some academicians, he had put his name forward for an associateship several more times, but the votes were not forthcoming. Farington, who continued to offer advice as though Constable were still a student, suggested that he study Claude more closely to overcome the sketchy, unfinished handling that was seen by the academy to be his greatest fault. Those few reviewers in the popular press who were beginning to notice Constable with some regularity now, particularly Robert Hunt in 'The Examiner', also expressed reservations about his supposedly careless execution, but they were none the less struck by qualities they characterized as 'natural', 'fresh', and 'truthful'. Indeed, the first known review of Constable had in 1807 singled out with apparent prescience several salient features that would engage both his supporters and detractors throughout his life: his boldness, his colouring, and his 'attention to Nature' ('St. James's Chronicle', 7-9 May). 
Constable's ties to East Bergholt, though still strong in 1816, were about to change radically. The sudden death of his mother in 1815 and the death of his father after months of ill health the following year were emotionally traumatic for him, but his share of the inheritance eased his financial worries and removed at least one of the barriers to his marriage. The frustrations of a seven-year courtship had taken their toll on his art but not lessened his feelings for Maria. When further difficulties with Dr Rhudde erupted in 1816, Constable persuaded her that they had waited long enough. Aged forty, he was about to achieve a private happiness without which, as his friends and family all suspected, he would never advance professionally: 'all my hopes and prospects in life', he had written to her in 1814, 'are included in my attachment to you' ('Correspondence', 2.119). 
On 2 October 1816 Constable and Maria were married at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, by Bishop Fisher's nephew, John Fisher (1788-1832), who since their first meeting in Salisbury in 1811 had become the artist's closest friend. Fisher, himself only recently married, invited the Constables to his vicarage in Osmington, Dorset, where they spent six weeks of their honeymoon, returning to London in December. Constable, who had lived in bachelor's lodgings in at least six different locations in London since 1799, brought Maria to his rooms at 63 Charlotte Street where he had been living for five years. Within six months they moved to 1 Keppel Street, Bloomsbury, by which time she had already suffered a miscarriage and was pregnant again. A son, the first of seven children, was born in December 1817; his arrival may have softened the heart of Dr Rhudde, who ultimately bequeathed to Maria the same portion as her siblings when he died in 1819. The child, as Constable's first biographer, the artist C. R. Leslie, recalled, was seen almost as often in his father's arms as in his mother's: 'His fondness for children exceeded, indeed, that of any man I ever knew' (Leslie, 1845, 77). 
To supplement the interest he was receiving from his father's bequest, plus his annual share of the family business and Maria's small annuity from her father, Constable calculated that he would need to earn an additional $100-150 per year to cover their expenses. He still relied heavily for his income on portraiture ('Mrs Jane Andrew', 1818; Tate collection; 'Mrs James Pulham, Sr', 1818; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) and on occasional paintings of specific sites, such as 'Wivenhoe Park, Essex', commissioned by General Slater-Rebow in 1816 (National Gallery of Art, Washington). Only a few of his landscapes shown at the Royal Academy or British Institution since 1802 had found buyers, and those for the most part had been purchased by family or acquaintances. In 1818, however, he sold two paintings at the British Institution and a third there the following year. The report of these sales in the press served as useful advertising, alerting other buyers in the market place to his potential, but that service was also being performed by the reviewers who had begun to notice him with increasing frequency and with greater appreciation for the vivacity and spirit of his landscapes. 
Maria, pregnant again by late 1818, gave birth to a daughter the following summer. His wife's health, delicate even before their marriage, was to be a constant source of concern to Constable; and in August 1819 he rented a cottage in Hampstead where Maria and the children would be spared the bad air of London for at least a few months. This retreat to a suburban (indeed, almost rural) setting would become an annual event, not only benefiting Maria's lungs but introducing Constable to a landscape that delighted him, engaging both his affections and his artistic creativity. As subject matter, Hampstead would never dislodge the pre-eminence of the Stour valley; with its glorious skies, however, it now began to attract his attention as Salisbury had done since his first visit there in 1811. 
Although settled and calm in his private life at last, Constable still faced professional frustration. He had failed yet again to become an associate member of the academy in the elections of 1817 and 1818; but with the same tenacity that had brought him to London in 1799 and sustained him in his difficult courtship, he renewed his efforts to discover an original, innovative style that would gain academic approval, public recognition, and patronage. He exhibited only one painting at the academy in 1819, 'A Scene on the River Stour' ('The White Horse', Frick Collection, New York), but it achieved much that had so far eluded him. Measuring 6 feet by 4 (the first of what came to be known as his 'six-footers'), it was the largest canvas he had submitted and represents an unprecedented development in his working method. Constable had by this time spent almost two decades experimenting with various procedures by which direct work from nature could be transformed into paintings deemed suitable for exhibition. To paint anything so large as 'The White Horse', a Stour Canal scene, direct from the motif was certainly impractical; the lengthy stays in East Anglia where such outdoor work could be done were now precluded by the sale of the parental home in East Bergholt and by his reluctance to be separated so long from his family in London. His solution was to comb through his extensive store of drawings and oil sketches as before, but to use them in conjunction with an intermediary, full-scale (that is, 6 foot) oil sketch on which he could test the effects of composition as well as of the chiaroscuro, that crucial balance of light and shadow so important to his perception of 'natural' landscape painting. Although much is still unknown about his precise working methods, Constable's experimentation unleashed a new power, enabling him to paint fresh and vibrant large-scale works in his Keppel Street studio without direct access to the actual scene. 'The White Horse', well received by the reviewers, was purchased by Constable's friend Fisher for 100 guineas; and in November 1819 the artist was finally elected an associate of the academy. 
The continued centrality of the Stour valley in Constable's life and art cannot be overstated, but from now until his death his visits there were infrequent and of short duration. No longer under pressure to stock his studio or his memory with East Anglian views, he drew or sketched when there, it would seem, simply because he could not restrain himself if he had materials with him and a site or an effect caught his eye. Never forsaking his commitment to the fundamental importance of outdoor study, however, he merely focused his attention -- and his affections -- on other locales. 
After exhibiting his second 'six-footer' in 1820, another canal scene bought this time by Fisher as a gift for his solicitor ('Stratford Mill'; National Gallery), Constable took Maria and the children to Salisbury for a long and idyllic summer visit. They stayed with Fisher, now a canon living in a spacious house in the close, from which Constable had ample opportunity to deepen his intimacy with the cathedral and its environs. His outdoor oil sketches and drawings, which included views of Stonehenge and Old Sarum, reveal a wide range of handling, from the closely detailed to the exuberantly free, and, in keeping with his standard procedure, would be consulted in subsequent years for works executed in his London studio ('Salisbury Cathedral from the Bishop's Grounds', 1823, and 'Stonehenge', 1836; V&A). This long visit intensified the already well-established friendship between Constable and Fisher. Their shared passion for landscape (Fisher was an amateur artist) and for their young families is fully revealed in their lengthy correspondence which, though ending with Fisher's early death in 1832, provides a poignant record of the joys and disappointments of Constable's private and professional life. Both men enjoyed a ribald sense of humour and indulged in satiric jibes at their colleagues, particularly those who brought their professions into disrepute. Only Constable's friendship with Leslie approached the closeness of his attachment to Fisher, and it is in his correspondence with these two men that his deeply held views about life and art are most fully articulated. 
Immediately upon their return to London, Maria (pregnant again) was settled with the children in a house in Hampstead. Although he needed to work in his Keppel Street studio, Constable stayed with them when he could and, invigorated by the surrounding landscape, began a new campaign of open-air sketching that once again transformed his painting. Concentrating on views from Hampstead Heath, which served as a virtual meteorological observatory, he embarked on a series of sky studies that throughout the early 1820s would enhance his understanding of the natural phenomena so crucial to his vision of landscape art. Already very knowledgeable about weather and its effects from his practical experience in the family business, he pursued both theoretical and empirical confirmation of what he had learned. Certainly aware of the contemporary scientific work of Luke Howard and Thomas Forster, he treated the heath as a laboratory for his own experiments, painting between October 1820 and October 1822 over one hundred studies in which the sky is the chief feature. Many are annotated with the date and time, wind speed and direction, the preceding weather conditions and those that followed. 'His accurate studies match almost perfectly the contemporary weather records'; despite the challenge of rapid, open-air oil sketching, 'he was able to capture those momentary glimpses of shape, process, colour and meteorological truth' (Thornes, 200). 
Constable informed Fisher in October 1821 that he had 'done a good deal of skying', writing at great length about his attempts to conquer 'that most arduous' difficulty faced by a landscape painter: 'if the Sky is 'obtrusive' -- (as mine are) it is bad, but if they are 'evaded' (as mine are not) it is worse... It will be difficult to name a class of Landscape, in which the sky is not the ''key note'', the 'standard of 'Scale'', and chief ''Organ of sentiment''... The sky is the ''source of light'' in nature -- and governs every thing.('Correspondence', 6.76-7; see also Thornes, 278-82, for Fleming-Williams's sensitive decipherment of this exceptionally telling letter to savour the orthographic and punctuation complexities typical of Constable's prose.)' The conjunction of art and science in his landscapes is perhaps most fully revealed in the effect Constable's 'skying' had on his studio work at this time. What he learned at Hampstead enabled him to unite the sky and land to an unprecedented degree and illustrates a maxim he later expressed in one of his lectures: ''We see nothing till we truly understand it'' ('Discourses', 64). 
Although Hampstead provided an occasional second home where Maria could recuperate, the birth of their third child in 1821 and the imminent arrival of another the following summer necessitated a larger London house for the family, prompting a move in June 1822 from Keppel Street to 35 Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square. The residence (now demolished) of the recently deceased Joseph Farington, it was a house Constable knew well and would remain his London home until his own death in 1837. Although it was preferable in many ways, Constable regretted leaving the house where he had painted four of his important 'six-footers': 'The 5 happiest & most interesting years of my life', he told Fisher, 'were passed in Keppel St. I got my children and my fame in that house, neither of which would I exchange with any other man' ('Correspondence', 6.99). 
Charlotte Street, though more agreeable in general, did little to restore Maria's health. Advised to 'try the sea' in 1824, Constable took lodgings for the family in Brighton, the first of several extended stays there. Travelling down from London to be with them whenever he could, Constable loosed his creative energy on the sea shore with its bustling activity and windswept skies. Drawings and oil sketches, frequently annotated with temporal and meteorological details, record Constable's fascination with his new surroundings ('Brighton Beach, with Colliers', V&A). Not having had such sustained access to the coast since his honeymoon trip to Dorset in 1816, he was struck by the magnificence of the sea, though its 'everlasting voice', he told Fisher, was drowned by the din of the beach which was like 'Piccadilly by the sea-side' ('Correspondence', 6.171). Undeterred, however, he drew and painted what passed before him in all its variety: the people, the boats, and the evanescent effects of sky and waves. In typical fashion, the stock of images produced here resurfaced in small studio works which were then used by Constable to construct the large-scale 'Chain Pier, Brighton' (Tate collection), shown at the 1827 academy exhibition. Some reviewers, surprised by a 'six-footer' devoted to a seaside resort rather than an inland canal, none the less praised Constable for its adherence to nature and freshness of colour. 'The Times' thought it one of his best works and declared him 'unquestionably the first landscape painter of the day' (11 May 1827). The 'Morning Post', however, found its colouring defective and thought it looked as if there were ''streaks of ink' dashed across it' (20 June 1827). 
By the mid-1820s Constable's reputation in England was already marked by this troubling contradiction. Credited with originality, he was praised for not painting in the 'manner' of any other artist. Yet his own 'mannerisms' -- loose handling, bold impasto, and a certain 'spottiness' that would come to be known as 'Constable's snow' or whitewash -- were a cause of concern to reviewers, academicians, and potential patrons. What was perceived as his 'naturalism' was hailed as his greatest strength, enabling him to capture the peculiarities of English landscape; but paradoxically his persistent concentration on the rural was thought to be repetitive, preventing his mastery of the more imaginative or 'poetic' aspects of the landscape tradition. 
While the English public dithered over Constable's strengths and weaknesses, the more radical factions of the French art world, in a flurry of enthusiastic support, revelled in his freshness and apparent rejection of staid landscape conventions. The first Frenchman to take notice was Charles Nodier who, having seen the third 'six-footer', 'Landscape: Noon' ('The Hay Wain'), at the 1821 academy exhibition, published a rhapsodic report in his 'Promenade de Dieppe aux montagnes d'Ecosse' (1821; Eng. trans., 1822, 49). Equally impressed, Amedee Pichot and Theodore Gericault also sent word back to France that year. As news of their keen interest spread, it sparked the curiosity of two Parisian dealers, John Arrowsmith and Claude Schroth, who were responsible for a remarkable interlude in Constable's career. Arrowsmith, having seen 'The Hay Wain' at the 1822 British Institution exhibition, purchased it in 1824 with a small Yarmouth scene and the fourth 'six-footer', 'View on the Stour near Dedham' (1822; Huntington Gallery, San Marino, California). Both he and Schroth visited Constable's studio and commissioned several other paintings, and Arrowsmith then arranged for the two large canvases plus a small Hampstead view to be shown at the 1824 Paris Salon. Although conservative French critics were shocked by Constable's unorthodox handling and colour, the response was otherwise very positive and he was awarded a gold medal by Charles X at the close of the exhibition. Eugene Delacroix and Paul Huet, both directly influenced by Constable, credited him accordingly; and as his fame spread, he heard reports that his paintings had become something of a 'cause celebre'. Artists, he told Fisher in December 1824, showed: 'much desire to purchase them & deposit them in a place in which they can have access to them... they have made a decided stir, and have set all the students in landscape thinking -- they say on going to begin a landscape, Oh! this shall be -- 'a la' 'Constable'!!! ('Correspondence', 6.185-6)' A year later Constable reported to Fisher that Arrowsmith had 'a room in his house called Mr. Constable's room... He says my landscapes have made an epoch there' (ibid., 6. 209). 
Unfortunately, events conspired to halt the flow of Constable's paintings to the continent. Offended one afternoon by Arrowsmith's impertinence, the artist severed relations in a fit of pique (instantly regretting the loss of income). Although both dealers ceased trading within a few years anyway, Constable continued to hear reports of his influence abroad. Having sent two paintings to an exhibition in Lille, he was notified in 1826 that he had been awarded another gold medal; and in 1827 he sent 'The Cornfield' (1826; National Gallery) to the Paris Salon. That same year, Arrowsmith's 'View on the Stour near Dedham' was shown in Douai; in 1833 Constable exhibited a version of 'A Barge Passing a Lock' in Brussels and in 1834 he was invited to exhibit again in Lille. In 1835 Thomas Uwins reported that there was 'no English painter's name known so well' in France as Constable's ('Correspondence', 5.179). There is still much to be discovered about Constable's impact on nineteenth-century French art. Historians, responding to Delacroix's enthusiastic comments in his journals, may have on occasion overestimated Constable's influence on subsequent developments in French landscape painting; but that he generated during his own lifetime a greater frisson among the artists in France than those in England, that he showed them effects of light and atmosphere they had never yet seen, is incontrovertible. 
An associate of the academy since 1819, Constable sought full membership on several occasions, and failed. He had, none the less, made substantial progress in his profession; and, if there were few people who understood precisely what he was trying to achieve, there were several who spoke of his 'genius' and originality. Sales were increasing; unfortunately so were his expenses. A fifth child had been born in 1825, a sixth in 1826. Maria's consumption, compounded by so many pregnancies, was worsening; and in 1827, with Maria pregnant yet again, Constable transferred the family permanently to Hampstead where he leased 6 Well Walk, keeping only his studio and a few rooms in Charlotte Street for his own use. 'Our little drawing room commands a view unequalled in Europe', he told Fisher, pleading in the same letter for a loan of $100 ('Correspondence', 6.231). His financial worries were alleviated in 1828, however, by an inheritance of $20,000 from Maria's father, but she had little time to enjoy it. She died on 23 November, leaving Constable with seven children under the age of eleven. 'The face of the World is totally changed to me', he told his brother ('Further Documents and Correspondence', 81). Three months later, aged fifty-two, he was finally elected a full member of the academy. 'It has been delayed until I am solitary, and cannot impart it' (Leslie, 1845, 186). 
Throughout this decade Constable had confined his exhibited studio works to those places he knew best, but he was becoming less tied to the topographical accuracy of the previous decade and intensifying the expressive robustness of his handling, particularly in his use of the palette knife to create surface texture. In 'The Leaping Horse' (1825; RA) Constable had come close to 'an abstracted art, and part of the brilliance of his effect is in the tension created through his efforts to force this into a figurative one' (Rosenthal, 164-6). This tension is particularly evident in 'Hadleigh Castle' (Yale Center for British Art, New Haven), exhibited at the 1829 academy within months of Maria's death. Simultaneously expressive and descriptive, Constable's brushwork combines with the palette knife to create an ode to melancholy and ruin. Reviewers, stunned by its power, were none the less perplexed by its surface texture which was likened to chopped hay and whitewash. Abuse of a personal nature began this year when the critic Edward Dubois credited Constable's academy membership to his recent acquisition of wealth. His attacks on Constable's merit and integrity continued in the following decade; and he, with several other reviewers, intensified their light-hearted (and occasionally mean-spirited) ridicule of Constable's increasingly rough and broken handling (Ivy, 'Constable and the Critics', 14-56). 
Constable, unlike many contemporary landscape painters, had very little contact with the print publishing industry or the burgeoning illustrated-book trade; and when he decided shortly after Maria's death to have several of his paintings and sketches engraved, he retained absolute control over the entire publishing venture. Choosing mezzotint as the process most suited to translate his bold handling and to convey his thoughts about the importance of chiaroscuro in landscape art, he engaged David Lucas to engrave 'Various Subjects of Landscape, Characteristic of English Scenery' (generally known as 'English Landscape'). Initially published between 1830 and 1832 in five separate parts and reissued in 1833 with several pages of letterpress text, it contained twenty-two mezzotints, all of which progressed from first proof to published state amid much dithering and petulance on Constable's part and infinite patience on Lucas's. Several more plates were planned as an appendix, six of which were issued just after Constable's death. Throughout their collaboration, which is chronicled in a remarkable series of letters (Shirley, 16-151, and 'Correspondence', 4.314-463), Constable interfered constantly, never actually working on the steel himself but doing everything he could to shape the gradually emerging black and white images as they developed from proof to proof. The autobiographical visual imagery, particularly in the 'Frontispiece' (his birthplace) and the 'Vignette' (Hampstead Heath), represents a genre of self-referential landscape that might be called 'egotistical topography'; coupled with the plates, the letterpress in 'English Landscape' (his 'book' as he called it) virtually serves as Constable's apologia and manifesto. As he explained to Leslie, 'many can read print & cannot read mezzotint' ('Correspondence', 3.108). Lucas also engraved six large plates after Constable, but only 'Hadleigh Castle' and 'Salisbury Cathedral from the Meadows' were fully collaborative, though not published until after his death. 
Concern for his children, grief for the loss of his wife, bouts of ill health caused by rheumatism and anxiety about the perceived threats to both state and church (as someone so politically conservative and anti-reform as Constable would have viewed the impending changes) plagued the last years of his life. Much of his time was taken up with duties at the academy (serving on the council and exhibition hanging committees and as visitor in the life academy) and as a director of the Artists' General Benevolent Institution with which he had been actively involved since 1818. Between 1833 and 1836 he delivered several lectures on the history of landscape painting at the Literary and Scientific Society of Hampstead, the Worcester Literary and Scientific Institution, and the Royal Institution in London, the last drawing eminent scientists and literary figures including Faraday and Wordsworth. In 1836 he was elected a member of both the Royal Institution and the Graphic Society. His outdoor work was severely limited during the 1830s, but he sketched or drew when the opportunity arose: at Hampstead, Worcester, Petworth (where he had been invited by Lord Egremont), Folkestone (where his two eldest sons were in school), and Arundel on the Sussex coast. His large exhibited works did not sell, but he had lately cultivated a reputation as someone reluctant to part with his paintings, preferring to retain them for his studio gallery and as future property for his children. Critics, bothered and bewildered by his increasingly unorthodox, rough, and 'frittered' handling, were none the less bewitched by his effects. Apparently unconvinced that the handling was necessary for the effects, they assumed that underneath late paintings like 'Salisbury Cathedral from the Meadows' (1831; National Gallery), 'The Opening of Waterloo Bridge' (1832; Tate collection), and 'The Valley Farm' (1835; Tate collection) there lurked a 'real' naturalism wilfully spoiled by Constable's final layer of scumbling and highly textured impasto. 
Seriously depressed by the deaths in 1832 of Fisher and John Dunthorne junior, who had served as his studio assistant for several years, Constable still derived great pleasure from his children and his art, although his correspondence reveals an underlying disquietude. On the evening of 31 March 1837, after returning to Charlotte Street from a charitable errand, he became ill, suffering from giddiness and sickness during the night. He died in the early hours of 1 April; despite a post-mortem the cause of death was not determined. His death mask preserves the strong features of a man known in his youth as 'the handsome miller'. Constable was buried with his wife in the churchyard of St John's, Hampstead, and left an estate valued at $25,000 to his seven children, all of whom were still minors. In the absence of a will, Constable's elder brother Golding and a cousin by marriage, Lancelot Archer-Burton, were with the consent of the family elected to administer the estate and act as guardians for the children, one of whom (Charles Golding) had gone to sea in 1835 at the age of fourteen and at the time of his father's death was on an East Indiaman bound for Bombay. When Constable's eldest son, John Charles, came of age in December 1838, he assumed responsibility for the estate and at his early death in 1841 his eldest sister, Maria Louisa, took his place. Several of Constable's children possessed artistic ability, particularly the youngest, Lionel Bicknell, whose works were for many years misattributed to his father. Subsequent generations descending from Charles Golding, Constable's only child to have children of his own, have produced both amateur and professional artists. 
Constable's children may have inherited their grandfather's wealth, but more important for the future of their father's reputation, they inherited his life's work. During his career he sold relatively little of what he produced, and his house was filled with not only the finished paintings, but all the preparatory sketches and drawings and the usual studio detritus surrounding an extremely active artistic life of almost forty years. An auction in 1838 dispersed some of the paintings, but the vast majority stayed with the family. Fleming-Williams and Parris's exhaustive study 'The Discovery of Constable' exposes the copies, forgeries, and misattributions that have complicated Constable studies and traces the crucial sales, exhibitions, and bequests to the national collections that account for the growing public consciousness of his art up to the 1930s. Throughout that period he was either praised or denigrated because of his painting style, valued or vilified according to prevailing tastes. Ruskin compared him unfavourably with Turner; Delacroix declared him the 'father' of modern French landscape. Leslie's 'Memoirs of the Life of John Constable', first published in 1843 in a limited edition (and illustrated with impressions from 'English Landscape'), was republished in a cheaper, smaller format in 1845 and has since been reissued numerous times. Drawn primarily from the artist's letters, Leslie's hagiographic biography established a private and professional persona for Constable with which subsequent biographers and historians have had to contend. Leslie virtually created a Constable whose development was a personal journey of self-discovery and whose art was purely and simply 'natural' in its devotion to an unmediated experience of English landscape. At the turn of the twentieth century, historians shifted their interest to Constable's sketches and studies, but continued to view him as an 'innocent eye', a Wordsworth of landscape painting; but just as literary criticism increasingly unearthed layers of meaning in Wordsworth's poetry, so art historians began a reassessment of Constable's art, placing it within a wider cultural context. By the middle of the twentieth century it became obvious that landscape art (even when 'unpeopled') signifies more than the land depicted. Literary, geographical, agricultural, scientific, political, religious, and psychosocial perspectives are all now regularly applied to the 'reading' of Constable's 'oeuvre', aided by the eight volumes of correspondence and related documents published between 1962 and 1975 by the Suffolk Records Society. Inspired by John Barrell's 1980 seminal study, 'The Dark Side of the Landscape', many Constable scholars have sought to reinterpret the 'naturalism' of his art, rejecting the idea that any landscape painter in eighteenth- or nineteenth-century Britain could have approached a rural setting in a pure, simple, or unmediated manner. Their conclusions have not lessened the perceived importance of Constable to the development of landscape painting, nor the public's fondness for his art; but they have shown that an art created for the public arena and for posterity, as Constable's was, inevitably signifies something beyond the artist's private journey toward self-discovery, toward that 'natural painture' he had sought since 1802. 
Although historiographical interpretations of Constable have changed enormously since his death, the works themselves have for the most part suffered only those changes attributable to 'the mellowing hand of Time', incompetent and misguided restoration, or later overpainting. He frequently reworked his paintings (even after their sale on occasion) and, especially in the early years, reused canvases; but, as Sarah Cove's research has shown (Cove, 493-516), Constable was acutely knowledgeable about his materials, their limitations and potential. He was experimental in his handling, but not careless in his working methods nor unaware of the dangers of ignoring traditional wisdom. His library contained theoretical treatises and practical manuals, and his friendship with the colourman George Field ensured that he kept up with the latest developments in materials and techniques. Consequently, his works are in remarkably good condition and have consistently increased in value. When they come onto the market, paintings that sold for hundreds of pounds or less during his lifetime now sell for millions, drawings for tens of thousands. Constable only occasionally signed his finished works; sketches and drawings are frequently inscribed with notes, though not necessarily with his signature or initials. 
The complete range of Constable's work can be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum, which received an incomparable and sensitively selected bequest in 1888 from his last surviving child, Isobel Constable. She had also arranged gifts to supplement the holdings of the National Gallery, the Royal Academy, and the British Museum (department of prints and drawings), which already owned a choice selection of the mezzotints. Prime examples of his work are to be found in many other institutions including: the Tate collection; the National Gallery, Washington; the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven; the Frick Collection, New York; the Huntington Gallery, San Marino, California; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Philadelphia Museum of Art. In addition to paintings, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, the Metropolitan Museum, New York, the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, all have extensive collections of the mezzotints, particularly the last which owns much of what remained in Lucas's studio, the prints as well as the correspondence from Constable. Many works are still in private collections, both in Britain and abroad. 
In 1923 the London county council marked Constable's house in Well Walk (now numbered 40) with a blue plaque. His birthplace was demolished long ago, but 'Constable country', particularly East Bergholt, Flatford, and Dedham, has been part of the heritage industry since at least the 1890s when Thomas Cook Ltd first arranged tours there. 


@@@@@


doc= 6108


Constable, Sir Marmaduke (1456/7?-1518), soldier and administrator, was the son of Sir Robert Constable (1423-1488) of Flamborough, Yorkshire ['see under 'Constable family (per. c.1300-1488)], and Agnes, daughter of Sir Roger Wentworth of North Elmsall, Yorkshire, and Margery, dowager Lady Ros. Marmaduke is described as aged thirty-one and more at his father's death in May 1488, which would give a birth date of 1456 or 1457. This fits the circumstances of his career better than the claim in his epitaph in Flamborough church that he was aged seventy when he fought at Flodden (1513), which would push his birth date back by over a decade. Unlike their kinsmen of Barnby by Bossall, who were Neville associates, the Flamborough Constables followed the Percys. Sir Robert transferred readily to the service of Edward IV in 1461, but father and son were both retained by Henry Percy, fourth earl of Northumberland, after his restoration in 1470 and shared the stewardship of his lands in the East Riding. Marmaduke served under the earl in the Scottish campaigns of the early 1480s and was knighted by him beside Berwick in August 1481. According to his epitaph he had earlier gone with Edward IV into France, presumably in Northumberland's contingent. 
Constable then entered the service of Richard III. He was a knight of the body by December 1483, when he was one of the king's associates given forfeited land and office in Kent in the aftermath of Buckingham's rebellion. Constable's Kentish base was to be the Stafford honour of Tonbridge, where he was made steward in December 1483 and where the inhabitants were informed in January that the king had deputed him 'to make his abode among you' (BL, Harl. MS 4332, fol. 81). However, the king had second thoughts about where Constable would be most useful and on 28 March granted him all the major duchy of Lancaster offices in the north midlands, including the constableship of Tutbury, which became his base. Unlike his predecessor in the offices, William, Lord Hastings, Constable was explicitly forbidden to retain the local gentry and was evidently intended to act under stricter royal control than Hastings, to whom Edward had allowed great independence of action. 
It is not clear whether Constable fought at Bosworth. Perhaps, like Northumberland, he was present without fighting. He certainly escaped attainder, and was pardoned on 18 November. By May 1486, when he was granted the stewardships of Bawtry and Hotham, Yorkshire, he was again a knight of the body. He succeeded his father in May 1488, having formerly held Holme on Spalding moor, Yorkshire, and Somerby, Lincolnshire, which his father had settled on him. In November 1488 he became sheriff of Yorkshire and thus played a major role in dealing with the unrest of 1489 in which the earl of Northumberland was killed. In 1492 he accompanied the king to France and was involved in the ensuing negotiations which led to the treaty of Etaples. It seems that after Northumberland's death Constable became associated with Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, who was taking an increasing role in northern affairs. In 1509 Surrey nominated him as a knight of the Garter, although he was not elected. In 1513 Constable served under Howard at Flodden, where he commanded the left wing; he received a letter of thanks from the king. 
Constable died on 20 November 1518. His will, made the previous May, requested that he be buried as soon as his body was cold, 'without calling of friends or any other solemnity' (Raine, 91). He had married twice. With his first wife, Margery, daughter of William, Lord Fitzhugh, Constable had no children. With his second wife, Joyce, the daughter of Humphrey Stafford of Grafton, he had four sons (Robert, who succeeded him, Marmaduke, William, and John) and two daughters. His second son, 


@@@@@


doc= 6109


Sir Marmaduke Constable (c.1480-1545), soldier, married Barbara, daughter of Sir John Sotehill of Everingham, by November 1502, the year in which the Sotehill lands were divided between her and her sister Mary, the wife of John Normanville, after the death of their imbecile brother, George. Constable fought under his father at Flodden and was knighted on the battlefield. He fought in several later Scottish campaigns, accompanied Henry VIII to the Field of Cloth of Gold and was a knight of the body by 1533. Unlike his elder brother Robert he did not support the Pilgrimage of Grace and his share of the spoils of the dissolution was Drax Priory, founded by his wife's ancestors. He died on 14 September 1545; his wife had died on 4 October 1540. 


@@@@@


doc= 6110


Constable, Sir Robert (1478?-1537), rebel, of Flamborough, in the East Riding of Yorkshire, was probably born in 1478, the eldest of four sons and two daughters of Sir Marmaduke Constable (1456/7?-1518), soldier and administrator, and his wife, Joyce, the daughter of Sir Humphrey Stafford of Grafton, Cheshire. Sir Marmaduke Constable the younger ['see under 'Constable, Sir Marmaduke (1456/?-1518)] was his brother. By his marriage to Jane, daughter of Sir William Ingleby of Ripley, Yorkshire, Constable had three sons and four (or possibly five) daughters. 
Little is known of Constable's early life and education. From his early career, however, it seems likely that he was trained as a soldier and retained a preference for the traditional militaristic pursuits of his class. He was in the royal army which defeated the Cornish rebels at Blackheath and was knighted on the battlefield on 17 June 1497. In 1511 he took part in the short-lived military expedition against the Moors led by Thomas Darcy, Baron Darcy, undertaken at the request of Ferdinand of Spain. Two years later he participated in the battle of Flodden, alongside his father, brothers, and other kinsmen. Constable forged increasingly close connections with the court at this time, where, by 1517, he had been appointed knight of the body. 
Upon the death of his father in 1518, Constable succeeded to the considerable estates centred on the principal family seat of Flamborough. Thereafter he continued to participate in the administration of his locality. He was JP and commissioner of array for the East Riding from the early 1500s until the outbreak of the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536. In the early 1530s he was also sworn of the king's council of the north, which had been newly reconstituted following the downfall of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, archbishop of York. His influence in the region was augmented by his appointment to a number of stewardships, including those of the crown lordships of Sheriff Hutton (which he was required to relinquish in 1532) and Hotham and the Percy lordships of Leconfield and Pocklington, all in Yorkshire. He was also steward of the Yorkshire liberty of Howden for Cuthbert Tunstall, bishop of Durham. 
By nature Constable was volatile and noted for his 'dangerous disposition' (Dodds and Dodds, 1.46). In the early 1520s his feuds were among those which, within Yorkshire, created much dissension and he was called to account for his behaviour before Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, Henry VIII's lieutenant in the north. In 1525 he obtained a royal pardon for his 'riotous' abduction of a royal ward ('LP Henry VIII', 4/1, no. 1115). In the early 1530s, as a result of his involvement in further disputes, he made several appearances before the court of Star Chamber. In 1534 Constable's unseemly behaviour led to calls for his dismissal from the commission of the peace. 
The precise motivation behind Constable's rebellious participation in the Pilgrimage of Grace is not clear. His family had long been tenants and clients of the earls of Northumberland, who had extensive landed interests in the East Riding and Constable was a member of the council of Henry Percy, sixth earl of Northumberland. Percy affinities undoubtedly played a part in the rebellion and this, to some extent, may have accounted for Constable's stance. Other factors, such as his increasing dissatisfaction with the aims of royal government, may also have played a part. In religious matters, too, he, along with his old friends Darcy and John Hussey, Baron Hussey, maintained a traditional stance. In 1534 all three men had agreed upon their aversion towards heresy and their determination to die as 'Christian men'. 
Whatever his ultimate motivation -- and despite his initial reluctance and claims that he was coerced -- Constable was quickly drawn into the pilgrimage and soon became one of its leaders. He adopted, in the first instance, a resolutely rebellious stance but subsequently went on to accept a royal pardon under the terms of the agreement reached at Doncaster in early December 1536. During Sir Francis Bigod's revolt in January 1537, Constable strove to stay the commons and maintain order, in accordance with the December agreement. Nevertheless, the resurgence of the rebellion provided the crown with the opportunity to take reprisals against the rebel leaders. Constable, together with other leading pilgrims, was summoned to London where he was imprisoned in the Tower of London and subsequently indicted, not for his activities in the main phase of the rebellion, but for offences allegedly committed after his pardon. Following his trial and condemnation, Constable was taken to Hull for execution. On 6 July 1537, he was taken to the town's Beverley Gate and there hanged in chains. 


@@@@@


doc= 6111


Thomas Constable (1812-1881), printer, was born in Edinburgh on 29 June 1812. He learned the trade of printer with C. Richards of St Martin's Lane in London, and took over the Willison printing business owned by his brother David in 1833. He moved the business from Craig's Close, off the High Street in Edinburgh, to 11 Thistle Street in the New Town, and traded under his own name, Thomas Constable. By 1834 he had won contracts from Robert Cadell and Adam and Charles Black, the present and the future publishers of Scott's works. In 1835 he had four presses; by 1852 he had sixteen, as well as a cylinder and three platen machines. In 1835 he had a Greek fount; by 1852 he had added Arabic, Hebrew, Coptic, Sanskrit, German, and music. 


@@@@@


doc= 6112


Clifford, Sir Thomas Hugh, first baronet (1762-1823), topographer and botanist, was born on 4 December 1762 in London, the eldest son of Thomas Clifford (1732-1787) (fourth son of Hugh, third Baron Clifford of Chudleigh) and Barbara Aston (died 1786), youngest daughter and coheir of James, fifth Lord Aston of Forfar. He belonged to a well-established Roman Catholic family with strong French connections and was educated in the academy opened at Liege by the English ex-Jesuits after their expulsion from Bruges. He continued his studies at the college of Navarre, in Paris, after which he travelled on foot over Switzerland. After the death of his mother he settled at Tixall in Staffordshire, the estate of the Astons, which he inherited from her. On 17 June 1791 he married Mary Macdonald (died 1825), second daughter of John Chichester of Arlington, Devonshire. They had one son, Sir Thomas Aston Clifford, second baronet. 
During periods of residence at Bath, Clifford gave a cordial welcome to the loyalist exiles from France, and when Louis XVIII visited that city in 1813, a few months before the restoration of the French monarchy, he twice invited him to his table. By patent dated 22 May 1815 Clifford was created a baronet at the special request of Louis XVIII. In 1821 he succeeded to the estates of Francis Constable of Burton Constable, Yorkshire and Wycliffe Hall, Oxfordshire and took the name of Constable only. With his brother Arthur Clifford he published 'A Topographical and Historical Description of the Parish of Tixall' (1817), to which he appended his 'Flora Tixalliana' (reissued separately in the following year). Some of his devotional reflections were published privately, at his own expense, in 1814. His works were published under the surname Clifford. He appears to have resided at Paris towards the end of his life, and his 'Description of Tixall' was issued there. A zealous Roman Catholic, he is said to have been a follower of the Abbe Carron (1760-1821), an influential French cleric active in London between 1799 and 1814. He died at Ghent on 25 February 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 6113


Constable, Sir William, baronet (bap. 1590, d. 1655), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was baptized on 4 March 1590, the only son of Sir Robert Constable (died 1600) of Flamborough and Holme, Yorkshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Hussey of Duffield in the same county. William belonged to an ancient Yorkshire family of several branches, and is often confused with an elder kinsman and namesake who was involved in Essex's plot of 1601. On 15 February 1608 he married Dorothy ('bap'. 1590, died 1656), the daughter of Sir Thomas Fairfax of Denton (later first Baron Fairfax of Cameron), but their union produced no surviving children. He was created a baronet on 29 June 1611. 
Constable rose to prominence in the 1620s when he emerged as one of Yorkshire's leading figures in the 'country' interest. He was an ally of Sir Thomas Wentworth (the future earl of Strafford) in his struggle with Sir John Savile, and in 1626 he successfully contested the county election against the Saviles after Wentworth had been pricked as sheriff. The following year he was summoned before the privy council and imprisoned as a loan refuser. In 1628 he was returned for Scarborough with the backing of his friend Edmund Sheffield, Lord Mulgrave. He and another friend, Sir Matthew Boynton, were made deputy lieutenants for the East Riding by Wentworth in 1629 after Sir John Hotham had recommended them as 'the ablest and best affected to do his Majesty service in respect of their undoubted affection in religion' (Hotham to Wentworth, 7 Jan 1629, Sheffield Central Library, Wentworth Woodhouse Muniments, Strafford Papers., 12(50)). Constable was summoned before the privy council again in 1630 for refusing to compound for distraint of knighthood. 
Although a man of godly convictions, Constable led a spendthrift existence, and was forced to sell most of his estate -- worth over $1000 a year -- to cover his debts. He parted with the manor of Holme in 1634 (to Sir Marmaduke Langdale for $6500) and the manor of Flamborough two years later. It was probably his ailing fortunes as much as his dislike of Laudian 'new ceremonies' that made him consider emigrating to America during Charles I's personal rule. In 1635 he and Boynton made secret preparations to settle in Connecticut, where Viscount Saye and Sele and Lord Brooke had obtained a grant of land, but the difficulties involved forced them to abandon the venture. In April 1637 Constable obtained a pass for himself and his wife to travel on the continent, and in June they crossed over to the Netherlands where they were joined by Boynton and his family. By 1640 they were leading members of the gathered church established at Arnhem by Philip Nye and Thomas Goodwin. 
Constable had returned to England by March 1641, and with the support of his brother-in-law, Ferdinando Fairfax, second Lord Fairfax, stood for election at Knaresborough in November, only to lose on a poll to one of the townsmen, William Dearlove. Constable petitioned the Commons against the result, and as the royalist interest (with which Dearlove was associated) dwindled at Westminster during 1642 so Constable's stock improved, until on 17 August his election was declared good. Despite his debts he raised a regiment of parliamentarian foot in 1642, which he commanded with distinction at Edgehill. In July 1643 he was given command of the forces of the East Riding under Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, and during the spring of 1644 he won a series of engagements against the royalists in Yorkshire. On 23 March 1645 the Commons acknowledged his 'faithful Services' as well as his 'great Losses' with a grant of $1000 ('JHC', 4, 1644-6, 88). Deprived of his command by the self-denying ordinance, he became a mainstay of the northern association committee, and emerged as a minor figure in the Independent interest at Westminster. After Sir Thomas Fairfax (later third baron) wrote to the speaker in February 1647 commending his uncle's services to parliament, the Commons awarded Constable $1984 for his arrears. He was among those MPs who fled to the army in August, and his loyalty to the Independents' cause was further rewarded in December, when he was given command of John Lambert's regiment of foot. The following month he was commissioned to assist Colonel Robert Hammond in guarding the king at Carisbrooke. 
Constable was made governor of Gloucester in 1648, his regiment having been sent to the town to quell unrest. During November and December he played a leading role in the council of officers as it moved towards confrontation with parliament. He supported the army's remonstrance to the Commons of 20 November, and was a member of various committees for deciding army policy, including the joint committee of officers, Levellers, and radical MPs for drawing up the 'Agreement of the People'. He may also have been one of the subcommittee to organize Pride's Purge. Appointed to the commission for trying the king, he attended the trial proceedings regularly and was a signatory to the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. In February 1649 he was elected to the first council of state, and he was subsequently a member of the second and fourth councils, serving twice as president of the latter. He was one of the more active councillors, attending over 400 meetings and sitting on numerous conciliar committees, mostly concerning military affairs. In May 1650 the Rump passed a bill for transferring Holme from the sequestered Sir Marmaduke Langdale back to Constable. 
Constable was largely inactive in national politics after the dissolution of the Rump, though he was warmly recommended by the Gloucestershire Independent churches during canvassing for membership of the nominated assembly. He died on 15 June 1655, and despite requesting in his will to be buried 'without ostentation' ('Abstracts of Yorkshire Wills in the Time of the Commonwealth', ed. W. J. Clay, Yorkshire Archaeological Society record ser. 9, 1890, 82), was given an elaborate state funeral and interred in Westminster Abbey on 21 June. At the Restoration his estate was confiscated and his remains were dug up and thrown into a common pit. 


@@@@@


doc= 6114


Constantine I (d. 876), king in Scotland, was the son of Kenneth I (d. 858). It has been suggested that his mother may have belonged to the Pictish royal matriline (perhaps a daughter of Uurad, king of Picts from 839 to 842), but this is incapable of proof. He was probably Kenneth I's eldest surviving son, and had at least one brother, King Aed (died 878), and two sisters, one of whom married Rhun, son of Arthgal, king of Dumbarton, and had a son, Eochaid, who challenged for the kingship in the confused period following Constantine I's death. 
Constantine succeeded his uncle Donald I ['see under 'Kenneth I] to the kingship on the latter's death on 13 April 862. During his reign his kingdom's heartland in east-central Scotland suffered from intense Scandinavian pressure. In 866 Olaf, the Norwegian king of Dublin, 'wasted Pictland' and wintered there. In 870-71 Olaf returned to Britain and took 'a very great spoil of people', including Picts, as captives. Olaf had taken Dumbarton in 870, and this may have allowed Constantine to gain the upper hand over the kings there: in 872 he arranged for the assassination of Arthgal, king of Dumbarton. In 875 Constantine was attacked by Halfdan, the Danish king of York, and suffered a crushing defeat at Dollar, in what is now Clackmannanshire. His forces were driven back to the highlands in Atholl and the east-central lowlands were occupied by the invaders for a year. And in the following year Constantine was killed by the Danes at the battle known as 'inber dub fata', 'long dark river-mouth' (unidentified). He was succeeded by his brother Aed (perhaps after an interregnum of a year) and is said to have been buried on Iona. He had a son, Donald II (d. 900) ['see under 'Constantine II], whose mother is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 6115


Constantine II (d. 952), king in Scotland, was the son of King Aed (died 878). It has been suggested that a King Dyfnwal of Strathclyde was his brother, but this is simply a misreading of an Irish source's obit of Domnall mac Aeda, king of the northern Ui Neill. Constantine succeeded as king to his cousin 
The long reign of Constantine II was probably crucial for the new kingdom's survival, allowing the new political order to be consolidated. It is now that mormaers (literally 'chief steward', the ruler of a province) are first heard of, and the first reference is found to one of a number of post-Pictish regional names associated with earls. It is possible, moreover, that Constantine was responsible for establishing St Andrews as the chief bishopric of his kingdom. If this is so, and the creation of earls and earldoms was in some sense his initiative, then it could be claimed not only that Constantine was the first king to be inaugurated as 'king of Scotland', but that he laid the foundations of the kingdom's political and ecclesiastical structure for the next five centuries. 
Constantine's reign also represented a turning point in the kingdom's fortunes in its struggle for survival against Danish incursions. In 903 the grandsons of Ivarr plundered Dunkeld and 'all Scotland', but in 904 Constantine met them in battle at an unknown location in Strathearn, in modern Perthshire, and comprehensively defeated them; there are no more recorded Scandinavian invasions for half a century. In 905-6 he made an agreement at Scone with Bishop Cellach, probably the first chief bishop of 'Scotland', which may represent Constantine's backing for the church in an attempt to restore social order -- of which the creation of earldoms may have formed a part -- in the wake of more than sixty years of repeated invasion and worsening political instability. In the 910s Constantine went on the offensive and backed the Bernicians against Rognvald, Danish king of York, culminating in a titanic but indecisive battle in 918 (probably) on the River Tyne in Lothian. 
The rise of the kings of Wessex changed the balance of power in Britain, however. In 920 along with other northern kings Constantine made a peace with Edward of Wessex, but he allied himself with the kings of Norse Dublin, marrying his daughter to King Guthfrith's son Olaf. After Edward of Wessex died, Constantine made his peace with Edward's successor, AEthelstan, in 927; and AEthelstan may have stood as godfather for one of Constantine's sons, possibly Indulf (d. 962). In 934, however, he renewed his alliance with Dublin against AEthelstan, causing AEthelstan to make a fruitless invasion in retaliation. When Olaf, Constantine's son-in-law, became king of Dublin, he joined forces with Constantine and the king of Dumbarton and invaded England in 937, only to suffer a crushing defeat at the battle of 'Brunanburh'. This may have weakened Constantine's hold on the kingship itself, for some time between 940 and 945 he relinquished it to his cousin, Malcolm I, the son of Donald II, and 'in his old age, being decrepit', retired to St Andrews, where he may have become abbot of the Celi De. He died at St Andrews in 952 and was buried there. In addition to his son Indulf and his daughter who married Olaf Guthfrithson, Constantine had at least one other son who, unnamed, died at 'Brunanburh'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6116


Culen (d. 971), king in Scotland, was the son of King Indulf (d. 962). He had two brothers: Eochaid (died 971) and Olaf (died 977). Culen became king on the death of Dubh in 966 at the hands of the men of Moray. He had opposed King Dubh the year before, gaining support from Donnchad, abbot of Dunkeld, and Dub Donn, earl of Atholl, who were both killed when Culen was defeated by Dubh at the battle of Duncrub, in modern Perthshire (965). He was killed in 971, with his brother Eochaid, by Rhydderch, son of King Donald of Strathclyde, allegedly on account of some wrong he had done to Rhydderch's daughter. The battle in which he was killed may have taken place in Lothian and he is said to have been buried on Iona. He was succeeded by Kenneth II who belonged to the branch of the royal dynasty descended from Constantine I. 
Culen had one son, Constantine III (d. 997), king in Scotland, who was called 'the Bald' by late medieval chroniclers and who reigned for one year and six months (995-7) following the assassination of Kenneth II by Finguala (Finella). He was killed at 'rath inber' 'Amon' ('the fort at the mouth of the Almond'), probably near Scone in what is now Perthshire, by Kenneth III, who, like the slayer of Culen, was a member of the alternative branch of the royal dynasty. A late (and debatable) source claims that he was buried on Iona. Constantine had no recorded offspring and was the last of the branch of the royal dynasty descended from King Aed (died 878) to hold the kingship. 


@@@@@


doc= 6117


Constantine mac Fergus (d. 820), who ousted Conall (Canaul) in 789, is styled king of Fortriu at his death. For the last nine years of his life (811-20) it seems that he held the overkingship of the Dal Riata also. He is presumed to have been a son of Aed Find's brother Fergus, who had been king of the Dal Riata from 778 to 781. Constantine was the first man, so far as is known, to hold the kingships of Pictland and Dal Riata simultaneously. There is nothing in the annals to suggest that his accession to the office in Dal Riata was other than peaceful. At this time the Dal Riata must have been living in fear of Scandinavian attacks, and perhaps welcomed a king with a secure base in the east. Constantine was credited with having built the church of Dunkeld. 
Constantine was succeeded in 820 by his brother 


@@@@@


doc= 6118


Constantine, George (b. c.1500, d. in or before 1561), evangelical reformer, was born near the Cheshire-Shropshire border and educated at a local school before going on to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1517-18. He became BCL in 1523-4. He took minor orders in 1521, and was subsequently ordained to the priesthood. He became vicar of Sedgley, Staffordshire, about 1526. It was almost certainly at Cambridge that Constantine became an enthusiast for the Reformation. In early 1527 he was in London, where he associated with the lawyer and pamphleteer Simon Fish and recruited Robert Necton to act as an agent for Tyndale's English 'New Testament'. 
In 1528 Constantine was engaged in spreading reformation ideas back in Shropshire, and later that year he was in Antwerp, having abandoned clerical dress. He was now actively being sought by the English authorities for his heterodoxy. At about this time he married, being one of the first English priests of the Reformation period to do so. As a protection against extradition he took out Antwerp citizenship, giving his profession as physician. He probably assisted William Tyndale in the publication and distribution of 'The examination of William Thorpe' early in 1530. Later in the year he returned to England. He was arrested in 1531 and personally examined and imprisoned by Lord Chancellor Sir Thomas More in More's own house in Chelsea. Under heavy pressure Constantine co-operated with More, providing the chancellor with evidence which led to the interception of one consignment of books and the arrest of Necton for a second time. However, when the book agent Richard Bayfield, whom More had also been interrogating, was executed, Constantine decided that he would be safer out of More's reach. He escaped and fled back to rejoin his wife in Antwerp on 6 December 1531. 
Constantine probably returned to England some time after More's resignation in 1532. He had custody of some of Thomas Poyntz's children when Poyntz was arrested in the Low Countries while attempting to secure the release of William Tyndale. Constantine was closely touched by the arrest and execution of Queen Anne Boleyn and those accused of adulterous relations with her: he admired Anne for her religious convictions and had links with some of those executed with her, having been in the service of Henry Norris and at school with William Brereton. He later expressed as much scepticism as was politic while Henry was still on the throne about the charges under which they died. 
Constantine had some minor role as a go-between for Cromwell and the printers in the publication of the first approved English bibles in the later 1530s. He was arrested for treason in 1539 on the evidence of John Barlow after a long journey in Barlow's company full of conversational indiscretions. Constantine wrote what he claimed was a full account of these for Cromwell. It provides his views on a range of topics including the true authorship of Henry's book on the seven sacraments, Anne Boleyn and her lovers, the two current candidates for Henry's hand from Milan and Cleves, clerical marriage, the young earl of Surrey, and the proper treatment for Henry's ulcerous leg. He was imprisoned in the Tower, but released at an unknown date. 
In the late 1540s Constantine's interests shifted to south Wales, where Bishop William Barlow of St David's made him vicar of Llawhaden and then, in 1546, appointed him his registrar. When a general visitation in six circuits was organized to implement religious reform in the following year, Constantine was a member of the circuit embracing Wales and the Welsh marches. In 1549 he became archdeacon of Carmarthen. He played a vigorous part in the enforcement of the Edwardian reformation in the diocese, for instance pulling down the high altar of St Peter's Church in Carmarthen, but became embroiled in the unedifying and highly personal conflicts which erupted between Robert Ferrar, Barlow's successor as bishop, and the cathedral chapter. Ferrar tried to deprive him of his registrarship, and eventually Constantine emerged as one of the bishop's leading opponents. His daughter had married Thomas Young, another of Ferrar's adversaries. Under Mary he adapted sufficiently at first to be able to retain his position as registrar, and in 1555 he took part in Ferrar's trial and condemnation for heresy. According to an unconfirmed report which reached John Foxe, Constantine and Young sought and obtained Ferrar's forgiveness before his execution. 
Constantine subsequently took refuge on the continent, being enrolled as a citizen of Emden on 6 May 1556. Having returned to England after the accession of Elizabeth, he became archdeacon of Brecon in 1559, and was also appointed to that year's royal visitation, on a circuit identical to that of 1547. But he seems to have played little part in its proceedings and was dead by 3 February 1561, when a successor was instituted in his archdeaconry. His son-in-law Thomas Young became Elizabeth's first archbishop of York. 


@@@@@


doc= 6119


Conway, Anne, Viscountess Conway and Killultagh (1631-1679), philosopher, was born on 14 December 1631, the posthumous and second surviving daughter of Heneage Finch (1580-1631), former speaker of the House of Commons, who predeceased her birth by a week, and of his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Cradock and widow of Richard Bennett, and was the half-sister of Heneage Finch (1621-1682) and John Finch (1626-1682). Little is known about Anne's upbringing and education. A good part of it was spent at home in the house that is now Kensington Palace. Anne's aptitude for learning must have been obvious, and her desire to study philosophy resulted in arrangements being made through her brother, John Finch, for her to receive instruction from his Cambridge tutor, the Cambridge Platonist Henry More ['see also 'Cambridge Platonists]. Since, as a woman, she was not able to attend the university, More instructed her by letter. This early tutorial relationship, which commenced in 1650, subsequently blossomed into a lifelong friendship which afforded Anne intellectual companionship unmatched for a woman of her generation. On 11 February 1651 Anne married at Kensington Edward Conway (c.1623-1683), the eldest son of the second Viscount Conway and Killultagh, who owned estates in Warwickshire and Ulster, at Portmore. Her husband's efforts in opposing the Irish uprising had helped to secure his family's fortunes in the immediate aftermath of the English civil war, and on the death of his father on 26 June 1655, he became third Viscount Conway. After the Restoration he played an active part in English and in Irish politics. The couple had only one child, a son, Heneage, who was born on 6 February 1658 but died of smallpox on 14 October 1660. 
The first part of Anne's married life was spent in London (where Lord Conway owned a house in Queen Street) and at Ragley Hall in Warwickshire (the Conway family seat). From 1661 to 1664 she visited Ireland. Chronic illness, however, took its toll, increasingly curtailing her movements. Her illness took the form of repeated bouts of chronic pain which grew more severe and more frequent as she got older. The main symptom was a headache, but her whole body was affected during these episodes, which first occurred when she was only twelve. She sought the advice of the leading medical practitioners of her time, including Sir Theodore Turquet de Mayerne, William Harvey, and Thomas Willis. An account of her symptoms is given, anonymously, by Willis in his 'De anima brutorum' (1672). In 1656 she travelled to Paris in the hope that trepanning might bring relief, but she was dissuaded from going through with the operation. In 1666 her husband persuaded the healer Valentine Greatrakes, known as the 'Irish stroker', to visit her, but he had no more success than the other physicians she consulted. The increasing severity of her illness meant that, for the last years of her life, she was confined to her home, Ragley Hall. 
Her semi-retired way of life notwithstanding, Lady Conway was able to pursue her interest in philosophy. Her husband appears to have encouraged her in her intellectual pursuits. At all events, marrying into the Conway family made her the mistress of one of the largest private libraries in England. In spite of the disabling effects of her illness, she was at the centre of a lively intellectual circle. The most significant figure in this group was Henry More, with whom she kept up a correspondence when he could not visit her in person. Through More, Lady Conway had contact with others of the Cambridge Platonists, including Ralph Cudworth and John Worthington. From 1666 to 1672, Elizabeth Foxcroft, the sister of Benjamin Whichcote, lived with her as her companion. In Ireland she enjoyed the company of Jeremy Taylor, of whom Lord Conway was chief patron, and of George Rust. 
It was Lady Conway's search for a cure for her illness that brought her into contact with Francis Mercury Van Helmont, son of the Flemish biologist and natural philosopher, who first met her in 1670 when he was visiting England on a mission on behalf of Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia. Van Helmont returned to become a member of Lady Conway's household for the last years of her life. He awakened her interest in studying Jewish cabbala, bringing her into contact with the German cabbalist scholar Christian Knorr von Rosenroth. Van Helmont also had a profound influence on her religious life. Through him she encountered Quakerism. During her last years she was visited by the Quaker leaders George Fox, Robert Barclay, George Keith, and William Penn. She used her influence to help imprisoned members of their following. She converted to Quakerism just before her death, despite opposition from Henry More and her own family. When she died on 23 February 1679, Van Helmont preserved her body in a glass coffin. Contrary to her express wish not to be given a Church of England funeral, she was buried in the family vault at Arrow church, Warwickshire, according to the Anglican rite. 
For a woman of her time, Anne Conway had unusual opportunities to pursue her interest in philosophy, but she treated it as very much a private activity and never wrote for publication. After her death a manuscript treatise was discovered among her effects. This was published anonymously in a Latin translation with the title, 'Principia philosophiae antiquissimae et recentissimae' in Amsterdam in 1690 under the auspices of Van Helmont who wrote a short preface for it. An English translation by J. C. was published, also anonymously, in London in 1692, with the title, 'The Principles of the most Ancient and Modern Philosophy'. This treatise clearly shows her acquaintance with contemporary philosophy as well as the impact of her cabbalistic studies. Her 'Principia' outlines an original metaphysical system according to which all created things are constituted of monads of spiritual substance deriving from God. She proposes a tripartite hierarchy of being where the infinite monads of created substance express the infinity of the divine creator, and where causality is mediated through an intermediate level of being that participates in both the divine and created being. Since God is essentially good, so too is his creation. Conway denies the eternity of hell, arguing for a perfective order of things. In the course of her discussion she attacks the dualism of Descartes and Henry More, and the materialism of Hobbes and Spinoza. As a theodicy and monadology, her system anticipates the philosophy of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. It is certain that Leibniz knew of the work, and indeed possessed a copy (probably the gift of their mutual friend, Van Helmont). 


@@@@@


doc= 6120


Conway, Edward, first Viscount Conway and first Viscount Killultagh (c.1564-1631), politician, was the son and heir of Sir John Conway (d. 1603), of Arrow, Warwickshire, and Ellen or Eleanor, daughter of Sir Fulke Greville (died 1560) of Beauchamp's Court, Warwickshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Willoughby. His family were substantial Warwickshire landowners by the late sixteenth century. About 1593 Conway married Dorothy (died 1612), widow of Edward Bray of Great Barrington, Gloucestershire, and daughter of Sir John Tracy of Toddington, in the same county. 
Edward pursued a military career, and was knighted by the earl of Essex at the sacking of Cadiz (1596), where he commanded a regiment of foot. Afterwards he served in the Netherlands as governor of the Brill. His time there may help account for the enthusiasm of his protestant convictions, as also the Christian name of his most famous daughter, Brilliana, baptized there in 1598 ['see 'Harley, Brilliana, Lady Harley]. His convictions were shared by his fellow officer Sir Horace Vere, who in 1607 married Dorothy Conway's sister Mary. 
In the first parliament held in the reign of James I, Conway sat as member for Penryn. When Brill was delivered up to the states of Holland (1616), he received a pension of $500 per annum. Before 30 December 1619 he married Katherine (died 1639), widow of John West, grocer and citizen of London, and daughter of Giles Hueriblock or Hambler of Ghent in the Spanish Netherlands. In 1620 he was an ambassador at Brussels and at Prague, and on 28 June 1622 he was sworn of the privy council. On 30 January 1623, under the patronage of the marquess of Buckingham, he was made secretary of state. His admission to Gray's Inn in 1624 was honorary, and there is no evidence to suggest that his lack of formal education had hindered him in his role as secretary, though his first royal master was apt to jest that his secretary of state was illiterate. Conway was returned for Evesham to the parliament which assembled on 19 February 1624. Like his cousin Fulke Greville (1554-1628) he had up until this point shown himself a staunch supporter of a 'protestant' foreign policy, and in the Commons he was a keen advocate of Buckingham's policy of war with Spain. 
After Charles I's accession continued royal favour kept him in office as secretary, and on 24 March 1625 he was created Baron Conway of Ragley in the county of Warwick; on 8 December he was appointed captain of the Isle of Wight. In the House of Lords he took a hand in co-ordinating the defence of Buckingham in the Commons in 1626. Its proceedings proved a turning point for Conway; not only did he follow Buckingham in abandoning the anti-Spanish policy, but he expressed himself in a letter to the earl of Carlisle on 5 June greatly disillusioned with parliament itself. On 15 March 1627 he was created Viscount Killultagh of Killultagh, co. Antrim, Ireland, and on 26 June Viscount Conway of Conway Castle in Caernarvonshire. In the early stages of collecting the forced loan that year he showed sensitivity to local sentiment, but later he advised a harder line against Gloucestershire refusers. By late 1627 he was arguing for war, mainly against France, and for extra parliamentary supply to fund it. Conway became lord president of the council in December 1628. He died in St Martin's Lane, London, on 3 January 1631, and was buried at Arrow on 12 January. 
Notwithstanding his prominence in the affairs of state, Conway's papers reveal the assiduity with which he performed 'the role of linking the county gentry with the government', performing many favours at court for his Warwickshire friends, neighbours, and kinsmen (Hughes, 25-6). He was 'part of the last manifestation of the Elizabethan style of central government which ensured that relatively broad strands of opinion, particularly religious opinion, were represented in the Privy Council' (ibid., 88-9). Their passing marked the end of an era in relations between Warwickshire and the court, and the beginning of a fatal division between court and country. Conway's eldest son, Edward Conway (bap. 1594, d. 1655), who succeeded as second viscount, was much less interested in local affairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 6121


Conway, Francis Seymour-, first marquess of Hertford (1718-1794), courtier and politician, was born on 5 July 1718 in Lindsey House, Chelsea, Middlesex, the son and heir of Francis Seymour-Conway, first Baron Conway of Ragley (1679-1732), politician, and his third wife, Charlotte (died 1734), the daughter of John and Elizabeth Shorter of Bybrook, Kent. His mother was the granddaughter of Sir John Shorter, lord mayor of London, and the sister of Catherine Shorter, the first wife of Sir Robert Walpole. From 1732 he attended Eton College, and in the same year he succeeded his father as second Baron Conway. On 29 May 1741 he married Isabella (1726-1782), the fourth and youngest daughter of Charles Fitzroy, second duke of Grafton, and his wife, Henrietta Somerset. They had seven sons, including Lord Hugh Seymour, naval officer, and six daughters. On 3 August 1750 he was created Viscount Beauchamp and earl of Hertford, titles recently extinct by the death of Algernon Seymour, seventh duke of Somerset. Described by his cousin Horace Walpole as 'a perfect courtier' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.269), Hertford held a succession of posts. He became a lord of the bedchamber and KG in 1757 and was sworn of the privy council in 1763. He served as ambassador to France in 1763-5, lord lieutenant of Ireland in 1765-6, and lord chamberlain from 1766 to 1782 and again from April to December 1783. He was also lord lieutenant of Warwickshire from 1757 until his death. 
Hertford was the head of a sizeable family interest. His brother Henry Seymour Conway (1719-1795), army officer and politician, was a political and military figure of importance, and his six sons were all members of parliament. He exerted control over the parliamentary borough of Orford from the 1760s and also influenced elections in Coventry. His ability to provide for himself and his family was the object of envy. The earl of Bristol once described him as 'an excellent sollicitor, [who] has a constant appetite for all preferments for himself and family, with the quickest digestion and the shortest memory of past favours of any of the present noblemen of this modest and reasonable age' (Brooke, 71). 
Hertford was at the peak of his importance from 1766 to 1782, when he was at the centre of court life as lord chamberlain and acted as friend and confidant to George III. With the king's blessing, he was active in negotiations in 1767 that sought to strengthen the Chatham administration. At one point he was mentioned as a possible first minister. Although he was tempted by the prospect of a promotion in the peerage (a personal ambition), he declined, citing his disinclination to speak in parliament. With the aid of Walpole he influenced his brother to remain part of the Chatham administration. After the latter resigned in 1768, Hertford worked with some success to prevent him from drawing too close to the opposition, at least until the outbreak of the war with the American colonies in 1775. Hertford himself continued to support Lord North's administration and the war in America, in which three of his sons served. His correspondence with Walpole, however, shows him to have doubted the prospects of its success. In 1779 he again acted as an intermediary in negotiations designed to shore up an embattled ministry, unsuccessfully approaching members of the opposition through the duke of Grafton, his wife's nephew. 
Following Lord North into opposition in 1782, Hertford became more of a party politician. He voted by proxy against Shelburne's peace preliminaries in February 1783. He then briefly returned to office with the Fox-North coalition and resumed his old post as lord chamberlain. After being dismissed with the coalition at the end of the year, he again followed North into opposition, reportedly spurning the younger Pitt's offer of a marquessate. He opposed Pitt's 'Regency Bill' in 1788. In the realignment that followed the outbreak of war with revolutionary France he finally went over to Pitt, and on 3 July 1793 was created marquess of Hertford and earl of Yarmouth. The owner of extensive estates in co. Antrim, he also exerted influence in Irish politics. He served a relatively uneventful term as lord lieutenant in 1765-6 and had a decisive influence on elections in the borough of Lisburn, which was briefly shaken by the Volunteer movement in 1783. 
Hertford died on 14 June 1794 from complications resulting from a riding accident at the home of his daughter, the countess of Lincoln, in Putney. He was buried on 23 June at Arrow, Warwickshire, where his wife had been buried twelve years earlier. His eldest son, Francis Ingram-Seymour-Conway (1743-1822), politician, succeeded to the titles. 


@@@@@


doc= 6122


Conway, Henry Seymour (1719-1795), army officer and politician, was born on 21 July 1719, probably at Lindsey House, Chelsea, Middlesex, the second son of Francis Seymour Conway, first Baron Conway of Ragley (1679-1732), and his third wife, Charlotte ('c'.1683-1734), the younger daughter of John and Elizabeth Shorter of Bybrook, Kent. His mother's sister Catherine was the wife of Sir Robert Walpole. 
Conway entered Eton College in 1732. His cousins Edward and Horace Walpole also attended Eton at this time, and with the latter he maintained a lifelong friendship and correspondence. Their letters reveal a strong emotional interdependence: Walpole was Conway's chief or only confidant in his youth. His confession in 1737 that a vulgar expression by Lady Caroline Fitzroy, with whom he was in love, provoked 'a strong garrison of anti-venerial thoughts' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.3), followed by an account of his attending a masquerade dressed as a woman, has been interpreted as evidence of Conway's sexual ambiguity, supporting the proposition that his relationship with Walpole had a sexual element -- something insinuated by contemporaries later in Conway's career. 
On 27 June 1737 Conway was commissioned lieutenant in the 5th dragoons. His military duties were not yet so arduous as to prevent his joining Walpole and Thomas Gray on their tour of Europe between May and October 1739, though he remained in Geneva while they proceeded to Italy. He found Geneva society tedious and by February 1740 had returned to Paris, where he related to Walpole his promotion to captain-lieutenant in the 8th dragoons: 'I am a-going over to fight like a 'tigre'' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.45). Nevertheless, that year his attention was taken by a visit to the Conway family estates in co. Antrim, in preparation for his unopposed election as member for that county in the Irish parliament, which formally took place on 19 October 1741. In May 1741 (formally dated 14 February 1741) he joined the 1st foot guards as captain-lieutenant, a rank equivalent to lieutenant-colonel in the army, and that summer he studied drawing and mathematics under private tutors. 
On 28 December 1741 Conway's long parliamentary career began when he was returned as MP for Higham Ferrers, Northamptonshire, by Thomas Watson-Wentworth, first earl of Malton, on the recommendation of Sir Robert Walpole. Horace Walpole later wrote that Conway, 'having set out upon a plan of fashionable virtue' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George II', 1.27), had voted against the government in 1742 on army supply and alienated George II and William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, but there seems to be no other evidence for this. In July 1742 Conway joined his brigade of guards as part of the so-called pragmatic army assembled for the defence of the Netherlands. The nearest his regiment came to action was in the battle of Dettingen on 27 June 1743, but here the guards formed the rearguard and missed the fighting. Writing to his elder brother, Francis Seymour-Conway, second Baron Conway and later earl and marquess of Hertford, he complained: 'You can't imagine how terrible it was not to be engaged... and been put always upon what is called the post of honour' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.138). 
Conway attended the parliamentary sessions during the autumn and winter. Along with other army officers who were also members of parliament he returned to campaign in the Netherlands in May 1744. In that year he served as aide-de-camp to the commander-in-chief, Field Marshal George Wade. His romantic attachment to Lady Caroline Fitzroy had been renewed about 1741, but in 1744 he concluded that his lack of means made a marriage impossible. Walpole, who had in any case strongly opposed the match, was willing to bestow a large portion of his own income, mostly from government offices, on his friend. He reasoned: 'If I ever felt much for anything... it was certainly for my mother. I look upon you as my nearest relation to her, and I think I can never do enough to show my gratitude and affection to her' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.170). Conway felt unable to accept this too generous offer. During the following year's campaigning Conway (who was now aide-de-camp to Prince William Augustus, duke of Cumberland, the new commander-in-chief) returned to Flanders just in time to take part in the battle of Fontenoy on 30 April 1745. He distinguished himself in the battle where only twenty-four of his company survived, and reportedly engaged single-handedly with two French grenadiers. 
Conway left Flanders in October 1745, when he was recalled as part of the force intended to combat the Jacobite rising. He spent the winter of 1745 and spring of the following year in pursuit of Charles Edward Stuart's forces in northern England and Scotland. On 15 April 1746 he was gazetted colonel of the 48th foot, and on 16 April he fought in the battle of Culloden. Conway remained in Scotland, gathering intelligence reports and writing verses, until he returned to Westminster in November for the parliamentary session. 
In spring 1747 Conway returned to the Netherlands. On 1 July, while on active service, he was re-elected to the Commons, this time for Penryn in Cornwall, in the interest of Hugh Boscawen, second Viscount Falmouth, a supporter of the Pelham ministry. He fought at Laffeldt on 2 July, where he narrowly escaped death, and was taken prisoner by the French, but was released on parole after three days. Conway was able to return to England in November, and on 19 December, at Somerset House chapel, Westminster, he married Caroline Bruce, countess of Ailesbury (1721-1803), the daughter of Lieutenant-General John Campbell, later fourth duke of Argyll, and the widow of Charles Bruce, third earl of Ailesbury. Lady Ailesbury (as she continued to be known) had one daughter from her first marriage, Lady Mary Bruce (1740-1796), who married Charles Lennox, third duke of Richmond. Conway and his wife had one child, Anne (1749-1828) ['see 'Damer, Anne Seymour]. The summer following his marriage Conway leased Latimers, in Chesham, Buckinghamshire, a sixteenth-century house owned by the Cavendish family but disliked by Horace Walpole: 'Old but of a bad age' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.102). 
Conway had been transferred from the 48th foot to the 34th foot in 1749 and in July 1751 went to join his regiment on Minorca, which failed to impress him: 'The country is one entire heap of rock and sand; not a tree for shelter nor a brook for refreshment in the whole island' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.310). He was anxious to escape and lobbied Cumberland for a new regiment, eventually receiving the 13th dragoons on 21 December 1751. 
After visiting Florence, where he met Horace Walpole's correspondent Horace Mann, he travelled to Rome, then returned to England in February or March 1752, when he purchased Park Place, at Remenham, near Henley-on-Thames, from Augusta, princess dowager of Wales. Shortly afterwards Conway and his wife followed his regiment to co. Sligo, leaving their daughter to be cared for by Walpole. They also spent part of 1753 in Sligo, when Walpole kept his friend informed of the 'Marriage Bill' passing through parliament. Conway, who professed a 'philosophical' indifference to politics, and seems at the time to have been happy with his family cultivating Park Place, on returning home in June 1753 claimed puzzlement at the heat generated in the passage of the legislation: 'I don't clearly understand but I must own myself and very honestly do a miserable politician... and it's so much the nature of Englishness to divide and subdivide that if there were but two left in the world I believe they'd form two parties and if there was but one he'd quarrel with himself. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.367)' He again visited his regiment in Ireland, now at Athlone, co. Westmeath, in May 1754. 
Conway regarded his Irish connections as burdensome, but it was Ireland that would invigorate his political career. The 1754 election saw him returned for St Mawes, Cornwall, again by Lord Falmouth. In May 1755 he was unexpectedly named as chief secretary for Ireland by the new lord lieutenant, William Cavendish, marquess of Hartington (fourth duke of Devonshire from December 1755), probably at Cumberland's suggestion. He finally took his seat in the Irish House of Commons as MP for co. Antrim on 17 October 1755. Conway's relaxed temperament was expected to assist Hartington settle the political dispute between the speaker of the Irish Commons, Henry Boyle, on one hand, and George Stone, archbishop of Armagh, and the Ponsonby family, on the other. This had bedevilled Irish politics for several years, and had reached a crisis when in 1753 Boyle and many of his leading supporters had voted with the opposition against the government over the issue of the principle of royal consent being required for a bill apportioning a surplus in the Treasury to the payment of the national debt. Boyle and his allies had been removed from their offices and replaced by allies of Stone and the Ponsonbys. Hartington was a relative of the Ponsonbys but was also closely associated with James Fitzgerald, twentieth earl of Kildare, one of Boyle's most vociferous allies. Conway conducted negotiations on Devonshire's behalf and reported their progress to the government in Westminster. In a letter to the prime minister, Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, Conway carefully expressed the settlement agreed between the parties on the question of the address to the king at the opening of the 1755 parliamentary session, and probably helped make it acceptable to the ministry. Newcastle wrote that he entirely depended upon Conway's 'good sense and integrity' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.404). Negotiations continued into early 1756, when Boyle was bought off with an earldom, Stone excluded from the list of lords justices, and Ponsonby made speaker of the Commons. Conway declared 'that the government was once more vested in the hands of the governor' (McCracken, 178), but the undertaker system survived until the Townshend lieutenancy of 1767-72. Conway was promoted major-general on 30 January and returned to England in May. He remained an Irish MP until 1761. 
Conway was appointed in April 1757 a groom of the bedchamber, a position he had long sought. He spent much of his time after his return from Ireland in semi-retirement at Park Place, but in June he was returned to active service. Initially stationed at Bradford Peverell, near Blandford, Dorset, in July he was appointed deputy military commander of the proposed expedition to raid the French fort of Rochefort. Conway, like his superior Sir John Mordaunt, expressed doubts about the operation and probably remained sceptical of a successful outcome. 
The naval force and troop transports after some delay set sail from the Isle of Wight on 6 September and reached the Basque Roads on 21 September. Here after further delays only the small Isle d'Aix was captured. A council of war was called on 25 September, where the senior officers of both the army and the navy decided that a direct attack on Rochefort could not succeed. Conway repeatedly advocated an attack on Fort Fouras, but his colleagues would only support a night attack, and when this was cancelled he was unwilling to take sole responsibility for a day assault. No further incursions were proposed and the fleet sailed for home on 1 October, arriving at Portsmouth on 6 October. In a letter to his brother, Conway wrote, 'These strange resolutions and irresolutions are endless and impossible and improper to relate' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.508), and later, 'I expect my share of blame; and for the only time of my life dread to come back to England' (ibid.). Conway gave evidence at Mordaunt's court martial; Mordaunt was eventually acquitted, but the affair badly damaged the reputations of both men, and Conway was made to feel the king's displeasure at court. When George II was presented with a list of the proposed staff officers for the 1758 campaign, the king struck out the names of Mordaunt, Conway, and the third in command at Rochefort, Edward Cornwallis. When the commander-in-chief, Jean Louis Ligonier, pointed out that Conway had tried to take action the king replied, 'Yes... apres diner la moutarde' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George II', 3.5), and said he would think of Conway, but not then. In spite of this, Conway's efforts to join the expedition to St Malo or that to the West Indies in November 1758 were unsuccessful. He remained militarily inactive (although he continued to attend the Commons) until sent, at Ligonier's behest, to sign a cartel for an exchange of prisoners at Sluys on 6 February 1759. 
Soon after the accession of George III in October 1760, Conway twice wrote to John Stuart, third earl of Bute, the king's mentor, to remind the new king of his 'desire for military employment'. He wrote to Bute again in February 1761 asking him to intercede so that he could 'throw himself at His Majesty's feet if he has given any intentional offence' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 1.xxxvi). At last, at the end of March 1761, Conway was sent to Germany as deputy to John Manners, marquess of Granby, commander of the British forces in the allied army led by Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick. At the battle of Vellinghausen on 15-16 July, Conway's corps, entrusted to him by Ferdinand, were placed in the centre of the allied line but were not attacked. During Granby's absence Conway became acting commander of the British forces in winter 1761-2. He was present at the battle of Wilhelmstal on 24 June 1762 and in the following month captured the castle at Waldeck, which surrendered on 11 July, Conway exclaiming: 'it cost me two days but the French don't shine at these defences... they let me frighten them out by marching up with scaling ladders when my ammunition was out' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 38.163). 
Following the signing of the peace preliminaries at Fontainebleau in November 1762, Conway was responsible for the embarkation of British forces in Europe. Some weeks before returning to England on 31 March he learned from his brother that Bute had apologized to the French concerning his management of the embarkation. Conway believed that Bute had acted thus because some of his army friends had voted in parliament against the peace, and he became convinced that Bute saw no role for him on the peacetime establishment. As a result Conway had informed Hertford that he did not intend to deserve favour by his own parliamentary conduct. This could be considered predictable: Conway's friends Walpole and Augustus Fitzroy, third duke of Grafton, were in opposition, as were most of his other connections. Grafton was the nephew of Lady Caroline Fitzroy and of Conway's sister-in-law Isabella Hertford, and returned Conway for Thetford at the 1761 election. When the parliamentary session opened Conway voted (on 15 and 23 November) against the new prime minister, George Grenville, to hear a complaint by John Wilkes that his arrest by general warrant breached his privilege as an MP. Then on 16 and 18 February Conway spoke and voted against the use of general warrants. The king insisted that as a consequence of his actions Conway should be deprived of his posts of groom of the bedchamber and colonel of the 1st dragoons. Attempts were made by Grenville himself and Walpole to mitigate the punishment. Conway thought he would lose only the civil post. The bedchamber, although prestigious, carried a relatively small salary, and the colonelcy constituted his principal income. In April 1764, following the prorogation of parliament, his dismissal was made public. Walpole at once wrote offering him $6000, and there was also an offer of $1000 from the duke of Devonshire. Although his income was now reduced from some $6000 per annum to $2000, Conway decided that retrenchment was preferable and declined the offers. When Devonshire died later that year Conway was left $5000 'as a testimony of my friendship for him and of my sense of his honourable conduct and friendship for me' ('London Chronicle', 16 Oct 1764, 363). 
Conway's dismissal became a 'cause celebre'. The government, stung by Walpole's remark at an opposition dinner that Conway's case indicated that ministers intended a purge of the army, published an anonymous pamphlet on 24 May 1764, 'An Address to the Public on the Late Dismission of a General Officer', written by the historian and propagandist William Guthrie. The address, although not mentioning Walpole by name, tried to force a retraction. Walpole replied with 'A Counter-Address to the Public on the Late Dismission of a General Officer'. On 30 August Guthrie retaliated with 'A Reply to the Counter Address', which insinuated that Walpole was suffering from sexual frustration at being unable to consummate his passion for Conway. Walpole never enlarged upon the background to this allegation, and most of his correspondence with Conway from the early 1760s onwards seems to have been destroyed. This was probably to protect both their reputations, although Walpole was more concerned with their roles in political history than with sexual impropriety. Walpole never denied his affection for his cousin or his desire to advance his political career. The allegation was intended rather to discredit Walpole by exposing his supposed 'effeminacy' than to suggest sexual motives on Conway's part. 
Conway was seriously alarmed by this crisis and wrote to his brother saying he was now finished with politics but would tell him 'how disagreeably I have myself been the object of them'. He added, 'I trust their efforts to hurt my reputation have only shown their malice' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 1.xli). However, Conway remained a martyr in the eyes of Grenville's opponents and was envisaged as a prominent component of any ministry they might form. The involvement of Cumberland and Devonshire's brother Lord John Cavendish in negotiations to replace Grenville in late 1764 and early 1765 can have done Conway no harm. Despite the confidence of his friends in his political abilities, Conway still saw the military as his principal career, and it was with great reluctance that he accepted Cumberland's proposal and joined the Rockingham administration in July 1765 as secretary of state for the southern department. The new ministry had hoped to include prominent members of the Commons who could direct government business there, including Charles Yorke, Charles Townshend, and, most importantly of all, William Pitt, but only Yorke joined the administration, as attorney-general. Well before parliament met in December, it was clear that Conway, well-meaning but irresolute under pressure, would be the leader of the Commons. 
The administration was concerned initially with matters close to Conway's own circumstances, including the restoration of dismissed army officers and a declaration that general warrants were illegal. They had also committed themselves to Pitt's scheme for a triple alliance between Britain, Russia, and Prussia, and Conway achieved some success in negotiating with the French over their outstanding debts in Canada and the fortifications at Dunkirk. There was no mention of the issue that was to dominate parliamentary affairs for the foreseeable future: the crisis engendered by Grenville's recent 'Stamp Act'. As southern secretary, Conway was responsible for American compliance with the act, a potential source of personal conflict, as he had spoken and voted against the 'Stamp Act' in the Commons in February. The act was to come into force on 1 November. American opposition was first thought by ministers to be the work of a small minority. Conway's response to the letters from Governor Bernard of Massachusetts and General Thomas Gage, received in October, mentioned his military background and expressed the government's reluctance to use excessive force against what they still thought was a temporary disturbance: he ordered Bernard to 'inforce a due Obedience to the Laws' with 'such a timely Exertion of Force as the Occasion may require', but endorsed 'lenient and persuasive Methods' (Langford, 80) if possible. Similarly, he told General Gage to use force if other measures were insufficient, but added that Gage should observe 'the utmost exertion of your prudence' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 16.113). By December Conway and his colleagues knew that the situation had deteriorated to a stage where the 'Stamp Act' was unenforceable without the involvement of an impractically large armed force, and he may have been one of the ministers who argued for the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' at the cabinet of 27 December. If so, his position was close to that eventually taken up by the Rockingham government. 
Policy formulation was complicated by the growing pressure to restructure the ministry in order to include William Pitt, and negotiations took place in early January 1766. Conway and Grafton at first favoured including Pitt, even though he would not reveal his position on American policy to his potential colleagues without having told the king and parliament first. This was unacceptable to Rockingham, as were Pitt's other demands, which would have seen Newcastle leave the ministry and Rockingham himself give way to Earl Temple, and Conway backed down. Pitt's support for repeal of the 'Stamp Act' was a mixed blessing for Conway, as he followed it with a denial of parliament's right to impose taxes on the colonies; Pitt's personal authority over the house left Conway in shadow, and it was in this unenviable position that he prepared to introduce the government's resolutions. 
As decided by the end of January 1766, repeal was to be preceded by the 'Declaratory Act', affirming British sovereignty in the colonies. Conway told the Massachusetts agent, Dennys De Berdt, that the ministry were for repeal of the 'Stamp Act' but could secure a majority only by including a measure that asserted parliamentary sovereignty against colonial defiance. His wish that the Americans would petition against the 'Stamp Act' to ease the government's way perhaps shows his continued yearning for consensus; his hopes were dashed, for most of the petitions from America directly challenged parliament's authority, in particular that from the congress of colonial representatives which had met in New York in October 1765 to co-ordinate the campaign for repeal. He failed to stop the petition being presented, but it was not received by the house and thus could not be debated, as it was signed by an association and not by individuals. Conway was anxious to assure the Americans that their opinions were not being disregarded, but his main priority was to prevent a Commons debate that could have fired anti-American passions and polarized opinion between Pitt's contention that, as a result of the 'Stamp Act', 'the Original Compact with the Americans was Broke' ('Correspondence of George III', 1.246) and Grenville's determination that the act should remain in force. 
Conway introduced the government's five resolutions, including the clause that would become the 'Declaratory Act', in the Commons on 3 February. The ministry won the day and defeated a resolution by Grenville opposed to repeal, but Conway's contribution to the debate, that repeal was the only way to avoid a war with America and Britain's continental enemies, was overshadowed by speeches from Pitt, Townshend, and Yorke, generally regarded as more effective orators. When repeal itself was debated in the Commons on 21 February, Conway's case, that parliament had a right to tax the colonies but should not actually exercise that power, held the day, although a speech in support of the government by Edmund Burke was considered more decisive. 
Horace Walpole later wrote of Conway as the hero of the hour: fellow members of parliament 'huzzaed him thrice, stopped him to thank and compliment him, and made a lane for his passage' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 3.29). Yet to many contemporaries his management of the Commons appeared uncertain. Walpole acknowledged that he 'could not be induced to traffic with Members, though offended that none of them paid court to him' (ibid., 3.97). In May 1766, following Grafton's resignation, Conway moved to the northern department and his stepson Richmond succeeded him as southern secretary. This relieved Conway of American problems but underlined the problem that no more senior politician would join an administration seen as fatally crippled. 
Conway was content with the new administration formed in July 1766; Pitt, at the head of the ministry and ennobled as earl of Chatham, told him the administration would consist 'of the best and ablest men, without any regard to parties, distinctions and connections' (Brooke, 'Chatham Administration', 12). He remained at the northern department and sought to maintain what appeared to have been Chatham's original plan, to lead a reinforced Rockingham ministry. This foundered on issues of personality and Chatham's determination to break up the party loyalties that had grown up during the 1760s. Conway's mediation between Rockingham and Chatham foundered, and by 25 November most of the Rockingham group had gone into opposition rather than renounce those of their friends whom Chatham felt unsuitable for office. For Conway, for whom the Rockingham ministry had always been an interim administration until a stronger ministry could be formed including Pitt, this was an embarrassment. He chose not to resign, but his estrangement from Chatham and his wish to keep faith both with his old friends and with George III led him to concentrate on routine administration in his department. In March 1767 he appointed David Hume as his under-secretary; Hume had been his brother's secretary as ambassador to France, and the previous year the two had negotiated over a pension for Jean-Jacques Rousseau, then living in Derbyshire. 
Conway, and the new southern secretary William Petty, second earl of Shelburne, were expected to put into effect Chatham's 'northern system' of diplomacy, which saw Britain as the ally of Prussia and Russia. Conway was more sympathetic to an Austrian alliance and was probably not disappointed when negotiations with Prussia and Russia proved unfruitful. Unlike Chatham, Conway and Shelburne perceived no immediate threat from France and Spain and concentrated on colonial issues and the strengthening of the fragile ministry. A Swedish proposal for a treaty remained unanswered by Conway for eighteen months, causing the ambassador, Baron Gustaf Adolf Nolken, to exclaim: 'The Secretaries of State are so busy in Parliament that they conduct their offices like a secondary business' (Scott, 113). 
Conway's instinct for conciliation frequently conflicted with Chatham's more combative approach. Like Charles Townshend, now chancellor of the exchequer, he opposed Chatham's desire to acquire the East India Company's territories for the crown, but was forced by Grafton and George III to acquiesce in the scheme. Even so, during the first debate on the motion to establish a parliamentary inquiry into the company's lands and revenues, he described himself as a passenger in administration. On 26 May 1767 he voted against the ministry's bill to restrain the company's dividends, although the measure passed. 
The plan to seize the East India Company's revenues had been intended to meet a perceived gap in government revenues, which Townshend intended to meet by taxing the import of tea and some other household goods into America. Conway was astonished that the plan was never discussed in cabinet. He refused to introduce the plan in the Commons and twice voted against the ministry, on 13 and 15 May. None the less, Townshend's 'American Revenue Bill' received the royal assent by 29 June with scarcely any effective opposition. 
Conway had entered office following his defence of American interests, and, with these interests now threatened by his own government, he told George III and Rockingham in May that he would resign at the end of the session. Rockingham trusted that his secession would lead to a comprehensive administration that encompassed his own followers plus the Grenvilles and Bedfords. Conway hoped to use the ensuing negotiations to bring Rockingham and his friends into the Chatham ministry, believing that Rockingham should be prepared to come in 'on his own bottom' ('Autobiography... of Grafton', 1.321), in Grafton's words, and not as leader of a new coalition. 
As Conway's date for resignation (22 July) approached, Grafton told the king that, without Conway, he must also resign. The king wrote a desperate letter to Lord Hertford: 'Indeed your brother has it now in his power to extricate me out of all my difficulties by lending himself to my civil service' ('Correspondence of George III', 1.499). Conway also found himself a prisoner of the now divided opposition. Rockingham insisted upon his remaining in office, the Bedfords on his returning to the army. Contemporaries and later commentators have thought that these were two incompatible reactions to Grenville's requirement for a stronger American policy, but Bedford's main reservation had been his lack of confidence in Conway as a parliamentarian. 
Negotiations failed, and on 31 July Grafton asked Lady Chatham to tell her husband 'that General Conway has given him authority to say, that, though the particular situation is not fixed on, he is determined to stand forward in the House of Commons to carry on the king's business' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 3.281-2). Conway's rupture with the Rockinghams was complete. Edmund Burke wrote to Rockingham that 'Conway is fairly gone to the devil' ('Correspondence', 1.321), but he continued to seek a middle way, attempting to distance himself from his colleagues while remaining loyal to the king. 
In August 1767 Conway was made lieutenant-general of the ordnance, and he continued, at Horace Walpole's suggestion, as secretary of state without salary. However, this gesture failed to appease the anger of the Rockinghams. At the end of the year negotiations between Grafton and the Bedfords at last allowed Conway an honourable escape, and in January 1768 he resigned the northern department to Thomas Thynne, third Viscount Weymouth, and North became leader of the Commons. Conway remained in the cabinet at the king's desire, and was appointed colonel of the 4th dragoons. 
During the new parliament elected in March 1768 Conway, who remained member for Thetford, concentrated on his own work at the ordnance. He was not present at the cabinet meeting on 20 April which decided on Wilkes's expulsion, although he soon afterwards expressed his opposition and successfully postponed action until the subsequent session of parliament. He remained useful as a peacemaker, negotiating compensation with Jeffrey Amherst in July and August 1768 following the latter's dismissal as governor of Virginia. He maintained his interest in American policy and in November and December 1768 objected to the proposals of Wills Hill, earl of Hillsborough, now secretary of state for America, to coerce opposition in Massachusetts, and he even voted against the milder resolution agreed by the rest of the cabinet that condemned the votes of the Massachusetts assembly, which challenged parliamentary supremacy. The cabinet's olive branch to the Americans, decided at a meeting on 1 May 1769, was the repeal of all Townshend's duties except those on tea; Conway, in the minority, sought the repeal of all duties. He had proposed in the Commons on 19 April that the government promise not to levy further taxes against the Americans, and this promise was made. 
The Wilkes affair had also returned to plague the cabinet. Conway remained opposed to the expulsion of Wilkes, which offended some cabinet members and George III. He avoided the vote on expulsion in February but then spoke in favour of parliamentary supremacy on 17 March, as the issue had become a matter of 'the liberty of the people against the liberty of parliament' (Brooke, 'Conway, Hon. Henry Seymour', 245). Later he voted for the seating of Henry Luttrell, Wilkes's opponent. 
The withdrawal of the Chathamites from the Grafton ministry led to Conway's being offered the position of master-general of the ordnance in January 1770. Conway declined, according to Walpole because he did not want to offend his friend Granby and because he sought to distance himself from the duke of Bedford's party, whose power in the ministry was rising. Instead, he offered to do the work of the master-general without taking the salary. George III is said to have told Conway 'he was a phenomenon; that there was no satisfying other people, but he would not take even what was offered to him' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 4.132). As Conway pointed out to Walpole, he did not need the extra $400 in his salary that the promotion would bring. Soon afterwards Lord North became prime minister, and although George III advised him that Conway could be managed through 'little marks of attention' ('Correspondence of George III', 2.126-7), by October Conway had become sufficiently estranged from his colleagues to resign from the cabinet. That month he was made colonel of the Royal Horse Guards (the Blues). He was at first friendly to the ministry, but in March 1772 he offended George III by opposing the 'Royal Marriages Bill'. Although he said he supported the principle of the bill, he was unable to vote a compliment -- that the king's family should ask the sovereign's permission to marry -- into a royal right of veto. Despite a reproving letter from his brother Hertford, the lord chamberlain, Conway vigorously opposed the bill in committee. Conway was promoted general on 26 May 1772, but when it became clear that the king intended to appoint George, fourth Viscount Townshend, an officer junior to Conway, as master-general of the ordnance, he resigned from the ordnance on 23 October. 'At the earnest solicitation of Lord North' (Brooke, 'Conway, Hon. Henry Seymour', 246) he was compensated with the governorship of Jersey. 
American affairs continued to engross Conway's parliamentary activity, and his wish to preserve his integrity drove further the wedge between him and the North ministry. After the Boston Tea Party in December 1773 he supported the punitive 'Boston Port Bill' of March 1774 in the hope that support for this measure might allow the repeal of the tax on tea, for which he voted in April. In May he opposed the third reading of North's bill to enhance the powers of the crown in Massachusetts Bay. He defended British authority over America, but expressed his concern that actions since the 'Stamp Act' had turned the British government into aggressors against the crown's American subjects. 
Without political or meaningful military office Conway was able to devote more time to his private affairs. On 8 June 1774 he left London on a tour of the continent, visiting battlefields in the Netherlands and Germany, dining with his former commanding officer Prince Ferdinand in Brunswick, and proceeding to Potsdam, where he was entertained by Frederick the Great. After a visit to the Saxon court in Dresden he went to Vienna, where he stayed with his friend the British ambassador, Sir Robert Murray Keith. There he was received by Emperor Joseph II and his mother Maria Theresa. He spent a week with the emperor's army near Buda in Hungary before moving to rejoin Frederick the Great with his camp at Breslau in Silesia, then returned to Austrian territory, where he joined Joseph II at a military review in Prague. The tour ended in Paris, where he was joined by his wife and daughter. The 'London Chronicle' (6 August 1774) was wrong to assume that Conway was engaged in formal diplomatic negotiations on the part of the government; rather, he was reinforcing his personal connections with British diplomats abroad and foreign princes and officials, in anticipation of a full-scale war against the colonies -- which to Conway must have seemed certain. 
Conway's absence during the general election of 1774 had deprived him of his seat at Thetford. He returned to parliament in March 1775 as MP for Bury St Edmunds, still as a nominee of Grafton. He renewed his criticisms of government policy and on 5 April opposed the third reading of the 'Prohibitory Bill', leading Richard Rigby to say he should emigrate to Philadelphia and join the rebels. 
Conway from the first strongly opposed the war with the colonies. In the Commons in October 1775 he condemned 'the butchery of his fellow-subjects' (Thomas, 'Tea Party to Independence', 278) as 'cruel, unnecessary and unnatural' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 18.761). The speech was considered his best by many parliamentarians. He continued to harry the administration on America and in 1776 brought forward a motion requiring to know General William Howe's instructions for seeking peace. He defended the administration where he agreed with their measures, and was often proposed as commander-in-chief, but in the context of the war and the opinions of North and George III this possibility could be little more than mischief-making. 
The alliance between the colonies and France in February 1778 led Conway to take an active interest in his position as governor of Jersey, and in June that year he toured the forts and garrisons on the island and on Guernsey. On 1 May 1779 Jersey repulsed a French attack. Conway set sail on hearing the news but reached the island only on 3 May. However, a second partially successful invasion was made on 6 January 1781, during which the lieutenant-governor was briefly captured. Strong weather prevented Conway reaching Jersey, and he later received news that the French attack had been defeated. Greatly unwell, he decided to return to Park Place. While convalescing he received letters from Hillsborough, the secretary of state, which implied dereliction of duty but allowed him further leave of absence, even though the governorship was not a residential one. The matter was smoothed over by a further letter which assured him that his conduct was approved by the king. 
Conway continued to oppose the war, often more stridently than the indecisive opposition factions. In 1780 he had introduced an unsuccessful bill to address American grievances once peace was achieved. Respect for his integrity was widespread in the Commons. Once the opposition saw, at the beginning of 1782, that the Commons was in a state where it might vote to end the war and so bring down the North ministry, Conway was identified as the person most likely to succeed in carrying a motion against the further prosecution of an offensive war in North America. The first, on 22 February 1782, was defeated by 194 votes to 193, but on 27 February the motion was repeated and carried by 234 votes to 215. 
North resigned on 20 March; in the Rockingham-Shelburne ministry that followed, Conway became commander-in-chief and a member of the cabinet. His opinions were thought decisive at the cabinet meeting on 30 June which agreed to make American independence conditional on successfully negotiating a general peace treaty. Conway remained in the government following Rockingham's death and the installation of Shelburne as prime minister, and was later attacked in the Commons by both Fox and Burke as politically naive. Shelburne himself had commented on his innocence. Conway said he 'looked to measures only, and not to men' (Brooke, 'Conway, Hon. Henry Seymour', 246). He believed American independence must be a precondition of any negotiation, and would not be deflected by the antagonism between Fox and Shelburne. During the autumn Fox's attacks on the Shelburne ministry revealed splits in the cabinet over the terms for peace with America. Conway agreed with William Pitt the younger, now chancellor of the exchequer, that the provisional articles made with the Americans in November 1782 made independence unconditional. Although by early 1783 Conway had moved closer to the opposition, he supported the government in the vote on 18 February which brought down the Shelburne ministry. He remained as commander-in-chief under the Fox-North coalition but withdrew from the cabinet, and he resigned on the defeat of the coalition in December 1783. 
Conway strongly deprecated Pitt's minority administration, writing to Grafton on 4 January 1784 that he considered an administration supported solely by the crown as impracticable. In parliament he inveighed against Pitt's 'sulky silence' (Cannon, 172) after defeat on the 'East India Bill'. At what turned out to be his last parliamentary speech, on 24 March 1784, Conway told Pitt that 'he had hitherto been fool enough to consider the House of Commons as of consequence to the country, and weight in the constitution; but the Right Hon. gentleman had undeceived him... and proved it to be a cypher' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 24, 1784, 773). Conway expected to be returned at Bury St Edmunds, but the loss of the American colonies and widespread hostility to the Bourbon powers had made his high whig principles unpalatable to electors, and Grafton, finding his influence threatened, replaced him with another candidate. 
Conway retired to Park Place, where he immersed himself in arboreal cultivation, a longstanding passion (in 1778 he had given the poet George Crabbe a work on botany), and pursued literary interests. He adapted Louis de Boissy's play 'Les dehors trompeurs' as 'False Appearances', which was performed first at the duke of Richmond's private theatre in May 1788 and in 1789 enjoyed several performances at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. He was also involved in designing the bridge over the Thames at Henley, near Park Place, built between 1785 and 1787, including sculptures of the river gods Thame and Isis by his daughter Anne Damer. 
Conway was appointed field marshal on 12 October 1793. He continued to entertain: in 1818 Hannah More remembered 'the brilliant society of Field-Marshal Conway's house' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.xiv). He died suddenly, of a cramp in the stomach, at Park Place on 9 July 1795, and was buried on 20 July in the Ragley old vault, Arrow church, Warwickshire. 
Nineteenth-century historians could be dismissive of Conway. Lord John Russell, later first Earl Russell, in 'The Life and Times of Charles James Fox' (1853-7), and Philip, fifth Earl Stanhope, in 'The Life of William Pitt' (1861-2), both paid little attention to Conway, portraying him as a parliamentary pawn set amid the Chathams, Bedfords, and Grenvilles. William Hunt, in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', remarked on the attention paid him by Horace Walpole, but said 'He was by no means so remarkable a man as Walpole makes him out' although admitting 'he was conspicuous for integrity and a delicate sense of honour'. Twentieth-century research on the American War of Independence in British politics has not entirely overturned the picture of Conway as lacking decision or leadership, but has still presented a more impressive picture of him, as a far-sighted and influential figure whose opinions were widely appreciated in Great Britain and America. The towns of Conway, New Hampshire, and Conway, Massachusetts, are testimony to his efforts to avert the conflict between Great Britain and her North American colonies. 


@@@@@


doc= 6123


Conway, Sir John (d. 1603), writer and soldier, was the son and heir of Sir John Conway of Arrow, Warwickshire, landowner, and Katherine, daughter of Sir Ralph Verney and his wife, Elizabeth. Little is known of his youth or education but he was well read. He was knighted in 1559, on the accession of Elizabeth I. On 26 July 1573 the queen granted him a two-year licence to 'pass beyond the seas, about the Queens affairs: and protection during that time' ('CPR', '1572-5', 56). He seems to have been hot-headed. In 1578 he was attacked in London by Ludovic Grevil, and would probably have been killed if his servant had not warded off the sword blows. The incident caused outrage at the time as Robert Rich, second Baron Rich, had also been attacked on the same day. In December 1583 he seems to have been imprisoned in connection with the Somerville-Arden case, and during his incarceration he probably wrote his 'Meditations and Praiers'. He also wrote commendatory verses prefixed to Geoffrey Fenton's 'Certaine Tragicall Discourses' (1567) and 'Poesie of Floured Praiers' (1611). Conway was connected with Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, because of the proximity of their landholdings in Warwickshire, a centre of Dudley power and influence. He was among Leicester's protestant clients and neighbours recruited for the expedition to the Netherlands in 1585. In 1586 he was the English commander in Middelburg, on Walcheren Island, close to the port and cautionary town of Flushing. He was master of Leicester's artillery from about June. He was well connected at court through membership of the Dudley clientele but became disillusioned with Leicester's lacklustre military leadership, and wrote on 28 January 1587 to Sir William Cecil, Lord Burghley, lord treasurer, and Sir Francis Walsingham, principal secretary, with an account of the betrayal of Zutphen and Deventer only two days earlier. His letters reveal his strong protestant leanings, and he laid much of the blame for the losses on Leicester. He noted sourly in his letter to Burghley that although Sir William Stanley had allegedly opened the gates of Deventer 'for the discharge of his conscience', the payment was 'said to be 13,000 pounds' ('CSP for.', 12.340-41). Despite his views, Leicester had made Conway governor of the important and isolated garrison of Ostend on 29 December 1586, where he was to serve until 1590. During this period he was involved in a number of major incidents. In 1587 Alessandro Farnese, duke of Parma, threatened Ostend as part of his preparations to prepare the way for the arrival of the Spanish Armada. Reinforcements under Sir Roger Williams, 'en route' for Ostend, were diverted into Sluys. Their heroic but unsuccessful defence of the town removed the threat to Ostend during 1587. In the following year the impending arrival of the Armada disrupted supplies of food to Ostend, and in late August the garrison broke out into a 'wonderful dangerous mutiny'. They complained of victuals that were 'neither wholesome, savoury, nor man's meat'. The victualler was thrown into the harbour by the irate troops, and Conway and his officers were imprisoned in the common gaol, after ten of the mutineers had discharged their muskets at them ('CSP for.', 22.xxxvi-xxxix). The queen took the complaints of the troops seriously, and Peregrine Bertie, Lord Willoughby de Eresby, Leicester's replacement, restored calm in late September by promising to rectify the grievances, and by removing the ringleaders to assist in the defence of Bergen op Zoom. 
In the wake of the Armada, a counter-attack was planned against Spain by raiding Portugal, and Conway was caught up in the controversy between Willoughby and Sir John Norris over the provision of troops from the English garrisons in the Netherlands for the expedition. Conway was reluctant to reduce the size of his garrison, or lose his veterans, due to the dilapidated state of the town defences and the continuing threat from the Spaniards. He was grateful for the insistence of the states general, who commissioned him as an officer and contributed to his salary, that he should maintain the integrity of his garrison. Conway co-operated with them. Willoughby regarded the affair as interference from the privy council. 
Conway was in a difficult position because he had upset his officers during the mutiny, Norris during the recruitment for the Portugal expedition, and Willoughby during the inspection of the town defences. His captains demanded his recall. He was licensed to leave in July 1590. However, in August -- taking advantage of the reduction of the Spanish forces, who had been drawn off to France -- he launched a series of aggressive raids in the surrounding area. His most successful nearly ended in disaster when his force of 600 was cut off by the tide at east Dunkirk on 28 August 1590. He was attacked by the Spanish garrisons from Nieuwpoort and Dunkirk in force, and lost most of the booty that had been collected, although he did bring his force and 750 cattle safely back to Ostend. He claimed to have inflicted great damage on the enemy. Under pressure from Willoughby he announced that he was willing to resign. He was replaced by Sir Edward Norris, Norris's brother, and does not appear to have served in the Netherlands again. 
Conway died on 4 October 1603, and was buried in Arrow church, where a monument was erected in his memory by his wife, Ellen, daughter of Sir Fulke Greville (died 1560) of Beauchamp's Court, Warwickshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Willoughby. They had four sons, including Fulke, John, and Thomas, and four daughters, Elizabeth, Katherine, Mary, and Frances. Edward Conway (d. 1631), the eldest son, was created Viscount Conway and Viscount Killultagh in 1627. 


@@@@@


doc= 6124


Conway, Roger (d. c.1360), Franciscan friar and theologian, was a native of Conwy in north Wales, who probably entered the order in Chester, and was a member of the custody of Worcester. He studied at Oxford and was DTh by 10 February 1355, when -- as guardian of the Franciscan convent in Worcester -- he received papal permission to live in the London Greyfriars, 'for the spiritual recreation of himself and of the nobles of England, who are said to frequent the friary in great numbers' ('CEPR letters', 3.563). He received the royal alms on behalf of the London Greyfriars on 4 February 1356 and became lector in theology at this convent, subsequently acting ('c'.1357-8) as provincial of the Friars Minor in England. In London he preached on the poverty of Christ, and was the most prominent, and frequently quoted, defender of mendicant poverty against the attacks of Richard Fitzralph, archbishop of Armagh (died 1360). He is probably identical with the Franciscan who in 1356 took up the challenge, when Fitzralph wagered his 'Bible' that no friar could find a scriptural text that would prove their claims concerning Christ's mendicancy. With the provincial of the English Dominicans, John Tatenhall, Conway in 1358 led a delegation of friars to Avignon, where they petitioned the pope to compel the English bishops to punish those who led the faithful astray by slandering the friars and by attacking papal powers to grant them pastoral privileges. 
Conway's 'Defensio religionis mendicantium', a treatise on the hearing of confessions by the friars, was previously regarded as a reply to Fitzralph's 'Defensio curatorum', but is now recognized as a refutation of the latter's 'De audientia confessionum', a treatise on the papal bull 'Vas electionis' (1321), composed during the hearing in Avignon 'c'.1358. Incorporating material written before 6 December 1352, since in chapter 7 Clement VI is mentioned as the present pope, whereas in chapter 5 the pope is named as Innocent VI ('r'. 1352-62), it consists primarily of a defence of the mendicant privilege of hearing confessions, though it also examines the question of dominion. 
Conway further composed a 'Tractatus de regalia Christi', also known as 'Quaestiones tres de Christi paupertate et de dominio temporali' ('Three questions on Christ's poverty and on the nature of the dominion he enjoyed in this life'). The work is of interest as suggesting modifications in earlier, primarily Franciscan, concepts of mendicant poverty -- presumably because Conway was now arguing on behalf of all four orders of friars -- while strenuously resisting Fitzralph's attack on the entire mendicant state. 
A further work on mendicant pastoral privileges attributed to Conway, 'Intellectus fratrum de constitutione Vas electionis quoad negativam ibidem definitam', is largely identical with the second part of the 'Defensio mendicantium'. In his writings Conway shifted the emphasis away from poverty and mendicancy, and back to pastoral issues. He procured on 14 July 1359 from Innocent VI a bull reaffirming the papal confirmation of the privileges contained in 'Vas electionis'. According to John Bale, who gives no source, Conway died in London in 1360 and was buried in the choir of the Franciscan church there. He gave at least three, possibly four, manuscripts containing patristic, homiletic, canonistic, and exegetical works to his native convent in Chester (three are now in the library of Gray's Inn, London), but sold a copy of Thomas Aquinas's commentary on part of the 'Sentences' of Peter Lombard to Lewis Charlton (died 1369), a fellow theologian who was later bishop of Hereford. 


@@@@@


doc= 6125


Conway, William Augustus (1789-1828), actor, was born in Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square, London, and was educated under a clergyman named Payne in Barbados, where he had been sent to live with friends of his mother. He returned to England in weak health at the age of eighteen. In Bath he saw a play for the first time and developed a longing for the stage strong enough to triumph over his family's objections. Accordingly he appeared at Chester as Zanga in Edward Young's tragedy 'The Revenge', with such success that the manager, Macready, offered him an engagement. After playing varied roles in many northern and midland towns, from Macbeth to Glen Alvon in John Home's 'Douglas', he appeared in 1812 at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, in the parts vacated by J. G. Holman, who had gone to America. There, it is said, he formed a violent but unavailing passion for Eliza O'Neill, with whom he acted. He also met Charles Mathews, who recommended him to Covent Garden, where he made his London debut on 4 October 1813, as Alexander the Great in a piece of that name altered from Lee's 'Rival Queens'. During the season he played various Shakespearian characters, including Petruchio, Orlando, Othello, Romeo, Coriolanus, Henry V, and Antony in 'Julius Caesar'. Jaffier in 'Venice Preserv'd', Alonzo in 'The Revenge', Rolla in 'Pizarro', and other parts of importance were assigned him, though, as the company at Covent Garden included Charles Young and Charles Kemble, he had occasionally to take secondary roles. The season of 1815-16 added to his list of characters Macbeth, Theseus in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', Beverley in Edward Moore's 'The Gamester', Posthumus in 'Cymbeline', and Henry V in Garrick's 'Jubilee', acted on 23 April 1816 for the Shakespeare bicentenary. Conway then disappeared from Covent Garden, and was next heard of in Bath, where he performed in March 1817 Joseph Surface in 'The School for Scandal'. He stayed in Bath until 1820, playing a range of characters in tragedy and comedy, and in July 1821 appeared at the Haymarket as Lord Townly in John Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband'. Here he remained during the season, at the end of which he withdrew from the English stage. A malignant attack upon him, said to be by the dramatist Theodore Hook, was the cause of his retirement. 
A curious circumstance in Conway's life was the infatuation for him shown, on his appearance in London, by the friend of Dr Johnson Hester Lynch Piozzi, then almost eighty years of age. It was rumoured that Conway showed Charles Mathews a letter from her offering him marriage. In the sale of Conway's effects in New York after his death, there figured a copy of Young's 'Night Thoughts', on which was written, 'Presented to me by my dearly attached friend, the celebrated Mrs Piozzi'. More sensible conduct is, however, generally assigned her, and the authenticity of 'The Love Letters of Mrs Piozzi, Written when she was Eighty, to Aug. W. Conway' (London 1843) is disputed. Conway's conduct, at least, appears to have been honourable. There are records of his having been sent a cheque by Mrs Piozzi for $500, a few days before her death in May 1821, which he returned to the executors of her will, declining to take advantage of what he considered a posthumous grant, even though at the time he was in need of money. 
At the close of 1823 Conway started for America, and appeared on 12 January 1824 at the Park Theatre in New York, where he played Coriolanus, Lord Townly, Beverley, Petruchio, and other parts with great success. Later he delivered in New York some religious discourses. Early in 1828 he took a passage to Charleston. When the vessel arrived off Charleston bar, Conway threw himself overboard, and was drowned. He was a good actor and might well have been on the threshold of a brilliant career. He was, however, self-conscious, ill at ease, and morbidly sensitive to criticism, which could have been a reason for his suicide. 
In 1863, Conway's son Frederick Bartlett Conway (1819-1874), with his wife, Sarah Crocker (1834-1875), opened the first theatre in Brooklyn, the Park Theatre. They also opened the Brooklyn Theatre in 1871. 


@@@@@


doc= 6126


Cony, William (d. 1707), naval officer, was one of four children of unknown parentage, possibly born in Sutton, Oxfordshire. He was appointed second lieutenant of the 'Torbay' on 3 October 1696 and transferred twenty-three days later to the 'Humber'. In May 1699 he was appointed third lieutenant of the 'Kent' and moved in March 1701 to the 'Boyne'. In September, still a third lieutenant, he was appointed to the 'Sorlings' (32 guns). Four months later, having been promoted to first lieutenant, he moved to the 'Boyne' before moving to the 'Chichester' in March 1702. He was appointed commander of the 'Maidstone' in January 1703 and in April 1704 was appointed captain of the 'Sorlings'. 
Cony was married to Catherine Pleydell (died 1715) by the time he made out his will while at sea on 13 June 1704. He bequeathed gold mourning rings 'of a Guinea value' to his brother-in-law Edmund Pleydell and other members of the Pleydell family. He gave a shilling to his brother Edward and 50 guineas to his sister Elizabeth, and appointed his wife his sole executor. 
In October 1705 Cony was sent to the Baltic with the 'Pendennis' (50 guns) and the 'Blackwall'. On 20 October the three ships escorted a homeward-bound Baltic convoy and met four French men-of-war and five merchant ships commanded by the Chevalier St-Pol. In the ensuing battle, St-Pol and two of the English captains died and Cony twice repelled boarders. He was badly wounded but declared later that 'I struck not the Queen's colours but defended the ship to the last moment, and was taken sword in hand being overpowered by numbers'. After Cony was captured he suffered 'barbarous usage... I was stripped naked and left cold with my wounds bleeding' until a French officer arrived (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5266, Cony to [Josiah Burchett], Dunkirk, 20 Nov [1705]). Learning that Cony was the captain the Frenchman expressed concern at this treatment and had his wounds dressed -- 'My being alive I look on as a wonderful Providence' (ibid.). Cony was imprisoned at Dunkirk, where he was well treated by the governor until his release. In his absence a court martial held on 29 January 1706 investigated the capture of the 'Sorlings' and resolved that Cony 'did particularly distinguish himself... and having been several times boarded and repulsing the enemy and received several dangerous wounds' and recommended him to 'his Royal Highnesses Favour' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5266, CM 29 Jan 1706). 
As a result Cony was appointed to the 'Romney' (52 guns) and joined Sir Cloudesley Shovell in the Mediterranean before taking part in the reduction of Ostend. In December 1706 Cony, cruising with the 'Milford' and the 'Fowey', learned about a French ship, which they sighted on 17 December in Malaga Bay. The French privateer of sixteen guns, which had bronze cannon from the French flagship 'Magnamine' on board, lay close to the mole under the town's cannon, but Cony 'resolved to go in with his own ship and fetch her off'. He sailed in 'under French colours' and anchored 'within pistol shot' next to the Frenchman, who sent a boat to greet him. Cony captured the crew, 'put out the English colours and fired a whole broadside into the ship', and continued to fire until he 'drove the men out of her'. Then he sent his boat, cut the privateer's cables, and sailed out of the bay with his prize, 'notwithstanding a very warm fire from all the works of Malaga upon him', without losing a man ('LondG', 4298; TNA: PRO, ADM 51/4261/7, 'Milford'). 
On 3 January 1707 Cony burnt the fifty-gun French ship 'Content'. Two days later he challenged another ship. After it ignored him for the third time, he declared: 'I am The Queen of England's Man of War. If he were a Algereene he should bring to under my stern else I would fire at him'. Cony fired a gun at the ship: 'which in an instance was returned with a general fire of small arms and then a broadside. I was ready for him and I thought myself obliged to defend Her Majesty's Honour and my own Reputation and not to suffer Her Majesty's Colours to be affronted with powder and ball.' The chase eventually put out Algerine colours, but as the two ships were very near the shore and the Algerine 'got so close in among the rocks' Cony stood off (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1593, Cony to [Josiah Burchett], 27 March 1707). On 8 January Cony and the other ships burnt the forty-gun French privateer 'La Mercure'. 
Cony wrote to Burchett from Lisbon in March 1707: 'I Return His Royal Highness Thanks for the Honour he is pleased to do me in taking notice of the great success I have had in my cruise. I beg you to assure his Royal Highness that I will endeavour to do everything in my power to preserve his opinion of me. (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/1593, Cony to [Josiah Burchett], 27 March 1707)' Cony took part in Shovell's attack on Toulon and was in Sir Thomas Dilkes's flagship at the bombardment of Toulon. He returned to England with Shovell and died on 22 October 1707 when the 'Romney', inshore of Shovell's flagship, ran on the rocks in the Isles of Scilly and was lost with all hands. 


@@@@@


doc= 6127


Conybeare, John (1692-1755), bishop of Bristol, was born on 31 January 1692 at Pinhoe, near Exeter. He was educated at the Exeter Free School. His father, the vicar of Pinhoe, whose vicarage was wrecked by the famous storm of 1703, died about 1706 'of a disorder caught on that occasion'. Friends helped Conybeare to continue his education, and he was admitted at Exeter College, Oxford, on 22 March 1708. He was elected a probationary fellow of his college in June 1710, and full fellow on 14 July 1711. He was a member of the strongly whig Constitutional Club. Conybeare graduated BA on 17 July 1713, and on 30 June 1714 was appointed praelector in philosophy by his college. On 19 December 1714 he was ordained deacon, and on 27 May 1716 priest. 
After holding a curacy for a short time at Fetcham, Surrey, Conybeare returned to Oxford, became tutor of his college, and soon obtained a reputation as a staunchly orthodox Anglican. The university church of St Mary's was crowded when he was in the pulpit. In 1719 he was one of those in the forefront of the move to prosecute Thomas Warton for heterodoxy. A sermon of his on miracles published in 1722 went through four editions, and was followed by another on the mysteries in 1724. Bishop Gibson appointed him one of the newly founded king's preachers at Whitehall; and in May 1724 Lord Chancellor Macclesfield presented him to the small rectory of St Clement's, Oxford. He was proctor in 1725, and proceeded BD in June 1728, and DD in January 1729. Among his pupils were Thomas Secker and the two sons of Charles Talbot, then solicitor-general. Conybeare dedicated two sermons to the solicitor-general and his father, William Talbot, bishop of Durham. His chances of preferment were injured by the death of the bishop in 1730. In the same year, however, he was elected rector of Exeter College. In 1732 he published 'A Defence of Reveal'd Religion' in reply to Tindal's controversial 'Christianity as Old as the Creation'; Conybeare's work was praised as one of the four ablest books produced on the occasion. Warburton called it 'one of the best-reasoned books in the world'. Conybeare was a temperate and able writer, and his lucid arguments attracted support from as far afield as Germany. 
The Exeter rectorship was a poor one, and soon afterwards Bishop Gibson successfully procured Conybeare's appointment to the deanery of Christ Church. He was installed in January 1733, and on 6 June 1733 married Jemima ('bap'. 1703, died 1747), daughter of William and Elizabeth Juckes of Hoxton Square, London. The Conybeares had five children. 
At Exeter College Conybeare effected many reforms, putting a stop to the sale of servants' places and opposing absenteeism and pluralism among the fellows; he instituted tutorial fees and restored lectures. In 1734 he entertained the prince of Orange at the deanery. Conybeare seems to have been energetic at Christ Church. In 1735 he published 'Calumny Refuted, or, An Answer to the Personal Slander of Dr Richard Newton', this time when Newton was endeavouring to obtain a charter for Hart Hall, a plan opposed by Conybeare. He subsequently led the whig interest in the parliamentary election of 1737 against Newton and the tory interest, and he thereafter remained a staunch whig, publishing a sermon on 'True Patriotism' in 1749. His hopes of a bishopric were lowered by the death of Charles Talbot, while lord chancellor, in 1737, and by Bishop Gibson's loss of influence at court. In 1750, however, after Archbishop Herring interceded with Newcastle on his behalf, he was appointed to the see of Bristol, in succession to Joseph Butler. With the bishopric he continued to hold the Christ Church deanery. Conybeare was by now a widower, following the death of Jemima on 29 October 1747; his health was broken by gout and he was disabled for most of his episcopate. He died in Bristol on 13 July 1755, and was buried in Bristol Cathedral. Two of his children survived him, Jemima (died 1785) and William, who was to become DD and rector of St Botolph without Bishopsgate. They were left without much provision, and Archbishop Secker arranged for two volumes of sermons to be published by subscription for their benefit in 1757. As there were 4600 subscribers, many of whom took more than one copy, the results must have been satisfactory. Nevertheless Secker was obliged to solicit a pension of $140 for Conybeare's dependants. 


@@@@@


doc= 6128


Conybeare, John Josias (1779-1824), geologist, antiquary, and Church of England clergyman, was born on 10 June 1779 at St Botolph's rectory, Bishopsgate, London, elder son of the then rector, William Conybeare (1739-1815), and his wife, Margaret Hester Olivier (1764-1806). William Daniel Conybeare (1787-1857) was his younger brother. He attended Westminster School (where he was captain of school) before going up to Christ Church, Oxford. There he won the chancellor's prize in 1800, graduating BA in 1801 and MA in 1804. From 1808 until 1812 he was professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford, and from 1812 until 1821 professor of poetry. 
Conybeare was ordained on 13 June 1802, prebendary of York from 1803, and in 1812 became vicar of Batheaston, in Somerset. He resided there from 1814 and much improved the parish, erecting a national school in the churchyard (1818) and a chemical laboratory at the front of his vicarage. He married Mary (1790-1848), only daughter of the Revd Charles Davies (1742-1810), on 21 February 1814. 
Conybeare was an early enthusiast for both chemistry and geology. He set up his own laboratory in Oxford in 1804, and published fourteen scientific papers -- the most significant of his geology papers concerning Devon and Cornwall. He was one of the original honorary members of the Geological Society of London and, between 1807 and 1812, visited many English counties, probably with his brother, gathering geological data with which he constructed rudimentary geological maps. He was a member of the Revd Richard Warner's Bath Literary Breakfasts, and was also, according to the surveyor R. C. Taylor (1789-1851), one of a triumvirate of local clerics who there supported the geologist William Smith and helped disseminate his results. 
Conybeare died suddenly of apoplexy, on 11 June 1824 at the house of Stephen Groombridge at Blackheath, having just delivered the Bampton lectures for 1824 at Oxford. He was buried at Batheaston on 20 June. News of his sudden death confused many, including Robert Bakewell (1768-1843) in England and Benjamin Silliman (1779-1864) in America. They both assumed this death was that of his brother W. D. Conybeare, who thus has the melancholy distinction of having had his death announced prematurely twice. The Society of Antiquaries, which had published 'endless Anglo Saxon texts' (Evans, 235) for Conybeare from 1811 to 1823, still felt able to encourage the posthumous publication in 1826 of his 'Illustrations of Anglo-Saxon Poetry', edited by his brother. The early death of Conybeare, who 'was considered one of the most learned men of his day' (Mitchell, 332), was widely mourned. 


@@@@@


doc= 6129


Conybeare, William Daniel (1787-1857), geologist and dean of Llandaff, was born at St Botolph's rectory, Bishopsgate, London, on 7 June 1787, younger son of the rector, William Conybeare (1739-1815), and his wife, Margaret Hester Olivier (1764-1806). His elder brother was John Josias Conybeare (1779-1824). From 1802 to 1803 he attended Westminster School and he entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1805, graduating BA in 1808 (first class in classics, second in mathematics), and MA in 1811. 
Conybeare had been introduced to fossil hunting at his parents' Bexley summer home, and Stukeley's 'Itinerarium curiosum' (1776) was another early inspiration. By 1809 he 'was prepared at once to seize the general fact of the successive distribution' of fossils in rocks 'when first laid down as an admitted fact in... geology' (W. D. Conybeare, 137). He visited many southern English counties between 1807 and 1812 to compile geological maps, was elected member of the Geological Society of London in 1811, and was much involved with the new Oxford Geology Club -- also established in 1811. In 1813 he studied Northern Ireland with William Buckland; they convinced themselves, and soon others, that basalt here was volcanic in origin. Conybeare was also much involved with the Geological Society's map, published in 1820. 
Conybeare had been ordained deacon in 1813 and on 23 August 1814 married Sarah Anne (1790/91-1864), daughter of Captain Charles Ranken or Rankin of the East India Company, of co. Down, Ireland; the Conybeares had six children, the eldest of whom was William John Conybeare, Church of England clergyman and author. Once married he had to leave Oxford; he settled as curate in Suffolk. In 1815 Conybeare's father died. His father had 'received, for thirty to forty years, an annual income of not less than $3500 from ecclesiastical preferments alone' (H. C. A. Conybeare, pt 3, 47), so his death meant that Conybeare was to have few financial worries for the remainder of his life. The following year he went on an important continental tour, with Buckland and Greenough, to gain 'a general view of the Formations of the Continent... to identify them with those of England and to ascertain to what extent the science had been cultivated abroad' (Torrens, 'Geology') during the Napoleonic wars. 
In 1817 Conybeare took up a new curacy at Chalcombe near Banbury, but the following year moved as a priest to Cropredy. In August 1819 he was appointed lecturer to St Luke's, Brislington, Bristol, and he was elected FRS that December. With Henry De la Beche, whom he had met at the Oxford club's Clifton meeting in 1818, he started work on the extinct marine reptiles 'Ichthyosaurus' and 'Plesiosaurus' (Conybeare's newly recognized genus). The two men helped inaugurate the Bristol Literary and Philosophical Institution in 1820 and also its associated society. Conybeare was encouraged by now living next to one of the earliest collectors of liassic reptiles, G. W. Braikenridge (1775-1856). This work culminated in three important papers by Conybeare, published between 1821 and 1824. About this time he also undertook a detailed survey of south-west coalfields with William Buckland -- work published in 1824. During the survey, in 1820, he gave field tuition to Adam Sedgwick. 
Conybeare's most important work, with William Phillips, was 'Outlines of the Geology of England and Wales, Part One' (ultimately the only part published), which appeared in June 1822. Conybeare extended and vastly improved Phillips's earlier attempts of 1816-18. The book stratigraphically surveyed all rocks down to the Old Red Sandstone. It also contained full catalogues of the fossils found in each formation, and first named the Carboniferous. It became Roderick Murchison's 'scientific bible' (Geikie, 1.126) and Whewell called it 'an event far more important than it might at first appear', because of 'the vast impulse which it gave to the study of sound descriptive geology... felt and acknowledged in other countries as well as in Britain' (Whewell, 429). This book and the geological maps of Smith (1815) and Greenough (1820) inspired French visitors to England in 1823 to learn how to prepare an equivalent map and memoir for France. The German Karl von Zittel called the book 'classic' and confirmed how the methods it had adopted 'signified the scientific recognition and marked success of William Smith's reform' (Zittel, 426). 
In January 1823 Conybeare started publication of a 'Memoir illustrative of a general geological map of the principal mountain chains of Europe', with a coloured map in the 'Annals of Philosophy'. Only six parts appeared, the last in September 1823, because this work had caused a serious breach with G. B. Greenough, president of the Geological Society of London (1807-13, 1818-20, and 1833-5), by June 1823. Greenough felt his plans for a similar map should have had priority. As a result, both projects were abandoned, Conybeare's half-finished. The death of Conybeare's only brother in June 1824 also affected him deeply and he published nothing further on geology between 1824 and 1829. 
In 1822 Conybeare had been appointed rector of Sully, Glamorgan, and in 1827 he left Brislington to live there. Late in that year he was elected corresponding member of the Institut de France, for his reptilian studies and stratigraphic work. William Phillips died in April 1828 and Conybeare now hoped to complete his 'Outlines', by collaborating with Adam Sedgwick of Cambridge. However, a serious carriage accident in October 1829, which resulted in Conybeare's being badly concussed, helped put paid to this. Conybeare was elected an honorary MA of Cambridge University in 1831 and at the Oxford meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1832 he read an important 'Report on the progress... of geology' to the first geology section. Conybeare was by now the leading diluvialist theoretician in England and led opposition to Lyell's 'Principles of Geology' in the 1830s, although Lyell could now note with justice that Conybeare 'promises but does not perform' (Wilson, 273). 
In April 1836 Conybeare presented himself to the family rectory of Axminster and moved to Devon. He was thus on hand in 1839 and 1840 to make his last significant geological observations, on the Lyme Regis landslip. With William Dawson and Professor and Mrs Buckland he issued 'Ten Plates' describing the landslip in 1840, but the 1830s had seen him busiest on theological matters, preaching the Oxford Bampton lectures in 1839. In the 1840s Conybeare abandoned his geology, though he received the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society in 1844. He remained at Axminster until a final move to Llandaff in 1848, where, having become dean in 1845, he was much involved in restoring the cathedral. He died on 12 August 1857 at the rectory, Itchenstoke, Hampshire. Conybeare had been the 'most impressive intellectually' (Rupke, 10) of the early Oxford school of geologists, but his reputation has since suffered because of the loss of his archives. 


@@@@@


doc= 6130


Conybeare, William John (1815-1857), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 1 August 1815 at Eliot Place, Lewisham, the eldest of six children of William Daniel Conybeare (1787-1857), geologist and dean of Llandaff, and his wife, Sarah Anne, daughter of Captain Charles Rankin. The infant Conybeare enjoyed a peripatetic life determined by his father's geological interests, until in 1819 the family settled at Brislington, Bristol, moving to Sully, Glamorgan, in 1827. The following year Conybeare was sent to Westminster School, where his friends included George Lynch Cotton. While at the school he permanently damaged one eye, and in 1829 experienced the first serious bout of the ill health that dogged him throughout his life, obliging him to spend much time at home. In 1833 he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner, where he won the college Greek Testament prize in 1834 and a scholarship in 1835. He graduated BA in 1837 as third classic and thirty-fifth wrangler; he was elected a minor fellow of Trinity in 1839, and on taking his MA in 1840 proceeded to a major fellowship. He served the college as third sub-lecturer and steward before being appointed mathematical lecturer in 1842. 
Although he had joined Lincoln's Inn in 1840, Conybeare was then ordained deacon, and travelled in Italy and Greece before being ordained priest in 1841. He was subsequently appointed Whitehall preacher, serving until 1844. In 1842 Conybeare left Cambridge to become first principal of the Liverpool Collegiate Institution, a school 'for two social grades which lie between the higher ranks of English society on the one hand and those who send their children to National Schools on the other' (H. C. A. Conybeare, 36). On 22 December of the same year he married Eliza (1820-1903), daughter of the Revd Joseph Rose of Rothley, Leicestershire, and first cousin once removed of Thomas Babington Macaulay. There were three children: John William Edward (1843-1931), later vicar of Barrington, Cambridgeshire, historian of the county and convert to Roman Catholicism; Bruce Dicey (1846-1850); and Grace ('b'. 1855). 
When illness prompted Conybeare to resign his Liverpool post in 1848 his father presented him to the family living of Axminster, Devon, worth some $1000 per annum. Here he co-operated with his college friend and successor at Liverpool, John Saul Howson, on 'The Life and Epistles' (originally, in best Victorian fashion, 'Life and Letters') 'of St Paul' (1852). His health worsened. In 1852 a supposedly therapeutic visit to the house in Funchal, Madeira, taken by his father for Conybeare's fatally consumptive brother, John Crawford William, probably caused his own tuberculosis. The next three years passed in further recuperative travel, Conybeare resigning Axminster in 1854. In 1856 he finally settled at Warren Cottage, Weybridge, Surrey, where he died from tuberculosis on 23 July 1857. He was buried in Weybridge; his father, taken ill travelling to visit him, succumbed three weeks after his son's death. 
Conybeare's modern reputation rests on his activity as a reviewer and novelist during his last years (although 'St Paul' enjoyed currency into the twentieth century, especially in the United States). The articles he wrote on religious subjects for the 'Quarterly Review' (1847-56) and the 'Edinburgh Review' (1852-4) exhibit a witty but occasionally brutally combative style: 'The Record' dubbed him the 'BRUMMAGEN Sydney Smith' (3 Nov 1853). His character assassination of 'Bishop Phillpotts' ('Edinburgh Review', 95, 1852) and his insightful study 'The church in the mountains' (ibid., 97, 1853) are often cited, but his most important and controversial article, published in the 'Edinburgh Review' (98, 1853) and in several subsequent revised editions, was 'Church parties'. Containing numerical estimates of the strength of different factions of the mid-nineteenth-century Church of England and lively accounts of their clerical cultures, this remains the starting point for investigations into the subject, and popularized the term 'broad church' as a description of liberal Anglicanism. 
Conybeare's last major publication was the novel 'Perversion, or, The Causes and Consequences of Infidelity' (1856), which drew on his articles and his own and friends' lives for a melodramatic account of the sources of scepticism in the extremes of contemporary religious culture (including -- unexpectedly through the character of an otherwise Flashmanesque villain -- Mormonism). If Conybeare's deficiencies as a novelist account in part for 'Perversion''s lukewarm reception, passages which suggested a 'roman-a-clef' caused scandal, especially its blunt portrayal of homoeroticism in an Anglo-Catholic Oxford tutor (possibly modelled on Frederick William Faber). Others bemoaned 'Perversion''s lack of charity to scepticism: Richard Holt Hutton described it as a 'hard church novel' and its author as a man of 'vigorous and somewhat menacing understanding' (Hutton, 127-8). More recently 'Perversion' has received attention as a significant example of the literature of the Victorian crisis of faith, one commentator characterizing it as 'a long and convincing argument by case history, rather than by sermonizing, for the liberal theological and practical views of Coleridge and Thomas Arnold' (Wolff, 283-4). Taken together with the article literature and sermons, the novel identifies Conybeare's own theological position as what he dubbed 'normal broad church', with more sympathy for Thomas Arnold and Julius Charles Hare than Benjamin Jowett and Rowland Williams. 


@@@@@


doc= 6131


Henry Conyngham, first Marquess Conyngham (1766-1832), was born on 26 December 1766, the elder of the twin sons of Francis Pierrepoint Burton, second Baron Conyngham (died 1787) (who took the surname Conyngham in 1781 on succeeding to the title), and his wife, Elizabeth Clements (died 1814/1816), sister of the first earl of Leitrim. He succeeded his father as the third Baron Conyngham in 1787, and was created Viscount Conyngham in the Irish peerage in 1789. In 1794 he raised the Londonderry regiment, and was made lieutenant-colonel that August; for this action, and for his influence as a magistrate during the upheavals in Ireland in the 1790s, he was created Viscount Mountcharles and Earl Conyngham, again in the Irish peerage, on 5 November 1797. In the Irish House of Lords he was a vigorous supporter of the 'Act of Union' between Britain and Ireland; when it was passed in 1801 he was elected one of the first Irish representative peers, was made a knight of St Patrick, and received $15,000 in cash for his close borough of Killybegs in the Irish House of Commons. Having thus benefited considerably from the sale of his country's independence, Conyngham took little further active interest in politics, although he generally supported the tory and ministerial party in the Lords. He is said to have owed his elevation to the marquessate in 1816 to his wife's relationship with the prince regent. 


@@@@@


doc= 6132


Conington, Richard (d. 1330), Franciscan friar and theologian, is of unknown origins. He is first mentioned in July 1300 when, along with John Duns Scotus, Robert Cowton, and nineteen other Oxford Franciscans, he was presented (unsuccessfully) to Bishop John Dalderby of Lincoln by the Franciscan provincial minister, Hugh of Hartlepool, for licence to hear confessions; only eight licences were granted. As an advanced student in theology he participated in disputations at Oxford in or shortly after 1300. He lectured on the 'Sentences' at Oxford as a bachelor of theology 'c'.1302-3, and was the Franciscan regent master (DTh) at Oxford 'c'.1306. He subsequently lectured on scripture as Franciscan regent master at Cambridge. His lost commentary on the penitential psalms, whose opening words, according to Bale, were 'Saepius dum sedebam solitarius', was probably a result of his teaching as master at Oxford or Cambridge. In 1310 he was elected provincial minister for the Franciscan order in England, a position he apparently held until 1316. He died at Cambridge in 1330 and was buried there in the Franciscan convent. 
Although a contemporary and co-religious of Duns Scotus, Conington often favoured the positions of theologians of the previous academic generation, particularly the views of Henri de Gand, who died in 1293. John Baconthorpe, a Carmelite friar and younger contemporary, as well as an anonymous author in Vatican City, Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, MS Vat. lat. 869, described Conington as a disciple ('discipulus') of Henri, which R. L. Poole interpreted to mean Conington had studied under Henri at Paris, but which Doucet read as implying only that Conington followed in Henri's intellectual footsteps. It is likely that Conington was among the select group of Franciscans sent to Paris for part of their initial theological training, which would have been in the early 1290s, but his training would have come primarily through Franciscan masters. Several of Conington's quodlibetal questions and disputed questions have survived from his teaching at Oxford or Cambridge. 
While he was in attendance at the Council of Vienne (1311-12) as provincial minister, Conington wrote a treatise on apostolic poverty, 'Beatus qui intelligit' (ed. Heysse, 1930), which he followed in 1322 with a second treatise, 'Responsiones ad conclusiones domini papae' (ed. Douie, 1931), which was critical of the views Pope John XXII expressed on this issue in the bull 'Ad conditorem canonum' of the same year. He is also credited by Leland and Bale with a defence, 'De Christi Dominio', of John XXII against the attacks of William Ockham, and by Leland with a commentary on the 'Quadragesimale' of Pope Gregory the Great. Conington was widely cited by contemporaries who, in addition to Baconthorpe, included William Alnwick, Robert Walsingham, William of Nottingham, Peter Thomas, and John Reading. Contemporary citations from his lost commentary on the 'Sentences' may eventually help identify it. 


@@@@@


doc= 6133


Coode, Sir John (1816-1892), civil engineer, was born at Bodmin on 11 November 1816, the son of Charles Coode, solicitor, and Ann, daughter of Joseph Bennett, rector of Great Wigborough, Essex. He was educated at Bodmin grammar school and after leaving school entered his father's office. His natural tastes, however, were not for law but for engineering, and he was therefore articled to the civil engineer James Meadows Rendel of Plymouth. On completion of his pupillage he worked briefly with Rendel and subsequently on the new Great Western Railway line between Bristol and Exeter. Coode married, on 5 October 1842, Jane Dod, daughter of William Price of Weston-super-Mare; they had at least one son. 
Between 1844 and 1847 Coode had his own practice in Westminster as a consulting engineer, working predominantly on the proposed Santander to Madrid Railway. In 1847 he was appointed resident engineer in charge of the construction of the works at Portland harbour, which had been designed by Rendel. On the death of the latter in 1856 Coode was appointed engineer-in-chief, a post he retained until the completion of the work in 1872. This harbour provided the largest area of deep water of any artificial harbour in Great Britain, and was a work of major national importance at the time, constructed partly by the use of convict labour. The first stone of the great breakwater was laid by the prince consort on 25 July 1849, and the work was completed in 1872. Coode was knighted in 1872 for his services in connection with this undertaking. In 1856, Coode had established his firm of consulting engineers which survived, with amalgamations, through three generations of his direct descendants. From 1858 he served as a member of the royal commission on harbours of refuge around Britain and Ireland. He also began to develop his overseas work. 
Coode was consulted by several of the most important British colonial governments, notably by those of the South African and Australian colonies, in reference to proposed harbour works, and he made several journeys to South Africa, Australia, and India in connection with the schemes upon which his advice was sought. Following his appointment as engineer-in-chief for Table Bay harbour, work proceeded from 1859 to 1870, with the subsequent addition of a graving dock in 1882. For many years, Coode served as consulting engineer for harbours to the crown agents, leading to many appointments in the British colonies. In 1873, he reported on the harbour for Colombo; construction of this major harbour started in 1874, and the works, extended with increasing trade, were completed in 1885. In 1877 he designed the works for Port Natal, Durban; the previous year he had advised on harbour works for Mossel Bay, Knysna, and Plattenberg Bay in Cape Colony. In 1878 he recommended harbour improvements for Port Phillip, Melbourne, where 'Coode island' results from realignment of the River Yarra. He also advised the state of Victoria on several other harbour proposals and river improvements. He inspected major and minor harbours in New Zealand, leading to recommendations for works undertaken at Dunedin. 
In 1885 Coode inspected sites for port works at Trincomali, Bombay, and Singapore, selecting the latter for a new graving dock. In the same year he gave comprehensive advice for port developments for New South Wales. He also advised on harbour proposals for St Lucia, Trinidad, Accra, Lagos, Kyrenia, Penang, Sierra Leone, Heligoland (a British colony), Newfoundland, Pondoland, Fremantle and Port Adelaide. Among the great number of other harbour works for which Coode was responsible may be mentioned Waterford harbour, and plans for the Dover commercial harbour, work for which was proceeding at the time of his death. He was a member of the royal commission on metropolitan sewage discharge (1882-4), and of the international commission of the Suez Canal; on the latter he served from 1884 until his death in 1892. He was made KCMG in 1886. 
Coode was probably the most distinguished harbour engineer of the nineteenth century. He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1849, served for many years on the council, and was president from May 1889 to May 1891. He was also an active member of the Royal Colonial Institute, and sat on its council from 1881 until his death. Coode contributed a paper to the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1852 on the Chesil Bank ('Proc. Inst. Civil Eng.', 12.520), providing a cogent explanation for the physical characteristics of this long shingle feature. He also wrote many professional reports about the harbour projects he was engaged upon, and these were often published. Coode died at Brighton on 2 March 1892 following a severe operation in Italy the previous year. 


@@@@@


doc= 6134


Cook, Edward Dutton (1829-1883), theatre critic and author, was born at 9 Grenville Street, Brunswick Square, London, on 30 January 1829, the second son among at least nine children of George Simon Cook (died 1852) of Grantham, Lincolnshire, a solicitor of the firm of Le Blanc and Cook of Blackfriars, London, and his wife, Frances Sophia, 'nee' Smith. At the age of six he went to a school kept by a Miss Boswell at Haverstock Hill. He moved to another school at Bradmore House, Chiswick, and finally, about 1843, entered King's College School. Having completed his education he was articled to his father, and remained in his office for about four years, after which he found work in the Madras Railway Company's office in New Broad Street in the City. In his spare time he followed his artistic and literary tastes, and as soon as he was able he left the railway company and devoted himself entirely to literature as a profession. Having studied painting under Rolt, and learned engraving, he at one time sought employment on 'Punch' as a draughtsman on wood. In 1859 he became a member of the Artists' rifle corps and of the Ramblers' Club, which met every night from November to May at Dick's Tavern, Fleet Street. About this period, in conjunction with Leopold Lewis, he wrote a melodrama entitled 'The Dove and the Serpent', which was produced with much success, under Nelson Lee's management, at the City of London Theatre. 
From 1867 to October 1875 Cook was the theatre critic for the 'Pall Mall Gazette', while simultaneously acting as the assistant editor of the 'Cornhill Magazine' (1868-71). In 1875 he resigned from the 'Pall Mall Gazette' when some of his articles were tampered with, and was asked by Edmund Yates to become theatre critic for 'The World' newspaper, a post he held until his death. On 20 August 1874 he married Linda Scates (1854/5-1915), the second daughter of Joseph Scates, a musician. They had met at Gad's Hill Place, at the house of Charles Dickens. She was a pupil of the Royal Academy of Music and a well-known pianist. Soon they had a daughter, whom they named Sylvia after the heroine of Cook's first novel. 
Cook was a writer of numerous articles on art topics in various reviews, newspapers, and periodicals, and the author of many works of fiction. Of the latter, 'Paul Foster's Daughter', his first work, served to establish his reputation in 1861. Although he remained a prolific writer, with 'Hobson's Choice', 'Young Mr Nightingale', and many other novels being published regularly, his later novels did not maintain the popularity which his earlier works achieved: his style was not sufficiently sensational to suit the fashion of the period. He was one of the contributors to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and furnished the dramatic and theatrical lives in letter A to the first and second volumes. Most successful were his writings on the theatre, which include 'A Book of the Play' (1876), 'Hours with the Players' (two vols., 1881), 'Nights at the Play', and 'On the Stage' (both 1883, the former containing selected articles from his contributions to the 'Pall Mall Gazette' and 'The World', including his notices of early London appearances of Henry Irving and Ellen Terry). Cook died suddenly of syncope, following heart disease, at his home, 69 Gloucester Crescent, on 11 September 1883, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 15 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 6135


Cook, Eliza (1812-1889), poet and journalist, was born on 24 December 1812 in London Road, Southwark, the youngest of eleven children of Joseph Cook, a tinman and brazier. Her poem 'The Streets' recalls her London childhood. Her father retired from business when she was about nine years old, and the family moved to a farm in St Leonard's Forest, near Horsham, Sussex. Cook was probably largely self-educated, but with her mother's encouragement she began to write poetry before the age of fifteen. In a preface to her collected 'Poems' (1845), she described this as a period in which 'rhyme was probably faster than reason'. Her mother died when she was fifteen, and poems such as 'The Old Arm-Chair' and 'I miss thee, my mother' testify to her loss. 
Cook's first volume of poetry, 'Lays of a Wild Harp', was published in 1835. Shortly thereafter she began submitting poems under her initials to the 'Weekly Dispatch', 'Metropolitan Magazine', and 'New Monthly Magazine'. Her work was praised by William Jerdan in the 'Literary Gazette', and the popular response to her poems prompted her to reveal her name to the public. She was then living in St George's Road, Walworth. Her second volume of poetry, 'Melaia and other Poems', was published in 1838 and reissued in 1840 and 1845; it met with popular success in both England and America. Her last volume, 'New Echoes and other Poems', was published in 1864. 
The appeal of Cook's poems lay in their simple forms and subjects and in the sentiment which infused them, which has aptly been described as 'consistently humane' (Taylor, 190). Her work was compared to that of Robert Burns, whom she admired. Cook wrote with great sympathy of marginal figures, including labourers, poor children, homesick seafarers, and American Indians. In A. H. Miles's 'Poets and Poetry of the Nineteenth Century', J. H. Ingram wrote that Cook 'sang for the people, and was comprehended of the people'. Cook's treatment of the disfranchised was informed by strong democratic beliefs, forcefully expressed in her poem 'Nature's Gentleman': '
Nature with a matchless hand, sends forth 'her' nobly born, 

And laughs the paltry attributes of wealth and rank to scorn. 

' Some of her poems, such as 'A Song, to 'The People' of England', were overtly revolutionary. As a testament to their widespread popularity, a number of her poems (including 'The Old Arm-Chair', 'The Old Water Mill', 'The Indian Hunter', and 'O come to the ingle side') were set to music by various composers in the 1840s and 1850s. In addition, her poem on Thomas Hood ('Poor Hood') led to the erection of a memorial to him in Kensal Green cemetery. 
In 1849 Cook began publishing a weekly miscellany, 'Eliza Cook's Journal'. In her first issue Cook punned on her surname, describing her editorial role as that of preparing 'a plain feast, where the viands will be all of my own choosing, and some of my own dressing'. The goal of her 'Journal' was to assist in the 'stirring development of progressive mind in 'the mass'' by providing materials that would provide a 'steady and free communion with Truth'. While her 'Journal' was certainly directed towards women readers and contained many of the staples of women's magazines -- including poetry, tips on housekeeping and childcare, and juvenile fiction -- it was also directed to members of the working classes. The 'Journal' thus supported and extended the democratic ideals expressed in Cook's poetry. During its five-year run the 'Journal' regularly featured strongly worded essays (many of them written by Cook) advocating increased educational and employment opportunities for women and for working-class people. Its pages supported public libraries, mechanics' institutions, extended Sunday hours for museums and exhibitions, and expanded career opportunities for women (such as interior and fashion design, engraving, typesetting, and watchmaking). 'Eliza Cook's Journal' also supported emigration and looked to America for models of social reform. In addition to her own work, Cook published essays, poetry, and fiction by Samuel Smiles, Eliza Meteyard (Silverpen), Frances Deane, and Charles Hardwick. Cook's journalistic endeavours met with success: the 'Journal' achieved a first-year circulation of between 50,000 and 60,000 copies (Altick, 394). Forced by ill health to cease publication in 1854, Cook used her final 'Word to my readers' to thank readers for supporting her 'efforts in the cause of simple Poetry and popular Progression', and to reiterate that she had undertaken the 'Journal' 'less with the desire of gaining my daily bread than with the wish to be of use to my fellow creatures'. Many of her essays were reissued in 1860 as 'Jottings from my Journal', and in 1865 sayings and aphorisms from the 'Journal' were collected, supplemented by new material, and published as 'Diamond Dust'. 
The sentiments expressed in Cook's poetry and prose reflect her efforts to break free from the societal limitations imposed on her class and gender. A woman who prided herself on her tiny hands and feet, Cook dressed in unconventionally masculine attire and wore her hair short. J. Leach notes that Cook's dress 'proclaimed a determination to be herself' and relates how an 1851 story in the 'New York Times' describes her as 'Tilting back in her chair, planting both feet on the fender', and 'bluffly order[ing] a glass of beer' (Leach, 157). Cook was also most probably a lesbian. She never married, and from 1845 to 1849 she was closely linked with the American actress Charlotte Cushman (1816-1876), to whom she wrote passionate poetic tributes ('To Charlotte Cushman'). 
Although collected editions of her works appeared in the 1870s and 1880s, Cook's public life ended in the 1860s. In 1863 she was granted a civil-list pension of $100 per annum. She appears to have lived in relative seclusion and semi-invalidism until her death at her home, Beech House, 23 Thornton Hill, Wimbledon, on 23 September 1889. 


@@@@@


doc= 6136


Cook, Frederick Charles (1804-1889), clergyman and biblical scholar, was born on 1 December 1804 at Millbrook, near Southampton, Hampshire, the son of William Cook. He was admitted as a sizar at St John's College, Cambridge, on 8 July 1824, and as a foundress scholar on 8 November 1825. In 1828 he took a first-class award in the classical tripos, and he graduated BA in 1831 and MA in 1844. He also studied under B. G. Niebuhr at Bonn, and became involved in a financially unsuccessful attempt at running a school near Paris. He then returned to England, where he was ordained deacon in the established church on 22 December 1839 and priest on 20 December 1840. 
In 1841 Cook became secretary to the London diocesan board and an inspector of schools in London and Middlesex; on 31 January 1844 he became one of her majesty's inspectors of church schools. On 2 June 1846, at Brighton, he married Janet Barbara Sophia (Jessie) MacKenzie (1810-1889), daughter of Alexander Douglas MacKenzie of Bursledon, Hampshire, and his wife, Sophia; they had no children. Cook was then living at St Michael, Highgate, in London. In 1849 he edited two poetry anthologies for schools, and in the following year his commentary on the book of 'Acts' was published. On 30 June 1855 he was installed prebendary of Ealdstreet, in St Paul's Cathedral. 
While in London Cook participated in an attempt at dialogue with representatives of the Eastern Orthodox church. On 30 March 1857 he was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria and on 14 September 1861 he became prebendary of Carlton-cum-Thurlby, in Lincoln Cathedral. On 13 February 1862 he was elected preacher at Lincoln's Inn: according to the obituary of Cook in 'Notes and Gleanings', E. B. Denison described him as the best preacher in England. 
By 1863, following the unease caused by 'Essays and Reviews' (1860) and by J. W. Colenso's ideas, it had occurred to J. E. Denison, speaker of the House of Commons, that the biblical questions raised should be answered by an authoritative commentary incorporating the church's traditional beliefs. This idea was eventually realized as 'The Holy Bible... with... Commentary' (or 'Speaker's Commentary', 10 vols., 1871-81). In view of his knowledge of Hebrew and of the archaeology of the Holy Land, Cook was appointed general editor, 'the great work of his life' ('Notes and Gleanings'), and wrote all or part of the commentary on 'Job', 'Mark', and six other books. Many felt that the learning displayed in the work was neutralized by its apologetic aim, and the 'Pentateuch' section was severely criticized by Colenso and others. 
In April 1864 Cook had been installed prebendary and canon residentiary of Exeter Cathedral, and in 1867, the better to tackle his work on the commentary, he was beginning to study Egyptian hieroglyphics. He was made precentor of Exeter Cathedral on 11 May 1872 and resigned the preachership at Lincoln's Inn in 1880 because of ill health. From then on Cook devoted himself largely to linguistic studies, but his deep misgivings about the Revised Version of the 'Bible' led to four publications on the subject between 1881 and 1885. In 'The Origins of Religion and Language' (1884) he propounded a primeval unity of language and belief among humanity. 
Cook was a complete invalid during the last four years of his life, but he continued adding to his remarkable book collection, which he bequeathed to the Exeter chapter and which remains part of Exeter Cathedral Library. The collection contains works in many more than the fifty-two languages with which Cook was reportedly acquainted. Cook was also the author of several sermons, and he contributed to various books and periodicals on religious and linguistic subjects. A photograph, apparently taken when Cook was in his eighties, shows him with a generous growth of white hair and beard. Cook died at his house in Exeter Cathedral close on 22 June 1889 and was buried at the cemetery in St Thomas, near Exeter, Devon, on 26 June. His wife died three months later, on 5 October. 
A conservative scholar of international repute, Cook was philanthropic, hospitable, and well liked, a Christian gentleman who used his gifts in the service of his faith and who came to represent a bygone age. One of the tributes to him claimed that he 'had done the work of at least a dozen men' ('Western Morning News', 24 June 1889). 


@@@@@


doc= 6137


Cook, George (1772-1845), Church of Scotland minister and ecclesiastical historian, was born in December 1772 in St Andrews, the second son of the Revd John Cook, professor of moral philosophy in the University of St Andrews, and Janet, daughter of the Revd John Hill, minister of St Andrews. John Cook (1771-1824) was his elder brother. Educated at the United College at the University of St Andrews (1786-90), he was awarded an MA in 1790 and spent the next four years studying divinity at St Mary's College at St Andrews. Cook was licensed a preacher in the Church of Scotland by St Andrews presbytery in April 1795 and the following June was presented by the principal and masters of St Mary's College to the living of Laurencekirk. On 23 February 1801 Cook married Diana, daughter of Alexander Shank, minister of St Cyrus, with whom he had seven children. 
In 1808 Cook published his first major work, 'An Illustration of the General Evidence Establishing the Reality of Christ's Resurrection', and the same year received the degree of DD from St Andrews University. Subsequently he devoted himself to the study of the constitution and history of the Church of Scotland. In 1811 he published the 'History of the Reformation in Scotland', which was followed in 1815 by the 'History of the Church of Scotland'. In 1820 he published 'The Life of George Hill', a biography of the long-time leader of the moderate party in the Church of Scotland, who was also his maternal uncle, and in 1822 a 'General and Historical View of Christianity'. His work was characterized by lucidity and accuracy, although his narrative style was cold and formal. 
From an early period Cook took a prominent part in the general assembly, and on the death of George Hill in 1819 he endeavoured to succeed him as leader of the moderate party. Cook had, however, in opposition to the general views of the party, taken a decided stand against pluralities and non-residence -- publishing a pamphlet on the importance of a resident parish clergy in 1816. Many moderates therefore distrusted him as a reformer with popular sympathies, and when he was proposed as moderator of the general assembly in 1821 and 1822 he was defeated on both occasions by large majorities. His temperate views, however, won over the party and he was unanimously elected moderator in 1825: from this time he was generally recognized as leader of the moderate party. In 1829 he was appointed professor of moral philosophy at St Andrews University, and demitted his charge at Laurencekirk, though this made no change in his relation to the Church of Scotland. 
In 1834 the evangelical party, under the leadership of Thomas Chalmers, gained control of the general assembly and sought to modify the civil law of patronage by passing the 'Veto Act'. This gave male communicants in a parish the right to veto the presentation of an unacceptable patron's candidate to the ministry of that parish. Cook strenuously opposed the passing of the 'Veto Act', claiming that it was an illegal infringement on the civil rights of patrons and presentees, and would involve the church in conflict with the civil courts. It would be more effective and constitutional, he argued, to leave it to presbyteries to judge the fitness of presentees and to refuse to ordain or translate unacceptable ones. When, as he predicted, the 'Veto Act' did lead to conflict between church and state, Cook maintained that an established church had to accept the decisions of the civil courts with respect to the civil law of patronage, and repeal its 'Veto Act'. He rejected the evangelical argument that this would compromise the church's 'spiritual independence'. Though unable to compete with Chalmers as a popular orator, Cook possessed great readiness of reply, while clear and logical exposition and accurate knowledge of the laws and constitution of the church enabled him to hold his own in technical arguments. 
In 1843 the patronage conflict culminated in the Disruption of the Church of Scotland. Cook became leader of the majority, who remained in the established church, and he sought to rebuild trust between the church and state. However, he did not long survive the Disruption. Shortly after the assembly of 1844 he was attacked by heart disease, and he died suddenly at St Andrews on 13 May 1845. Four sons and one daughter survived him, including his eldest son, John Cook (1807-1874), minister at Haddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 6138


Cook, Henry (1642?-1700), decorative painter, has been described as the son of a portraitist of the same name employed by the Ironmongers' Company in 1640; it is impossible, however, to reconcile this with the accounts of the company, which record payments to an Edward Cocke, painter. According to Bernard Buckeridge, Henry Cook was well educated and accomplished; he may have attended Cambridge University. It is possible that he travelled to Italy to study painting and that he spent some time working in Salvator Rosa's studio, although accounts of this journey are confused. 
Cook did not enjoy a great deal of success in the early stages of his career and seems to have lived in obscurity until he obtained an introduction to Sir Godfrey Copley from Edward Lutterell which led to his decorating the former's new house in Yorkshire for $150. He subsequently spent five years living with the painter Theodore Russel (nephew of the artist Cornelius Johnson and pupil of Van Dyck); during this period he killed a man in a brawl over a woman -- whom he was eventually to marry -- and fled abroad, spending at least seven years in Italy until his crime was forgotten. He then went into partnership with a house painter in Knaves Acre, off Wardour Street, London. 
Cook was employed by William III to reintegrate Raphael's cartoons (they had been cut up and kept as strips since being sent to the tapestry works at Mortlake). This took place about 1697, with the help of Parry Walton, the surveyor of paintings. The adhesion of the strips on to canvas and the restoration of the cartoons was devised in conjunction with Sir Christopher Wren's remodelling of the king's gallery at Hampton Court, which was designed to display the repaired works. Cook was also responsible for making at least one set of copies of the cartoons, using turpentine and distemper, a new technique which he pioneered. This set was presumably made for William III, who sent it to Holland. He also seems to have restored other paintings in the Royal Collection and to have made copies of them for the king. 
Most of Cook's painting was on a large scale and of a decorative nature. He completed a wall-painting at Chelsea Hospital which had been begun by Antonio Verrio in 1687 (Verrio was paid $210 15's'. for the work in 1688), signing the work in the lower right-hand corner 'H. Cooke Pinxit'. He was paid $295 for the work about 1690. The central area of the painting contains a life-size equestrian portrait of Charles II attended by marine deities, with the hospital in the background. According to George Vertue, the painting was a gift from the earl of Ranelagh whose house in Chelsea Cook had decorated. 
Cook's other decorative schemes included the ceiling of the board room of the New River Company in Islington, London, which survives. This oval compartment, which depicts William III supported by winged allegorical figures, was painted between 1688 and 1697. He also painted the east end of New College chapel, Oxford, with a 'Salutation' within a false apse; this was destroyed in 1788. 
Apart from being a restorer and decorative painter, Cook was also an easel painter, his picture of 'A Listening Faun' having been commemorated in an epigram by John Elsum, while George Vertue records a picture of 'Charity' with life-size figures. He amassed a significant collection of books, paintings, and drawings which were sold after his death. He died on 18 November 1700 at his house in Bloomsbury Square, London; he was buried on 22 November at St Giles-in-the-Fields. His executors were the portraitist John Closterman and the banker and goldsmith James Seamer. The latter owned his self-portrait 'in his own hair' which was passed from George Vertue to Horace Walpole. It appeared in the Strawberry Hill sale of 18 May 1842, and was engraved by Bannerman for Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting' (1862). 


@@@@@


doc= 6139


Cook, James (1571/2-1610), Church of England clergyman, was born at Chale on the Isle of Wight and went to Winchester College in 1585, aged thirteen. In 1592 he matriculated (as a 'plebeius') at New College, Oxford, where he became a fellow in January 1593. On 29 October 1597 he was admitted BCL at Oxford; he was incorporated as such at Cambridge in 1607. He was created DCL at Oxford on 16 April 1608. By 1609 he was rector of Houghton, Hampshire. Cook enjoyed the patronage of Bishop Thomas Bilson of Winchester, whose chaplain he is said to have been. It was to Bilson that in 1608 Cook dedicated his 'Juridica trium quaestionum'. Influenced by the ideas of the French jurist Jean Bodin, Cook's treatise is a defence of the king's sovereignty, especially in matters of religion, and above all against the Jesuits -- it was intended to answer a recent attack on Sir Edward Coke by Robert Persons, and also to uphold the rightfulness of proceedings against Henry Garnett, executed for treason in 1606. According to Wood, Cook was renowned for his expertise in Greek, and left a collection of poems, under the title 'Poemata varia', which does not appear to have survived. He died on 2 October 1610. 


@@@@@


doc= 6140


Cook, James (1728-1779), explorer, was born on 27 October 1728 in the village of Marton in Cleveland, North Riding of Yorkshire, the son of James Cook (1694-1779), a day labourer, and his wife, Grace Pace (1701/2-1765). 
Cook spent most of his childhood in the nearby village of Great Ayton where his father had found employment as a farm foreman and where he attended Postgate School. At the age of seventeen he went to work in a shop in the fishing village of Staithes on the north Yorkshire coast. He remained there for eighteen months before signing an apprenticeship agreement with John Walker, a highly respected Quaker shipowner, whose ships, based on Whitby, were employed in the North Sea coal trade. Cook spent nine years in these highly dangerous waters, which were subject to violent storms, shifting sandbanks, and uncharted shoals -- a valuable lesson in seamanship and navigation that was to serve him well later in his career. In 1755 Cook was offered the command of one of Walker's ships, but instead, on 17 June 1755, he enlisted in the Royal Navy as an able seaman as he was determined 'to take his future fortune' that way (Kippis, 4). 
Cook's abilities were soon recognized and within a month he was rated master's mate. On 29 June 1757 he passed the examination for master and thus became responsible for the navigation and handling of ships of the Royal Navy. Cook spent most of the Seven Years' War in North American waters. As master of the 60 gun 'Pembroke' under Captain John Simcoe, he was present at the surrender of Louisburg on 26 July 1758. The day after the surrender Cook went ashore, where he met Major Samuel Holland, an army officer who was making a plan of the fortress with a plane table. Cook invited Holland on board the 'Pembroke' to meet Simcoe, an officer with a scientific bent, to explain the use of this instrument. From this moment Cook took an active interest in hydrographic surveying and a few months later, during a raid on French settlements in the Gulf of St Lawrence, surveyed the Bay of Gaspe; the chart was published by Mount and Page the following year. During the winter of 1758-9, spent in Halifax, Cook and Holland compiled a chart of the gulf and St Lawrence River from plans in the possession of Admiral Durrell, which was published in London by Thomas Jeffreys in 1760. During the following spring Cook was one of several masters of the fleet that surveyed and marked the Traverse, the principal hazard in the St Lawrence River, and their work enabled the entire British fleet to pass safely through and attack Quebec. After the fall of Quebec, Cook was appointed master of the 70 gun 'Northumberland' under Captain Alexander, Lord Colville. During the next three and a half years Cook surveyed Halifax harbour, compiled sailing directions of the Gulf of St Lawrence, and studied the theory of navigation. In July 1762 the 'Northumberland' played a prominent part in the brief campaign leading to the recapture of St John's, Newfoundland, from the French, enabling Cook to carry out a number of surveys which so impressed Colville that he informed their lordships 'that from my Experience of Mr Cook's Genius and Capacity, I think him well qualified for the Work he has performed, and for greater Undertakings of the same kind' (Colville to Clevland, 30 Dec 1762, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/482, quoted in Beaglehole, 59). Thomas Graves, the governor of Newfoundland, was equally impressed and when he asked for a marine surveyor to chart the north and west coasts of Newfoundland he specifically asked for Cook. After the French capitulation Colville returned to England where Cook was discharged on 11 November. After a brief courtship Cook married Elizabeth (1740/41-1835), daughter of Samuel Batts, landlord of The Bell inn, Execution Dock, Wapping, on 21 December 1762, at St Margaret's, Barking, Essex. 
On 19 April 1763 Cook took passage for Newfoundland in Graves's ship the 'Antelope'. Immediately on arrival Graves sent Cook to survey the islands of St Pierre and Miquelon which were to be restored to France. At the end of July Cook sailed for the northern end of Newfoundland in the specially purchased 68 ton schooner the 'Grenville', and in her surveyed Croque, Quirpon, and Noddy harbours, before returning to St John's at the end of September. He then returned in the 'Tweed' to England, where he spent the winter working on his charts in his house in Mile End, in east London, returning to St John's the following spring. In 1764, now in command of the 'Grenville', Cook sailed once again for the north of the island to resume his surveys under the orders of the new governor and his former captain, Commodore Sir Hugh Palliser. On 14 July Cook 'went into the Bay Sacre, Measured a base Line and fix'd Flaggs on the Different Islands, &c' (TNA: PRO, ADM 52/1263). The base was extended to the west by triangulation, while Cook established the latitudes of salient points by meridian altitudes of the sun. At the same time the 'Grenville''s boats obtained soundings off the coast. Over the next four years Cook surveyed the whole of the west and south coasts of the island in a similar manner, returning to England each autumn in the 'Grenville' to draw his charts and refit the schooner. One of the difficulties facing Cook during his survey was his inability to observe for longitude, with the result that his charts of the island were graduated only for latitude. However, on 5 August 1766 he observed an eclipse of the sun on the Burgeo Islands off the south coast of Newfoundland, from which Dr John Bevis computed the longitude of the islands, which he published in 1767 in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (57.215-16). This enabled Cook to calculate the longitude of a number of other places on the south coast of Newfoundland for inclusion in his sailing directions. In 1766, with permission from the Admiralty, Cook began publishing his surveys and sailing directions. Subsequently his surveys were published in 1769 in a folio atlas by Thomas Jeffreys, who republished Cook's sailing directions in the same year in 'The Newfoundland Pilot'. These were incorporated in the famous 'North American Pilot' published by Sayer and Bennett in 1775, which remained in use for many years. 
Cook returned to England on 15 November 1767. At the time the Royal Society was planning an expedition to the south Pacific to observe the transit of Venus across the face of the sun, which would enable the distance between the earth and the sun to be calculated. The Royal Society's first choice to lead this expedition was Alexander Dalrymple, but the Admiralty, who were to provide the ship, insisted that it should be commanded by a naval officer, and so Cook was appointed instead. The Whitby-built 'Earl of Pembroke' of 336 tons was bought by the Admiralty and renamed 'Endeavour'. Having passed for lieutenant on 13 May, Cook was appointed in command of her on 25 May 1768 and joined her two days later. The astronomer Charles Green was appointed by the Royal Society to observe the transit of Venus, with Cook as the second observer. Joseph Banks, a wealthy amateur botanist, also joined the expedition, bringing with him as his assistants Daniel Solander and Diedrich Sporing together with the landscape artist Alexander Buchan and the botanical artist Sydney Parkinson. The island of Tahiti, whose longitude had recently been determined astronomically by Samuel Wallis, was chosen for the observation. 
The 'Endeavour' sailed from Plymouth on 25 August 1768 and, after calling at Madeira and Rio de Janeiro and rounding Cape Horn, anchored in Matavai Bay on the north coast of Tahiti on 13 April 1769. After successfully observing the transit on 3 June Cook, in accordance with his secret instructions, then sailed due south as far as 40 degree S to search for the great southern continent that geographers considered must exist in the Southern Ocean. Failing to sight land Cook then altered course to the west to investigate the land seen by Abel Tasman in 1642. The east coast of New Zealand was sighted on 6 October and Cook spent the next six months carrying out a running survey of New Zealand's North and South islands in which he established that Tasman's Staeten Landt was not part of the supposed southern continent. During this survey Cook was able to determine his longitude with considerable accuracy by means of the newly established method of lunar distances. 
Cook next carried out a running survey of the unknown east coast of Australia in which his discovery of Botany Bay was to have a significant effect on the history of that continent. During the survey Cook was forced to spend over six weeks in Endeavour River making temporary repairs after running aground on an isolated coral reef, now known as Endeavour Reef. He then made for Batavia (Jakarta) in the Dutch East Indies for more permanent repairs. In sailing through Endeavour Strait Cook confirmed the discovery of Luis Vaez de Torres in 1606 that Australia was not joined to New Guinea as shown on most maps. Before his final departure from Australia Cook took possession of the whole of the east coast of Australia in the name of George III, naming it New South Wales. After further calls at Table Bay and St Helena, Cook finally anchored in the Downs on 12 June 1771. Although thirty members of the ship's company and Banks's party, including both artists, died during the voyage, mainly as a result of illnesses contracted in Batavia, the voyage was judged a success and Cook was promoted to commander on 29 August 1771. 
In spite of the achievements of Cook's first voyage it was clear that there were vast areas in the Southern Ocean where a great land mass might yet be found. Cook therefore proposed that a search for it should be made by circumnavigating the globe from west to east in a high southern latitude, thereby taking advantage of the strong prevailing westerly winds to be found there. Cook's plan was accepted and two further Whitby-built vessels were purchased and named 'Resolution' and 'Adventure', Cook being given command of the former and Tobias Furneaux command of the latter. As a result of disagreements Banks, who was to accompany the expedition, withdrew and his place was taken by the German-born scientist Johann Reinhold Forster and his son George, while William Hodges was engaged as the expedition's artist. An important secondary aim of the expedition was to give extended trials to a copy of John Harrison's prize-winning chronometer H4 made by Larcum Kendall, known as K1, and three others made to the design of John Arnold. To supervise these trials the board of longitude appointed two astronomers, William Wales to the 'Resolution' to take charge of K1 and Arnold no. 3 and William Bayly to the 'Adventure' to take charge of Arnold nos. 1 and 2. 
Cook sailed from Plymouth on 13 July 1772. After calling at Table Bay, where the Swedish botanist Anders Sparrman joined the expedition, he set a course to the south, and on encountering numerous tabular bergs, altered course to the east to begin his first ice-edge cruise. On 17 January 1773 he became the first person to cross the Antarctic circle. On 9 February, during an unsuccessful search in lower latitudes for land discovered by Kerguelen in 1772, the two ships became separated in a fog. When contact was not regained Cook decided to continue his sweep to the south before the onset of the southern winter, reaching Dusky Sound, in New Zealand's South Island on 27 March 1773, after a passage lasting four months without sighting land. He remained there for six weeks refreshing his crew and surveying this extensive inlet before joining Furneaux at the agreed rendezvous in Queen Charlotte Sound. 
On 7 June, with Furneaux in company, Cook got under way and after an uneventful passage anchored on 26 August in Matavai Bay. He then spent the next two months working his way back to Queen Charlotte Sound through the Society Islands and Tonga. Off the east coast of New Zealand's North Island the two ships were struck by a severe gale and on 30 October became separated for a second time. After waiting in vain for three weeks for Furneaux in Queen Charlotte Sound, Cook sailed on his second ice-edge cruise. On 26 January 1774 he crossed into the Antarctic circle for the third time (having done so a second time the previous month) and four days later, at 71 degree 10' S, 106 degree 54' W, achieved his farthest south. Cook now decided to spend one more winter in the south Pacific so that he could explore the south Atlantic the following summer. Making his way back to Tahiti, Cook anchored briefly off Easter Island, the first land to be sighted for 104 days. He next called at the Marquesas Islands before anchoring once more in Matavai Bay on 22 April. After spending a few weeks in the Society Islands Cook set off once again for Queen Charlotte Sound, visiting Tonga for a second time and carrying out running surveys of the New Hebrides (Vanuatu) and the north-eastern side of New Caledonia. In Queen Charlotte Sound he learned that Furneaux had arrived a few days after his departure and had sailed some days later. On 11 November Cook set off on the long voyage home, spending Christmas at anchor in the appropriately named Christmas Sound in Tierra del Fuego. After examining the north coast of Staten Island, Cook began his third ice-edge cruise, during which he rediscovered South Georgia on 14 January 1775 and discovered the South Sandwich Islands a few days later. Following an unsuccessful search for Bouvet's Cape Circumcision, Cook anchored in Table Bay on 21 March. After calling at St Helena, Ascension, and Fayal in the Azores, Cook dropped anchor in Spithead on 30 July after an absence of three years and eighteen days, during which four men had died, but only one from sickness and none from scurvy -- a remarkable achievement. 
On his return to England Cook was promoted to post captain on 9 August 1775 and appointed fourth captain of Greenwich Hospital, an appointment he accepted with the proviso that it would not preclude him from being considered for further service. At first he was occupied with the publication of his journal under the general editorship of John Douglas, canon of Windsor, since the account of his first voyage by John Hawkesworth had been highly criticized. In March 1776 Cook was elected a fellow of the Royal Society and at the same time awarded the society's Copley medal for his work on the prevention of scurvy. Early in 1776 Cook came out of retirement to command a further expedition to the Pacific with the purpose 'that an attempt should be made to find out a Northern Passage by Sea from the Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean' (BL, Egerton MS 2177B). Once again he was appointed to the 'Resolution' with the newly purchased 'Discovery', commanded by Charles Clerke, as consort. Cook and Lieutenant James King were to act as astronomers on board the 'Resolution', while William Bayly was appointed once more as the 'Discovery''s astronomer. The artist John Webber, appointed to the 'Resolution', completed the scientific staff. 
Cook sailed from Plymouth on 12 July 1776, anchoring on 18 October in Table Bay, where he was joined by the 'Discovery'. On crossing the Indian Ocean, Cook fixed the position of Prince Edward and Marion islands. He next carried out a running survey of the north coast of Kerguelen, establishing the island's longitude accurately with the aid of K1, which was once again carried on board the 'Resolution'. After brief stops in Adventure Bay in Van Diemen's Land and his old anchorage in Queen Charlotte Sound, adverse winds forced Cook to call at Tonga instead of making directly for Tahiti. On eventually reaching the Society Islands, Omai, the Society Islander Furneaux had brought back to England, was landed at Raiatea. Cook then continued across the Pacific, making his first major 'discovery' on this voyage when Oahu and Kauai, at the western end of the Hawaiian Islands, were sighted on 18 January 1778. Next the north-west coast of North America was sighted on 7 March and for the next six and a half months Cook carried out a running survey of some 4000 miles of its coast from Cape Blanco on the coast of Oregon to Icy Cape on the north coast of Alaska, where he was forced to turn back by an impenetrable wall of ice. A search for a route back to Europe north of Siberia also proved fruitless. During this cruise Cook became the first European to enter Nootka Sound on the north-west coast of Vancouver Island, where he remained for a month taking astronomical observations and cutting spars for use as spare masts and yardarms. Trade was carried out with the native Mowachaht for furs, mostly of the sea otter, which when sold later in China drew attention to the commercial potential of this trade. 
Cook decided to winter in the Hawaiian Islands, which he had named after his patron the earl of Sandwich, before making a further attempt to find a north-west passage the following year. After carrying out a running survey of the easternmost of the Hawaiian Islands, Cook anchored in Kealakekua Bay on the island of Hawaii on 17 January 1779. At first he was well received and by some accounts was considered by the Hawaiians as the embodiment of their god Lono. On 4 February 1779 Cook got under way to continue his survey of the islands but was forced to return to Kealakekua Bay for repairs after the 'Resolution''s foremast was damaged in a violent storm. It soon became clear that his return was not welcome, and bad relations culminated in the theft of the 'Discovery''s cutter. On the morning of 14 February Cook, with less than his usual judgement, landed with an escort of marines in an attempt to persuade the local chief to return on board where he intended to hold him as a hostage against the return of the cutter. The chief readily agreed to accompany Cook, but at the landing place they were met by a hostile crowd and in the altercation that followed Cook and four of the marines were killed. Cook's body and those of the marines were carried away by the Hawaiians and, according to custom, were cut up and the flesh scraped from the bones and ceremonially burnt, the bones being distributed among the various chiefs. Clerke, who now took command of the expedition, eventually managed to persuade the Hawaiians to return the majority of Cook's bones. These were put into a coffin and, on the afternoon of 21 February, were committed to the waters of Kealakekua Bay. On 23 February the two ships put to sea to complete the survey of the Hawaiian Islands. Clerke then set a course for Petropavlovsk Bay in Kamchatka, from where he sailed once more for the Arctic in an unsuccessful attempt to complete Cook's instructions, in spite of the fact that he was dying of tuberculosis. Clerke died in sight of Kamchatka as the expedition was returning to Petropavlovsk and it was left to John Gore, who succeeded to the command, to bring the expedition safely back to England. 
Cook was survived by his wife but of their six children only three survived to young adulthood and none married so he left no descendants. His legacy lies in his contributions to exploration and science. In his three voyages to the Pacific, Cook disproved the existence of a great southern continent, completed the outlines of Australia and New Zealand, charted the Society Islands, the New Hebrides, New Caledonia, and the Hawaiian Islands, and depicted accurately for the first time the north-west coast of America, leaving no major discoveries for his successors. In addition the scientific discoveries in the fields of natural history and ethnology were considerable and the drawings made by the artists were of great significance. 
There are numerous statues and monuments to Cook in many parts of the world, but the monument erected by Palliser in the grounds of The Vache, his country house in Chalfont St Giles, is perhaps the most significant. It consists of a square plinth, within a square tower, open on all sides, with a lengthy eulogy to Cook inscribed on the four sides of the plinth, beginning with the words 'To the Memory of Captain James Cook The ablest and most renowned Navigator this or any country hath produced'. In 1874 an obelisk to Cook's memory was erected near the spot where he fell, but the best memorial to him is the present-day map of the Pacific, which he did so much to shape. 


@@@@@


doc= 6141


Cook, John (bap. 1608, d. 1660), judge and regicide, was the eldest son of the landowner Isaac Cook (died 'c'.1658) and his wife, Elizabeth Twigden, of Burbage and Husbands Bosworth, Leicestershire; he was baptized on 18 September 1608 at Husbands Bosworth. Cook matriculated as a commoner from Wadham College, Oxford, in January 1623, although he was apparently in residence as early as March 1621, and left without a degree in June 1624. His father is styled esquire in the record of John's admission to Gray's Inn on 1 November 1623, where he came under the influence of the puritan preacher Richard Sibbes. Cook also benefited from the advice of an older barrister, Thomas Brickenden, in his early struggles with the 'Tenures' of Littleton, 'undoubtedly the most crabbed Author to begin with any Science in the world' (J. Cook, 'Vindication of the Professors and Profession of the Law', 1646, 94), and later advocated the appointment of two law professors at each inn of court. He was nevertheless called to the bar in November 1631, and even hostile witnesses later expressed respect 'for his profession-sake, being learned therein' ('State trials', 5.1082). 
The difficulty of building a practice in Westminster Hall may well explain Cook's next career move, signalled by his admission to King's Inns, Dublin, in November 1634. During this first stay in Dublin of 'almost two years' (Firth, 15) he attracted the patronage of Lord Deputy Wentworth, who may have commissioned him to prepare a printed edition of the Irish statutes. If so, the project seemingly failed; Cook later refers obliquely to his own personal shortcomings as having obliged him to leave Ireland, but no other evidence corroborates the suggestion of a royalist journalist that he had embezzled moneys provided by Wentworth. Whatever his reasons, Cook certainly travelled widely on the continent during the later 1630s. Visits to France and Italy gave him a fund of useful knowledge about the history and institutions of Counter-Reformation Europe, as well as the experience of dining at the English College, Rome, in April 1638 (Chaney, 276). In Geneva he lodged with the eminent liberal Calvinist theologian Giovanni Diodati, signing the 'Album amicorum' of the Neapolitan protestant noble Camillo Cerdogni in August 1638. While staying with some English congregational exiles, probably in the Netherlands, he began to read the works of Henry Ainsworth and other separatists, and to question the validity of the Church of England's episcopal administration. 
Cook next appears in 1641 in the persona of a young lawyer, addressing his former patron Strafford, now imprisoned in the Tower. In a document transcribed by William Knowler and printed by Charles Firth, the original of which seems to have disappeared, Cook paid his respects in elaborately obsequious terms, while offering Strafford a series of legal arguments for his defence. Thereafter he vanishes from view, until his assignment by the House of Lords on 12 February 1646 as counsel for John Lilburne at the rehearing of the latter's conviction in Star Chamber nearly ten years before. Cook at his own trial in 1660 would claim to be 'no swordsman' ('State trials', 5.1094), and in 1646 referred to 'us that have been London Residentes' during the civil war ('Vindication', 76). As for what had prompted him 'to adhere so cordially and constantly to the Parliament against the late Oxford party', he himself asserted that 'Scripture grounds and reasons of state', as distinct from legal points or precedents, were the 'Arguments and motives which swayed me' (Cook, 'Redintegratio amoris', 17). 
Early in 1646 Cook also launched his career as a public commentator on current issues. 'The Vindication of the Professors and Profession of the Law' was written in response to an anonymous pamphlet of the previous year which had urged the rejection of common lawyers as recruiter MPs. Defending his occupation against various conventional charges, Cook maintained that England's laws were 'either actually, or potentially, the best in the world' ('Vindication', 35), even if changes were needed to ensure that existing legal institutions contradicted neither God's word nor the dictates of reason. In detailing numerous desirable innovations and reforms, such as a national land registry, Cook naively assumed that acceptance in principle would more or less guarantee legislative implementation. His far-sighted and original proposals for reconstituting legal education similarly foundered on the indifference or hostility of the rulers of the inns of court. Cook married about this time: the principal candidates for his wife are Frances (surname unknown but beginning Barr... or possibly Farr...), who married 'Mr John Cooke, counsellor' at St Peter, Cornhill, on 19 May 1646, and Frances Cutler, who married a John Cook at St Olave, Hart Street, on 12 September 1646. They had one daughter, Free-love. 
Over the next four years Cook published a further five tracts, and wrote others which remained unprinted. Addressing the political crisis arising from the army's occupation of London, 'Redintegratio amoris, or, A Union of Hearts' and 'What the Independents would Have' both appeared in the autumn of 1647. The former argued that the army alone could secure liberty of conscience and reform the courts of justice, both preconditions of a peaceful settlement, while the latter provides a succinct apologia for limited religious toleration. In February 1648 his 'Unum necessarium, or, The Poore Mans Case' advocated numerous measures to relieve social distress, including diversion of grain from beer to bread by suppressing alehouses, and the provision of subsidized loans and medical services to the poor (the latter an issue arising from the College of Physicians' prosecution of the empiric Dr William Trigg, who had retained Cook as counsel). 
Whatever notice Cook's writings had already attracted was overshadowed in January 1649 when he took on the invidious task of prosecuting Charles I ['see also 'Regicides]. The king's refusal to plead largely confined Cook's public role as solicitor-general for the Commonwealth to reading the indictment which he had drafted. A version of his intended speech for the prosecution, published shortly after the king's execution as 'King Charls his Case, or, An Appeal to All Rational Men', characterized the trial as 'the most comprehensive, impartial, and glorious piece of justice that ever was acted' and claimed 'I went as cheerfully about it, as to a Wedding' (p. 39). Yet Cook's zeal earned him little material reward other than the mastership of St Cross Hospital, Winchester, and then appointment as chief justice of Munster. Having accompanied Oliver Cromwell to Ireland in the summer of 1649, he took up the latter post in March 1650, after prosecuting his former client Lilburne and other Leveller leaders, and serving on the court which convicted the royalist duke of Hamilton. Cook's visionary experience during a sea passage from Wexford to Kinsale forms the centrepiece of his 'A True Relation', and also figures in his wife's shorter account ([F. Cook], 'Mris Cookes Meditations'), both appearing in the spring of 1650. 
Cook sought with some success to provide cheap, accessible, and summary justice in Munster by reducing fees, office-holders, and professional lawyers, amalgamating law and equity, and proceeding on circuit through the province. These initiatives were understandably more popular with tenants than landlords, against whom he may have consciously discriminated. Cook's judicial role in Munster became increasingly circumscribed as he antagonized powerful political and religious interests, and in 1655 he was offered a judgeship in Dublin. A letter of refusal addressed to Lord Deputy Henry Cromwell eloquently expresses his conscientious scruples, deprecating at some length the 'Grand Cheat and Abominable Idoll Call'd the Course of the Courts' (Maclysaght, 443-4). But after returning to England in 1657, Cook was again offered an Irish judge's place, which he accepted early in 1659, possibly for financial reasons. Besides a defence of the civilian republican Edmund Ludlow, he may have published later that year a broadsheet propounding a series of measures designed to restore 'these poor shaken and shattered Nations' (Ludlow, 87; J. C., 'Magna Charta', 1659). 
As the prospects of a Stuart restoration strengthened, Monck's Irish ally Sir Charles Coote seized Cook in February 1660. Sent a prisoner to the Tower of London, in early June Cook was exempted by name from the proposed parliamentary act of indemnity and oblivion. While its outcome was inevitable, his trial for treason at the Old Bailey lasted longer than that of any other indicted regicide, thanks to both his skilful self-defence, and the legally anomalous nature of the crown's case. After conviction and sentencing Cook abandoned any attempt to mitigate his role in the king's trial. Protesting in a letter to his daughter that 'thou art the Child of one whom God counted worthy to suffer for his sake', his confident avowals of spiritual assurance may also have helped comfort his wife, to whose tearful last farewell on the morning of 16 October he reportedly responded 'My dear Lamb, let us not part in a showre, God hath wiped away all tears' ('Speeches and Prayers', 81, 82). Cook's scaffold speech at Tyburn asserted that 'I am not convinced of any thing I have done amisse, as to that I have been charged with' (ibid., 31). However, in a series of articles in 'Notes and Queries' (1913) J. B. Williams questioned the authenticity of 'Speeches and Prayers' ('The forged 'Speeches and prayers' of the regicides', 'N&Q', 11th ser. 7, 301-2, and 8, 22-3). As G. E. Aylmer has noted, 'John Cook, that epitome of honest Independency and frustrated reforming zeal, remains 'sui generis'' (G. E. Aylmer, 'The State's Servants', 1973, 276). Samuel Pepys saw Cook's head in Westminster Hall on 21 October; it is unclear when or if his remains were buried. His widow, Frances, petitioned Charles II about 1664 for the recovery of land in Ireland bought with her marriage portion. She may have married William Proctor, army officer, about 1670, and after his death Acquilla Stoughton ('d. c.'1690) of Antigua. Free-love, her daughter, married John Gunthorpe, also of Antigua, in 1675. The suggestion in the 2004 edition of this article that Frances had died by 1659, when Cook married, second, Mary, daughter of Henry Chawner, of Barwell, Leicestershire, is based on a reference in John Nichols's 'History of Leicestershire', which probably refers to another John Cook. 


@@@@@


doc= 6142


Cook, John (1771-1824), Church of Scotland minister and Hebrew scholar, eldest son of the Revd John Cook, professor of moral philosophy at the University of St Andrews, and his wife, Janet, daughter of the Revd John Hill, was born on 24 November 1771. He graduated at St Andrews in 1788. He was licensed for the ministry of the Church of Scotland on 19 September 1792, and was ordained minister of Kilmany, Fife, on 9 May 1793. He held this charge until 12 October 1802; his immediate successor was Thomas Chalmers. Cook left Kilmany to fill the chair of Hebrew and divinity at St Mary's College, St Andrews, a position which he held until his death. On 2 July 1803 he married Elizabeth (died 1848), daughter of George Hill (1750-1819), principal of St Mary's College. They had three daughters and five sons, among whom was the ecclesiastical historian John Cook (1807-1869). On 16 May 1816 Cook became moderator of the general assembly. He published 'Inquiry into the Authenticity of the Books of the New Testament' (1821). He died on 28 November 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 6143


Cook, John (1807-1869), Church of Scotland minister, was born at St Andrews on 1 September 1807, the eldest son of John Cook (1771-1824), Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Elizabeth Hill (died 1848). He graduated AM at St Andrews in 1823, and in 1824 he was factor to St Mary's College. He was licensed for the ministry of the Church of Scotland on 13 August 1828, and ordained minister of Laurencekirk, in Kincardineshire, on 3 September 1829. On 9 May 1837 he married Rachel Susan, 'nee' Farquhar; they had five daughters, the youngest of whom was Rachel Susan Scott, educationist and journalist. From Laurencekirk he was translated to St Leonard's at St Andrews, on 11 September 1845. On 9 December 1848 he was made DD at St Andrews; and on 19 June 1860 he was appointed to the chair of divinity and ecclesiastical history in that university. He held this post until 30 July 1868, having resigned his pastoral charge on 30 September 1863, on becoming one of the deans of the Chapel Royal. 
Cook was an efficient ecclesiastical administrator and an able pamphleteer on church affairs, publishing such topical pieces as 'Evidence on Church Patronage' (1838). The general assembly (of which he was elected moderator on 19 May 1859) appointed him convener of many of its important committees, including those on education (1849), the improvement of the conditions of parish schoolmasters (1850), aids to devotion (1857), and army and navy chaplains (1859). In 1859 he was chosen an assessor to the university court of St Andrews, under the new constitution of the Scottish universities. He died on 17 April 1869 at St Andrews; his wife survived him. A painted window to his memory was placed in the college church at St Andrews. 


@@@@@


doc= 6144


Cook, John (1807-1874), Church of Scotland minister, was born on 12 September 1807, the eldest son of George Cook (1772-1845), also a Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Diana, eldest daughter of Revd Alexander Shank. In 1823 he graduated AM at the University of St Andrews. He was licensed for the ministry of the Church of Scotland by the presbytery of Fordoun on 17 September 1828, and ordained minister of Cults, Fife, on 1 June 1832. He was translated to the second charge at Haddington on 26 November 1833. On 14 July 1840 he married Helen, the daughter of Henry Davidson, sheriff clerk of East Lothian. They had five daughters before her death in January 1860. 
In common with other members of his family Cook was a strong supporter of the moderate party in the Church of Scotland. In May 1842 he was suspended from judicial functions for nine months by the general assembly, as a result of his support for the ministers of Strathbogie, who had complied with a decree from the court of sessions in a patronage case. Cook's promotion to the first charge at Haddington naturally followed on the Disruption of 1843; in the same year the degree of DD was conferred on him by his university. 
A strong and persuasive speaker, Cook commanded much respect as a leading figure in the church courts; he was the author of 'Styles of Writs and Forms of Procedure in the Church Courts of Scotland' (1850), which was praised in the 'Edinburgh Advertiser'. In 1854 the general assembly made him convener of its committee for improving education and religious instruction in Scotland. He was elected sub-clerk of assembly on 25 May 1859, principal clerk on 22 May 1862, and became moderator on 24 May 1866. Cook's position as a leader of the moderates in ecclesiastical politics was unattended by any latitudinarian tendencies in the area of doctrine. He died on 11 September 1874 at the manse, Haddington. 


@@@@@


doc= 6145


Cook, John Douglas (1808?-1868), newspaper editor, was born at Banchory-Ternan in Aberdeenshire, probably in 1808, although he favoured 1811. An unsubstantiated rumour suggested he was the illegitimate son of Thomas Hope (1769-1831), author, and thus half-brother to the Rt Hon. A. J. B. Beresford Hope, Conservative politician, who affirmed the earlier date (Bevington, 10-11). Cook may have attended the University of Aberdeen (Escott, 231). At an early age he obtained an appointment as a clerk in India, probably through an uncle, Sir George Rose. After a quarrel with his employers Cook returned, on foot for a great part of the way. Destitute in London, he tried literature, possibly including hack work. After an anonymous article was accepted by 'The Times', he became a reporter, leader writer, and friend of John Walter, the proprietor. Cook also indexed the early volumes of the 'Quarterly Review'. When Walter was elected for Nottingham as a tory in 1841, Cook served as his canvassing agent and became acquainted with Lord Lincoln (later fifth duke of Newcastle), who appointed Cook as secretary to his newly established commission inquiring into the revenues of the duchy of Cornwall. 
About 1848 some Peelites, including Lincoln, bought the 'Morning Chronicle' and appointed Cook the editor. As Lincoln's 'protege' Cook took close instruction from him on the line that the paper was to take, and its stance became determinedly Peelite. He had close relations, too, with Gladstone, who as well as taking Cook's advice regarded him as a useful publicist and intermediary. Cook showed great resourcefulness, originality, and imagination, but spent money lavishly. He hired Philip Harwood as co-editor; they worked together until Cook's death. One contributor, Henry Maine, recruited his Cambridge pupils Vernon Harcourt and James Fitzjames Stephen. The paper, though a literary success with such works as Henry Mayhew's series 'Labour and the poor', was a political and financial failure. It was sold in 1854 and Cook was replaced as editor. 
Cook planned a new journalistic venture with a contributor, Beresford Hope, which was to be the joint property of the two with the power of purchase secured to the survivor. The new weekly paper, the 'Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art', first appeared on 3 November 1855 and became an organ of moderate conservatism, policing the world of letters and politics. Business relations between Cook and Beresford Hope were frequently strained by Cook's tendency to overrule his partner's political and religious stances despite Beresford Hope's greater financial contribution. Cook kept the paper as much as possible out of theological controversy and made it a rule to have 'the Liberals to write on matters where they were most conservative, and the Conservatives on topics which they could treat liberally' (Griffiths, 168). As circulation increased, due to the excellent editing and lively writing, so did the size and scope of the paper. Because Cook valued scholarly, politically minded young men who could address an educated readership, nearly all his contributors were graduates of Oxford or Cambridge and loyal writers from the 'Morning Chronicle'. Over the years contributors left to become eminent in various directions; however controversy over 'Essays and Reviews' caused several regulars to depart, eventually won over by Cook's tact. The 'Saturday Review' became the leading critical weekly at least partially as a result of the addition of John Morley from 1863 until 1867, who attributed his journalistic success to his patron John Douglas Cook, 'the queer, intemperate, and almost illiterate, but wonderfully successful editor-manager' (Hirst, 38). At Cook's instigation Morley wrote the slashing review of Swinburne's 'Poems and Ballads'. Leslie Stephen joined his brother on the staff in 1865. To keep harmonious unity, these three were among those restricted to writing middles and reviews and kept away from the leaders. Although Cook paid less generously than on the 'Morning Chronicle', he did provide Morley and Leslie Stephen with an annual retainer fee. An annual dinner for male contributors inspired Cook's staff with the sense of honour and privilege gained through writing for the 'Saturday Review'. Eliza Lynn Linton, formerly with the 'Morning Chronicle' until an angry disagreement with Cook, contributed 'The girl of the period' (14 March 1868), perhaps the most sensational middle article of Cook's editorship. 
Cook's instinct for recognizing ability in others and his judgement in directing them made him one of the most efficient editors of his day. Each Tuesday he presented writers with their assignments in his rooms at The Albany, Piccadilly, London; Harwood remained in charge of the office at Southampton Street. Cook was an exacting editor and reader, unstinting of himself and his health. He spent only brief vacations at his house in Tintagel, Cornwall -- purchased with profits from the weekly -- at which he annually entertained the Beresford Hopes. He died, unmarried, of chronic liver disease in his rooms in The Albany on 10 August 1868, and was buried at Tintagel. No notice appeared in the 'Saturday Review' at Beresford Hope's request; however a memorial tribute in the 'Pall Mall Gazette' was reprinted in 'The Times'. 


@@@@@


doc= 6146


John Mason Cook (1834-1899), travel agent, was born on 13 January 1834 at Quaker's Yard, Market Harborough, the first of two surviving children of Thomas Cook and his wife, Marianne. He was brought up with Baptist, teetotal beliefs which he never changed. Since both his parents were wholly preoccupied by the temperance movement he may have had, as some allege, a 'pathetic' childhood. Certainly he was, as a mere boy, 'broken to the harness' of tourism by being required to officiate on his father's juvenile excursions ('Blackwood's Magazine', Aug 1899, 211). But he received a basic education at a dame-school in Market Harborough and at a preparatory school in Leicester. In 1848 he left to work as a printer in Derby. 


@@@@@


doc= 6147


Cook, Richard (1784-1857), history painter, was born in London and was baptized on 17 October 1784 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, the son of Richard Cook ('fl'. 1785-1804), painter, and Jane, 'nee' Tuck whom he married at St Leonard, Shoreditch, on 22 July 1784. Farington recorded in his 'Diary' for 18 November 1816 that, according to the sculptor John Rossi, 'Cooke ['sic'] the new Associate, is a native of Gloucestershire. His father, who was a farmer, has retired from business, having sufficient to live upon' would appear to be inaccurate (Farington, 'Diary' 14, 4926). The work of both Cooks has been 'inextricably confused' (Stewart and Cutten, 142). He obtained admission into the schools of the Royal Academy when sixteen years of age, and received the Society of Arts gold medal in 1832. He first exhibited at the Royal Academy 'A Landscape', in 1808. At that period he resided at 41 North Audley Street, Grosvenor Square; in the same year he sent to the British Institution 'The Agony of Christ' and 'Hector Reproving Paris'. In 1814 he exhibited at the Royal Academy a portrait of G. F. Cooke, and 'Acis and Galatea', afterwards engraved by W. Taylor. He then lived at 12 Greek Street, Soho Square. In 1816, being elected an associate of the Royal Academy, he sent from 50 Upper Marylebone Street five pictures: four derived from Scott's 'Lady of the Lake', and 'Ceres, disconsolate for the loss of Proserpine, rejects the solicitation of Iris, sent to her by Jupiter'. In 1822 Cook was elected Royal Academician, and from that time forward he almost seems to have relinquished his profession. He married a lady of fortune, which enabled him to entertain liberally his brother artists. He died in Cumberland Place, Hyde Park, London, on 11 March 1857. A sale of his pictures, sketches, and prints at Christie and Manson and Woods on 1 June 1857 included Thomas Stothard's 'George III and Queen, Sitting, Surrounded by a Family of Boys and Girls'. The British Museum preserves several of Cook's drawings, chiefly studies for book illustrations, executed in 1806; a large study for the 'Lady of the Lake'; a tinted pencil portrait of Mrs Cook, and a folio volume containing numerous carefully drawn figures, furniture, and arms, from the eighth to the fifteenth century. In addition to illustrating several classics published by John Sharpe, Cook provided illustrations to works by Fenelon, Shakespeare, Homer, Goldsmith, Ovid, Dryden, and Tasso. Further examples of Cook's work are in Swansea Art Gallery; one of his sketchbooks is in the Mitchell Library, Glasgow. 


@@@@@


doc= 6148


Cooke, Robert (d. 1593), herald, was purportedly the son of a tanner. As a youth he was said to have been a member of the household of Sir Edmund Brudenell, a great collector of pedigrees. He matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, in 1553, graduated BA in 1558, and proceeded MA in 1561. In January 1562 he was appointed Rose Blanche pursuivant, and he then became Chester herald. In May 1567 he became Clarenceux king of arms, and in that office he was an assiduous maker of visitations to register coats of arms and pedigrees in southern England, visiting his whole province at least once. Between 1584 and 1586 he was acting Garter king of arms between Sir Gilbert Dethick and his son William, and in that capacity he served on the embassy to deliver the Order of the Garter to Henri III of France. A dispute with one of the earl marshal's servants over a gratuity provides evidence that Cooke expected to succeed Sir Gilbert Dethick permanently as Garter, but despite the apparent patronage of the earl of Leicester, who also seems to have been responsible for Cooke's appointment as Chester herald, this fell through and William Dethick succeeded his father instead. 
Cooke's tenure as Clarenceux was troubled, beginning with the orders issued in 1568 by the duke of Norfolk as earl marshal, controlling grants of arms made by the provincial kings of arms (Clarenceux and Norroy) and securing their records for the College of Arms. It culminated in a bitter dispute with the younger Dethick over the latter's attempts as Garter both to encroach on the traditional rights of the provincial kings to grant arms and to make his own visitations throughout England. 
As a result of Dethick's attacks biographers have often discounted the accusations against Cooke in the understandable but 'ad hominem' belief that Dethick is an untrustworthy witness. However, 'Lant's observations' on the officers of arms seem to bear Dethick out, at least in part. Regarding Cooke's linguistic deficiencies, an entry in the French chancery records suggests that one of the two gold chains supposedly given to Cooke by the French king was actually intended for his interpreter, suggesting that Cooke's French was inadequate for his diplomatic duties. A more telling charge, though a common one among heralds, is that Cooke gave arms and crests 'without number to base and unworthy persons for his private gain only without the knowledge of the E[arle]. Marshall' ('Lant's observations', fol. 68'v'). Cooke himself answered this indirectly in a treatise on granting arms by arguing that decaying nobility possibly envied men of mean birth whose virtue none the less outshone the older aristocracy's. 
Cooke seems to have made excellent financial business out of granting arms, though he may have displeased Queen Elizabeth by making too many supposedly unworthy gentlemen: Ralph Brooke, York herald, writing to Sir Robert Cotton in 1614, says that Cooke gave more than 500 coats of arms and that both Dethicks gave more. This may be an understatement, possibly a very substantial one. Yet Dethick also claims that even with this lucrative source of income in fees, Cooke nevertheless dissipated a $1000 gift from the queen. 
'Lant's observations' also accuse Cooke of burying knights as if they were barons 'and some no Gentlemen as Esqre' ('Lant's observations', fol. 68'v'). He did bury Sir Philip Sidney magnificently as a baron, but this seems justified by Sir Philip's title from the French crown. Sir William Dugdale denounced Cooke's employment of a painter-stainer as the start of that profession's encroachments on the herald's prerogatives to marshal aristocratic funerals. Cooke also kept his official books as his own property, contrary to orders; it is likely, however, that like many of his colleagues, he still considered these his own papers. At his death his books, precedents, visitations, and pedigrees were bought for the College of Arms. Finally, if all this were not enough, Dethick also alleged that Cooke married another man's wife. 
As well as heraldic compilations, visitations, precedencies, heraldry treatises, and ordinaries of arms, Cooke wrote 'The armorie of nobiliti' on the English baronage with Robert Glover of Somerset and Thomas Lant, then Portcullis. This survives in several copies, most notably BL, Royal MS 18 C. XVII, a fine painted folio with colour portraits of each sovereign of varying accuracy: the portraits of Mary I and Elizabeth I were 'cutte out by reason of ye inconsiderate vnseemlynes of ye picture' (Cooke and others, 'The armorie of nobiliti', fols. 155'v', 158'v'). 
Whereas Noble praised Cooke for his diligence, later writers have been more critical. Sir Anthony Wagner condemns Cooke's pedigrees for their 'amateurishness', though he also notes that Cooke adopted Glover's improved pedigree form and apparently initiated the practice of making a pedigree official by having it signed by the person registering it. Whatever his failings, Cooke should not be judged wholly by the critical standards of later ages, especially as many of the charges against him stemmed from acrimony among Elizabethan heralds. He died and was buried at Hanworth in Cheshire in August 1593, leaving a daughter, Catherine, who married John Woodnote of Shavington, Cheshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 6149


Cooke, Robert (d. c.1726), vegetarian and author, the elder son of Robert Cooke, came of a family that settled in co. Cork in the early seventeenth century and prospered in the linen and other trades, particularly in Cork city and the town of Youghal. Reliable information on Cooke's genealogy and life is virtually limited to two sources: a biographical entry in 'The Antient and Present State of... Waterford' (Dublin, 1746), whose author, the Dungarvan pharmacist Charles Smith, presumably knew Cooke at least by reputation; and a brief article in the magazine 'The Patrician' for 1847 based on information supplied by a descendant of Cooke's brother William. 
Cooke's grandfather Peter Cooke -- allegedly of Norfolk origin -- was the first of his family to settle in co. Cork. His eldest son, Thomas, was father of another Thomas, an active Quaker, who died in 1706 having made a fortune in the linen trade which enabled him to acquire much land, including Dungallane near Kilworth: renamed Castle Cooke, it was the seat of the Cooke-Collis family down to 1921. Peter's second son, Robert Cooke, who served as an officer in the cavalry regiment raised among the protestant settlers of Munster by Roger Boyle, Lord Broghill, settled at Cappoquin, co. Waterford. Robert Cooke, later known as Linen Cooke, was his elder son. The younger son, William Cooke (died 1742) of Camphire, was mayor of Youghal in 1708 and married a niece of the faith healer Valentine Greatrakes, 'the Stroker'. 
Cooke inherited Cappoquin from his father but fled to England with many other protestant settlers upon the Catholic take-over of Ireland in 1689 and was among those outlawed as absentees by the Irish parliament of James II. He lived for a time at Ipswich, Suffolk, but returned to Ireland after the Williamite victory of 1691. He was twice married: his first wife was a woman of Bristol (a port with which he had commercial links); his second wife, Cicely, with whom he had three sons -- John (of Youghal), Robert, and Josiah -- and two daughters, appears to have survived him. 
Like his cousin Thomas, Robert Cooke was a member of the Society of Friends, but he left it to pursue his own solitary quest for a relationship with the Almighty. In 1691 he published a pamphlet or broadside (partially reproduced by Smith) in which he explained his vegetarian and theological opinions. 'I am a Christian and a Protestant', he declared: 'and my Religion is to fear God and to keep his Commandments, to keep my soul undefiled from the worldly evil nature. I abhor the evil and love the good and have fellowship therein with all in every sect or gathered or scattered people. (Smith, 372)' In 1695 he was in correspondence with the Dublin merchant and Quaker Anthony Sharp. 
Smith states that Cooke would 'neither eat fish, flesh, butter, &c., nor drank any fermented liquor, nor wore woollen cloaths, or any other produce of an animal' (Smith, 371) and relates anecdotes of his eccentricity. Cooke chose white cows rather than black and always had his coach drawn by white horses. On one occasion his servants caught a fox which had killed some of his poultry: Cooke assembled his employees and tenants, and having delivered a lengthy harangue on the fox's crime, ordered it to run the gauntlet of rods before letting it go. In his pamphlet Cooke declared that killing an animal would have done violence to his conscience, 'that innocent life in me', while he preferred 'water for drink and pulse (viz.) corn (and other vegitives) for food, and linen and other vegitives for rayment' as 'cleanest and wholesomest, and warm, and strengthening, and nourishing, and healthful' (ibid., 374). Cooke died at Cappoquin Castle about 1726, aged 'upwards of four score' (Smith, 374). In his will he directed that he should be buried with the family of his son John 'in the cathedral or church called 'tempul' in Youghal' and stipulated, perhaps unnecessarily, that his shroud be made of linen ('Fragments of family history'). 


@@@@@


doc= 6150


Cook, Samuel (1806-1859), watercolour painter, was born at Camelford in Cornwall. His mother kept a bakehouse, and under the same roof was a small school where Cook learned to read and write. This was, however, the extent of his formal education. At the age of nine he was apprenticed to a firm of woollen manufacturers at Camelford, where he was said to have amused himself by making chalk drawings on the workshop floor, much to the annoyance of the foreman, who disparaged his talent. He nevertheless found additional employment in sign-painting, and his work adorned public houses and other local businesses. He also painted stage scenery for itinerant showmen, and grained wood. On the termination of his apprenticeship he became assistant to a painter and glazier in Plymouth. Cook later established his own painting and glazing business in the city, but continued to devote every spare hour to sketching. His favourite locations were on the nearby quays and along the stretches of coast around Plymouth and Clovelly. Most of his works were coastal scenes, but he also executed several inland views. 
Cook's sketches attracted the attention of local art enthusiasts, and he found generous and wealthy patrons, including the duke of Devonshire, Lady Morley, and the family of Earl Mount Edgcumbe. Encouraged by them, he sent some drawings to the committee of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours on its foundation in 1831. He applied for membership in 1843 but was rejected, though he was eventually elected an associate in 1849 and a member in 1854. He was a regular contributor to the gallery in Pall Mall until his death and also exhibited once at Suffolk Street. In 1858 his painting 'A Fisherman's Cottage, by the Mewstone, at the Entrance to Plymouth Sound' was displayed at the Liverpool Society of Fine Arts. 
Cook was always a weak colourist, and his pictures tended to be overlooked when hung next to the deeper-toned works of contemporaries. But his paintings also exhibited 'such quiet, simple truth, and so much real artistic feeling' that he came to be highly regarded by his peers ('Art Journal', 23, 1861, 212). Even when his painting had attained a degree of excellence, though, he preferred not to depend solely upon his art, and because he never relinquished his trade the number of his works was relatively small. He died on 7 June 1859 at his home, North Prospect, Stoke Damerel, Devon, survived by his wife, Elizabeth. 


@@@@@


doc= 6151


Thomas Cook (1744/5?-1818), a pupil of Simon Francis Ravenet, was a relatively minor figure who none the less undertook a range of projects for the publisher. In 1770 he won a silver pallet for drawing outlines of the human figure at the Society of Arts. Cook worked as a printmaker in a number of contexts, producing portraits for the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and frontispieces for book publishers, as well as a number of single plates in different genres for Boydell. He was most famous for his reproductions of the works of Hogarth, published as 'Hogarth Restored' in 1806. These were much scorned for their inferior technique. He also engraved the reduced reproductions of Hogarth for Nichols and Stevens's 'Genuine Works of William Hogarth' (1808-17). Cook died in 1818, probably in April, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', at the age of seventy-four, which may identify him as the Thomas Cook, son of William Cook and his wife, Judith, baptized at St Luke's, Old Street, on 18 January 1745. 


@@@@@


doc= 6152


Cook, Thomas (1808-1892), travel agent, was born on 22 November 1808 at 9 Quick Close, Melbourne, Derbyshire. He was the only child of John Cook (1785-1812), labourer, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1854), daughter of Thomas Perkins, a New Connexion Baptist pastor. The family was poor and their circumstances did not improve when Elizabeth married James Smithard soon after the death of her first husband in 1812. Thomas went to school until he was ten, when he began work as a gardener's boy on Lord Melbourne's estate. He received some further education at Sunday school, attending that of the Methodists until he was thirteen or fourteen, after which, as his mother wished, he joined that of the Baptists. At about the same time he started as an apprentice cabinet-maker with his uncle, John Pegg, who was also a strong Baptist. Described at this time as 'an earnest, active, devoted, young Christian' ('General Baptist Magazine', 185), Thomas advanced quickly in the Sunday school to become a teacher and then the superintendent. On 26 February 1826 he was baptized by Joseph Foulks Winks, the New Connexion pastor at Melbourne, who influenced him considerably during this stage of his life. 
Just before his twentieth birthday Cook abandoned his apprenticeship to become an itinerant village missionary, on a salary of $36 a year (which was later reduced to $26 because he received so much hospitality from the faithful). His job was to spread the Word by preaching, distributing tracts, and setting up Sunday schools throughout the south midland counties. Thus began a career in travel. In 1829 Cook, a young man with a commanding presence and black penetrating eyes in which some discerned a gleam of fanaticism, met Marianne Mason (1807-1884). She was a 'very dapper' and sensible farmer's daughter who taught at the Baptist Sunday school at Barrowden in Rutland (Thomas Cook Archive, 'Bishop reminiscences'). After a long courtship they married at Barrowden on 2 March 1833. The couple went to live at Market Harborough, near Leicester, where Cook had now set up in trade as a wood-turner, since the Baptist church could no longer afford to pay him as a preacher. All his life he remained a strict and ardent Baptist, although he was tolerant of other protestant sects. Religion gave him a strong desire to help the downtrodden and his political inclinations were liberal. 
During the 1830s the burgeoning temperance movement gradually persuaded Cook that cheap strong liquor exacerbated the 'poverty, crime, strife and wretchedness' of the people ('Temperance Messenger', 50). In 1836 both he and Marianne signed the pledge and decided that their workmen too should be denied alcohol on the premises. For the next few years Cook's own temperance crusade took precedence over both his business and his family, which now included a son, John Mason Cook ['see below'], born on 13 January 1834. (A second son, Henry, died as an infant in September 1835 and, after an interval of ten years, a daughter, Annie, was born.) Cook made speeches and published tracts inveighing against the demon drink. More significantly, he also arranged alternatives: wholesome forms of 'rational recreation' such as picnics at which revellers were sustained with 'biscuits, buns and ginger beer' ('Temperance Messenger', 132). In 1840 he founded the 'Children's Temperance Magazine', the first English publication of its kind. On 5 July 1841 Cook organized and personally conducted a railway excursion from Leicester to Loughborough for some 500 temperance supporters, who paid a shilling each. The journey was a great success and Cook afterwards looked back on it as 'the starting point of a career of labour and pleasure which has expanded into... a mission of goodwill and benevolence on a grand scale' ('Cook's Excursionist', 13 Sept 1856). 
Later in 1841 Cook moved to Leicester, which offered the advantages of good communications, a large Baptist community, and a radical corporation. It also provided a challenge in the shape of 700 beershops and public houses. Cook set up as a bookseller and printer, specializing in temperance literature but also producing such useful publications as his own 'Leicester Almanack' (1842) and 'Guide to Leicester' (1843). In addition he opened temperance hotels in Derby and Leicester (run by his mother and his wife respectively) and continued to organize excursions. In 1845, having won a reputation as an entrepreneur who could obtain cheap rates from the railway companies for large parties, he undertook his first profit-making excursion -- to Liverpool, Caernarfon, and Mount Snowdon. Cook wrote a handbook which resembled in essential respects the modern tour operator's brochure. He also gave the 350 tourists his ''personal' superintendence' ('Handbook of the Trip to Liverpool'), while taking the opportunity to encourage them to climb Snowdon without 'the stimulus of alcohol' ('Cook's Excursionist', 4 June 1856). The success of this tour made him determined to reach that bourn of contemporary romance, Scotland. 
Cook's first Scottish tour in the summer of 1846, although meticulously planned, was dogged by problems. Against expectations, the 500 tourists were unable to get off the train, which lacked a restaurant car and lavatories, at intervening stations; so they arrived at Fleetwood starving and bursting. There were not enough cabins on the steamer to Ardrossan and a storm soaked the deck passengers. Cook irritated them further by banging the temperance drum. A subsequent article in the 'Leicester Chronicle' warned readers against future excursions arranged by the teetotal projector, who deserved a toss overboard into his ''favourite element''. Cook was damaged by this attack but the collapse of his business in August 1846 was probably due more to competition from another temperance publisher. However, by 1848, for reasons which remain obscure, he had recovered sufficiently to be running three successful operations in Leicester: the temperance hotel, a bookselling business, and what can now be called a travel agency. 
In the middle years of the century, as the country prospered and the railway system grew, Thomas Cook's tourist enterprise developed. In 1851 Cook arranged for 165,000 people to visit London for the Great Exhibition, which he described as 'a great School of Science, of Art, of Industry, of Peace and Universal Brotherhood' ('Cook's Excursionist', 3 May 1851). This was followed by expeditions on which thousands of tourists viewed the cities, resorts, and beauty spots of England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. For these groups Cook provided cheap tickets, mapped out routes, supplied handbooks. He also chaperoned 'unprotected females', for whom tourism became a step towards emancipation ('Cook's Excursionist', 18 July 1860). Cook accompanied many parties himself, organizing them in such a peremptory fashion that he was nicknamed 'the General' ('Cook's Excursionist', 3 Sept 1853). His clients were expected to find their own food and accommodation since Cook was reluctant to provide for the 'stomachs of Tourists' ('Cook's Excursionist', 23 Aug 1858). As he often explained in his monthly journal the 'Excursionist', begun in 1851 and written in vigorous, self-revelatory prose, his main aim was to inculcate 'great moral and social lessons' (Thomas Cook Archive). Although his firm's profits were modest at this stage, Cook was able to abandon the printing trade, give considerable sums to poor relief, promote the erection of a Temperance Hall in Leicester, and finance the rebuilding of his Commercial and Family Temperance Hotel. 
The travel business could have been ruined in 1862, however, when the Scottish railway companies refused to issue any more group tickets for Cook's popular tours north of the border. With characteristic vision and 'wonderful strength of will' ('Barton Church Magazine'), Cook looked towards Europe, though his few previous forays across the channel had been financial failures. Now, with the help and encouragement of Joseph Paxton, he decided to exploit new rail links for the conveyance of large numbers of tourists to the continent. He set up an office in London and by September 1863 he had conducted 2000 visitors to France and 500 to Switzerland. Cook's continental tourists were provided not only with rail travel and a channel crossing via Newhaven and Dieppe (a route which he popularized), but also with accommodation in 'first-class establishments' and food acceptable to the 'thorough roast-beef-and-pudding-eating Englishman' ('Cook's Excursionist', 28 Aug 1863). 
The 'Cook's tour' rapidly became a byword and its originator was hailed as the 'Napoleon of Excursions' ('Civil Service Gazette') -- though critics like Charles Lever accused Cook of swamping Europe with 'everything that is low-bred, vulgar and ridiculous' ('Blackwood's Magazine', Feb 1865, 231). During the 1860s alpine journeys became increasingly popular and in 1864 parties began to venture into the newly united Italy. In 1866 the first Cook's tourists to America witnessed scenes of the recent civil war. At the end of the decade Cook took clients to even more exciting destinations: Egypt and the Holy Land, 'the greatest event of my tourist life' ('Cook's Excursionist', 3 May 1869). He achieved a further ambition in 1872-3 when he conducted the first organized tourist party ever to go round the world. Cook hoped to 'pioneer the way for the golden age when nations shall learn war no more' ('Cook's Excursionist', 29 July 1873). Certainly he blazed a trail which twenty further groups had followed by the time of his death. 
On the world tour, as on all others, Thomas Cook mixed 'Missions with business'. In a letter to his wife he explained that the practice 'has sweetened my journey and... improved my heart without prejudice to the mercenary object of my tour' (T. Cook to M. Cook, 24 March 1873, Thomas Cook Archive). In fact the firm's profits remained small. But the business began to change when John Mason Cook started full-time work with his father in 1865 -- to become a partner in what was subsequently known as Thomas Cook & Son in 1871. By then there were three English offices, manned by a growing staff and served by four 'travelling assistants'. While Thomas was away on his world tour the firm moved to grand new headquarters in Ludgate Circus. In 1873 Thomas Cook & Son entered into a short-lived and ill-fated partnership with an American, E. M. Jenkins, to encourage the transatlantic side of the undertaking, in which Thomas became increasingly involved. By this time there had been frequent serious disagreements between father and son arising from their radically different approaches to the business. In 1878 a full-scale quarrel occurred, as a result of which Thomas retired to Thorncroft, the large house which he had built on the outskirts of Leicester, while John took charge of the firm. 
Cook led a lonely life after the deaths of his unmarried daughter Annie (who drowned in her bath, apparently overcome by fumes from a new gas heater) in 1880 and his wife four years later. He continued to travel, however, making his final pilgrimage to the Holy Land in 1888. Much of his time and money were spent, as they had been throughout his career, in work for the Baptist church, the temperance movement, and other charities. He did not attend the firm's silver jubilee celebrations in 1891; whether this was because of blindness and physical incapacity or because John did not want him there is not clear. After suffering a stroke, Thomas Cook died at Thorncroft, Knighton, Leicester, on 18 July 1892, aged eighty-three. He was given a Baptist burial on 22 July in Leicester, where the flags (including that on the temperance hall) flew at half-mast. 


After a few months of hard labour and low pay Cook returned to Leicester to serve in his father's printing office. He also arranged and conducted more tours. Father and son did not work well together and in 1856 John Cook took up a post as superintendent of the Midland Railway's excursion traffic. Three years later he set up on his own as a printer in Leicester. He married a local girl, Emma Hodges, on 29 December 1861 and their first son, Frank, was born in 1862. Perhaps because of his growing financial responsibilities, John Cook agreed to rejoin his father's firm in 1865. He was put in charge of its new office at 98 Fleet Street, where he made an immediate impact. 
John Cook pioneered Cook's tours to America, personally conducting his first party across the Atlantic in 1866. It was on his initiative that new offices were opened in Manchester, Brussels, and Cologne. He also introduced the popular system of hotel coupons, which tourists bought from Cook and exchanged for bed and board, thus preventing hoteliers from overcharging. It was to his incessant, painstaking toil that the firm largely owed its increased efficiency and profitability during the late 1860s. Yet only after much persuasion from his father did John consent to become a full partner in 1871. His reluctance was probably due to disputes between the two men, mainly over financial matters. Unlike Thomas, John believed that business should be kept separate from religion and philanthropy. He also upset his father by being more adventurous in investing money. He opened a hotel at Luxor and refurbished the Nile steamers of the khedive, from whom he obtained the passenger agency, thus helping to make Egypt a safer and more attractive destination. In 1872 he took advantage of Thomas Cook's prolonged absence to arrange the expensive move to large new premises, which soon proved to be indispensable. John Cook, a tall, thickset, heavily bearded man with an intimidating manner, imposed on his staff strict rules of dress, work, and conduct. But he was also a fair and benevolent employer. 
During the 1870s Cook untiringly arranged new enterprises, nearly all of which proved to be profitable. The most lucrative was his creation, in 1878, of a foreign banking and money exchange department. Its business, especially through the improvement of credit notes, which he helped to develop into travellers' cheques, soon began to flourish. Railway coupons were another important facility, enabling passengers to book and pay for an entire international train journey in advance. Since railway companies accepted payments on a monthly basis, the firm as well as the customers benefited from this innovation. Meanwhile an angry correspondence raged between father and son which led to John's bringing about Thomas Cook's retirement. After taking charge in 1879 he paid his father a pension (probably $1000 a year) and rigorously excluded him from the business. Relations between them remained correct but distant. 
John Cook's first success as sole director was to build up the American side of Thomas Cook & Son after the dissolution of the partnership with E. M. Jenkins in 1878. During the 1880s he opened up new tourist destinations, among them India, which was not very popular, and Australia and New Zealand, which proved lucrative. He experimented with novel schemes such as improving the Mount Vesuvius funicular railway, which he purchased in 1887. Although the travel business became more competitive, Cook expanded the scope and increased the profits of his own firm. He concentrated on 'select' tours for a more exclusive clientele than that favoured by his father. He also sought out government patronage and was happy to accept official commissions like transporting the expedition to relieve General Gordon in 1884. The firm took the army from Cairo to Wadi Halfa, though he himself made a hazardous trip as far south as Dongola. With pardonable hyperbole some admirers said that if Cook had conducted the relief force all the way to Khartoum, Gordon would have been saved ('Daily Telegraph'; Royle, 554). 
In 1887, at the behest of the India Office, which wanted to stop the exploitation of Muslim pilgrims, the firm took on the equally challenging task of transporting them between the subcontinent and Mecca. But the service was abandoned in 1893 when Cook's prices proved too high. There was no such problem about Cook's lavish arrangements for conducting Indian princes to London for Queen Victoria's silver and golden jubilees. Such public undertakings brought the firm prestige as well as profit -- though the financial dispute with the war ministry which followed the death of Gordon may have cost Cook the knighthood he craved. Nevertheless at the firm's own golden jubilee in 1891 it was much praised for its services to the empire. 
On this occasion John Cook enumerated the assets of his business: 84 offices, 85 agencies, 2692 staff (978 of them in Egypt), and 45 bank accounts. He rightly claimed to be personally responsible for its spectacular growth. But when he went on to speak of his belief 'that the world would be a pleasanter place of habitation if all the dwellers on its surface were brought closer together, and that international travel was one of the best preservatives against international wars' ('Cook's Excursionist', 8 Aug 1891), Cook was echoing the ideals of his father. Although often at odds, the two men were complementary, Thomas providing the creative vision, John the executive drive. Between them, Thomas Cook & Son contributed signally to a revolution in popular tourism that changed the world. 
John Cook also announced in 1891 that he wanted to hand over management of the business to his three sons, Frank, Ernest, and Thomas Albert (Bert), all of whom were already involved in it. Actually he could not bear to relinquish control. But because of deteriorating health he spent the winters in Egypt, where the firm enjoyed such a large share of the flourishing tourist trade that John Cook was often hailed as uncrowned king. There he supervised the construction of a fleet of splendid new Nile paddle-steamers, in which wealthy passengers enjoyed a sybaritic existence and were almost entirely insulated from Egyptian life. Cook showed the more charitable side of his nature, though, when in 1891 he built the first hospital for Egyptians at Luxor. 
After going round the world to inspect the company's work in 1893, Cook gave much of his attention to special events and was particularly pleased to carry out royal commissions. His devotion to royalty -- as well as to duty -- may well have hastened his end. In 1898 he personally conducted Kaiser Wilhelm II to the Holy Land. The tour was arranged with the usual military precision but both men were affected by the 'excessive heat'. John Cook contracted dysentery and never really recovered. He died on 6 March 1899, aged sixty-five, at Mount Felix, his new residence in Walton-on-Thames. Like his father he was given a Baptist funeral in Leicester and buried in the family vault. He was survived by his wife. 
The three grandsons of Thomas Cook carried on the business; and Ernest Edward Cook was responsible for the banking and exchange department. Although the firm continued to prosper under their direction it was sold, quite unexpectedly, on 8 February 1928 to the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons-Lits of Belgium for $3.5 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 6153


Cooke, William (d. 1824), writer, was descended from an old family originally from Cheshire, but for some time settled in Cork. He was educated at Cork grammar school, and afterwards by a private tutor. At the age of nineteen he married a lady of considerable fortune, but squandered a large portion of it, and lost nearly all the remainder in his business, that of a woollen manufacturer. His first wife died after about three years, and later in life he married his second wife, Maria, identified only as a sister of a late Major Galway. 
In 1766 Cooke left Cork for London with strong recommendations to the duke of Richmond, the marquess of Lansdowne, Edmund Burke, and Oliver Goldsmith, whose friendship he retained through life. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1777, and for one or two years went on the home circuit, but already occupied himself chiefly with literature. His earliest publication was a poem entitled 'The Art of Living in London', which met with some success, and in 1807 he published another of greater pretension, entitled 'Conversation', in the fourth edition of which, published in 1815, he introduced the characters of several of the members of the well-known literary club in Gerrard Street, Soho, such as Burke, Samuel Johnson, Sir Joshua Reynolds, and Goldsmith. 
Contemporary biographical accounts usually present Cooke's relationship with Goldsmith as amicable and mutually congratulatory. Some twentieth-century commentators, however, suggest that Cooke's 'anecdotes' or 'reminiscences' of Goldsmith were less than charitable, and show a tendency to paint the more famous author as something of a simpleton. To one of Goldsmith's biographers, R. M. Wardle, Cooke was a 'goon' who was often among those who were 'more interested in telling an effective story (and perhaps incidentally suggesting an intimacy with the great) than in checking the accuracy of their information' (Wardle, 5, 190, 290). It seems, however, that Goldsmith maintained his friendship with Cooke, regardless of the latter's own inconsistencies. 
Cooke also authored 'Elements of Dramatic Criticism' (1775); 'The Capricious Lady', a comedy, altered from Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Scornful Lady' (1783); 'Memoirs of C. Macklin' (1806), the actor, including a history of the stage during Macklin's lifetime; and 'Memoirs of Samuel Foote, with some of his Writings' (3 vols., 1805). He died at his house in Piccadilly on 3 April 1824, at a very advanced age. 


@@@@@


doc= 6154


Cooke, Alexander (bap. 1564, d. 1632), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, was born at Beeston, near Leeds, Yorkshire, the second son of William Gayle or Cooke, and baptized there on 3 September 1564. After Leeds grammar school he followed his elder brother, Robert Cooke (1549/50-1615), to Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1581, graduating BA in 1585. In 1587 he was elected to a Percy fellowship at University College, proceeding MA in 1588 and BD in 1596. Cooke returned to Yorkshire, where his strongly anti-Catholic views were employed in preaching to the recusant prisoners in York Castle in 1600, and on 5 February 1601 he was instituted to the important royal living of Louth in Lincolnshire. Cooke was appointed one of the select preachers at the accession of James I in 1603, but in the following year his puritan principles landed him in trouble with the diocesan authorities at Lincoln and he was deprived of his living on 30 October 1604 for refusing to wear the surplice. 
Cooke then again returned to Yorkshire to assist, in the capacity of curate, his brother Robert, who as vicar of Leeds was instrumental in establishing a vigorous protestant tradition there. The brothers made a formidable partnership which attracted the support of many of the leading townsmen so that, when Robert died in 1615, a group of them persuaded the archbishop of York, Tobie Matthew, to bypass the surviving owners of the advowson -- also local worthies, who had hoped to appoint to the vicarage Richard Middleton, a chaplain to Prince Charles -- and to place Cooke in the living instead. A suit in chancery followed. This was settled in Cooke's favour in August 1617 when the right of presentation was confirmed in a self-perpetuating body of twenty-five trustees, mostly local lay sympathizers of Cooke and his brand of churchmanship, but also including John Favour, vicar of Halifax, and other puritan clergy of the area associated with the exercise at Halifax at which Cooke had been a preacher. 
Though it met with vociferous opposition from some quarters, Cooke's subsequent ministry in the town was both purposeful and authoritative; he preached against popular festivals, including Christmas, and was firm in his opposition to the alehouse, denouncing from the pulpit by name those who had failed to live up to his godly standards. More positively, his ministry produced a flowering of puritan piety in Leeds and its chapelries, best expressed in the charitable giving to the poor and in support for clergy and educational institutions during the 1620s and 1630s. This was given institutional direction through the committee for pious uses established for the parish in 1619, and Cooke's supporters also formed the nucleus of the corporation set up by royal charter in 1626 giving the town self-government and releasing it from control of the manor. 
Cooke's renowned anti-Catholic views were well known in senior ecclesiastical circles and brought him to the attention of Matthew, who encouraged him to publish controversial works, the first of which, 'Pope Joane: a dialogue betweene a protestant and a papist, manifestly proving that a woman called Joane was pope of Rome', was published in 1610, and in the course of the well-known argument pilloried the views of Bellarmine. A second edition followed in 1625 and a French translation was published in 1633, but Cooke's most popular controversial work in his lifetime was his more substantial 'Work for a Mass-Priest', first published in 1617, and going through four further amplified editions in the author's lifetime. 
In addition to his public opposition to popery, Cooke was thought to be a vigorous critic of the Arminians in private. His controversial style also affected his pastoral ministry, which was disturbed between 1619 and 1622 by a cause in Star Chamber between Cooke and John Metcalf, the bailiff of Leeds manor, over a variety of issues which had much to do with the administration of local charities and the traditional loyalties of the latter in matters of religion. Not withstanding these problems, Cooke's legacy to the religious and cultural temper of seventeenth-century Leeds was substantial and in the years immediately after his death several endowments were made to the outlying chapelries of the parish and a new chapel, St John's, established in the town. Cooke died in 1632 and was buried in his parish church on 23 June next to his brother Robert. He was survived by his wife, Anne, and three children, to whom he left his books, which later formed the nucleus of a library for St John's Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 6155


Cooke, Sir Anthony (1505/6-1576), educator and humanist, was the only son of John Coke or Cooke (1485-1516) of Gidea Hall, Essex, within the liberty of Havering-atte-Bower near Romford, and Alice Saunders (died 1510), daughter of William Saunders of Banbury, Oxfordshire. He was the great-grandson of Sir Thomas Cook, a wealthy draper, who was lord mayor of London in 1462-3. 
John Coke died in 1516, leaving the eleven-year-old Anthony to be raised by his uncle Richard Cooke, a diplomatic courier under Henry VIII, and his stepmother, Margaret Pennington, a lady-in-waiting first to Katherine of Aragon and later to the Princess Mary. Some time before 1523 Anthony Cooke married Anne (died 1553), daughter of Sir William Fitzwilliam (died 1460) of Gaynes Park, Essex, a London merchant and former sheriff of London. In 1523 Cooke was admitted to the Inner Temple and was granted the use for life of the Essex chamber. 
Almost nothing is known of Cooke's actions over the next twelve years. There are no further references to him at the Inner Temple but he apparently remained in England for much of this time. He appears in the one surviving Havering manor court roll for these years acting as an agent for his family's lands, and his landed inheritance may have occupied much of his time. A fourth share in the estate of his maternal great-grandfather, Sir Henry Belknap, fell to Cooke in 1521, when he was only sixteen, giving him valuable lands in Warwickshire and adjoining counties. 
Cooke next appears in the 1530s. From 1531 he was regularly appointed a justice in the liberty of Havering, and he was one of the Essex gentlemen alerted during the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536; he may also have served in Ireland in 1536-7. Called upon to provide troops for the army in Flanders in 1543 and France in 1544, he served as sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire in 1544-5, and was named to several local commissions. In 1539 he had received his first appointment at court, being named one of the fifty 'spears' of Henry VIII's reconstituted bodyguard. He was present at the reception of Anne of Cleves in 1540 and of the admiral of France in 1546, and in the latter year was given a regular position at court as a gentleman of the privy chamber. He was made a knight of the Bath on 20 February 1547, and also sat for Lewes in that year's parliament. He subsequently served as a commissioner to inquire into heresies in Essex in 1549, and on the commission of 1552 to revise the ecclesiastical laws. 
Cooke's greatest importance lies in the field of education, particularly of women, yet nothing is known of his own basic training. He was almost certainly self-taught. At some point, perhaps in the 1530s, he embarked on a serious study of the church fathers, and was sufficiently advanced by 1541 to complete a translation from the Latin of a sermon on prayer by St Cyprian, which he dedicated to the king. The dedication of the manuscript (it remains unpublished) suggests some familiarity with the 'new thought' of the humanist movement in England, although there is no evidence of Cooke's having studied with any of the humanists of his day. It praises Henry VIII for delivering his subjects from the 'captivity and bondage' of Rome but is not otherwise overtly protestant, although this may represent a deliberate attempt to avoid controversy. 
Some time in the 1530s Cooke turned his attention to the education of his children, and especially that of his daughters. Enlightened opinion favoured some form of training for girls, but Cooke's five daughters received as good an education as that given to his four sons and probably better. Latin and Greek certainly formed part of their studies and they may also have received some training in Hebrew and modern languages. They read both early Christian writers and the works of contemporary protestant thinkers, and became well known for their scholarly abilities. The eldest daughter, Mildred Cecil, who married the future Lord Burghley, was especially praised for her knowledge of Greek, while Anne Bacon, the second wife of Lord Keeper Bacon, published works by Ochino and Jewel in translations from Italian and Latin respectively. Katherine Killigrew, the wife of the diplomat Sir Henry Killigrew, was a strong protestant noted for her linguistic scholarship. She published nothing, but the formidable Elizabeth Russell, who married successively the translator Sir Thomas Hoby and John, Lord Russell, second son of the second earl of Bedford, published her translation of a Latin treatise on the sacrament in 1605. The remaining daughter, Margaret, who became a maid-in-waiting to Queen Mary, married Sir Ralph Rowlett in 1558 as his second wife but died only a few weeks later. 
The high point of Cooke's career has traditionally been seen as his appointment as tutor to Edward VI, although whether he ever actually held a formal post is uncertain. In 1550 John Hooper referred to Cooke as one of Edward's tutors along with John Cheke, and in May of that year Cooke received a life annuity of $100 in return for giving 'training in good letters and manners' to the king (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 1.690). Cooke is never mentioned in Edward's journal, however, nor was he ever officially described as royal tutor. Most probably, Cooke began working with Edward in 1550 after the retirement of Richard Cox, another of the royal tutors, but as a companion and guide rather than as a formal teacher. 
Cooke may have been slow to move towards religious evangelicalism, but his commitment had grown sufficiently strong by 1553 to lead him to an apparently self-imposed exile shortly after Mary's accession. While on the continent he travelled widely, making visits to Italy before settling in Strasbourg in 1555. There he attended lectures by Pietro Martire Vermigli (known as Peter Martyr) and was in contact with leaders of the reformed faith. Following Mary's death he returned to England, where many expected that he would be named to high office. He played an active part in the parliament of 1559 (in which he sat as a knight of the shire for Essex), but in some way seems to have become disaffected from the progress of the religious settlement, and in spite of his close connections with the highest echelons of the new government he was never granted an important position. He served on several religious commissions early in Elizabeth's reign and sat as a member for Essex again in 1563, but his participation in national affairs, whether political or religious, had virtually ended by that year, and he appears to have been largely absorbed in family matters in the last years of his life. His occupations included the extension of Gidea Hall, which Queen Elizabeth visited in 1568. In his will, drawn up on 22 May 1576 and with a codicil added on 9 June, Cooke provided for the descent of his lands (estimated to be worth some $1100 per annum) to his sons Richard and William. All his surviving sons and daughters received bequests of plate, while each daughter was given her choice of books, two Latin and one Greek, from her father's library. The executors were headed by Bacon and Burghley, each of whom was to have $200 for his pains. His bequests in cash, totalling nearly $1200, bear witness both to Cooke's wealth and to his concern for his wider family -- he remembered a number of grandchildren, including Robert Cecil, Anthony and Francis Bacon, and Thomas Posthumous Hoby. Surprisingly, perhaps, his will makes only the briefest possible provision for the well-being of his soul, and contains no charitable bequest at all. Cooke died on 11 June 1576, aged seventy, and was buried in St Andrew's Church at Romford. His effigy survives at St Edward's Church, Romford. 


@@@@@


doc= 6156


Cooke, Benjamin (1734-1793), organist and composer, was born on 28 November 1734 in London, probably at his father's premises in Covent Garden. He was the son of Benjamin Cooke (died 1742/3), a music seller and publisher in New Street, Covent Garden, and his second wife, Elizabeth Wayet, whose family came from Nottinghamshire and who was sister-in-law to Lancelot 'Capability' Brown. Among the works which Cooke's father published was the first ever edition in score of the classic op. 6 concertos and trio sonatas (opp. 1-4) of Arcangelo Corelli, 'Carefully Corrected by several Eminent Masters, and revis'd by Dr. Pepusch'. Shortly after Cooke's eighth birthday his father died, and it was to Pepusch that young Benjamin's musical education was entrusted. Under him the boy made such rapid progress that he is said to have deputized for John Robinson, organist of Westminster Abbey, by the age of twelve. Through Pepusch he also became intimately involved in the affairs of the Academy of Ancient Music, and developed those antiquarian interests which were to remain with him for life. In 1749 the young Cooke took over from Samuel Howard as the academy's librarian, and three years later, on the death of Pepusch (who left him a gold piece worth 5 guineas in his will), Cooke stepped naturally into his shoes as its musical director. He continued in that role until 1789, when, in the face of mounting press criticism of the academy's performance standards, he was unceremoniously ousted by the members, and Samuel Arnold appointed in his stead. 
By this date Benjamin Cooke had long been firmly ensconced at Westminster Abbey, where he succeeded Bernard Gates as master of the choristers in September 1757 and John Robinson as organist in July 1762; he had also held an appointment as a lay vicar there since 27 January 1758. On 22 May 1758 he married one of his pupils, Mary Jackson (1731/2-1784); according to her son, 'she was a most amiable and affectionate woman, and possessed good property' (Cooke, 11). Of their ten children, five died in infancy. A sixth (another Benjamin) showed an early talent for music, but died aged ten and a half on 25 January 1772. On 2 November 1760 Cooke had been elected a member of the society 'for the Support of Decay'd Musicians or their Families' (later the Royal Society of Musicians), and in April 1767 he joined the Catch Club, in whose annual competition for the composition of catches, canons, and glees he was later to win several prizes; he was also a member of the Madrigal Society (from 1769). In July 1775 Cooke took a doctorate of music at Cambridge (which degree he subsequently incorporated at Oxford). Though he refused at first to join a little club of musical graduates set up in 1790, he had apparently been reconciled to the fact that Arnold was also a member by December 1791, when he dined quite happily with a group of fellow 'graduates' (including Haydn, a recent honorary DMus of Oxford). 
Not content with his Westminster Abbey appointments, it seems that Cooke had hopes of becoming organist of St Michael Cornhill, London, as well; but in a parish election for the post held in 1781 he was resoundingly beaten by Richard John Samuel Stevens. The following year, however, he trounced Charles Burney in a similar contest for the organistship of St Martin-in-the-Fields. As one of the eight assistant directors responsible for organizing the first great Handel commemoration festival at Westminster Abbey and the Pantheon in 1784, Cooke worked closely with Burney, and he received one of the commemorative medals that George III had ordered to be struck on the occasion. Though Cooke is said to have been 'extremely thin' when young, he evidently became quite corpulent in old age; he also suffered much from gout, but it was probably a heart attack that carried him off on 14 September 1793. He died at his house in Dorset Court, Parliament Street, Westminster, and was buried in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey on 21 September. His grave, which he shares with his wife, who died on 19 March 1784, his mother-in-law, and all ten children, is marked by a wall plaque on which is inscribed a canon of his own composition and an epitaph written by James Mathias, a fellow member of the Madrigal Society. 
As a composer Benjamin Cooke is of no great importance. His output, however, was considerable, and includes a good deal of convivial vocal music, some of which -- his glees in particular -- reveals a modest but none the less genuine creative talent. He was also, it seems, not only a respectable scholar but also a good-natured and very likeable man, and Laetitia Hawkins's character reference is positively glowing. Her father, Sir John, was one of Cooke's oldest friends, and in the preface to his 'General History of the Science and Practice of Music' (1776) he acknowledges Cooke's 'learning and ingenuity' in transcribing into modern notation some of 'the compositions of greatest antiquity' which he had felt obliged to include; indeed, there are several examples of such pieces among the large collection of Cooke's musical manuscripts now in the library of the Royal College of Music, London. Evidence of his studies in musical theory and other such matters survives in the British Library (Add. MS 29298) and in a very miscellaneous volume of 'Musical conjectures' (started in 1769) now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford (Tenbury collection). Cooke liked to deprecate his abilities as a teacher, but this 'did high injustice to his ability and diligence; self, or mutual instruction could never have produced such pupils as left the choir of Westminster Abbey while it was under his tuition' ('Memoir of Benjamin Cooke', 208). Among the many musicians who benefited from Cooke's tuition were Sir William Parsons, John Crosdill, both the elder and the younger Charles Knyvett, Reginald Spofforth, James Bartleman, Thomas Greatorex, and John Hindle. 
Cooke's four surviving children all died unmarried, the two girls, Mary and Amelia, in 1819 and 1845 respectively. Henry (1766-1840) was professionally active in the General Post Office (as was his uncle, Charles Jackson); in addition to 'Some Remarks on the Greek Theory of Tuning Instruments', he published a short memoir of his father (1837) and edited two volumes of his organ pieces. Cooke's second surviving son, Robert Cooke (1768-1814), succeeded him as organist of St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 6157


Cooke, Edward (fl. 1676-1678), playwright and translator, wrote 'The Divine Epicurus, or, The Empire of Pleasure over the Vertues' (1676), translated from the philosopher Antoine Le Grand. In 1678 he produced 'A Just and Seasonable Reprehension of Naked Breasts and Shoulders', translated from the work of Jacques Boileau. Cooke's major work was 'Love's Triumph, or, The Royal Union' (1678), a drama dedicated to Mary, princess of Orange, which portrays Oroondates, prince of Scythia, in love with Statira, and Artaxerxes, prince of Persia, in love with Berenice, and ends with nuptials. 
Another Edward Cooke wrote 'Bartas junior, or, The world's epitome: man, set forth in his 1. Generation, 2. Degeneration, 3. Rejuvenation', published in London in 1631 though probably drafted twelve years earlier. He may also have been responsible for 'Duello foiled, or, The whole proceedings in the orderly disposing of a design for a single fight between two valiant gentleman' (n.d.). 


@@@@@


doc= 6158


Cooke, Edward (1772-1799), naval officer, was born on 14 April 1772, the son of Colonel George John Cooke of Harefield, Middlesex, and Penelope, only daughter of Sir William Bowyer, third baronet, and Anne Stonhouse. His brothers were General Sir George Cooke, army officer, who commanded the first division at Waterloo, and Major-General Sir Henry Frederick Cooke, private secretary to the duke of York. Following the death of Edward Cooke's father, his mother married General Edward Smith, uncle of Admiral Sir W. Sidney Smith. 
Cooke entered the navy and was made lieutenant on 14 September 1790. In 1793 he was appointed to the 'Victory', going to the Mediterranean as Lord Hood's flagship. In August he was entrusted with the negotiations with the royalist inhabitants of Toulon, a service which he conducted with skill and boldness, and which resulted in Lord Hood's obtaining possession of the town and arsenal. Cooke was then appointed Toulon's lieutenant-governor and served with the governor, Captain George Elphinstone (later Viscount Keith). He continued in this post until the town's evacuation at the end of December. His services were rewarded by promotion, and on 12 April 1794 he was advanced to the rank of post captain. He took charge of the landing for the siege of Calvi in June 1794, and played an active part in subsequent operations, his zeal drawing the praise of Nelson, under whose immediate orders he was serving. 
On 7 October 1794 Cooke was appointed to the 'Sibylle', a fine (40-gun) frigate, recently captured from the French, and in her he went out to the Cape of Good Hope, from where he was sent on to the East Indies to escort home the China trade. In early January 1798, in company with Captain Charles Malcolm of the 'Fox', he reconnoitred the Spanish force in the Philippines with the hope, if possible, of capturing two richly laden ships reported as ready to sail from Manila. As they neared the islands it occurred to Cooke that they might pass themselves off as French. The 'Sibylle', a French-built ship, was easily disguised, as was the 'Fox' once it had been repainted. Between them, Cooke and an officer on the 'Fox' spoke fluent French and some Spanish. 
On 14 January the two frigates were off Manila where they aroused no suspicion. The guardboats came alongside, and the Spanish officers were taken down to the cabin and hospitably entertained, while in the foremost part of the ship the Spanish seamen were stripped, and British sailors dressed in their clothes were sent away in the guardboats to capture what they could. They thus took the Spanish entirely by surprise and brought off three large gunboats. By the time the townsmen and the garrison realized that the two frigates were British, Cooke and Malcolm, in friendly talk with the Spanish officers, had gained much confidential information. They then sent them on shore along with the 200 prisoners, and, with the three gunboats in tow, stood out of the bay. 
In February 1799 the 'Sibylle' was lying at Madras when Cooke learned that the French frigate 'Forte' was in the Bay of Bengal, and on 19 February he put to sea in search of her. On the evening of 28 February the 'Sibylle' was off the Sand-heads; about nine o'clock she made out three ships, which she understood to be the 'Forte' and two recently captured country ships. The 'Forte' supposed that the 'Sibylle' was another merchant ship and ordered her to strike. The 'Sibylle' closed at once, and, with her main yard between the enemy's main and mizen masts, poured in a broadside and shower of musketry with deadly effect. The 'Forte' was taken by surprise; the terrible broadside was the first intimation that she had to contend with the largest British frigate on the station. For nearly an hour the two ships lay broadside to broadside at a distance seldom greater than pistol shot. At about 1.30 a.m. Cooke was wounded by grape shot to the chest and shoulder. The action was then maintained by Lucius Hardyman, the first lieutenant. At 2.30 a.m. the 'Forte', being entirely dismasted, and having lost 150 men killed and wounded, struck her colours. She was at the time the largest and most heavily armed frigate afloat, being about one-third larger than the 'Sibylle', and carrying 24-pounders on her main deck, as against the 'Sibylle's' 18-pounders. By comparison the 'Sibylle's' loss was comparatively slight. 
The darkness of the night, and the superior discipline and training of the 'Sibylle's' crew are principal factors in explaining what proved to be one of the eighteenth century's most brilliant frigate actions. Lucius Hardyman was immediately promoted commander, and in January 1800 captain, of the 'Forte'. However, Cooke's wounds proved fatal. After lingering for some months in extreme agony he died at Calcutta on 25 May 1799. He was buried there with the highest military honours; a monument was erected to his memory by the directors of the East India Company. 


@@@@@


doc= 6159


Cooke, Edward (bap. 1755, d. 1820), government official and political pamphleteer, was baptized on 27 June 1755 at Denham, Buckinghamshire, the third and only surviving son of William Cooke (1711-1797), provost of King's College, Cambridge, and his wife, Catherine, the daughter of Richard Sleech, a canon of Windsor. He was educated at Eton College (1760-72) and, from 16 May 1773, at King's College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA in 1777 and MA in 1785, and was a fellow from 1776 to 1786. 
Cooke entered government service in 1778, when he became private secretary to Sir Richard Heron, the chief secretary of Ireland during the vice-royalty of John Hobart, second earl of Buckinghamshire, and in the course of the next twenty-two years he became the most prominent English member of the Dublin Castle secretariat. He was therefore private secretary to Heron's successors, William Eden and Richard Fitzpatrick. He held a succession of posts in the Irish administration and parliament from 1778 -- as second chamberlain of the exchequer (1778-86), clerk of the stationery stores (1781-4), second clerk of the House of Commons (1786-9, 1798), and education commissioner (1788) -- before occupying the more influential positions of under-secretary for the military department, from 7 April 1789 to 1796, and for the civil department, from 5 June 1796 to 21 October 1801. In addition the Irish administration had him returned an MP for the nomination boroughs of Lifford (1789-90) and Old Leighlin (1790-1800) and topped up his official perquisites of $1414 per annum and, by 1801, a house in the Phoenix Park, with several sinecures. It is a measure of his standing as a leading member of the secretariat of Dublin Castle that, despite being English, he was unanimously voted the freedom of Dublin in 1796 and that of the Guild of Merchants in 1798. 
Cooke's career in Ireland prospered because he was clever and ready to support British policy there. His intellect was widely admired: in 1782 Lord Mornington recommended him to the incoming chief secretary, William Grenville, on the ground of the 'very high character' he had acquired 'for his knowledge and talents in his line' ('Fortescue MSS', 1.164); and in 1800 Lord Cornwallis, then viceroy, referred to him as 'a very clever fellow' ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 3.310). He did not wear his intelligence lightly, however. Cornwallis was not alone in criticizing his lack of an 'accommodating temper' (ibid.), and Edmund Burke took such criticism to extremes with his remark that Cooke was 'a shallow hot headed puppy, proud and presumptuous, and ill behav'd' ('Correspondence', 9.339). Cornwallis also alleged that by the time of his vice-royalty Cooke guarded his position at the castle jealously, failed to delegate to others, and, being 'no man of details himself', left ordinary business 'behindhand, and in great confusion' ('Correspondence of... Cornwallis', 3.315). However, it has to be said that there was little love lost between the two men, Cooke being coruscating in his criticism of his chief's administration. 
With the exception of Earl Fitzwilliam's administration in 1795, when he was temporarily dismissed because of his influence and his identification with Pitt's regime, Cooke served successive Irish administrations in a variety of ways. There is circumstantial evidence of his involvement in managing the Irish parliament for the castle in the early 1780s and no doubt of that role later, especially during the Regency crisis and, most notably, during the passage of the Union (1799-1800). In the last case he was, in his own opinion, the official most 'deeply engaged in all the promises' made to individuals to reward them for their support of the measure or to win that support (Cooke to Auckland, 8 Oct 1801, Sneyd MSS), and therefore involved in the irregular funding of them through the English secret service fund. He was also routinely called upon to advise and to frame policy with the British government: for example, on the commercial propositions in 1785; on the ramifications in Ireland of the Portland whigs' taking office in 1794; and, most importantly, on the Union, when he played a prominent role in drawing up the relevant bills and, on the eve of Pitt's resignation, in working up drafts of measures to enable Catholics to sit in the imperial parliament and to reduce the burden of tithe. Throughout the Union episode his frequent correspondence with Castlereagh, Grenville, and Auckland is a major source of information on the disposition of the Irish politicians and the progress of the measure. Indeed, his influence in Dublin and his connections in London made him the vital bureaucratic link between the Irish administration and the British government. 
Cooke was most widely known, however, as a pamphleteer. There is a strong possibility that he was the author of 'A Letter to a Venerated Nobleman Lately Retired from this Kingdom' (1795), in which Fitzwilliam was accused of setting back the Catholic question by his alleged indiscretions. He certainly wrote the anonymous 'Arguments for and Against a Union between Great Britain and Ireland Considered' (1798), which was regarded as a statement of the government's thinking and was 'very universally read' ('Fortescue MSS', 4.404). In this Cooke argued that the union would benefit both countries and eventually bring about political benefits for Catholics -- a cause on which he had come to believe that concession 'risks nothing, and denial risks everything' ('Memoirs... of Viscount Castlereagh', 4.41-6). He even went so far in a 'Most secret' letter to Grenville on 15 January 1799 as to advise the government that it should make it clear to the Catholic hierarchy that concession would be made 'at an early period' after the Union in order to secure its passage in Ireland. However, on an issue that became a matter of repeated controversy in parliament until 1829, he later denied that he had had any communications with Catholics or protestants in Ireland on the subject 'before' Pitt declared his intention to retire. On the other hand, his commitment to Catholic relief after Union was sufficiently strong to determine him to resign his post and return to England as soon as he heard of the king's veto and Pitt's replacement by the anti-Catholic Addington. As he put it as early as 9 February 1801 (in words that tend to confirm Cornwallis's opinion of his temper): 'How can I, with my natural eagerness and indiscretion, (which official habits for twenty years have not been able to tame) sit a quiet, torpid, useless clerk at a desk, going through mere common drudgery, and disapproving every measure that is taken by the Government...? (ibid., 4.28)' Cooke's departure, however, was protracted and acrimonious. In the immediate aftermath of the change of ministers he remained determined to leave Ireland, stressing now the needs of his many relatives in England, but was persuaded to remain for the time being by Lord Hardwicke, the new viceroy, on the ground that he was the best person to oversee the fulfilment of the Union promises. Indeed Hardwicke and the new chief secretary, Charles Abbot, asked him to go to London in spring 1801 to help with the 'secret business' of filling up the holes in the Secret Service Fund made by Cooke's promises, from which the new Irish administration wished to keep its distance (Cooke to Auckland, 8 Oct 1801, Sneyd MSS). At approximately the same time, however, Cooke took severe umbrage at Abbot's being appointed Irish lord privy seal and at the appointment of a new fellow under-secretary -- on the ground of their ignorance of the country. With family pressures mounting, he renewed his decision to leave Ireland and, unbeknown to Hardwicke and Abbot, used part of the time he spent in London to make an arrangement with Lord Pelham, one of his former chiefs in Ireland and the incoming home secretary, by which he would become Pelham's under-secretary and Sir George Shee would replace him in Ireland. Cooke argued later that he believed that, in the new post-Union conditions, the authority of the home secretary over Irish matters had increased and that he would, in effect, have a decisive say in all major appointments. He also alleged that, although he had asked Pelham to broach the subject with Hardwicke himself, Pelham had dissembled and enjoined him to keep quiet. 
When the arrangement did become known, a serious row broke out which had public and personal dimensions. Contrary to Cooke's interpretation of the respective powers of the viceroy and the home secretary, Hardwicke saw himself as a king's representative who should settle policy in collaboration with the prime minister and the cabinet rather than act under the Home Office. He and Abbot therefore regarded Cooke's action as 'a most monstrous and inadmissible presumption' by a public servant who had no right 'to govern and dispose of Lords Lieutenants and Secretaries of State' as he pleased (Abbot to Hardwicke, 1, 6 July 1801, BL, Add. MS 35711, fols. 67, 76). They therefore vetoed the intended exchange of posts. 
Cooke reacted bitterly. 'I do not deserve this after 23 years service here and my labours in the Rebellion and Union', he pleaded to Auckland (6 Aug 1801, BL, Add. MS 34455, fol. 425), and later he told Pitt that he had been excluded from the discussion of policy following Abbot's arrival in order to force his retirement. Abbot, for his part, accused Cooke of publicly criticizing the government both during and after his time in London, and of describing his own intended reforms of the Irish administration in exaggerated and alarmist terms. It was even suspected that Cooke had colluded with Lord Clare and others in feeding such alarms to the government's opponents at Westminster. The otherwise temperate Hardwicke had seen enough and, although it removed the master of the complicated Union promises from the castle, consented to Cooke's retirement, which took place on 21 October 1801; he received a salary of $1000 for the sinecure post of keeper of the records of the Irish parliament, two other sinecures worth $500 each, and the imminent reversion of a post worth $800 a year. 
Following his return to England Cooke was unemployed until the formation of Pitt's second administration in May 1804, when he was appointed under-secretary to Lord Camden, the new secretary for war and the colonies. Camden knew of Cooke, for he had been Cornwallis's predecessor as viceroy and, more particularly, was the father-in-law of Lord Castlereagh, Cooke's chief during the making of the Union. There was considerable respect and friendship between Cooke and Castlereagh, and both men had taken part in the horse-trading involved in passing the Union. Cooke served the remainder of his career first as Camden's and then as Castlereagh's under-secretary for war and the colonies, from 1804 to 1806, and then as Castlereagh's secretary at the Foreign Office, from 1807 to 1809, and again from 1812 to 1817. Although he and Castlereagh corresponded in private frequently, the evidence of his influence is slight. Under Camden (1804-5) he evidently conducted the military and colonial business of the department single-handed, and he claimed to be one of the prime movers in making the ill-fated assault on Buenos Aires (1806-7) an object of war policy for which the Grenville administration was criticized. Later he was reputed to be the author of pamphlets defending George III's conduct leading to the resignation of the Grenville government and that of Castlereagh in his dispute with Canning (1809). In winter 1814-15 he accompanied Castlereagh to Vienna and to Italy, partly to support his chief in the peace negotiations and partly to further ongoing talks with Cardinal Consalvi about securing an agreement with the Vatican on a settlement of the Catholic question. Two years later, in 1817, he retired, to Castlereagh's very considerable regret. 
Cooke had married, on 10 August 1791, Isabella (died 1821x4), the daughter of Hamilton Gorges of Kilbrew, co. Meath, an Irish MP, who endowed her with a portion of $10,000. They had no children, and the absence of any evidence of a social life seems to suggest that Cooke was the dedicated 'civil servant'. He even thought like one: ''thinking'', he once remarked to Lord Clare regarding the Catholic question, 'ought perhaps to make but a small part of my duty'; and on another occasion he told Castlereagh that 'vanity, ambition, interest' were the dominant passions in all governments and that a belief in 'utopian systems' which 'will not do' was one of the weaknesses of politicians ('Memoirs... of Viscount Castlereagh', 4.41-6, 50-52). He died at his home in Park Lane, London, on 19 March 1820. Much to the regret of historians, he left no papers behind him. 


@@@@@


doc= 6160


Cooke, Edward William (1811-1880), marine artist and gardener, was born on 27 March 1811 in Chapel Street, Pentonville, London, the second of the eleven children of George Cooke (1781-1834) ['see under 'Cooke family], engraver and print publisher, and his wife, Elizabeth Harriet Eglinton (1785-1882). He was educated at Grove House School, Woodford, Essex, before receiving artistic training in the studios of his father, uncle, and family friends, during which he became deeply versed in works of the early nineteenth-century landscapists. 
Cooke was almost obsessively interested in recording his natural and man-made environment. He early became a proficient botanical illustrator, drawing from nature from the age of nine in the celebrated Hackney nurseries of Conrad Loddiges & Sons and later assisting his father with aquatints for the Loddiges's 'Botanical Cabinet' (1817-33). The marine artist Clarkson Stanfield employed him to make drawings of nautical details, while a friendship with the captain of the West Indiaman 'Thetis' gave Cooke opportunities for study on board. As an etcher of marine subjects he developed an almost archaeological approach, recording as if aware that change was afoot. He published 'Fifty Plates of Shipping and Craft' (1829), 'Twelve Plates of Coast Sketches: Brighton' (1830), and 'The British Coast' (1831), all of which were republished together in 1831 as 'Sixty-Five Plates of Shipping and Craft' but bearing the date of 1829. In 1833 he and his father produced 'Views of the Old and the New London Bridges', twelve plates from his drawings of the subjects. His father's 'London and its Vicinity' (1826-34) was engraved from watercolours by Augustus Callcott, J. S. Cotman, Stanfield, and Samuel Prout, all based on outline drawings made by the younger Cooke to relieve them of the preliminary labour. 
Cooke and several of his father's other pupils moved in the circle of Richard Parkes Bonington, whose watercolour style Cooke emulated. He showed a single-minded devotion to minutely observed portraits of smaller working craft, recording their appearance in every country he visited; his travels abroad included tours of France from 1833, the Netherlands from 1837, western Italy from 1845-6, Venice from 1850, Sweden and Denmark in 1853, Spain in 1861, and Egypt in 1874. His scenes of Netherlandish coasts and waterways earned him the nickname Dutch Cooke among picture dealers (he often inscribed Van Kook on his boats); he was also dubbed Venetian Cooke for his portrayals of the craft of the Adriatic Sea and the lagoons, which he sometimes inscribed II Lagunetto. 
Cooke first exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution from 1835; he was elected ARA in 1851 and RA in 1863. Critics in general reviewed his work favourably and, early on in his artistic career, he attracted the patronage of John Sheepshanks, Robert Vernon, and William Wells, all wealthy collectors of modern art. Many major British galleries and museums own works by him, but his important 'Morning after a Heavy Gale' (exh. RA, 1857), which was well reviewed by Ruskin, is in a private collection in the USA. On 13 June 1840 he married Jane Loddiges (1812-1843), the younger daughter of George Loddiges; they had a daughter who died in infancy and two sons. 
Cooke combined his artistic interests with scientific ones, displaying an early enthusiasm for geology. He was introduced to the use of the microscope by George Loddiges and attended the inaugural meeting of the Microscopical Society. He was a fellow of the Linnean Society from 1857 and of the Royal Society from 1863. He was very interested in photography and was an early collector of calotypes. A member of the Athenaeum, he also belonged to the Alpine Club and the dining clubs of several scientific as well as artistic societies, including the Palaeontological Society. Among his publications is the eccentric 'Entwicklungsgeschichte -- grotesque animals' (1872), illustrated with ingenious drawings mixing fur, feather, bone, shells, and other fragments to demonstrate, with humorous descriptions, his familiarity with natural history. Ruskin -- a fellow enthusiast for the natural sciences -- described him a little cruelly as 'the smallest clever man I ever knew... full of accurate and valuable knowledge in natural history with which he is always overflowing at the wrong times' (J. Ruskin, 'The Works of John Ruskin', ed. E. T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 1903-12, 14.69). 
As a gardener Cooke displayed a talent for artistic grouping combined with great knowledge and love of plants. A determined collector of ferns, he named both his two Kensington houses The Ferns. For his friend James Bateman he designed many features of the remarkable gardens of Biddulph Grange, Staffordshire, which still exist. His own gardens at Glen Andred, Groombridge, Sussex, spreading round a house built for him by Norman Shaw in 1868, were renowned for the rocks which he revealed by removing the topsoil. 
Cooke found inactivity unbearable, according to his letters; Richard Redgrave described him as 'of a lively and genial disposition, restlessly active, a greater talker, and full of anecdote' (R. Redgrave and S. Redgrave, 'A Century of Painters' 1890, new edn, 1947, 424). W. E. Oswell recalled him at work, writing of 'the alert restless figure, the clear wide-set blue eyes... the marvellously sure hand darting from palette to canvas' (W. E. Oswell, ed., 'William Cotton Oswell, Hunter and Explorer: the Story of his Life', 1900, 2.96). Cooke died from cancer of the liver and lung on 4 January 1880 at Glen Andred and was buried at the church in Groombridge on 10 January. Sales of his remaining works took place at Christies, London, on 22 May 1880 and 11 March 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 6161


Cooke family (per. c.1800-1865), engravers, artists, and publishers, came to prominence with William Bernard Cooke (1778-1855), who was born in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, the son of a German immigrant confectioner from Frankfurt am Main, Johann Bernhard Guck, who changed his name to John Bernard Cooke. His mother was Maria Anna White (died 1821). An older brother of George Cooke ['see below'], with whom he frequently worked, W. B. Cooke was apprenticed to William Angus, engraver of 'The Seats of the Nobility and Gentry in Great Britain and Wales' (1787-[1800]). He married, on 12 April 1804, Elizabeth Blundstone (died 1830); there were no surviving children. His second wife was a sister of Anastasia Cromek, wife of the watercolourist Robert Hartley Cromek, whose maiden name was Priestman; they married in 1831, and she died in 1840. 
William Bernard Cooke was employed on John Norris Brewer's 'The Beauties of England and Wales' (1805), and much of his work thereafter was in the same vein. Sir Henry Charles Englefield, bt, chose W. B. and George Cooke to engrave the illustrations to his 'A description of the principal picturesque beauties, antiquities, and geological phenomena of the Isle of Wight and coast of Dorset' (1816) because of their truth to the original drawings and absence of engravers' invention. 
W. B. Cooke opened a print gallery and shop at 9 Soho Square, London, with an exhibition entitled 'Engraving by Living British Artists under the Patronage of His Majesty' (1821), the catalogue claiming that: 'The Professors of the interesting and highly useful art have long felt the necessity [of]... direct communication with its Patrons and Admirers... and have invited their Brothers to co-operate by sending their work... Under such auspices the British School of Engraving may confidently hope to arrive at a higher degree of Public estimation. (p. 1)' Subsequent exhibitions included drawings, some loaned by private collectors and some for sale, in 1822, 1823, and 1824.'Picturesque Views of the Southern Coast of England' (1814-26) totalled forty-eight plates and thirty-two vignettes chiefly after drawings commissioned from J. M. W. Turner who closely supervised the proofs. Drawings by Alexander, F. L. T. Francia, Havell, Samuel Prout, and William Westall were included. The copperplates were engraved by, among others, W. B. and G. Cooke, E. Finden, E. Goodall, and W. Miller. It was acknowledged as a high point in the monochrome reproduction of watercolour drawings. The engravers worked in the line manner but were: 'a school truly indigenous, both in its style and its technical means... not... line-engraving at all, as practically all the work was done by etching... a wriggling wormlike line which is absolutely opposed to all the reasonable possibilities and conventions of graver work... in such contrast to the true ideals of the etcher's art that we would still be content to call its exponents line-engravers. (Hind, 221-2)' W. B. Cooke's dealings with Turner and John Constable show him to have had a keen business sense. His reputation rested on topographical, especially marine or coastal, subjects, and on antiquarian interests. Typical are Turner's five 'Views in Sussex' (1819), Thomas Allason's 'Picturesque Views of the Antiquities of Pola in Istria' (1819), James Hakewill's 'A Picturesque Tour of Italy' (1820), T. L. Donaldson's 'Pompeii... Including Recent Excavations' (1827), and 'Vases, Altars &c from the... Louvre' (1828), drawn by W. B. Cooke and Thomas Boys, and engraved by Henry Moses. W. B. Cooke's apprentices were Frederick Smith, J. C. Allen, and W. Brandard. Samuel Redgrave wrote that he showed great ability and enterprise, published 'several of his own plates', but did not succeed (Redgrave, 'Artists', 96), a somewhat harsh verdict repeated by R. E. Graves. William Bernard Cook died at his home, 9 Camden Square, Camberwell, on 2 August 1855, of heart disease, and was buried on 8 August in Nunhead cemetery, London. His executors were Thomas Goff Lupton, engraver, and son. 

George Cooke (1781-1834) was born on 22 January 1781 in Charles Street, Hatton Garden, London, a younger brother of W. B. Cooke, and apprenticed to James Basire (1769-1822) in 1795. He married, on 26 October 1808, Elizabeth Harriet Eglinton (1785-1882), with whom he had eleven children, the second being the marine painter Edward William Cooke RA (1811-1880). George Cooke's wife kept a boarding-school, Albion House, Barnes, at which the daughters of Clarkson Stanfield RA and David Roberts RA were pupils and where he was drawing-master. His indentured apprentices were George Hollis, John Barnett, W. J. Cooke ['see below'], W. Miller, Thomas Shotter Boys, Percy Heath, Theo Lindsey Aspland, and F. R. Hay. 
Basire, remembered as a neglectful master, produced for the 'Oxford Almanack' engravings of drawings by J. M. W. Turner, and George Cooke's enthusiasm for these led him to plan a published series of that artist's watercolours. He engraved fifteen of the plates for Turner's 'Picturesque Views of the Southern Coast of England' (1814-26) but a disagreement with Turner over the disposal of proofs led to an acrimonious severing of relations. He worked with W. B. Cooke on many of the series mentioned above, and there were also 160 plates from his hand in John Pinkerton's 'General Collection of Voyages and Travels' (1808-14) in which he had to make acceptable pictures from 'mere tracings... & abortions of art' ('Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', 1834, 555). He undertook the engraving of the 2000 aquatint plates for the publisher Conrad Loddiges & Sons' work 'The Botanical Cabinet' (20 vols., 1817-33). His studio and family being fully employed in its regular appearance, he moved to a house adjoining the Loddiges at their Hackney nursery gardens. 
George Cooke published 'Views of London and its Vicinity', in parts, in 1826-34, planned to illustrate the developing metropolis; his painter friends gave him drawings for engraving for which his son Edward William had made preliminary outlines to save established artists, including A. W. Callcott, David Roberts, Clarkson Stanfield, and Samuel Prout, time and labour. Projected as eighty plates, on copper, it was overtaken by similar works quickly produced on steel plates which, whatever the quality, gave proofs of unvarying clarity. Conservative dislike of steel led him to avoid it but rivals using it outdistanced him and prospered. Cooke meanwhile doggedly maintained traditional high-quality proofs from copper, supervising printing to ensure the best results. However, he reduced 'London' to forty-eight plates, the last number being published posthumously, by his widow. 
A great many books of the 1820s contain plates of picturesque scenery and topographical interest from George Cooke's hand. 'Sunderland Iron Bridge', after Edward Blore, with 'effect' by F. L. Francia, was produced for R. Surtees' 'The History and Antiquities of... Durham'. He engraved after A. W. Callcott a view of Rotterdam, and had begun two further large plates of Antwerp and Dover, but by the failure of his agent in the financial crash of 1825-6 he lost money, putting an end to the venture as well as straitening his circumstances. His 'Views of the Old and the New London Bridges' (1833), from his son Edward's drawings, was engraved and etched conjointly; although the work was very well received, George Cooke's name does not appear on the title-page. 
George Cooke was a member of the Associated Society of Engravers whose aims included securing recognition by the Royal Academy for engravers to be full academicians. They also embarked on engraving and publishing selected paintings in the National Gallery. Cooke was also a member of the Graphic Society, the Calcographic Society, and the Artists' Joint Stock Fund. He died on 27 February 1834 of brain fever at his home, Albion House, Terrace, Barnes, Surrey. He was buried in St Mary's Church, Barnes, on 6 March. He was remembered for his 'buoyancy of spirit, industry, perseverance, temperance and unsullied integrity' ('Arnold's Magazine of the Fine Arts', 1834, 560). 

William John Cooke (bap. 1796, d. 1865), engraver, was baptized in London on 5 April 1796, the son of John Conrad Cooke ('b'. 1770, died before 1829), eldest brother of W. B. and G. Cooke, and his wife, Mary Ann, 'nee' Harrison. He was apprenticed to his uncle George Cooke about 1810. He married in 1823 Mary Boys, sister of his fellow apprentice Thomas Shotter Boys, the lithographer. 
A pioneer worker on steel, which his former master despised, W. J. Cooke won in 1826 the Isis gold medal of the Society of Arts for improvements in fluids for etching on steel and the invention of an 'apparatus for gradating tints'. He engraved drawings by Richard Parkes Bonington whom he met in 1825 and with whom he remained friends. 'Rouen from Bon Secours' and 'Chillon', both small in size, were published in 'Friendship's Offering' in 1826. Cooke was a frequent visitor to the house of his former fellow apprentice John Barnett, where Bonington died in 1828. 
William John Cooke engraved mainly for the annuals 'The Gem', 'The Amulet', 'The Bouquet', and 'Friendship's Offering'. He also contributed plates to 'Stanfield's Coast Scenery' by Clarkson Stanfield (1836) and the 'Oriental Annual', after works by W. Daniell (1834). He also engraved plates after J. M. W. Turner's drawings of Nottingham, Plymouth, Newark Castle (Scotland), and the Thames at Mortlake, and 'Calais Pier', after David Cox, which was engraved for the 'Gallery of the Society of Painters in Water Colours' (1832). His work is sometimes signed W. Cooke Junr. A set of W. J. Cooke's pencil studies (priv. coll.) recording the ruins of the Palace of Westminster after the fire of 1834 was proposed for engraving jointly with his cousin Edward, but never carried out. 
In 1840 the decline in the fashion for illustrated annuals and the possible adverse effect of photography upon engraving in England caused W. J. Cooke to move with his family to Darmstadt. He made topographical drawings in England and Germany, perhaps with publication in view but died in Darmstadt on 6 April 1865. His family later returned to England. His son William Montague Cooke ('b'. 1824) evidently inherited artistic talent for he gave drawing instruction to the children of Princess Alice, princess of Great Britain and Ireland, and grand duchess of Hesse and by Rhine. 


@@@@@


doc= 6162


Cooke, Sir George (1768-1837), army officer, was the son and heir of George John Cooke of Harefield, Middlesex, and his wife, Penelope, only daughter of Sir William Bowyer, third baronet; he was a grandson of George Cooke ('c'.1705-1768), protonotary of the court of common pleas and MP for Middlesex from 1750 to 1768, and great-grandson of Sir George Cooke (died 1740) of Harefield, protonotary of the court of common pleas. The naval officer Edward Cooke (1772-1799) was one of his two brothers. His second sister, Penelope Anne, married Robert Brudenell, sixth earl of Cardigan, and was the mother of James Thomas Brudenell, seventh earl. Cooke was educated at Harrow School, and at Caen in Normandy. He was appointed ensign in the 10th foot guards in 1784, and lieutenant and captain in 1792. In March 1794 he joined the flank battalion of the guards in Flanders, and in June was appointed aide-de-camp to Major-General Samuel Hulse. He was present when the combined armies took the field and attacked the French posts in April, in the actions of 17 and 18 May, and at the affair at Boxtel on 15 September. In 1795 he joined the brigade of guards at Darley camp and became aide-de-camp to Major-General Edmund Stevens. In 1798 he was promoted captain and lieutenant-colonel in his regiment, and in August 1799 he went with it to the Netherlands. He was present in the action at the Zuype on 10 September, and in the battle on 19 September, when he was severely wounded. 
From 1803 until the spring of 1805 Cooke was assistant adjutant-general in the north-west district. In 1806 he went to Sicily, returning to England in December 1807. On 25 April 1808 he received the brevet rank of colonel, and in July 1809 he was employed in the expedition to the Schelde, from where he returned sick in September. 
In April 1811 Cooke went to Cadiz, and on 4 June attained the rank of major-general, and succeeded to the command of the troops stationed there, which he retained until his return to England in July 1813. In November he returned to the Netherlands with the brigade of guards. He commanded the 1st division of the guards at Waterloo, and lost his right arm in the battle. He was appointed KCB on 22 June 1815, and colonel of the 77th foot on the following day. He also received for his share in the engagement the order of St George of Russia (third class) and the order of Wilhelm of the Netherlands (third class). 
On 20 October 1819 Cooke was appointed lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth, a post which he resigned a few years later. On 19 July 1821 he obtained the rank of lieutenant-general, and on 23 December 1834 he was transferred to the command of the 40th regiment. His health was shattered by his military career, and he died of influenza, unmarried, at his house, Harefield Park, Harefield, Middlesex, on 3 February 1837. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'the poor of the village have lost in him a most benevolent and kind-hearted friend' ('GM', 657). 


@@@@@


doc= 6163


Cooke, George Boughey (1807-1863), actor, was born in Manchester on 7 March 1807. In early life he was placed with the mercantile firm of Hoyle & Co., but his interests lay in the theatre. After performing the role of Othello in amateur theatricals, he left the firm and in March 1828 began his professional career at Walsall theatre, under the management of Chamberlayne. He remained with Chamberlayne for eighteen months, playing in Coventry, Lichfield, and Leamington. He then joined other managements and appeared successfully at Margate, at Doncaster in 1832, and at Edinburgh in October 1835, as Old Crumbs in Douglas Jerrold's 'The Rent Day'. In July 1837 he was at the Strand in London, then under the management of W. J. Hammond, playing Mr Wardle in W. T. Moncrieff's adaptation 'Sam Weller, or, The Pickwickians'. He accompanied Hammond to Drury Lane in October 1839 but had rather a disastrous season at that theatre. 
Cooke married in 1840 Elizabeth Stuart, the sister of a well-known actor. After playing at Liverpool, Manchester, and Birmingham, he appeared at the Marylebone in 1847, when that theatre was under the management of Mary Amelia Warner. Here he played the Old Shepherd in 'The Winter's Tale', Sir Oliver Surface in 'The School for Scandal', and Colonel Damas in 'The Lady of Lyons'. He later enjoyed a long engagement at the Olympic Theatre, where he remained until his death, and became a favourite with the public in the original comic roles he played in Wilkie Collins's 'The Lighthouse' (1857), John Oxenford's 'The Porter's Knot' (1858), 'Retained for the Defence' (1859), and 'Uncle Zachary' (1860), and many other plays. He died on 5 March 1863, committing suicide by cutting his throat at his residence, 51 Cambridge Street, Pimlico, London. He had been suffering for a long time from 'a dropsical disease'. 
Cooke was a genial actor, skilled in the impersonation of old men, generous uncles, good-natured guardians, and similar such sketches of character. 


@@@@@


doc= 6164


Cooke, George Frederick (1756?-1812), actor, claimed to have been born in Westminster, London, on 17 April 1756. The truth about his birth and parentage is unverifiable; perhaps the most probable scenario is that he was born out of wedlock in Dublin, possibly in a military barracks, the son of Eliza or Allison Renton and a British military man, possibly one James Moore. Little is known of his early life. He probably moved with his mother to Berwick upon Tweed, where her two sisters lived; he received some education there, and on his mother's death about 1764 was apprenticed to a printer, John Taylor. It was in Berwick too that Cooke saw his first dramatic performance, given by strolling players in the town hall about 1766. By 1769 he had been involved with amateur theatricals, and in 1771 obtained his release from Taylor and travelled to London, where he continued his amateur performances. In November 1771 he sailed to the Netherlands, probably as a cabin boy, but returned to Berwick early in 1772. 
Over the next twenty-seven years, and despite two brief London engagements, it was as a provincial actor that Cooke made his mark: few major British actors have had to wait so long to earn recognition in the capital city. The date and place of his first professional appearance are uncertain, though it was most probably Lincolnshire between 1773 and 1775. For the next few years he was a strolling player, appearing in such towns as King's Lynn, Stamford, Brentford, and, during the summer of 1777, Hastings. In the spring of 1778 he took part in three benefit performances during the off-season at London's Haymarket Theatre, as Castalio in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' (9 April), Modely in Charles Johnson's 'The Country Lasses' (29 April), and Lovewell in Garrick and Colman's 'The Clandestine Marriage' (30 April). Other than two additional benefits at the Haymarket in 1779, these were his last appearances in London for over twenty years. He returned to the provinces to continue his theatrical apprenticeship, where his early roles were predominantly in comedy. 
Among Cooke's notable provincial engagements in the next few years were periods in Manchester, Lancaster, Preston, Liverpool, Chester, York, Hull, Leeds, Newcastle upon Tyne, Sheffield, and Buxton. In York on 29 July 1786 he first appeared with Sarah Siddons, with whom he would later frequently appear at Covent Garden in London. In 1787 he joined Joseph Austin and Charles Whitlock's company in Manchester as a leading player; he had previously appeared with them in supporting roles. By 1794 he was a provincial star, with prestigious engagements to follow, beginning in Dublin, where his first role was Othello on 19 November 1794. His initial success there was modest, but by the spring of 1800 he had been dubbed 'the Dublin Roscius' by the London press. 
This formative period was critical for Cooke, for not only did he master over 300 roles, he also developed a major problem with alcohol, a reputation for unreliability, and domestic difficulties -- conditions that would plague him throughout his career. For example, in the summer of 1795, following a period of dissipation (and no doubt drunk at the time), he enlisted in the army, but was soon discharged through the efforts of the Portsmouth theatre manager. He married his first wife, Alicia Daniels ('b'. 1777), an actress, on 20 December 1796, though at least two other actresses had previously called themselves Mrs Cooke (one appears by this name in playbills as early as February 1775, another in 1784). Daniels had her marriage to Cooke annulled on 4 July 1801, after Cooke had finally made the move to a major London theatre. 
In February 1800 Cooke was invited to join the Covent Garden company for the 1800-01 season, and he made his debut there on 31 October 1800 as Richard III, the role that would become his most famous. The critics were split in their opinions. Some preferred the more studied and refined style of Cooke's contemporary and competitor at Drury Lane, John Philip Kemble, while others considered Cooke a true original, one who did not imitate other actors but did in some respects resemble the great David Garrick. During his first season Cooke made his first London appearances in such notable roles as Shylock (10 November), Sir Archy MacSarcasm in Charles Macklin's 'Love-a-la-mode' (added as an afterpiece to 'The Merchant of Venice' on 13 November), Iago (28 November), Macbeth (5 December), Kitely in Ben Jonson's 'Every Man in his Humour' (17 December), the title role in Kotzebue's 'The Stranger' (27 January 1801), and Sir Giles Overreach in Massinger's 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts' (28 March). The following season he added two significant roles to these: Stukely in Edward Moore's 'The Gamester' (27 November 1801) and Sir Pertinax McSycophant in Macklin's 'Man of the World' (10 April 1802). These ten became his great parts, repeated frequently. For this auspicious first London season he managed to control his drinking. Thereafter, however, apologies for his 'indisposition' became more and more common. 
For the next eight years Cooke invariably took summer provincial engagements between London seasons, including several in Scotland and Ireland and in theatres in the midlands familiar from his apprentice days. The summers became something of a respite from his troubled winter seasons in London. His appearance in London for his second season was delayed, probably by a genuine illness, and on this occasion his apology was accepted, even though many believed his absence was caused by drunkenness. 
Although it was not one of his principal roles, Cooke performed King Lear for the first time in London during his second season (8 January 1801), but it was not repeated during that season. On 11 May for the first time it was recorded publicly that his drunkenness prevented his performance. A note written on a theatre playbill in the British Library declares that 'Cooke attempted to perform but was too inebriated to proceed beyond a few speeches' as Orsino in Matthew Lewis's 'Alphonso, King of Castille'. Such occurrences now became commonplace. To complicate further Cooke's career and reputation, John Philip Kemble was engaged by Covent Garden in 1803, thus bringing their rivalry to the same stage. 
Cooke's most discouraging season was that of 1805-6, when he appeared on only fifty nights in a season of 212 nights and presented no role more than six times. The press made frequent reference to his misdeeds, as they would in the next season, even though it was his least controversial in years. When he failed to appear in Manchester in June 1807 despite an advance payment, Cooke, unable to return the advance, was confined in Appleby prison, Westmorland, from 17 August until 30 December 1807. While he was frequently in financial straits and a poor manager of his funds, his alcoholism complicated his finances, and he was known to squander large sums of money. Numerous anecdotes record examples of his generous gifts to women in distress and to other unfortunates. The most positive result of his four and a half months in prison was the diary and journal of his career, which was the closest thing to an autobiography he ever undertook. 
Perhaps chastened by the experience, Cooke performed his professional duties without incident between January and July 1808; he returned to Covent Garden in March 1808 and performed there for at least forty-eight nights in what remained of the season. Back in Edinburgh, on 21 September 1808 he married Sarah Harvey Lamb, the daughter of John Lamb of Newark, Nottinghamshire. Little is known of her or of the marriage, not even of its dissolution (it seems to have lasted less than a year). When Cooke returned to London for the 1808-9 season, Sarah accompanied him. It was a difficult period. Covent Garden had been destroyed by fire on 19 September 1808, and the company was forced to perform elsewhere. According to Arnold Hare, Cooke took Sarah back to Newark in February 1809, and she never returned. By then Cooke's London career was almost over: 1809-10 was to be his last season. He was frequently required to perform during the period of the Old Price riots which began in September 1809. His final London appearance was as Shylock on 22 June 1810. With his career at a low point and, according to his first biographer, William Dunlap, discontented with his position in London, where he was constantly undermined by a hostile press, Cooke was easily persuaded by the American actor-manager Thomas A. Cooper to appear in the United States under the aegis of the New York Park Theater. He sailed from Liverpool on the 'Columbia' on 4 October 1810, having made his final English performance without fanfare or comment before a small country audience in Preston on 17 August. 
Cooke made his debut in New York on 11 November as Richard III. His reception was the most enthusiastic yet accorded an actor in the United States, and, although his reputation for drunkenness and debauchery preceded him, he was generally on his best behaviour, sobered after the long voyage, and shepherded by the playwright and manager William Dunlap during his 160 performances in New York, Boston, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and Providence. His appearance as Sir Giles Overreach in Providence on 31 July 1812 was to prove to be his final performance on the stage. The visit was a lucrative one for the managers of the theatres that hosted Cooke, with receipts totalling about $250,000. But Cooke himself received only $20,000, and this, coupled with anger over the devious terms on which he felt he had been taken to America, left him resentful and drove him back to the bottle. Although he fully intended to return to England, where he had accepted an invitation to rejoin the Covent Garden company, the Anglo-American War of 1812-14 and the subsequent American embargo on foreign-bound ships left him stranded in the United States. With his health steadily declining, Cooke returned to New York city, where he died on 26 September 1812, of cirrhosis of the liver, at the Mechanics' Hall, a well-known tavern at the corner of Broadway and Robinson Street (later Park Place). At his deathbed was his new American wife, Violet Mary Behn, the widow of a German merchant and the daughter of James Bryden, keeper of the Tontine Coffee House in New York. They had married on 20 June 1811. On 27 September 1812 Cooke's remains were placed in the strangers' vault of St Paul's Church. Edmund Kean, an admirer of Cooke's, had the actor's body reburied at the church and erected an elaborate monument during his first American tour, in 1821. 
Cooke's accomplishment as an actor of the first order should overshadow his tainted personal reputation and quixotic career. Arguably he was the first true British romantic actor, ranking in the annals of the stage with the small group of great actors of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. He was the first major foreign star on the American stage, and his appearance there marked the inception of the star system in the United States. Even after age and debilitation had all but destroyed him, Cooke's figure continued to make an impression on those who saw him on or off stage. He was 5 feet 10 inches tall, broad-chested, and had a prominent nose in shape between Roman and aquiline, expressive eyes, and (when in possession of his faculties) a dignified, self-possessed, and courteous manner, and he fascinated observers. Yet underneath this exterior was a coarseness that coloured his acting, and his voice, which was not particularly pleasant, was even hoarse on occasion. Some critics believed his awkward, grotesque movements limited his scope of characters. But in the tradition of his great predecessors David Garrick and Charles Macklin, Cooke brought a new natural style to the stage: he spoke poetry like prose and delivered soliloquies as if thinking aloud. Although he created few important new roles, he did establish a reputation for playing a line of characters noted for their grim humour, sardonic sarcasm, specious menace, savage ferocity, and baleful guile. 


@@@@@


doc= 6165


Cooke, George Leigh (bap. 1779, d. 1853), Church of England clergyman and natural philosopher, was baptized on 12 September 1779, the son of Samuel Cooke, rector of Great Bookham, Surrey, and his wife, Cassandra. He entered the University of Oxford in 1797 as a commoner of Balliol College, and was elected the same year a scholar of Corpus Christi College, of which he afterwards became a fellow and tutor. He graduated BA on 6 November 1800, MA on 9 March 1804, and BD on 12 June 1812. In 1810 he was elected Sedleian professor of natural philosophy; he resigned his fellowship to marry, on 26 October 1815, Anne, the eldest daughter of William Hay of Russell Square, London. From 1818 to 1826 he was keeper of the archives of the university. He also held the office of public preacher, and was several times public examiner. 
Cooke was presented to the rectory of Cubbington, Warwickshire, in 1820, and to Wick Rissington, Gloucestershire, and Hunningham, Warwickshire, in the same year. A sociable man, Cooke was the probable founder, and for many years the secretary, of the Literary Dining Club, frequented by the university's most distinguished scholars. An obituarist described him as 'a zealous clergyman, a kind and benevolent landlord and an honourable gentleman' ('GM', 1853). He published in 1850 'The first three sections and part of the seventh section of Newton's 'Principia', with a preface recommending a geometrical course of mathematical reading, and an introduction on the atomic constitution of matter and the laws of motion'. 
Cooke died at Cubbington on 29 March 1853, leaving a widow and several children, of whom Samuel Hay Cooke (1818-1877) and George Theophilus Cooke ('b'. 1820) both graduated at Oxford and took holy orders. 


@@@@@


doc= 6166


Cooke, George Wingrove (1814-1865), legal and historical writer, eldest son of Thomas Homans Cooke, who came from a Devon family, was born at Bristol. He studied law under Andrew Amos at London University, and was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in January 1835. He was at the same time completing his classical education at Jesus College, Oxford, where he took his BA in 1834. 
From the first, Cooke was a prolific writer, rarely needing to correct or retouch what he had written. While still an undergraduate he wrote 'Memoirs of Lord Bolingbroke', which was published in 1835. Clearly written from a whig standpoint, the book was unfavourably reviewed by John Croker in the tory 'Quarterly Review', but was strongly defended in the 'Edinburgh Review'. 
Encouraged by this success, Cooke went on to publish a 'History of Party from the Rise of the Whig and Tory Factions to the Passing of the Reform Bill' (1836-7) and a 'Life of the First Earl Shaftesbury' (1836), edited from the materials collected by Andrew Kippis, Benjamin Martyn, and others. 
For many years after settling in London, Cooke was employed by the tithe commutation commission in defining the principles and supervising the mechanism for the composition of tithes. He also worked for the enclosure commission in a similar capacity. These years were marked by the preparation and publication of a number of legal treatises, dealing with subjects as diverse as agricultural tenancies and poll booths. 
However, Cooke also turned his holidays to advantage by publishing the narratives of his long vacation travels. Most of these appeared anonymously, but in 1855, at the height of the Crimean War, he visited the Crimea, and on his return to his own country vividly described what he had seen in 'Inside Sebastopol' (1856). Soon afterwards, the managers of 'The Times', to which he was a frequent contributor, dispatched him to China as the special correspondent on the outbreak of the second Chinese war in 1857. His dispatches, narrating the progress of the British expedition and the details of life among the Chinese, were republished in book form in 1858, and sold well in several editions. 
One of Cooke's holiday expeditions took him to Algiers, where he enquired into the intentions of the French, and speculated as to their prospects of colonization. The results of his investigations appeared as a series of letters in 'The Times', published in 1860 as 'Conquest and Colonisation in North Africa'. 
Cooke made two unsuccessful attempts to enter parliament as a Liberal: for Colchester in 1850 and for Marylebone in 1861. In 1862, he was appointed to a commissionership in the copyhold commission. Given to overwork, Cooke fell ill in June 1865. On the morning of 18 June he died of a heart attack at his house, 25 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 6167


Cooke, Henry (d. 1672), singer, composer, and choirmaster, was 'bred up' in the Chapel Royal according to Anthony Wood, but Joseph Bridge's suggestion that his father was John Cooke of the chapel, formerly a vicar-choral at Lichfield, is speculative. Cooke joined the royalist army in the civil wars; it is uncertain whether he was the Lieutenant Henry Cooke of Colonel George Goring's regiment in 1640, but if he was it must be doubtful whether he could, as sometimes stated, have been the Henry Cooke who in 1642 scratched his name on a window in the Jerusalem chamber at Westminster. He reached the rank of captain, and retained the title; the will of the musician Thomas Ford, in which he was forgiven a debt, shows that he was using it by 1648. 
Cooke was in London by 1651, when John Playford listed him in 'A Musicall Banquet' among teachers 'For the Voyce or Viole'. A letter of 1656 from the musician George Jeffreys indicates that Cooke's pupils included the children of Christopher, first Baron Hatton, whose principal residence was Kirby Hall in Northamptonshire. Hatton's ownership of much Italian music may have helped to familiarize Cooke with the Italian style; John Evelyn's diary entry for 28 October 1654 describes him as 'the best singer, after the 'Italian' manner, of any in 'England'', an opinion endorsed in the 1664 edition of Playford's 'Introduction to the Skill of Musick'. Another influence may have been Walter Porter, a member of the Chapel Royal before the wars, who visited Italy and claimed an association with Monteverdi. In 1656 Cooke provided some of the music for two stage works by William D'Avenant, 'The First Days Entertainment at Rutland-House' and 'The Siege of Rhodes', singing the part of Solyman in the second -- a performance remembered well enough for Mrs Coleman to impersonate it for Samuel Pepys on 31 October 1665. Pepys's view, recorded on 13 February 1667, was that Cooke was 'a vain coxcomb', although 'as to voice and manner, the best I ever heard yet; and a strange mastery he hath in making of extraordinary surprizing closes, that are mighty pretty'. In spite of a distaste for Cooke's bragging, Pepys was often in his company, and in 1664 employed one of his choristers, Tom Edwards, as a musical servant. 
At the Restoration in 1660 Cooke became a gentleman of the Chapel Royal and one of the musicians for the lutes and voices, receiving additional payments for training two singing boys in the private musick. On 29 June he was sworn in as master of the children of the Chapel Royal, with responsibility for enlisting and training choirboys and seeing that they were fed, clothed, cared for, and taught to read and write Latin and play instruments. Cooke travelled throughout England to recruit boys at intervals for the rest of his life, with authority from January 1661 to impress them. The necessity appears in Matthew Locke's statement, in 'The Present Practice of Musick Vindicated' (1673), that for over a year after the chapel was reopened cornetts and men singing falsetto were substituted for boys' voices, 'there being not one Lad, for all that time, capable of Singing his part readily'. Cooke's duties were carried out with vigour and patent success, but in the face of financial difficulties that began as early as October 1661. By 1668 the boys' clothes were 'so worn out that they keep within doors', and Cooke was called before the privy council. It was not until 1670 that the king resolved to have the boys clothed 'as formerly', and Cooke agreed to arrange a loan for the purpose. 
Cooke was among the composers who provided the chapel with a new repertory, writing some thirty anthems, nearly all of the verse type, and other devotional pieces. Most of these are lost. Pepys commented favourably on anthems by Cooke on 12 August 1660 (when Cooke himself sang) and the following 7 October. Ashmole noted Cooke's part in composing and performing music for the St George's feast at Windsor on 17 April 1661; and on 23 April Cooke and his choristers were at Charles II's coronation in Westminster Abbey, when three of his anthems were performed. On Sunday 14 September 1662 Pepys heard 'Cookes new Musique' and wrote: 'This the first day of having Vialls and other Instruments to play a Symphony between every verse of the Anthem; but the Musique more full than it was the last Sunday, and very fine it is. But yet I could discern Captain Cooke to overdo his part at singing, which I never did before.' Cooke's surviving anthems show no great gift for composition, but they are carefully tailored to the resources at his disposal, and contain innovations, afterwards developed by younger men, in the independence of instrumental passages, contrasting scorings, and the disposition of performers within the chapel. Cooke wrote four undistinguished court odes and also a handful of songs and catches, of which four were published in 'Catch that Catch Can' (1667). 
In 1663 Cooke successfully petitioned the king for an augmentation of the pay of the gentlemen and children of the chapel, and in the same year was chosen as a steward of the annual chapel feast. From early in 1663 he signed orders as deputy marshall of the Corporation of Musick, a society composed of royal musicians and claiming wide powers to regulate professional music-making; he was one of four members deputed on 31 May 1664 to attend a fruitless meeting with musicians of the City of London, who claimed similar powers. Cooke afterwards became marshall, probably in 1666 (when there is a gap in the records), following the death of Nicholas Lanier. Before that, in August 1664, he had obtained a further official appointment as a composer in the private musick. 
Little is known of Cooke's family. His wife was named Mary and brought him land at Pluckley, in Kent; a daughter of the same name predeceased him. In 1672 his daughter Katherine married his pupil Pelham Humfrey, who became master of the children on Cooke's death but died in 1674; Katherine's second husband was named Darcey. A third daughter, Amey, was married first to Bartholomew Tothill and then to Arthur Browne. Cooke's will suggests residence at both Westminster and Hampton. His Westminster house may have been in Little Sanctuary, where 'Widow Cooke' lived after his death. In 1669 he had lodgings at 'the further end' of the old bowling alley at Hampton Court, which in 1671 it was decided to demolish. 
On 24 June 1672 Cooke asked to be replaced as marshall of the Corporation of Musick because of illness, and on 6 July he made his will; he added a codicil a few days afterwards. Most of his possessions were left to the members of his family. The will disposed of his house in Westminster, a house and land at Hampton, his land at Pluckley, and houses in Longditch, Westminster, a street in which people named Cooke lived, though it is not known whether they were related to him. He also left plate and jewellery, 120 pieces of gold, and well over $1000 owed to him in wages and allowances. Cooke died on 13 July 1672, presumably at Westminster, and was buried on 17 July close to his daughter Mary in the east cloister of Westminster Abbey, 'near the steps'. His widow, who he wished to be buried near him, made her will on 16 March 1696; it was proved on 16 June by her daughter Katherine. 


@@@@@


doc= 6168


Cooke, Henry (1788-1868), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, was born on 11 May 1788, the fourth and youngest child of Jane Howe, the second wife of John Macook, a tenant farmer of the Grillagh, near Maghera, in co. Londonderry. 
Henry's early education was in a series of 'hedge' schools, and later he recalled how he and a Roman Catholic companion 'tended the peaceful flocks with Vergil or fought again the battles of Homer' (Kennedy, 70). This classical education was supplemented at home by his mother's vivid accounts of the battles of his protestant forefathers for 'faith and freedom'. His son-in-law and biographer, J. L. Porter, tells us that to her 'Henry was indebted for most of those anecdotes and incidents of Irish history which in after years he recited with such pathos and power' (Porter, 2). His boyhood experiences, in the disturbed confusion surrounding the 1798 rising, left impressions on his mind which inclined him towards the conservative principles which he adopted in later life. 
In 1802 the fourteen-year-old Henry Macook matriculated in the University of Glasgow and began his studies for the ministry. In spite of his failure to graduate in arts he was accepted as a student for the ministry by the Root presbytery in 1807 and licensed the following year by the Ballymena presbytery. Although he was only twenty years of age he was soon called to the congregation of Denain in co. Antrim as assistant and successor to the Revd Robert Scott, being ordained and installed on 10 November 1808. If his university career had been undistinguished, his first pastorate was inauspicious, ending in resignation after only two years. Cook, who had now discarded Mac from his name but had not yet added the letter 'e', was young, poor, and lonely, living in lodgings on a pittance of $25 a year, and in November 1810 he resigned to become the tutor in the family of Alexander Brown, a farmer, of Kells, near Ballymena. This interruption of his ministerial career proved short-lived, however, and on 22 January 1811 he was installed in the nearby Donegore congregation by the Templepatrick presbytery. Donegore had rejected an apparently more attractive candidate in the brilliant Henry Montgomery (1788-1865), destined to be Cooke's great opponent in the conflict which divided the synod of Ulster in the 1820s. The peace of the synod had been threatened for almost a century by the tensions between conservatives or Old Lights, who held tenaciously to traditional Calvinism, as enshrined in the Westminster formularies, and liberals or New Lights, who espoused a latitudinarian theology and opposed the obligation of ordinands to subscribe to the Westminster confession of faith. Cooke's Old Light theology had been one of the reasons for his discomfort in Denain, where his predecessor had been New Light, while Henry Montgomery's biographer, J. A. Crozier, claims that it was Montgomery's unequivocal New Light preaching which led to his rejection by Donegore. Donegore, unlike Denain, preferred Old Light. In Donegore Cooke made a fresh start, and his marriage in 1813 to Ellen Mann (died 1868) of Toome gave his life a new stability. His gifts as a preacher began to blossom and in December 1814 he was invited to preach in Belfast on behalf of the rapidly growing town's recently founded house of industry. The occasion was a success, Cooke's sermon was printed, and his name begins to appear in newspaper accounts of special sermons for 'Bible' societies and Sunday schools. Conscious now of the deficiencies in his earlier education, he returned to his studies, and between 1815 and 1818 an indulgent congregation allowed him to spend two winters in Glasgow and one in Dublin, largely in medical studies. This was not unusual at a time when, according to an observer of the Ulster scene, 'most Presbyterian ministers were physicians and surgeons likewise' (Gamble, 222). 
While in Dublin Cooke was involved in preaching on Sundays in Carlow and Stratford-on-Slaney, where Presbyterian congregations were being formed. This kind of outreach was characteristic of the evangelical movement, which was breathing new life into the dry bones of Irish protestantism and which was to lead to what was called the protestant crusade in Ireland. Dublin was the headquarters of the Irish evangelical movement, in which Dr Benjamin McDowell, the senior minister of the Presbyterian Mary's Abbey congregation, had been prominently involved, and Cooke's sojourn in Dublin and his associations with the Mary's Abbey congregation strengthened his evangelical and Old Light convictions. 
To the disappointment of his Donegore congregation, Cooke moved to Killyleagh in co. Down soon after his return from Dublin, being installed there by the Dromore presbytery on 8 September 1818. He had been recommended to the Killyleagh congregation by his New Light predecessor there, the Revd W. D. H. McEwen, who described him as 'not bigoted in his opinions' and having 'too much good sense not to be charitable towards those who differ from him in sentiment' (McCreery, 228). Yet within three years of his arrival in Killyleagh he had emerged as an uncompromising champion of orthodoxy. One reason for this was the influence of a ruling elder in the Killyleagh congregation, Captain Sidney Hamilton Rowan. Rowan was the son of the local landlord, the United Irishman Archibald Hamilton Rowan. Captain Rowan shared his father's vigour and public spirit but differed from him in theology and politics. He was an ardent evangelical, and Alexander McCreery, a later minister in Killyleagh, claimed that 'to him [Rowan] primarily and mainly is attributable the influence which brought forward Dr. Cooke as the exponent and defender of evangelical doctrine' (ibid., 366). In 1821 an English Unitarian missionary, the Revd John Smethurst, visited Killyleagh in the course of a preaching tour in Ulster. Rowan and Cooke attended his lecture and Cooke, encouraged by Rowan, announced that he would reply to the Unitarian on the following Sunday evening. So enthusiastic was the response of a crowded congregation to Cooke's polemic that he pursued Smethurst through the province, attacking his teaching. 
Few Irish Presbyterians were unitarians in 1821 but some were Arians, who rejected the full deity of Christ, and it was the appointment of an Arian, William Bruce, as professor of Greek and Hebrew in the Belfast Institution in 1821 which drew Cooke into the arena of public theological controversy once more. The Belfast Academical Institution, founded in 1810 to meet the urgent need in Belfast and Ulster for higher education of some kind, had already been a target for conservative political suspicion. Its founders included well-known Belfast radicals such as Dr William Drennan and Dr R. J. Tennent, which led the Ulster-born tory statesman Lord Castlereagh to suspect that the college would be the centre of radical influence. In particular Castlereagh feared that if, as its founders hoped, the institution became the training college for Ulster's Presbyterian ministers, this would defeat his policy of discouraging radicalism and encouraging loyalism among the ministers, some of whom had been implicated in the United Irish movement and the 1798 rising. Castlereagh, one of the architects of the 'Act of Union', had thrown the weight of his influence against arrangements to train Presbyterian students for the ministry in the institution, but he had failed because the college authorities and the Presbyterian synods had stood together for academic and ecclesiastical freedom. There were now three Presbyterian synods in Ulster for, during the eighteenth century, covenanters and seceders from Scotland had planted congregations and formed presbyteries in opposition to the increasingly liberal or New Light Synod of Ulster. All three had agreed to allow their students for the ministry to be educated in the institution and had appointed divinity professors to enable them to take their full course of training in Belfast. This had been a success, and when Cooke attacked Arian influences in the institution at the 1822 meeting of the synod of Ulster in Newry he found that few members of synod believed that a crusade against Arianism was necessary or desirable. Nevertheless Cooke persisted, rallying supporters, particularly among the Presbyterian laity. 
Cooke's election as moderator of the synod in 1824 gave him opportunities to ventilate his convictions, particularly when he was called upon to give evidence to parliamentary committees and government commissions of inquiry, including one into the affairs of the Belfast Institution. His allegations that the institution was becoming a 'seminary of Arianism' were publicized and provoked warm controversy. He survived attacks upon his evidence at the annual meeting of the synod in 1825 and succeeded in persuading the synod to demand increased influence in future appointment in the college. This the institution authorities refused to concede, insisting that the synod had already sufficient influence in appointment through the 'ex officio' vote of its moderator. The institution was popular among Presbyterians who saw no evidence of Arian influences on their students for the ministry, and, at the meeting of the synod in 1826 in Ballymena, Cooke found the tide of majority opinion flowing against him as strongly as it had been with him the previous year. His campaign against Arianism in the institution had ended in defeat. The publication in 1827 of evidence given to the commission of inquiry into the affairs of the institution, however, gave him an opportunity to attack ministers of the synod who had avowed their Arian convictions. These included Henry Montgomery and William Porter, the clerk of the synod. When the synod met in Strabane in 1827 Cooke insisted that the reaffirmation of their church's Trinitarian faith was necessary, and in spite of Henry Montgomery's eloquent plea for liberty of conscience and the right of private judgement the overwhelming majority of the members of synod agreed, thus isolating the small minority of Arians and those opposed to doctrinal statements as tests of faith. The rejection, in 1826, of Cooke's allegations of Arian influences in the institution had not implied any approval of Arianism, and this was made clear by the 1827 synod's affirmation of its Trinitarian faith. 
The following year the synod, meeting in Cookstown, was persuaded to set up a committee to examine the orthodoxy of students for the ministry, and it was clear that no Arian would be accepted in future. This led Montgomery and his party to publish a remonstrance against the proceedings of the synod, threatening to secede if their objections were not met, and in 1830 seventeen ministers and their congregations withdrew from the synod of Ulster to form the Remonstrant Synod. Before the separation took place, however, there was a final confrontation between the two parties, involving once more the Belfast Institution. The appointment of a Scot, John Ferrie of Glasgow University, to the chair of moral philosophy in the institution was attacked by Cooke on the grounds of Ferrie's doubtful orthodoxy. Montgomery, in reply, attacked Cooke's consistency and integrity because in his evidence to the institution commission of inquiry he had stated that he had never known of any Arianism in Glasgow, but now he was querying the orthodoxy of the former Glasgow University chaplain. 
Cooke chose to interpret this as a charge of perjury, as his evidence had been given on oath, and, in the words of the radical Presbyterian journalist James McKnight, 'on this rhetorical hypothesis, he made, to the feeling of the audience, an appeal unequalled in the annals of oratory' ('Londonderry Standard', 24 Dec 1875). This was hyperbole, of course, but, coming from a journalist who did not admire Cooke, it is a tribute to his remarkable oratorical powers. The withdrawal of the remonstrants left Cooke on a pinnacle of influence in the synod of Ulster, and the historian W. D. Killen, who was ordained in 1829, has judged that 'The popularity enjoyed in this period by the pastor of Killyleagh, was such as perhaps has never been attained by any other minister in this country and wherever he appeared either on the pulpit or on the platform he was sure to attract an overwhelming audience. (Reid, 3.462)' He refused a call to the Mary's Abbey congregation in Dublin in 1828, but in 1829 his admirers in Belfast, disappointed that he had not been invited to be the first minister of the new congregation in Fisherwick Place, built May Street Church to provide him with a pulpit in their growing town. His rejection by the Fisherwick Place congregation was clear evidence, however, that he was 'persona non grata' in some quarters, and not all of them Arian or New Light. When Jefferson College, Pennsylvania, made him an honorary DD in 1829, the 'Northern Whig' commented that 'in consequence of distance' the college had discerned 'literary and scientific attainments which, in consequence of our too near approximation to the luminary, we are unable to discern' (14 Dec 1829). 
In his evidence before both houses of parliament in 1824, Cooke had queried the commitment of a majority of Irish Presbyterians to Catholic emancipation, in spite of the synod's declaration in its favour in 1813. This brought him into conflict with liberal Presbyterians but made him a hero with the opponents of emancipation. During the controversy in the synod he was prepared to play the Orange card, as when in Coleraine in 1825 he appealed improperly 'to those galleries, crowded with the freemen of my native county... for a unanimous and cordial verdict of acquittal' ('Northern Whig', 7 July 1825). It was alleged that the Orangemen in the galleries in Coleraine and in Strabane in 1827 may have influenced the outcome of the debates. Henry Montgomery claimed that it was by uniting evangelicalism and Orangeism that Cooke acquired his extraordinary popularity and influence. 
The historian of the Belfast Institution, John Jamieson, has argued that Cooke's real objective in attacking the institution was the destruction of political liberalism in his church. Certainly, after his victory in the synod, Cooke became increasingly identified with the political interests of the protestant establishment in Ireland. He and his great ally, Robert Stewart of Broughshane, were among the few Presbyterians who opposed the concession of Catholic emancipation in 1829. He waged a relentless and ultimately successful campaign against the Irish national education system, introduced by a reforming whig government in 1831 to end Protestant proselytization of Roman Catholics through education by uniting all children for secular education and separating them for religious instruction. He advocated protestant political union in response to the challenge of post-emancipation Irish Roman Catholicism, antagonizing Presbyterian radicals by publishing the 'banns of marriage' of presbytery and prelacy at a great conservative demonstration at Hillsborough in co. Down in 1834. 
Cooke was a determined supporter of the principle of religious establishments against voluntarism, which demanded the separation of the church and state. He liked to describe himself as a minister of the Church of Scotland in Ireland and was delighted when full communion between the Church of Scotland and the synod of Ulster was restored in 1836 following legislation in the synod to reintroduce subscription to the Westminster formularies for ordinands. In 1837 Trinity College, Dublin, made him an LLD for his services to the cause of religious establishments. The restoration of subscription in the synod of Ulster was a step on the road to union with the Secession synod, which took place in 1840. But union with the Seceders diminished Cooke's authority in what was now the general assembly of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, and in the 1840s he was confronted by a renaissance of Presbyterian liberalism. In 1843, angered by the Disruption of the Church of Scotland and problems relating to the legality of marriages by Presbyterian ministers, the general assembly passed a resolution calling for better representation of Presbyterian interests in parliament, to which Cooke responded by withdrawing from the assembly until the resolution was rescinded in 1847. His absence from the assembly did not prevent his involvement in the negotiations between his church and the government over the foundation of the Queen's Colleges. 
Cooke had finally succeeded in breaking his church's links with the Belfast Institution, and he played a significant part in an agreement between church and government by which the government endowed chairs in theological subjects for a Presbyterian college and the church recognized the Queen's Colleges for their ministerial students' pre-theological education. Cooke was considered as a possible first president of the Belfast Queen's College, but his increasingly strident anti-Catholicism ruled him out. A Presbyterian, the Revd P. S. Henry of Armagh, was appointed, and Cooke succeeded him as agent for the distribution of the 'regium donum' at a salary of $320 a year. He was also appointed professor of sacred rhetoric and catechetics by the general assembly in the Presbyterian theological faculty in 1847 and president of the Presbyterian Theological College, which was opened in 1853. Compelled by the law of the church to resign his May Street pastorate, he continued a constant supplier of the pulpit until his retirement in 1867. He had been moderator of the general assembly in 1841 and was so honoured again in 1862. 
Cooke continued to champion the causes of political Conservatism and unionism. His greatest political triumph was in 1841 when Daniel O'Connell, visiting Belfast to advocate the repeal of the union, declined to accept Cooke's challenge to debate the subject, and he was hailed as the 'cook who dish'd Dan'. It is often said that Cooke changed the political outlook of the Ulster Presbyterians from the radicalism and republicanism of the eighteenth century to Conservatism and unionism in the nineteenth, but this must be qualified. Irish Presbyterians may have become unionists, but they did not become Conservatives until Gladstone made home rule Liberal Party policy in 1886. Cooke's criticisms of the tenant-right movement in the 1850s, which was supported by many Presbyterian tenant farmers, lost him much popularity, and few Presbyterians shared his support for the Church of Ireland or responded to his deathbed appeal to Ulster's electorate to vote tory and save the Church of Ireland from disestablishment in 1868. He died at his home, 124 Ormeau Road, Belfast, on 13 December 1868, his wife and most of his thirteen children having predeceased him. He was accorded a civic funeral and burial on 18 December in Balmoral cemetery, Belfast; in 1876 his statue was placed in the centre of that city. Many of his sermons and addresses were published, but are regarded as failing to convey the dramatic impact of his oratory. 
Few have articulated as effectively as Henry Cooke the distinctive and emotive emphases of nineteenth- and twentieth-century Ulster protestantism -- evangelicalism, anti-Catholicism, and unionism in politics. Irish Presbyterians have traditionally honoured him as the Athanasius of their church, but many have deplored his identification of the interest of protestantism with unionism. J. L. Porter's biography is indispensable but uncritical, while John Jamieson, the historian of the Belfast Academical Institution, debunks him as a self-seeking demagogue. A study by R. F. G. Holmes (1981) is sympathetic but not uncritical. 


@@@@@


doc= 6169


Cooke, John (d. in or before 1614), playwright, was the author of a comedy entitled 'Greene's Tu quoque, or, The Cittie Gallant', published in 1614 with a preface by Thomas Heywood. Another edition appeared in 1622 and there is also an undated quarto, possibly from as late as 1640. The play was performed at court by Queen Anne's men on 9 and 11 November 1611. The noted clown Thomas Greene took the part of Bubble, the Cittie Gallant, who constantly has on his lips the words 'Tu quoque', hence the origin of the first title. Entered in the Stationers' register under date 22 May 1604 is 'to William Cotton, Fyftie epigrams written by J. Cooke, Gent'; two editions of this survive, both undated. 
Cooke may have been the John Cooke who stood surety to a loan of $20 to several of the shareholders in the Whitefriars syndicate (manager of the King's Revels company of actors). The loan was made on 16 October 1607 by William Cooke, a haberdasher. A link between Cooke and this company might explain the explicit borrowings in 'Tu quoque' from 'Ram Alley', Lording Barry's Whitefriars play. It has been argued that Cooke may have been writing for the Whitefriars syndicate about the time of 'Ram Alley' (1607-8) and may simply have reappropriated his own scenes from that play when he wrote 'Tu quoque' (Bly, 361). 
Heywood's 'A Pleasant Conceited Comedie, wherein is Shewed, how a Man may Chuse a Good Wife from a Bad' is attributed, in a manuscript note on the title-page of a British Museum copy of the edition of 1602, to Joshua Cooke, whose name is otherwise unknown. John Cooke died before the publication of 'Tu quoque' in 1614. 


@@@@@


doc= 6170


Cooke, Sir John (1666-1710), lawyer, was born on 29 August 1666, the third son of John Cooke of Whitechapel, London, surveyor of the customs, and his wife, Mary Bathurst. He was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in 1673, and from there was elected to St John's College, Oxford, in 1684. While still a student, being a supporter of William III, he obtained a lieutenant's commission in an infantry regiment, and served in Ireland at the time of the battle of the Boyne. On returning to Oxford he resumed his studies, and graduated BCL in 1691 and DCL in 1694. 
He was admitted as an advocate of the court of arches on 20 October 1694, and three days later became a member of Doctors' Commons. On 19 December 1695 he married Mary (died 1709), the only daughter of Matthew and Mary Bateman, of London; the couple had one daughter. In 1699 Cooke served as counsel for Archbishop Tenison in the House of Lords to justify the archbishop's deprivation of Dr Thomas Watson from the bishopric of St David's. Cooke was almost certainly the author of the anonymous pamphlet 'A Summary View of the Articles Exhibited Against the Late Bishop of St. David's' (1701), which defended the archbishop's proceedings against Watson and countered the claim that a bishop could only be deprived in a synod. Robert Ferguson, who wrote in support of Watson, described this pamphlet as 'scurrilous and virulent' and its author as a 'mercenary tool' of the archbishop (Ferguson, 64). 
On 21 May 1701 Cooke received the honour of knighthood, and on 26 July of that year William III appointed him advocate-general. His competitor for that position was Dr Thomas Lane, who had been a captain of horse on King James's side at the battle of the Boyne, where he was wounded. When told that both men were good advocates but that 'the first fought against you, the other fought for you', the king said: 'Oh, I will have my own fellow soldier' (Lansdowne MS, 987/201). In 1702 Cooke served as a commissioner to negotiate a union between England and Scotland, and in the same year he was named to the renewed commission for building St Paul's. On 11 March 1703 Archbishop Tenison appointed Cooke to succeed Dr George Oxenden as official principal and dean of the arches. He also named him as his vicar-general, and as dean and commissary of the peculiars belonging to the archbishop. 
In 1706 Cooke was appointed clerk of the pipe in the exchequer. He died at his house in Great Knight Rider Street, London, on 31 March 1710, and was buried at St Mary's, Whitechapel, on 2 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 6171


Cooke, John (1763-1805), naval officer, entered the navy at the age of thirteen, on the 'Eagle', Lord Howe's flagship on the North American station; having remained in her through her whole commission, he was promoted lieutenant on 21 January 1779. He was then appointed to the 'Superb', with Sir Edward Hughes, in the East Indies; he was obliged to invalid from there, and was then appointed to the 'Duke' with Captain Gardner, who went out to the West Indies and took a distinguished part in the action off Dominica on 12 April 1782. After the peace of Versailles (1783) Gardner was for some time commodore at Jamaica, Cooke remaining with him as first lieutenant of the 'Europa'. In 1790 he served for some time as a lieutenant of the 'London', flagship of Vice-Admiral Sir Alexander Hood, and in February 1793 was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Royal George', bearing Sir Alexander's flag. At Lord Howe's battle of 1 June 1794 in the north Atlantic he served as commander, having been promoted on 21 February that year, and a few weeks later, on 23 June, was made a captain. He then served for a year in Newfoundland as flag captain to Sir James Wallace, in the 'Monarch'; on his return home he was appointed, in the spring of 1796, to command the 'Nymphe'. On 9 March 1797 his ship, in company with the 'San Fiorenzo', captured the two French frigates 'Resistance' and 'Constance'. These were returning to France after landing a band of convicts in Fishguard Bay, in memory of which the 'Resistance', a fine vessel of forty-eight guns, received the name of 'Fisgard' when recommissioned for the British navy. When the mutiny broke out in April and May the 'Nymphe' was at Spithead, and her crew joined the mutineers. On Cooke's attempting to give assistance to Rear-Admiral John Colpoys, he was ordered by the mutineers to go on shore; nor was it thought expedient for him to rejoin the ship. Clearly he was not a 'popular' officer. Two years later he was appointed to the 'Amethyst', which he commanded in the channel until the peace of Amiens. In October 1804 Cooke was invited by Sir William Young, the commander-in-chief at Plymouth, to come as his flag captain; but a few months later, having applied for active service, he was appointed to the 'Bellerophon', in which he joined the fleet off Cadiz in the beginning of October 1805. To be in a general engagement with Nelson would, he used to say, crown all his military ambition. In the battle of Trafalgar (21 October 1805) the 'Bellerophon' was the fifth ship of the lee line, and was thus early in action; in the thick of the fight Cooke received two musket balls in the chest. He fell, and died within a few minutes, saying with his last breath, 'Tell Lieutenant Cumby never to strike'. He was buried at sea. A monumental tablet to his memory was placed by his widow, of whom nothing is known, in the parish church of Donhead in Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 6172


Cooke, John (1730/31-1810), publisher, first appears, according to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', as an assistant to Alexander Hogg, one of the first to publish cheap ''Paternoster Row' numbers', or standard popular works issued in weekly parts. In this line of publishing Cooke made a fortune, successively setting up shop in London at the sign of the King's Arms in Great Turnstile, Holborn (1756), opposite St Clement's in the Strand (1758), and at Shakespear's Head, first behind the chapter house in St Paul's Churchyard (1759), then in Paternoster Row (1761 onwards). Religious works, practical manuals, and jest books dominated his work; nearly half of fifty-four titles in his 'c'.1770 catalogue contain the words 'complete' or 'universal', as in 'The Complete English Brewer' and 'The Gardener's Universal Guide'. His folios and quartos were sold in parts, each 6died number 'enriched' with a copperplate-engraving. Keen attention to advertising these illustrations was displayed in his catalogue of 'c'.1784, a sign that his son Charles Cooke ['see below'] was now active in the concern. Depictions of torture and 'general Scenes of Pagan Barbarity and Popish Cruelty', for example, adorned Southwell's 'New Book of Martyrs'. Likewise the 'Universal Family Bible' (called Southwell's, though compiled by Robert Sanders) was 'embellished' with 100 plates 'taken from the finest Paintings of the most esteemed Masters'. The many editions of this title reportedly netted the publisher $30,000. 
On 18 January 1773 Cooke was made a freeman and liveryman of the Musicians' Company, and was made steward in 1778. Between 1774 and 1782 he served on the city's common council for the ward of Farringdon Within. He died at his home in York Place, Kingsland Road, London, on 25 February 1810, aged seventy-nine. 




@@@@@


doc= 6173


Cooke, John (1738-1823), Church of England clergyman, was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge (BA 1761, MA 1764), and was presented to the rectory of Denton, Buckinghamshire, on 2 August 1773. He was also chaplain to Greenwich Hospital, and a commissioner from 1773 until his death on 4 May 1823 at Greenwich Hospital. 
Cooke published a number of works, including 'An Historical Account of the Royal Hospital for Seamen at Greenwich' (1789). The sermon he preached at the opening of the chapel of the hospital on 20 September 1789, on the suitable theme of the preservation of St Paul from shipwreck on the island of Melita, was also published. In 1799 he wrote an account of the voyage of John, earl of Sandwich, round the Mediterranean (together with a memoir of the earl's life). He was survived by his wife, whose name is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 6174


Cooke, John (c.1756-1838), physician, was born in Lancashire but was descended from a family from Edith Weston, Rutlandshire. He was educated at the school established by Philip Doddridge at Northampton, and at first intended to become a dissenting minister. He preached at Rochdale and at Preston but later turned his attention to medicine. He studied at Guy's Hospital in London, at Edinburgh, and at Leiden, where he graduated MD in 1781. His thesis was on the use of cinchona bark in cases where there was no rise of temperature. 
Cooke settled in London and became physician to the Royal General Dispensary in Bartholomew Close. In April 1784, after a drawn-out contest with John Whitehead, he was elected physician to the London Hospital, an office he held for twenty-three years. He delivered the first clinical lectures ever given in that institution. In June the same year he was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. In 1799 he was requested by the lord mayor of London to investigate the death of two men thought to have died of the plague. Cooke showed that the fears were groundless. In 1807 he was elected FRCP, and ten years later he became a fellow of the Royal Society. He was censor at the College of Physicians in 1811 and 1820, and he delivered the Croonian lectures in 1819, 1820, and 1821, and the Harveian oration in 1828. He was president of the Medico-Chirurgical Society in 1822 and 1823. 
In 1820 Cooke began the publication of 'A Treatise on Nervous Diseases', which was continued in 1821 and completed in 1823. An American edition, in one volume, was published in Boston in 1824. This work, based on Cooke's Croonian lectures, gives an account of the existing knowledge of hemiplegia, paraplegia, paralysis of separate nerves, epilepsy, apoplexy, lethargy, and hydrocephalus internus. Although it contains no important addition to medical knowledge, it shows considerable clinical acquaintance with the subject. 
During his latter years Cooke gave up practice and went little into society. A fellow of the Antiquarian Society he was well-read and a classical scholar, and throughout life he studied and enjoyed Homer. He died at his house in Gower Street, London, on 1 January 1838. 


@@@@@


doc= 6175


Cooke, Robert (1549/50-1615), Church of England clergyman, was the son of William Gayle, also known as Cooke, of Beeston, Leeds, where he was baptized on 23 July 1550. (The name Cooke seems to have originated from the employment of generations of the Gayle family.) After attending Leeds grammar school, he matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 5 April 1567, aged seventeen, graduated BA on 27 June 1573, and was unanimously elected as a probationer fellow on 2 December that year. Appointed proctor in 1582, he carried out his duties conscientiously. A speech given on 10 April 1583 on his resignation vividly described the state of the university and the difficulties and animosity Cooke had encountered as proctor. Apparently he was not too discouraged. He proceeded BTh in 1584 and was appointed college bursar shortly afterwards. 
Highly respected for his learning and skill in debate, Cooke seemed set for a long university career. But in June 1590 he resigned his fellowship and on 18 December was instituted vicar of Leeds on the presentation of the parishioners. He succeeded the aged Alexander Fawcett, who may have had popish sympathies and seems not to have been a preaching minister. Cooke's arrival signalled more than a routine change in personnel. Since 1570 protestant sympathies had been gradually gaining ground. The energetic town merchants were seeking to further the town's economic, political, and religious development, and with the aid of Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon, who negotiated a reduction in price, they were able to secure the advowson in 1588. Cooke's uncle, Ralph Cooke, was a leading figure in Leeds, but his appointment shortly afterwards may also have reflected the earl's influence. In his new position, ironically, Cooke found himself in a dispute with Christ Church, Oxford, over property in the town, to which both the parish church and the college had claims. The matter was resolved in 1596 by Matthew Hutton, archbishop of York. 
Cooke's brand of puritan piety seems to have agreed well with the hopes of many of his influential parishioners; there is evidence from wills of the affection and respect in which they held him. He also found it necessary to arrange for the construction of galleries in the church, but these proved inadequate to accommodate the growing numbers of townspeople who attended Sunday services. Cooke also became a trustee of Wakefield grammar school. 
Cooke was a zealous opponent of Catholicism; his 'Censura quorundam scriptorum' (1614), dedicated to William James, bishop of Durham, strove 'to detect the numerous forgeries and unauthorized insertions made by Roman Catholic editors or transcribers in the works of the Fathers' (Taylor, 77). A manuscript once in the Leeds museum of Ralph Thoresby contained 'A learned disputation between Robert Cooke, B.D., and Cuthbert Johnson, alias William Darrell, before his majesty's council, and other learned men at York, an 1610'. Latterly Cooke was assisted by a curate, his brother, Alexander Cooke, a militant puritan who would succeed him as vicar. On 20 July 1614 he was collated by Bishop James to the sixth prebend of Durham Cathedral. Robert Cooke died in Leeds on 1 January 1615, and was buried at Leeds parish church the following day. 


@@@@@


doc= 6176


Cooke, Robert (1768-1814), organist and composer, was born in Westminster, London, the second son of the organist and composer Dr Benjamin Cooke (1734-1793) and his wife, Mary Jackson (died 1784). He succeeded his father as organist of St Martin-in-the-Fields in 1793 and was appointed organist at Westminster Abbey on the death of Samuel Arnold in 1802; by 1805 he was master of the choristers there. Cooke was one of the first members of the Philharmonic Society. His religious compositions include an evening service in C (1806) and a collection of chants for daily use in Westminster Abbey. He published a collection of eight glees in 1805, and three of his thirty-three glees won Catch Club prizes. He drowned in the River Thames near Millbank on 22 or 23 August 1814, and it was assumed he had taken his own life. He was buried in Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 6177


Cooke, Robert (c.1820-1882), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Waterford about 1820. He studied medicine for a time but, during a visit to France, joined the Roman Catholic congregation of the Oblates of Mary Immaculate. After being ordained a priest he was stationed at the residence of the Catholic convert A. P. De Lisle, Grace Dieu Manor, Leicestershire, where he spent much of his time preaching in the open air in the surrounding towns and villages. In 1847 he was sent to Everingham Park, Yorkshire, and established missions at the nearby towns of Howden and Pocklington. In 1851 he moved to Leeds, where he founded another new mission in the town. Cooke then visited Ireland and established a house of the Oblates at Inchicore; he later founded another at Kilburn in London. 
In 1875 Cooke published: 'Catholic Memories of the Tower of London', and in 1879 and 1882 the two volumes of a biography of the founder of his order entitled 'Sketches of the life of Mgr. de Mazenod, bishop of Marseilles, and founder of the Oblates of Mary Immaculate, and of the missionary labours of the French Oblates of Mary Immaculate'. His last missionary endeavour was in the East End of London, where he founded the church of the English Martyrs, Tower Hill. He died in Tower Hill on 18 June 1882. 


@@@@@


doc= 6178


Cooke, Roger (b. 1552, d. after 1612?), alchemist, was born on 1 February 1552. In 1567, at the age of fourteen, he became an assistant to John Dee, with whom he lived for the next fourteen years. Most of the little that is known about Cooke is derived from the diary of John Dee. Cooke seems to have assisted Dee in his alchemical experiments, and may have scryed (crystal gazed) for him. On 28 December 1579 Dee revealed an alchemical secret to Cooke, but on 12 July 1581, when Cooke was not invited to witness an alchemical experiment, they argued. On 5 September Cooke asked Dee's permission to leave him; he departed two days later. Dee describes Cooke as of a melancholy nature, and sought to rectify the ill sentiment between them by promising Cooke $100 as soon as he could afford it, as well as 'some pretty alchemical experiments, wheruppon he might honestly live' ('Private Diary', 13). 
No records of Cooke's life for the two decades after he left Dee have been located, though he seems to have had some association with Francis Anthony, the London medical practitioner and alchemist. On 30 September 1600 Cooke returned to Dee, 'offred and promised his faithfull and diligent care and help, to the best of his skill and powre, in the processes chymicall, and that he will rather do so then to be with any in England' ('Private Diary', 63). Dee agreed, and on 1 November Cooke began his distillations. The reconciliation was short-lived, however, and on 2 February 1601 Dee's son, Arthur, discovered that Cooke was plotting against Dee; despite a series of further reconciliations, Cooke departed for London on 2 March of that year. 
This is probably the same Roger Cooke who was employed by Henry Percy, 'the Wizard Earl', in building and running a still house in the Tower between 1606 and at least 1609. He might also be the Roger Cooke who assisted the experiments of Cornelis Drebbel at the court of Rudolf II and returned to England late in 1612. He seems not to have written anything, and nothing is known about his death. 


