@@@@@


doc= 52183


Holland, Ralph (d. 1452), tailor and alderman of London, was possibly from Newington, Surrey, where he owned property. He had married a woman called Matilda by 1419, when he was already a successful cloth merchant. He owned shops in various parishes in London, and supplied cloth to, among others, Thomas of Lancaster, duke of Clarence (died 1421). Like other ambitious London tailors involved in the cloth trade he was frequently described as a 'draper' and even became a member of the Drapers' Company. Despite this his loyalties clearly lay with the Tailors' Company, of which he became a liveryman in 1415-16 before being chosen master in 1419. He enrolled at least eleven apprentices during his career and made substantial contributions to the funds of the tailors' fraternity, dedicated to St John the Baptist, at a time when it was seeking to enhance its prestige in the City. His political career was controversial from the outset: in October 1426 he spoke out against the mayor who, drawing upon a royal writ of 1315, attempted to restrict participation in the mayoral and shrieval elections to those personally summoned by the mayor and aldermen. Holland declared the ordinance a fabrication, threatened several prominent citizens, and was sent to Ludgate prison. By 1429 he was a common councilman and was elected sheriff by the commonalty the same year, but failed in his first attempt to be elected an alderman. By 1434, when he was appointed one of the auditors of the accounts of London Bridge, he was probably the wealthiest member of his guild: he acquired two substantial houses, Basset's Inn and Pembridge's Inn, as well as other properties in London and Surrey which, in 1436, were assessed as being worth $24 per annum. 
In 1435 Holland made the first of several loans to the crown and by October that year had finally been elected an alderman, for Bread Street ward. He subsequently served on several important civil committees. His election coincided with the intensification of the rivalry which existed between the tailors and the drapers, particularly over the right to search shops and stalls for defective cloth, a function normally delegated to guild officials by the mayor. In 1439, following an earlier statute, the tailors acquired a controversial new grant by letter patent, probably with the assistance of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447), with whom Holland and the tailors had established a strong connection. It was claimed by the drapers that this charter infringed the city's liberties concerning the 'search', and relations were further strained when the tailors claimed the right to scrutinize cloth sold at St Bartholomew's fair at Smithfield. In October 1439 Holland made the first of three bids for the mayoralty, knowing that success would greatly assist the ambitions of the predominantly artisan tailors, now in direct competition with the drapers. Holland was rejected on each occasion, but by 1441 his candidacy had become identified with the interests of a wider constituency of artisans in the capital, concerned at the gradual encroachment upon their rights as freemen by an overwhelmingly mercantile court of aldermen. At the election that October a large crowd of tailors, skinners, and other 'handycraftymen' greeted the election of Robert Clopton, a draper, with cries of 'nay, not that man but Raulyn Holland!' (Kingsford, 154-5), and in the ensuing disturbances six tailors and five skinners were arrested and sent to prison. 
Over the next three years Holland continued to criticize the ruling oligarchy and leading citizens such as John Paddesley, a former mayor unpopular with the tailors, whom he accused of spending 1000 marks of the city's money on his private concerns. When a peace commission for London was established in 1443 Holland was at the forefront of the opposition to it, using the forum of the court of aldermen to declare it to be a commission 'not of peace but of war' (CLRO, Journal 4, fol. 4'v'), which would act against the interests of the city's artisans. The dissension came to a head at the election of the chamberlain in September, and a show of force was planned for the mayoral election on 13 October. Holland now rarely attended the court of aldermen and his house was used by the leaders of the artisans for conspiratorial meetings. The subsequent failure of the artisan movement resulted in Holland's own removal from the court of aldermen on 18 May 1444, after the aldermen had heard a lengthy account of his activities as an instigator of the unrest, and the accusations he had levelled at fellow aldermen over the years. 
Holland took no further part in city politics and died before 23 October 1452, when the first of his wills was proved. His wife had died before March that year. In June he had received two tenements in Watling Street from the crown in recognition of his services to the present king and Henry V. Holland remembered his craft in his wills, leaving Basset's Inn, Pembridge's Inn, and other properties in London to the Tailors' guild. As well as funding his obit the income was to be used by the master and wardens to increase the amount paid to the almsmen and women of the guild by 1died per week. He asked to be buried alongside his wife in the church of St Mary Aldermary. In 1454 the executors of that 'worshipful and notable man Raulyn Holand' (Anstey, 1.327) received a letter from Oxford University asking for a bequest for the new divinity schools. His son, also named Ralph, was likewise a tailor and appears to have predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52184


Barrow, Samuel (1625?-1683), physician and lawyer of the army, was the eldest of the seven children of Samuel Barrow, a lawyer of Burwell, in Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Judith, daughter of George FitzGeffrey of Bedford. Although the exact date and place of his birth are not known, the 'Visitation of Essex' of 1634 states that he was then about nine years old. He may have attended school at Charterhouse. On 6 July 1639, at the age of about fourteen, Barrow entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner, becoming a scholar in 1641, and BA in 1644. According to Sir Thomas Clarges, he was 'ejected out of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge for his affection to his Majesty' (Baker, 651). This may have taken place in 1644. It is not known where he studied medicine. 
In February 1654 Barrow was appointed physician to the armies in Scotland and in December 1659 judge-advocate of the army. In the unstable period after the death of Cromwell in 1658 he became one of the closest advisers of General Monck; he was recommended to the general's brother, Nicholas, as 'a very discreet gentleman' (Baker, 651). When Monck marched south on 30 December 1659, Barrow rallied support for the general on the way. In London Monck was ordered by the Rump Parliament to take action against the hostile City, but Barrow was instrumental in persuading him to demand a full parliament with the recall of the secluded members, a decision which led inevitably to the restoration of the monarchy. 
Barrow was sent to Breda with Clarges to negotiate with the king. Clarges was knighted on the spot, but, strangely, not Barrow. The reason may have lain in the rumour about the 'Doctor's relations with Cromwell' (Routledge, 5.27). In August 1660 Barrow was appointed physician-in-ordinary to the king, with a fee of $100 a year, and the next year judge-advocate-general to the first permanent establishment of guards. In June 1666 Barrow's old friend Sir William Clarke was mortally wounded in a battle at sea, and in July 1668 Barrow married the widow, Lady Dorothy (died 1695), daughter of Thomas Hyliard of Hampshire and Elizabeth Kimpton. 
Although Barrow wrote nothing of consequence, he was regarded as an authority on the events of the time. He was consulted by Thomas Skinner (or Skynner), a biographer of Monck, and encouraged Sir Thomas Morgan to write his 'A true and just relation of Major-General Morgan's progress in France and Flanders with the 6,000 English in the years 1657 and 1658'. It was written in 1675 but not published until 1699. Barrow greatly admired John Milton, and his Latin verses in praise of 'Paradise Lost', signed 'S. B., M. D.', were prefixed to the second edition of 1674. He may have been of help to the poet after the Restoration, but there is no evidence of any close friendship between the two. 
When Barrow became ill in 1681, he resigned the post of judge-advocate in favour of his stepson, George Clarke (1661-1736). He died on 21 March 1683, and was buried in All Saints' Church, Fulham, Middlesex, on 25 March. In his will of 1676 he left all his property to his wife, apart from small gifts to brothers and sisters. No portrait of Barrow exists, but John Aubrey described him as a good-humoured man: 'He much resembled and spoke like Dr. Ezerel Tong' ('Brief Lives', 1.94). 


@@@@@


doc= 52185


Lemberg, Tideman (c.1310-1386), merchant and banker, came of a family which had migrated to the Westphalian town of Dortmund, in north-west Germany, during the thirteenth century, and there joined the influential guild of shoemakers and tanners. Nothing is known of his youth and apprenticeship, but there is evidence for his taking an active part in the trade with England from 1339 -- not surprisingly, since Hanseatic merchants from Dortmund had been playing an important part in the English wool trade from about 1275. Between 1340 and 1350 Lemberg was one of Edward III's leading bankers. In order to finance his wars in France the king badly needed larger sums of money than could be raised from the crown's regular income, through direct taxation or by additional wool subsidies granted by parliament, while his former Florentine bankers, the Bardi and Peruzzi, had collapsed in 1340 and so were no longer at his disposal. During the 1340s, at first along with his Westphalian compatriots Johann vom Walde, Johann Klepping, and others, and afterwards in company with English merchants like Walter Chiriton and Gilbert Wendlinburgh, Lemberg negotiated five substantial loans, for a total of more than $100,000, on the king's behalf. It is difficult to analyse the structure of these transactions in detail, because new loans might be agreed before the earlier ones had been repaid; methods of repayment might be altered while a loan was still outstanding, and it is seldom possible to tell which payments were made for which loans. Repayments of the king's debts were made from customs on exported wool; the lenders might be given licences to export specified quantities of wool, wool-fells, and hides, or granted customs reductions or even exemptions, or customs revenues might be in part transferred to the king's creditors, or placed in pawn to them. These transactions were so organized that the loans were made on the continent, where the king needed the money, while repayments were made in England, so that the German merchants then had at their disposal the money they needed for buying wool. And at the same time dangerous and costly shipments of money could be avoided. 
Lemberg won Edward III's particular favour in 1343, when he made two loans, of nearly 50,000 florins ($8850), to redeem the royal crowns and other jewels which in 1339 had been given in pledge to Archbishop Baldwin of Trier and certain citizens of Cologne respectively. The king's German creditors, headed by Lemberg, consequently came to be temporarily possessed both of the entire customs revenue from wool shipped out of all the English ports from Bristol to Newcastle, and of one part of the revenues of the cocket seals. The extent of their profits cannot be calculated exactly, but they were clearly substantial. Lemberg's commercial activities, too, benefited considerably from the confidence that Edward III placed in him, which in 1347 gave him the opportunity to secure for all Hanseatic merchants a limited exemption from customs duties. 
After that year Lemberg no longer confined his activities to trading in wool. In 1347 he farmed the coinage dues from all the Cornish tin mines (at 40's'. per hundredweight), and secured for three years the entire revenue from the stannaries of Devon and Cornwall. At this time Lemberg, who already owned a house in London, seems to have intended to settle permanently in England, and may even have aimed at becoming a country gentleman, since in 1348 he purchased estates in several counties. But when the final settlement of the large sums due to him was being organized at the exchequer in the spring of 1352, numerous irregularities came to light. It became increasingly difficult for Lemberg to prove the legitimacy either of his demands or of the payments he had already received. He was accused of embezzlement, of illegal dealings in royal bonds, and of dishonest use of tin scales, and several actions were brought against him. In 1352 his tin supplies were confiscated in compensation for irregular receipts from the customs, and he was even temporarily arrested. Lemberg was able to negotiate a settlement with the king and with his English creditors, but he was obliged to leave England. He sold his estates to the sons of William de la Pole (died 1366) and moved to Cologne. 
In 1359, however, Lemberg returned to England. He farmed the lead and copper mines at Alston Moor, Cumberland, and acquired the right to exploit them as he pleased, having negotiated an agreement with the crown under which the latter took 15 per cent of the profits. A debt of 5000 marks at the exchequer was pardoned by the king, to whom Lemberg once more became a lender, this time of 1000 marks. In return he and his partners received customs reductions at Boston. However in 1363 he finally left England. At first he moved to his native town of Dortmund, but strained relations with its leading families made it impossible for him to remain there, and so in 1367 he once more settled in Cologne, where he was active in the wine trade and as a financier. He gave generous support to the Carthusian monastery of St Barbara, and in his will remembered other religious houses and collegiate churches in Cologne, among them the Augustinian friary, where he was laid to rest following his death in Cologne on 29 July 1386. 


@@@@@


doc= 52186


Le Fayre, Mark (d. 1417/18), merchant, is of uncertain origins, but his unusual names, and his interest in Freefolk, Hampshire, point to a connection with the baronial Husee family, possibly as an illegitimate son. Sir Mark Husee, heir to the lord of Freefolk, died in 1346, and the surname Le Fayre may signify the vair (ermine) of the Husee arms. Husee contacts, including the earls of Arundel, perhaps helped him make his way. 
Le Fayre, who entered the Winchester merchant guild in 1366 or 1367, came to dominate that city's long-distance commerce in a way that no single merchant had done in earlier and more prosperous times. He dealt in woollen cloth, for the making and finishing of which Winchester became a notable centre in his time, and imported large quantities of Gascon wine through Southampton. Between 1383 and 1408 he regularly sold wine in Winchester. He also shipped wine from Southampton to London, and by 1400 was supplying it to the king. Between 1371/2 and 1404/5 he exported cloth through Southampton. His sales of cloth in Winchester were on a smaller scale. In 1408 he was the only merchant not a Londoner to sell cloth to the royal household, and in 1414 claimed to be owed nearly $448 for cloth and wine supplied to Henry IV. He also imported woad, iron, oil, wax, and salt, and supplied woad and potash to the Winchester dyeing trade. On occasion he shipped wool to Calais and exported corn to Bordeaux. An entrepreneur in the cloth industry, he put out work to weavers and supervised a dyehouse. He had debtors, including clergy and knights, in London and at least five counties. 
Le Fayre rose high in Winchester and was often active in the capital on its behalf. His first known civic position was as a bagman (collector of revenues) in 1377, and in 1378-9 he was the senior bailiff. He represented Winchester in seven of the nine parliaments between 1385 and 1395, and in six between 1399 and 1417. First elected as mayor for 1398-9, he held the office four more times (1402-3, 1408-9, 1411-12, 1413-14). Constable of the Winchester staple in 1390-91, he was aulnager for Hampshire between 1408 and 1415, and had a royal commission to seize Flemish ships in 1415. 
Le Fayre's earliest known property holdings were for commercial use, and included shops in Winchester High Street where cloth was sold, a shop with the same speciality in St Giles's Fair outside Winchester, a stone cellar on a prime site for wine dealing in Southampton, and a wine tavern in Winchester, all acquired well before 1400. His spacious Winchester residence occupied a secluded site, but was in Parchment Street, close to High Street and the cloth-working district. He was probably living there by 1381, but only as tenant of the Inkepenne family, wool merchants before 1350 whose wealth probably exceeded Le Fayre's. His occupancy of the house where they had lived was a sign of success. About 1400, when he would have been well over fifty, his career became more sedentary, a change marked by tenure of the mayoralty, a shift in investment from trade to rents, and probably a more direct engagement in cloth production. He built several houses, a sound investment since, despite the contraction of the city, rents for good-quality buildings rose until about 1410. In that year he purchased tenements which he rebuilt as an inn, a prominent place of resort in High Street. At the same time he organized the repair of an inn belonging to the city, promising to lend money for the enterprise should it be needed. In 1412 the net annual value of his lands in Winchester, Southampton, Romsey, Freefolk, and Wiltshire (probably Salisbury) was given as $46. The estate reflects his interest in towns associated with the cloth trade, and is notable for its lack of rural holdings, apart from his country seat at Freefolk acquired in 1403. In 1417 his Winchester holdings alone brought in about $34, one of the most valuable rent rolls in the city. 
By 1386 Le Fayre had married his first wife, Joan. Later he made provision for properties to descend to his daughter Catherine and her heirs. By 1398 Catherine had married John Newman, a Salisbury merchant who died in 1402. Later that year she married Henry Somer (died 1450), a rising and highly regarded crown servant. Le Fayre stood surety for Somer more than once, and with him acquired property in London. The two men probably began their alliance before 1400, possibly in connection with the Southampton wine trade and through the influence of Somer's patron, Archbishop Thomas Arundel (died 1414). Joan died in 1410, and in the following year Le Fayre married Agnes Langestoke. At that time he settled Freefolk on Somer and Catherine, and arranged for his Winchester freeholds to be settled on himself, Agnes, and his heirs. Somer gained control of the Winchester property early in 1417, and just over year later, Le Fayre having died around the end of 1417, bought out Agnes's claim. A fortune created by a Winchester merchant thus came to contribute a regular, if declining, income to an influential official based in London. The city of Winchester later acquired the freeholds and commemorated Le Fayre and Joan as benefactors. 


@@@@@


doc= 52187


Ludlow, Lawrence of (d. 1294), merchant, was the son of 
Lawrence of Ludlow was probably the eldest of Nicholas's sons. Active as a merchant by 1272, he seems sometimes to have traded in partnership with his father and brothers, two of whom (John and Thomas) also dealt in wool. Indeed, it may not be an exaggeration to describe him as the head of a family business. His sister Cecilia's first husband, John Adrian, was a London draper who traded in wool, while her second, John Banquell, was a lawyer who might act as Lawrence's attorney. Like his father, Lawrence exported wool to the Low Countries in the 1270s (200 sacks in 1277, for instance) and afterwards; in 1285 he complained that 60 sacks destined for sale abroad had been arrested at Boston fair at the suit of a merchant of Arras. And he continued to trade in his native Shropshire -- at the 1292 Shropshire eyre his name headed the list of those infringing the assize of cloth at Ludlow. His wealth enabled Lawrence to lend money to the king, who in 1291 made arrangements to repay a loan of 1000 marks, and also to lay and ecclesiastical magnates in and around Shropshire, including the earl of Arundel, Edmund Mortimer of Wigmore, Roger Mortimer of Chirk, John (V) Lestrange of Knockin (who acknowledged owing $4000), the abbot of Buildwas, and Worcester Cathedral priory. Another outlet for his capital was real estate. Lawrence bought several properties in Ludlow itself, and at the time of his death was in process of acquiring the Shropshire manors of Rowton and Ellerdine. But his most notable purchase was the manor of Stokesay, some 7 miles north-west of Ludlow, which he bought in 1281. Since he obtained rights of common for his livestock in the neighbouring manor of Sibdon, Lawrence probably did not intend Stokesay to be only a country retreat. Even so, the grant of free warren which he obtained in the year of purchase, and still more the fortified manor house which he constructed there, obtaining a licence to crenellate in 1291, may still point to social ambitions for himself and his family. The structure surviving in the late twentieth century incorporated earlier work, but the three-storied south tower, the impressive hall, with the fine timberwork of its cruck roof and staircase, and the handsome stone fireplace and decorated floor tiles in the north tower, all of the late thirteenth century, proclaimed their owner and creator as a man of wealth, taste, and standing. 
Lawrence of Ludlow was clearly a capable man of affairs, with talents extending beyond commerce. In June 1294 Ralph de Tosny, lord of Painscastle in Shropshire, who was about to go overseas, made Lawrence his principal agent for the administration of his estates during his absence. The king, too, made use of Lawrence's organizational skills. 1294 saw the outbreak of war with France, and Edward I, badly in need of funds, devised ways of raising money with Lawrence's assistance. The annals of Dunstable specifically attributed a new tax on exports of wool, the so-called 'maltote' of 40's'. per sack, to Lawrence of Ludlow, describing him as 'nominatissimus mercatorum' ('most renowned of merchants'; 'Ann. mon.', 3.389). And he was also involved in an accompanying scheme for raising money from wool, which was to be shipped under royal supervision to the Low Countries, and customs duties paid to the king's officers on its arrival, while its owners would also make loans to the king from the proceeds of subsequent sales. The money thus raised would go towards the substantial sums which Edward I undertook to pay to his allies, the archbishop of Cologne and the count of Bar. The latter had earlier visited England, and Lawrence was apparently involved in negotiations with the count, who was later said to have received $200 from him in London. 
The fleet carrying the wool left from London under the command of Lawrence of Ludlow, whose own contribution to the king's finances was later calculated at just over $1000 in customs payments and loans, and the royal clerk Roger of Lincoln, but ran into a storm. Most of the fleet escaped destruction, but the ship carrying Lawrence and Roger was driven onto the Suffolk coast at Aldeburgh on the night of 26 November 1294, and both men were drowned. Lawrence's body was recovered from the sea and buried at Ludlow on 20 December following. With his wife, Agnes, he had at least five sons, and some of his purchases of land may have been intended to provide for them -- a fragment of his will records a bequest of two messuages and seven shops in Ludlow to his youngest son, Richard. After his death his widow herself traded in wool, and in company with her eldest son, William, devoted much energy to the recovery of her husband's debts. She later married Simon Leyburn. The descendants of Lawrence of Ludlow deserted trade for a country life in Shropshire, remaining lords of Stokesay until 1497. 


@@@@@


doc= 52190


Nicholas of Ludlow (d. in or before 1279), also a merchant, and his first wife, Margery, to whom he was married by 1267. Although his family took its name from Ludlow in Shropshire, the centre for Nicholas's operations was Shrewsbury, where the fine wools of the Welsh borderlands provided the basis for his fortunes. Active in the wool trade by the mid-1260s, Nicholas had important court connections; he was described as merchant to Edward I, as both prince and king, and bought cloths and skins for Edward's cousin, Henry of Almain. In the 1270s Nicholas was exporting wool (often through London) on a considerable scale, and inevitably suffered from the disruption of trade caused by English disputes with successive rulers of Flanders between 1270 and 1276, even though he was several times licensed to export wool at times of embargo -- in 1274 his losses were estimated at $1928. His personal involvement made him an appropriate person to be sent to Flanders in 1276 to demand reimbursement for English losses. But in spite of his difficulties his profits remained such as to enable him to sell silver to the mint worth $900 per annum. Nicholas was dead by 20 August 1279; Margery had predeceased him, and he left a widow named Idonia. His children, at least four sons and two daughters, all appear to have been born of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 52191


Lyons, Richard (d. 1381), merchant and financier, was of unknown origins, though it is possible that he was a Fleming who settled in London. It is likely that he was also illegitimate, and this may help explain alike the lack of family information, his apparent failure to marry into an established London family, and his slow acceptance into the ranks of the ruling classes of London. There appear to have been no children of his marriage to Isabella Pledour, from whom he was divorced in 1363. 
Lyons had by then become a very wealthy vintner and shipowner. At the time of his divorce his property, revenues, and goods in London alone were valued at $2443, and his wife claimed 5000 marks ($3333. 6's'. 8died) as her share of his total wealth. Lyons dealt in wine, wool, cloth, iron, and lead. Not surprisingly, with an apparently Flemish background, he had considerable business interests in Flanders and was heavily involved in overseas trade, travelling abroad with three servants in 1368. Although probably resident in London from the 1340s, it was not until 1359 that he first purchased property in the city. Similarly, although an active London tradesman in the 1340s, it was not until the later 1350s that he became accepted into the London merchant community. After 1359 Lyons emerged as a leading city merchant and became increasingly involved in city politics and government, though it was not until 1374 that he was appointed both alderman (of Broad Street ward) and sheriff. Like many other fourteenth-century London merchants Lyons sought wealth in the city but gentry status in the countryside by purchasing property outside London. In 1364 he bought his first extra-mural property, in Essex, and his assumption of gentry status and a decline of interest in London gradually followed. In 1380 he represented Essex in parliament, and during the peasants' revolt in 1381 his manor of Overhall at Liston in Suffolk was a target for attack. At his death he held lands in Essex, Kent, Suffolk, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and Hertfordshire, as well as London property which included a large house adjoining the Guildhall of the merchants of the Hanse of Germany in Thames Street, and other property situated in Cosyn Lane in the Ropery. 
Lyons was closely involved with John Pecche (died 1380) and Adam Bury, both leading London merchants, engaged in the exercise of the sweet wine monopoly. The latter was granted to Pecche by the crown in November 1373, when Bury was mayor of London. Under this monopoly only three taverns in London were allowed to sell sweet wines; all of them had been leased by Lyons from the city during Bury's first mayoralty in 1365. In 1376 all three Londoners were impeached on various charges of corruption by the Good Parliament, which also brought a number of other accusations against Lyons alone, including the misuse of his position as collector of the wool subsidy and member of the king's council to avoid exporting his wool via the staple at Calais; the appropriation for himself of customs duties that had not been sanctioned by parliament; the charging of usurious levels of interest on loans to the crown; and the purchase of royal debts owed to others at a fraction of their worth but obtaining full repayment of them at the exchequer. He was found guilty of these charges and imprisoned, his property was seized in June, and he was dismissed from his aldermanry in August. Although he was pardoned by the crown in March 1377, he was never restored to office in London. 
Lyons had been closely linked to the crown as a financier and adviser. He lent sums to the crown himself, but mainly acted as a middleman on behalf of the crown during the 1370s to arrange loans from denizen and alien merchants in London and to secure the payment of royal debts. Undoubtedly his involvement with the crown gave him influence; in June 1375, for example, he obtained the king's consent to the release of Thomas Gisors, a London merchant, from prison, together with royal protection against his creditors while he was conducting his business, so as to enable Gisors to raise money to repay his debts. Lyons held a number of royal appointments, including a commission to investigate an attack on three Portuguese merchant ships in 1371. He was keeper of the king's moneys at the Tower of London in 1375, and collector of the petty customs in 1373 and of customs and subsidies in 1375. 
Lyons was killed in Cheapside during the peasants' revolt on 14 June 1381. Froissart suggests that Lyons was killed as an act of revenge for some much earlier slight to Wat Tyler, the leader of the rebels, who had been his servant or apprentice. But the chronicler Knighton, perhaps more plausibly, connects Lyons's death with his lasting unpopularity from the days when he had been convicted of extortion and fraud. Lyons was buried in the church of St Martin Vintry, London, where according to Stow there was an impressive effigy of him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52192


Maghfeld, Gilbert (d. 1397), merchant, was of unknown parentage, and no details of his early years, whether in London or elsewhere, have been traced. He trained as an ironmonger and was elected by his fellow ironmongers in London to represent them in the reforming council assembled in 1376. He seems to have prospered quickly, in particular as a merchant in wholesale and overseas trade. He and his wife, Margery, lived in some style with their cook and other servants and a staff to deal with the business. Their home was on part of a valuable leased property with a wharf in the parish of St Botolph, Billingsgate, and with associates and his brother Geoffrey he extended his holdings and invested in land in nearby counties. He acquired two wardships, one of which brought him control of valuable manors in Kent. 
Maghfeld's unique position in the history of late medieval London, however, is due to the survival among the records of the exchequer of one of his ledgers, that kept from 4 July 1390 to 23 June 1395. Maghfeld or his clerk noted, day by day, debts and expenses, cancelling them when settled. Much illuminating detail on aspects of medieval life can be drawn from this volume of forty-seven folios, written chiefly in French, on subjects ranging from the costs of the schooling of two small boys -- one of whom, William, may have been Maghfeld's son -- to wages for those laying paving tiles in a local church. 
The ledger is of the greatest importance for the light it sheds on the business activities of a London merchant. Some of the debts -- over eighty debtors are named, some carried over from an earlier ledger -- represent straightforward loans. Some of these were sizeable, and were repaid in instalments, sometimes long after the agreed term; others, like the 26's'. 8died borrowed by Geoffrey Chaucer one Sunday in July 1392 and repaid as arranged the following Saturday, involved only relatively small sums. Much of Maghfeld's trade was with south-west Europe, whence his agents dispatched iron, wines, and other products, while cargoes of grain and cloth were shipped to Bayonne. He was well placed at Billingsgate to handle imports of fish and other raw materials such as woad and alum, essential for the cloth industry. While London was his chief market he had contacts as far away as Suffolk and Hampshire. Credit played an essential part in the exchange of goods, although the interest involved is not noted in the ledger. 
Maghfeld's financial skills were soon recognized at court. From 1383 he was active on royal business, particularly as collector of customs duties at Boston, Southampton, and London. He was among those to whom Richard II turned for help when he quarrelled with London in 1392. The mayor and leading citizens were summoned to account for disorder, and at councils held in June and July Richard over-rode long-established privileges. He sent the mayor and sheriffs to prison, appointed a warden and sheriffs to rule the city, and imposed a heavy fine. Although Maghfeld, after brief service in 1382, had been elected alderman of the ward of Billingsgate only in the previous March, Richard appointed him on 25 June 1392 one of the two sheriffs, and on 23 July collector of the London wool customs duties. Richard's favour was partly regained by the city by substantial gifts and loans, and when free elections were allowed Londoners found it politic to put forward Maghfeld's name again as sheriff on 21 September 1392. He continued as alderman and customs collector until 1396/7. But his position was not a comfortable one: the city continued to hold its privileges at the royal pleasure. 
The impact of his responsibilities on Maghfeld's own finances is clearly shown by the ledger. There was a marked decline in his trading activities, losses for which moneylending could not compensate. Royal favour seems to have harmed his relations with his fellow merchants and therefore his credit. Although he was able to buy a ship and its gear in September 1395, arrears on customs duties for the year 1395/6 led to the seizure of his possessions, including his ledger, on his death in May 1397. He may not then have been worth more than about $500, judging from debts for which the king sought payment. No will is extant. 


@@@@@


doc= 52193


Maunche, John (d. 1465), merchant, was Venetian by birth, but had settled in London by 1439, when he imported a cargo of madder, currants, and linen cloth worth just over $35 on the 'Jacob' captained by William Johnson. However, trading on his own account does not seem to have been the main purpose of his presence in the capital. From April 1440, together with his fellow Venetians, James Trott and Lorenzo Marconovo, he was regularly assigned to the supervision of the English mercer and royal wardrobe supplier Thomas Chalton. Chalton's summaries of their trade show that the trio worked as factors for Lorenzo's relative Giovanni Marconovo, who had been resident in London during the 1420s and 1430s, and -- along with Trott -- had been named among the grocers' livery in the 1430s. 
In this capacity Maunche and his associates offloaded goods from the Venetian galleys which stopped at London, as well as handling goods coming into the capital from Sandwich and Southampton. Their business consisted partly of grocery -- luxury spices such as currants, cloves, nutmeg, pepper, mace, green ginger, and cinnamon, which would yield very high profits -- and partly of useful chemicals for the English cloth industry -- dyestuffs such as brasil, saffron, madder, and woad, and the mordant alum. They also sold raw silk and small quantities of gold and silver thread to London silkwomen, including the royal wardrobe supplier Isabel Norman. They dabbled in luxury fabrics, such as the gold baldachins worth nearly $110 which they sold to the earl of Gloucester in March 1442. Although they bought piece tin from Londoners like Philip Malpas and Nicholas Yeo, their particular export interest was cloth, and in this respect Maunche's freedom of the Drapers' Company proved useful to their enterprise. Indeed, he and his associates were valuable clients for the London drapers. In October and November 1440, they spent just over $770 on purchases of 'Western' cloths from Simon Eyre alone, and in June 1442 they bought 'Ludlow' cloths worth $560 from John Gedeney. Their occasional forays outside London to buy wool were also lucrative for provincial English merchants, with whom they spent over $2000 in February 1443; again, this could work in favour of an individual such as Margery Page, who had sold Cotswolds wool worth almost $430 to Maunche and his colleagues in March 1442. 
On 26 November 1443 Maunche was granted letters of denization, which cost him 10 marks, and he was admitted to the freedom of the city a few months later, on 8 February 1444. His freedom came at exactly double the price of naturalization. At first he continued at his usual residence in Langbourn ward, where he had lived since at least 1441, but he moved to the more prestigious Broad Street and Bishopsgate area by September 1449, where he was still recorded as a Venetian by the English authorities despite his changed nationality. He stayed there until at least 1451. His name featured in four suits in the mayor's court during 1444-6, two of them involving the debts of Francesco de San Cassiano, for whom Maunche may also have worked as a factor. He traded in his own name on the Venetian galleys in 1445, importing ginger and silk worth almost $130; and in 1450 he imported in his own name again, this time a small cargo including sweet wine, madder, miniver, and linen thread, with a total value of $32, but the record for his independent business activities indicates a much more limited range and capital than that to which he was accustomed as an employee. 
Together with Lorenzo Marconovo, Maunche was among the witnesses to the Venetian Antonio Zane's will in 1440, and in 1450 he acted as administrator on the death of his long-standing colleague James Trott. Maunche died at some time between February and November 1465, describing himself in his will as a citizen and draper. He was to be buried under a marble slab at the Austin Friars -- the most popular place of interment for fifteenth-century Italians in London -- and left a $2 fee to the friars. His parish church was St Margaret, Lothbury, nearby, to which he left $1 for maintenance of the building and 2's'. for the high altar. The entire residue of his estate was bequeathed to his widow and principal executor, Margaret, 'therwith to do and dispose her owne free wille' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/5/11). Margaret afterwards married the draper Thomas Asby, and both were pardoned any debts due to the crown from her late husband within a year of his death, in respect of accounts for his office as aulnager (inspector of cloths) in Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 52195


Melchebourne, Thomas (d. 1356), merchant and financier, was a native of Bishop's Lynn, for which he sat in the parliaments of 1319, 1328, 1330, 1336, 1337, and 1340, and of which he was mayor in 1338. Between 1319 and the beginning of the Hundred Years' War he is often mentioned in connection with mercantile or administrative affairs. He exported wheat and cloth to Gascony, and wool to Flanders, and his ships also traded with Norway and carried victuals for the king's forces in Scotland. In 1333 he was collector of customs on wine and wool at Bishop's Lynn. 
With the beginning of the war in 1337 Melchebourne had other opportunities, and from this time was described as 'king's merchant'. In 1336 he and his brother were already building a barge with sixty oars for the king at Bishop's Lynn, and in 1337 he was commissioned to make anchors. In 1338 he was collecting wool for the king in Norfolk, and was again a collector of customs at Bishop's Lynn and deputy chief butler. He purveyed victuals for the king's use, and in 1339 was one of those appointed to collect the moiety of wool in Norfolk. He sent ships carrying the king's envoys to Holland and Zeeland, and was empowered in 1341 both to arrest ships illegally exporting corn to Scotland, and to search for wool exported without payment of customs. 
The opportunity for Melchebourne's major step into prominence, in connection with Edward III's financial schemes involving wool export and customs duties, came in 1343. On 2 June Melchebourne was elected mayor of the staple of Bruges by the community of English merchants, a position which he held until at least March 1345. On 8 July the king set up the English Company, replacing the aliens who had hitherto played a large part in war finance, with a moderately large group of merchants, who were entrusted with the farming of the customs and subsidies from midsummer 1343 until Michaelmas 1346. In return they were obliged to pay the wardrobe 1000 marks a month, and also to lend the king 10,000 marks per annum -- in all 22,000 marks a year, a sum easily obtainable from the normal yield of customs. Later documents show that the leading member of the English Company was William de la Pole (died 1366), but he remained in the background, with Melchebourne as the most prominent representative of the company, and Melchebourne was still present when it was reorganized in 1344 as a smaller group of six members. The company did in fact advance more than $60,000 to the crown between 1343 and 1345, but it was wound up in August 1345. Melchebourne was one of those involved in redeeming the king's small crown in 1343, and Queen Philippa's crown in March 1344, after these had been pledged for loans at Cologne. 
For the years 1343-5 Melchebourne had been in an absolutely central position in trade with the Netherlands and in war finance. After the winding-up of the company, apparently because it was unable to make the payments required, Melchebourne appears to have retained royal favour. In 1347 the king granted him and his brother three inns at Calais, and in 1349 he was exporting corn to Norway. He died in 1356, when he owned houses at Stokfysshrowe and Briggegate at Bishop's Lynn and land at Melchbourn and Beccles. His wife's name was Johanna, and he had a son, Peter, who also became a prominent merchant, and a daughter, Alice. 




@@@@@


doc= 52196


William Melchebourne (d. 1360x62?), the brother of Thomas, was also an important merchant of Bishop's Lynn, who was associated with his brother in the business of exporting grain to Norway and wool to the Netherlands, in supplying the royal army's needs for victuals in the north, and as a member of the English Company of 1343. He is also sometimes named independently as carrying out these trading or financial functions. Likewise given the designation of king's merchant, William was appointed weigher of wools in the port of London in 1341, and collector of tunnage at Bishop's Lynn and butler at Boston in 1342. In 1344 he was rewarded for helping to recover the king's great crowns from Flanders, where they had been left as pledges for debts. His brother left him a house in Stokfysshrowe, Bishop's Lynn, for life. William died apparently between December 1360 and May 1362, leaving a widow named Deruegolda and a son, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 52198


Jones, (Ronald) Maxwell (1917-1993), jazz critic and author, was born on 28 February 1917 at 9 Nightingale Road, Bushey, Hertfordshire, the youngest son and second of the three children of Theophilus Hill (Theo) Jones, an iron and scrap metal merchant, and his wife, Elsie, 'nee' Brierley. Both parents were English. He lived and was educated in the Primrose Hill area before attending Regent Street Polytechnic, London, where, with his brother Clifford Hill (Cliff) Jones ('b'. 1914) and friends, he formed an eight-piece amateur dance band. He played tenor and soprano saxophones and learned about jazz from American records, and, although the band never progressed further than amateur standard, it continued beyond his student days. He joined the band of trumpeter Johnny Claes but abandoned the tenor saxophone after hearing the instrument's master Coleman Hawkins at first hand, and, although persevering with lessons on alto saxophone, he eventually decided to abandon playing music. He heard Louis Armstrong, Duke Ellington, Joe Venuti, and Cab Calloway on their British visits and, with Claes, got to know the small contingent of local black musicians, whose society he enjoyed. By the end of the 1930s he was involved with the rhythm club movement, giving record recitals and writing about jazz. 
A lifelong social conscience, formed early on through Jones's interest in African American music, was cemented by witnessing police corruption at his father's business premises. In 1935 he joined the Communist Party. As a conscientious objector he spent most of the war years as an air raid warden in London, but he also travelled to High Wycombe, where his parents had moved, and, with Peter Duffell, started a rhythm club in the town. In 1943 he wrote about jazz for the Young Communist League weekly, 'Challenge', and formed the Challenge Rhythm Club, organizing record recitals and lectures under its auspices and concert appearances by Claes and the Trinidadian trumpeter Cyril Blake. 
On 8 January 1942 Jones married Amy Alice (Sandra) Salberg (1920-2002), the daughter of George Henry Salberg, glass worker and photographer's processor; they had one daughter, Vivienne Anne Lindsey Jones ('b'. 1944), who was later known as Vivienne Anne Lindsey Luck. He subsequently began a long relationship with his sister-in-law Betty Elizabeth Salberg (1925-1992), who changed her name to Jones before their son, Nicholas Carl Maxwell Jones, was born in 1948; they married on 14 May 1965 after his previous marriage was dissolved. 
In the summer of 1942 the publication 'Jazz Music' was launched, with Jones and Albert J. McCarthy as editors. Established jazz writers were featured and Jones, in addition to his musical articles, reported on racial matters in the USA. 'A survey of slavery', written with Charles Wilford and published in 'Jazz Music' in 1944, provided an educational jolt to enthusiasts for whom the blues existed only as music on a 78 r.p.m. shellac record. Although limited in size by wartime restrictions, the magazine published poetry and reprinted writings by the American jazz historian William Russell and Harlem renaissance figures Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston. In April 1944 the editors formed the Jazz Sociological Society and, when 'Jazz Music' temporarily ceased publication, they produced a series of erudite booklets on aspects of jazz, one of which included a report by Jones on the fight to desegregate the American armed forces. In 1945 Jones was one of several writers who formed the British Hot Record Society; he also co-edited 'Piano Jazz' with McCarthy. A tribute to the folk-singer Leadbelly (1946) presaged the reappearance of 'Jazz Music', which included new articles by musicians as well as collectors; notable features included Jeff Aldam's 'African survivals in Afro-America' (1947). He also edited Ernest Borneman's important book 'A critic looks at jazz' (1946). 
In 1944 Jones collaborated with Rex Harris in writing the column 'Collectors' corner' for 'Melody Maker', then, in 1945, joined the staff of that newspaper. In the ensuing years he produced a substantial body of writing about jazz, blues, and gospel music, and the lives of these musical idioms' practitioners. At the heart of this corpus was a prolific collection of interviews, many of which, through their subsequent -- and uncredited -- extraction in Nat Hentoff and Nat Shapiro's 'Hear me Talkin' to ya' (1955), provided important building blocks in the creation of the oral jazz history. With Jones as amanuensis, the stories of pianist Mary Lou Williams, clarinettist Edmond Hall, and others were serialized at a time when no other newspaper would have considered them worthy of such coverage; these recollections were later reprinted in 'Talking Jazz' (1987). 
Jones was always concerned by racial injustice, whether in the United States, Britain, or South Africa. Following the 1958 Notting Hill racial disturbances he became involved in the Stars' Campaign for Inter-racial Friendship (SCIF) and, while proposing reforms, wrote a spirited defence of the new black settler community, published in 'Melody Maker' in 1959. Though always associated with jazz, his musical and other interests were wide: he wrote about the folk-singer Woody Guthrie when he was unknown outside the USA, and expressed enthusiasm for the young Bob Dylan. He also wrote sympathetically about many women musicians. 
Although he was himself a spirited raconteur and bon viveur, Jones had the ability to empathize with his subjects and thus get the best from them. He wrote about both major and minor jazz figures with uncommon respect, while presenting them as equally human and fallible characters. This emphasis influenced several younger acolytes. The seamless conversational style he evolved, his horn-rimmed spectacles, and the trademark black beret he always wore were known throughout the jazz world. 
A long-standing admirer of Louis Armstrong, Jones paid tribute to his hero by co-writing the trumpeter's biography with John Chilton; 'Louis' was published in 1971. His genuine love for the music led to lasting friendships with many of the musicians he interviewed, most notably with Armstrong and the singer Billie Holiday, and the Jones household accommodated many top names from the world of jazz; trumpeter Buck Clayton tipped his hat to his host with his composition 'Mr Melody Maker'. Motor-racing remained another passion: his long association with Claes and former drummer Les Leston encompassed shared racing-circuit activities. His other enduring interests were cricket and wine: he was vice-captain of both the Melody Maker and the Ravers cricket teams and an enthusiastic member of the Wig and Pen Club. 
On retirement from 'Melody Maker' in 1982 Jones became a freelance television consultant and continued to write, and turned his collection of photographs and memorabilia into a library which his son continued to maintain. He died of heart failure at St Richard's Hospital, Chichester, Sussex, on 2 August 1993. He was survived by his two children, his wife, Betty, having predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52199


Moneyers (act. c.1180-c.1500) served in a profession that included a wide range of different types of people employed, chiefly in London, in the production of currency. 
At its most comprehensive the mint could employ both illiterate labourers at the bottom of the scale, and figures of the stature of Peter de Rivallis (d. 1262), Gregory of Ruxley (d. 1291), and John Sandale (d. 1319) at the top. These distinguished men all served as wardens of the mint and exchange, but theirs was essentially a civil service, supervisory post, which could be exercised by deputy, and which monitored the work of mint staff and accounted for the king's seigniorage (the fee received by the crown for every pound of coin struck). Thus 


@@@@@


doc= 52204


Kennedy, John Stodart (1912-1993), entomologist, was born in Titusville, Pennsylvania, USA, on 19 May 1912, the only son in the family of three children of James John Stodart Kennedy, an Anglo-Scottish engineer, and his American wife, Edith Roberts Lammers. His early childhood was unsettled -- his family lived in Hong Kong, Philadelphia, and Toronto -- and he attended six different schools. His father was a first-class handyman and imbued him with something of his mechanical ingenuity as well as with his disrespect for people like lawyers and stockbrokers who 'produced nothing'. Both parents were deeply religious; Kennedy's teenage apostasy and later divorce gave them profound unhappiness. 
Kennedy was unlike many entomologists: neither he nor any of his family had any particular interest in natural history. At school he 'never excelled at anything in particular, unless it was French, and keeping white mice, and [he] had a habit of wool-gathering' (unpublished autobiographical note). It was not until his last years at Westminster School that he discovered biology, with his enthusiasm fostered by his biology teacher George Pickering. He went on to study zoology at University College, London, where he was deeply influenced by his teachers: simultaneously attracted by the mechanistic approach of J. B. S. Haldane and G. P. Wells, and repelled by E. S. Russell's vitalist animal behaviour lectures. This was the period when his biological and political views both took shape. His politics were characterized by compassion, a concern for social justice, and anti-fascism, articulated for many years as support for the Communist Party. In 1936 he completed his MSc under the eminent physiologist Gottfried Fraenkel, a recent refugee from Hitler's Germany who introduced him to the study of insect behaviour that was to become a passion for the rest of his life. On 20 November the same year he married a fellow student, Dorothy Violet Bartholomew ('b'. 1908/9), daughter of Walter Bartholomew, general merchant; they had one son. 
From 1934 to 1936 Kennedy worked as a locust investigator for the Imperial Institute of Entomology at the University of Birmingham, where he studied for his PhD under G. L. Gunn and B. P. Uvarov. In 1936-7 he and Dorothy spent four months in Sudan doing fieldwork. Kennedy was intrigued by the mechanisms locusts used to steer a course towards a stimulus such as a bush, by the conditions of the environment that stimulated them to leave some locales yet remain in others, and by variation in the conditions of the locusts themselves that led to variation in their behaviour. These studies underpinned all his science thenceforth. They led to an understanding of how insects orient to visual and chemical stimuli, to factors underlying migration, to the importance of physiological state in affecting behavioural responses, and to a more general understanding of the causes that underlie the behaviour of insects and other animals. Rigorous experimentation for the interpretation of behaviour and precision in terminology were already his hallmarks. His work led to the award of a PhD in 1938, and to a succession of short-term posts, at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (1937-8), the Rockefeller Malaria Research Laboratory, Tirana, Albania (1938-9), and the Wellcome Entomological Field Laboratories, Esher, Surrey (1939-42). 
In 1942 Kennedy was given a wartime assignment with the Middle East anti-locust unit and investigated the effectiveness of applying an insecticide to the winged locusts that were devastating food crops in Africa and the Middle East. Eventually he overcame the major logistical difficulties, only to find that it was generally an ineffective method of control. He continued his war work at the chemical defence experimental station, Porton Down (1944-5). Porton Down was already expert at the dissemination of poison from the air. Kennedy helped adapt this expertise to killing disease-carrying mosquitoes as part of the preparation for allied attacks on Japanese-occupied positions. He discovered that the initial effect of DDT is to excite the insect so that it can fly off before receiving a lethal dose, a phenomenon now known to occur with many insecticides. 
In 1946 Kennedy took up a research post in V. B. Wigglesworth's newly formed Agricultural Research Council unit of insect physiology in Cambridge, where he remained until 1967. Divorced from his first wife in 1946, he later met Dr Claude Jacqueline (Claudette) Bloch, 'nee' Raphael, a French biologist, at a conference. Widowed by the holocaust and herself recovering from three years in Auschwitz and other Nazi camps, she brought her ten-year-old son to live with them after they were married in Paris in 1950. They had two further children, a son and a daughter, and established a happy home whence warmth and hospitality were extended to a wide circle of friends and colleagues. 
Throughout his period at Cambridge and for five years subsequently, Kennedy studied the behaviour of aphids, and in particular how their flight is related to their leaving and finding host plants. He brought to this work his knack for devising methods and apparatus that could give answers not possible with 'off-the-shelf' equipment. Using a vertical wind tunnel which balanced the speed of the down draft against an aphid's rate of climb towards the light, he showed that the aphid responds primarily to the ultraviolet wavelengths of skylight while dispersing, and that its primary response then shifts to the wavelengths of light corresponding to leaves. Similar techniques enabled him to recognize that host-finding involves the integration of take-off, ascent, migration, descent, landing, probing, and reproduction behaviours. By cutting the stylets of a feeding aphid he confirmed that the turgor pressure of the plant provides a flow of sap to the insect -- and incidentally provided plant physiologists with a technique for directly assaying unadulterated plant phloem. 
Kennedy realized that generalizations were possible between the behaviour of the aphids during their migratory phase and that of the locusts with which he had worked earlier. Migration could be distinguished by persistent locomotion which is continued even if the insect is presented with a stimulus such as a mate or host plant; the difference between migratory and 'trivial' locomotion lay in the insect's threshold of responsiveness to these types of stimuli. Later Kennedy showed that this was part of an antagonistic system of behaviour: the longer an aphid's flight, the stronger its subsequent response to a leaf, and the stronger the response to the leaf, the stronger any subsequent flight. 
When Wigglesworth retired in 1967, the Cambridge Agricultural Research Council unit was disbanded. T. R. E. Southwood then invited Kennedy and his colleague A. D. Lees to move to the department of zoology and applied entomology of Imperial College, where they established the Agricultural Research Council's insect physiology group at the Silwood Park field station. The title of professor of animal behaviour in the University of London was conferred on Kennedy in 1968, but he never really enjoyed the small number of lectures that fell to his lot. 
At Silwood, Kennedy's research continued to blossom. In 1973 he returned to investigating insect orientation in flight. Using a large wind tunnel with a moving floor to represent changes in the ground pattern, he demonstrated that male moths tend to 'zig-zag' up odour plumes (pheromones) released by a female, adjusting to the effect of wind drift by reference to the ground and changing their angle of turn according to changes in the strength of the odour. He tested the responses of moths to odour in the field using an ingenious system: pheromone and soap bubbles were released simultaneously from an old tower, allowing the researchers and their videotapes to 'see' the direction of travel of the pheromone and relate it to the moths' flight. He was able to prove that, contrary to previous beliefs, moths did not find the pheromone source by moving up the concentration gradient; instead, the moths primarily track the wind, finding the pheromone within it. Together with his colleagues, Kennedy revolutionized biologists' understanding of the nature of moth orientation to odour sources, and the laboratory attracted visiting scientists from all over the world. 
Kennedy continued his research at Silwood (as a senior research fellow and emeritus professor of Imperial College, London) past his retirement in 1977 until 1983, when Southwood, now head of the department of zoology at Oxford, invited him to join as a research associate. In Oxford his main work was his book 'The New Anthropomorphism' (1992). In this, his scientific testament, he condemned the description of animal behaviour in teleological terms; this, he powerfully argued, obstructed clear analytical thought. 
Kennedy was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1965. He was president of the Royal Entomological Society from 1967 to 1969, and was elected an honorary fellow in 1974 and awarded its Wigglesworth medal in 1985. He was awarded the gold medal of the Linnean Society in 1985. On 3 February 1993, while working at the zoology department in Oxford, and just after a discussion with a colleague, he suffered a brain haemorrhage. He died on 4 February at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. He was survived by his wife and stepson, and his own three children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52205


Kenyon, Lloyd Tyrell-, fifth Baron Kenyon (1917-1993), museum administrator and book collector, was born on 13 September 1917 at 17 Manchester Street, Marylebone, London, the only son of Lloyd Tyrell-Kenyon, fourth Baron Kenyon (1864-1927), a lord-in-waiting to Queen Victoria, Edward VII, and George V, and his wife, Gwladys Julia (1884-1965), the only daughter of Colonel Henry Lloyd Howard, of Wigfair, Denbighshire. He had a twin sister. He succeeded to his father's peerage at the age of ten and was educated at Eton College and Magdalene College, Cambridge. After taking his degree Lord Kenyon's interest in the visual arts led to his appointment as an honorary attache at the Fitzwilliam Museum, where Louis Clarke had just become director. He joined the Shropshire yeomanry in 1937 and served in the Second World War in the Royal Artillery (Territorial Army) until he was invalided out in 1943 on account of his poor eyesight. 
After the war Kenyon married, on 3 June 1946, Leila Mary, 'nee' Cookson ('b'. 1923), the widow of Lieutenant Hugh Peel of the Welsh Guards; the couple had three sons (one of whom died in the same year as his father) and a daughter. The subsequent pattern of Kenyon's life was set in these post-war years. Motivated by a strong sense of public duty and skilled at leading on a loose rein, he served on Flint county council for ten years, becoming chairman in 1954-5, was president of the University of North Wales at Bangor from 1947 to 1982 (a post his father had held before him), chief commissioner for the Wales Boy Scouts Association from 1948 to 1966 (his mother had been a friend of the Baden-Powells), and a deputy lieutenant for Flint from 1948. He had boundless zest for the constant travelling involved in these duties, but he also found time to look after his own properties and manage his 10,000 acre estate. He was the first farmer to import Charollais cattle into Britain; and he was a keen gardener and plantsman, personally labelling every species in his borders with meticulous care. Unsentimental about what he owned, he had the once fine and elaborately timbered mansion of Kenyon Peel Hall -- which had begun to fall apart after coal extraction in the area had undermined it structurally -- pulled down in the 1950s, and Gredington itself, impractically large, he also demolished to be replaced by smaller family houses. He then lived himself in nearby Cumbers House, an attractive late-Victorian red-brick house. 
From 1958 Kenyon was closely involved with the Welsh hospital service. He was a member of the Welsh Regional Hospital Board from 1958 to 1963 and of the Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine from 1961 to 1965, and chairman of the Wrexham, Powys, and Mawddach hospital management committee from 1960 to 1974 and of the Clwyd Area Health Authority from 1974 to 1978. He was also a director of Lloyds Bank from 1962 to 1988 and chairman of its north-west board. But closest to his heart was the world of art and books. At the age of thirty-five he was appointed president of the National Museum of Wales (he had been vice-president since 1947), serving for five years from 1952 to 1957. In the following year he began a seven-year term as a member of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries and became a trustee of the National Portrait Gallery, where he remained on the board for five consecutive terms, succeeding Sir Geoffrey Keynes as chairman in 1966 and relinquishing this position only in 1988, when he was finding it increasingly difficult to read. 
Kenyon was in his element with historical portraits; he never tired of consulting and quoting from the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. As chairman he trusted and supported successive directors and their staff; he always found time to talk and encourage, and if, very rarely, reproof were needed, it might happen over dinner at Brooks's. Crisply but meticulously conducted trustees' meetings were preceded by lunch at the Beefsteak and ended in good time for catching the train at Euston. The most important issues in his time were expansion of the gallery's confined building of 1896 adjoining the National Gallery and the provision of outstations in the regions -- chiefly in collaboration with the National Trust -- to allow significant parts of the collection to be shown outside London. Kenyon was always prepared to lobby ministers, but he disliked fund-raising, except for important purchases such as the portraits of Handel and Sterne, and the first stage of expansion (1993) did not happen until after his retirement. He did, however, initiate and use his personal authority and his proximity to carry through, with characteristic and tireless energy, a highly successful Victorian outstation as part of Clwyd county council's cultural development at Bodelwyddan Castle in north Wales, opened in 1988. It was perhaps his most remarkable single achievement. 
Kenyon's appreciation of the unique significance of the gallery's historic archive and his wise encouragement of research reflected his deep love of books. He helped to relaunch the celebrated Gregynog Press in 1978, and was a passionate collector chiefly of early English liturgical books. His elegant handwriting was that of a calligrapher. Kenyon was a member of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts from 1966 to 1992 and chairman of the friends of the national libraries from 1962 to 1985. His knowledge of rare books was always at the service of others, and it was one of the greatest sadnesses of his life that in his later years he had to sell a large part of his collection. 
Kenyon never sought to move in London society, and did not attend the House of Lords. He rarely travelled outside England and Wales except for occasional holidays in the sun and a visit to the United States for the centenary of Kenyon College, Ohio. Although his commitments took him frequently to London, where he greatly enjoyed club life and its rituals and his visits to the bookseller Heywood Hill, he was essentially a man of the shires. In his younger days he enjoyed country pursuits, especially hare-coursing, and for many years he was secretary of Altcar Racing Club. Later he owned one racehorse, Rupertino, but although the Peel estate, which adjoined his own and of which he was a senior trustee, included Bangor-on-Dee (Bangor Is-coed) racecourse, he was not at heart a racing man. Kenyon was sociable and hospitable, and infinitely generous. He bore his troubles and infirmities without complaining and never lost his quiet good humour. He was an old-fashioned aristocrat in his self-confident bearing and affability, his way of life, and his devotion to public service. But he was distinctive, too, in his pebble glasses, bow-tie, light fawn topcoat worn even in extreme weathers, and cultural interests. He was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and was appointed CBE in 1972. He died at Cumbers House, Gredington, Shropshire, on 16 May 1993, from lung cancer. 


@@@@@


doc= 52206


Kersley, George Durant (1906-1993), physician and rheumatologist, was born on 27 December 1906 at 3 Park Lane, Bath, and baptized in Bath Abbey, the elder of two sons of Henry George Kersley (1863-1927), of independent means, and his wife, Edith, 'nee' Durant (1871-1958). He was educated at Malvern School and in 1925 went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. From 1928 he studied medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital medical school, qualifying MB, BCh (Cambridge) and MRCP, LRCS (London) in 1931. In 1934 he won a prize for his Cambridge MD thesis. He was elected fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of London in 1943. He married on 1 February 1933 Mary Ada Roper Yeomans (1910-1992), nurse, and daughter of Robert Roper Yeomans, schoolmaster. They had a daughter, Gillian, and a son, Henry Jonathan. This marriage having ended in divorce, on 8 May 1948 Kersley married Lilian May (Mickie) Davis ('b'. 1920), the daughter of Richard Mark Vernon, motor mechanic, and former wife of Major Kenneth Davis. They had one daughter, Diana Alison Durant, and Kersley became stepfather to Christopher, Mickie's son by her previous marriage. 
In 1934 Kersley took up the appointments in Bath as consultant physician (general medicine) at the Royal United Hospital and consultant in rheumatology at the Mineral Water Hospital (later renamed the Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases). This hospital and the city of Bath became two of the dominant passions of his life. On moving to Bath he joined the Territorial Army in the North Somerset yeomanry as captain. In 1939 he was called up as medical specialist with rank of major, later colonel. He set up the army school of occupational therapy at Taunton and reorganized the army school of physiotherapy at Netley. As adviser in physical medicine to the army he was concerned with training schedules and the rehabilitation of military casualties. After the war he gave up his general medicine commitment in order to concentrate on the rheumatic diseases, running specialist clinics in Bath and Bristol. This was at a time when there was an apparent conflict between science-based academic rheumatology and physical medicine, the latter having strong links with physiotherapy departments and less science-minded army specialists who had been concerned with getting recruits back to active service after injury. As a founder member of the Empire Rheumatism Council (later the Arthritis Research Campaign) and of the British Association for Physical Medicine, Kersley had a foot in both camps. Throughout his life he worked to resolve the apparent antithesis. 
The Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases had been badly damaged in the 'Baedeker' air raids launched in response to the allied bombing of Dresden. Kersley raised money not only to fund repairs to the hospital but also to modernize the interior and add a new research floor. This was a critical time. When the patients were moved into temporary hutted accommodation elsewhere, Kersley found himself up against the regional medical board, the professor of medicine in Bristol, and five successive ministers of health, who all wanted to close the hospital and put the money to other uses. It was greatly to Kersley's credit that he fought off the predators and cynics, taking his case to the House of Lords. The repairs and upgrading were completed in 1965. Under Kersley's guidance, the annual reports of the hospital reflected the increasing volume and quality of research carried out and numbers of patients treated. Younger doctors came to Bath as trainees, many from abroad. Five of the country's professors of rheumatology at Kersley's death had part of their training in Bath. In 1983 he retired, but he continued to give full support to the hospital and the Bath Institute for Rheumatic Diseases, which took over its research and teaching functions and became part of the postgraduate medical school at Bath. In 1986 he saw the celebrations of the quarter-millennium of the hospital, the oldest specialist rheumatology hospital in the world. 
Kersley lived and practised at 6 The Circus, Bath, leaving it temporarily to move nearer to the university. But his love for things Georgian took him back to 20 Royal Crescent, where he lived for the rest of his life. He became a city councillor in 1968 and mayor in 1979. He was active in local Conservative politics, a discerning collector of antique glass, and instigator and chairman of the Bath tattoo, which was held from 1954 to 1964 and for which he was appointed OBE. He wrote on the history of medicine in Bath. His practitioner's manual, 'The Rheumatic Diseases' (1934), was four times updated; he also wrote 'The three 'Rs': rheumatology, rehabilitation and research as viewed from Bath' (1981) and a number of research and historical papers. He made the first complete description of the disease 'polymyalgia rheumatica'. His book 'A Concise International History of Rheumatology and Rehabilitation' (1991, co-authored with John Glyn), was published by the Royal Society of Medicine, London. He was president of the Heberden Society (1961), vice-chairman of the International League against Rheumatism (1967), and president of the European League against Rheumatism (1969). He was also an honorary member of the American and most European rheumatological associations. In 1971 he was awarded an honorary DSc by the University of Bath. He also served as a deputy lieutenant of Somerset (later Avon), and as colonel (later honorary colonel) of the 19th Southern General Hospital (Territorial Army), which he helped to set up. 
Kersley's sixty years of professional life saw signal changes in rheumatology. When his career began, rheumatic fever, rheumatic heart disease, and tuberculosis of bones and joints were rife. By the time he retired they had virtually disappeared, gout had become curable, and surgeons had devised ways to replace damaged joints. Research had switched to osteoporosis and back pain with promising results. The problems of preventing and curing rheumatoid arthritis and other auto-immune diseases of joints had not been solved, although with advances in treatment the outlook for sufferers had vastly improved. He died on 1 September 1993 at the Royal United Hospital, Bath. After cremation, his ashes were buried in the family grave at Bath Abbey cemetery on 29 April 1994. He was survived by his second wife, Mickie, his three children, and his stepson. 


@@@@@


doc= 52209


Koenig, Ghisha (1921-1993), sculptor, was born on 8 December 1921 at 81 St Mark's Road, Kensington, London, the younger of the two children of (Mendel) Leo Koenig (1898-1970), art critic and writer, and his wife, Fanny Hildebrand ('fl'. 1900-1940), formerly a Yiddish actress. The family was Jewish and culturally conscious, though not observant. Koenig adopted her father's strong left-wing politics -- 'The Zionists called him a Communist and the Communists called him a Zionist' (private information) -- and his immersion in the arts. Poverty notwithstanding, the family home was the centre of a circle of Jewish artists and writers, including the painters Josef Herman and David Bomberg, who became role models for Koenig. She was educated at Hendon county grammar school where, perhaps because of her lifelong ill health, caused by asthma, she failed to shine academically. 
In 1939, defying advice from her school, Koenig won a scholarship to study sculpture at Hornsey College of Art. She joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service in 1942 and was posted to Leeds. She was transferred to London in 1944 to edit the army's 'London Educational Bulletin', which involved visiting factories to investigate work opportunities, a formative experience for her subsequent career. Determined to study with Henry Moore, she attended Chelsea School of Art from 1946 to 1948, before moving to the Slade School of Fine Art for a year. Moore discouraged her, as a woman, from practising sculpture -- which, given her obstinacy, was probably an important stimulus. On 5 January 1951 she married Emanuel (Manny) Tuckman ('b'. 1921/2), medical doctor and son of Lewis Tuckman, company director. Tuckman's practice took them to Kent, where he worked on a new housing estate in St Paul's Cray. They moved to Sidcup in 1967 and, on his retirement in 1986, to north London, where Koenig worked in the studio previously owned by the sculptor Naum Gabo. 
A solitary worker, Koenig never used assistants but relied on Tuckman for much essential help, from lifting to casting and burnishing. She was a perfectionist, obsessively devoted to her work, which she recorded meticulously. Tuckman's support enabled her to work single-mindedly even after their daughter, Sarah, was born in 1955. The working process that Koenig initiated in 1951 was precisely attuned both to the circumstances of her life and to her political orientation. Both Koenig and Tuckman were consistently left-wing politically; if not members of the Communist Party, they were for a time far from unsympathetic to it. Koenig sold the 'Daily Worker' outside University College, London. They were politically active, taking part in the first Aldermaston march in 1958, and later holding Labour Party ward meetings in their home. Koenig would spend weeks or months at a local factory with a manual labour force involved in a craft process such as paper making or button carding. She worked in at least ten such factories, the first being the vegetable parchment mills in St Mary Cray. She habitually sketched each stage of the production process, then made enlarged working drawings in the studio as the basis of her reliefs and free-standing figures. They were made in terracotta and sometimes cast in bronze. 'The Machine Minders' (mixed media, 1956; Tate collection), one of her largest free-standing groups, portrayed two men working at the Coates ink factory in St Mary Cray. Koenig modelled her figures on individual workers and though she never talked to them in the factory, she would invite them to see the completed work. She was best-known for such series of reliefs as 'The Tentmakers' (bronze, terracotta, 1980). Either these followed the Renaissance model of figures in a stage-like illusory space, or much of the background was omitted, so that the figures were almost free-floating. 
Belying her small stature and fragility, Koenig had a strong personality, emphasized by her oversize spectacles. Insecure but driven by ambition, she could be aggressive and short-tempered, though she was highly sociable and loved parties. Close friends included the historian Eric Hobsbawm who, as jazz critic of the 'New Statesman & Nation', arranged for her to draw at a dance club in Oxford Street when she was commissioned in 1963 to make a dance trophy ('The Twisters') for Arnold Wesker's Centre 42. She had a pronounced sense of humour and a taste for gossip, good food, and luxury items. She enjoyed theatre and travel; she and Tuckman made long trips to southern Europe and visited the United States several times. 
Like many women artists of her generation, Koenig exhibited relatively little. Ferociously independent, she avoided professional groups and disliked the commercial art world, though Eric Estorick's Grosvenor Gallery, which she joined in 1963, did much to promote her work. The high point of her exhibiting career was an Arts Council retrospective at the Serpentine Gallery, London, in 1986, with a simultaneous exhibition of smaller works at Agi Katz's Boundary Gallery in north London. It was there that her memorial exhibition was held in April 1994. Virtually throughout her career, Koenig's work was unfashionable. Her small, narrative, profoundly socialist pieces defied the critical focus on very large abstract sculpture. Nevertheless the commissions, including portraits, that punctuated her career indicated that she was never entirely overlooked. Among the most memorable were 'Crucifixion' (terracotta, 1961) for St John's, Earlsfield, arranged by Nevile Wallis, 'The Observer''s art critic, and the 'Blind School' series (bronze, terracotta, 1985-6) made at Dalton House School for the Blind, Sevenoaks, Kent, in which she recorded the school's many activities. Her last work was a relief based on children at a local sports centre in north London. She died of chronic bronchitis and emphysema on 15 October 1993 at University College Hospital, Camden, London, and was cremated at Golders Green. She was survived by her husband and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 52212


Pecche, John (d. 1380), merchant and mayor of London, may have been the son of Bartholomew Pecche of London. Variously described as a fishmonger and draper, and dealing in wine and cloth, Pecche became very wealthy through his mercantile activities in London. He supplied drapery to the king's wardrobe, held the monopoly for sweet wine sales in London from 1373 to 1376, and had business dealings with the merchants of the Bardi family of Florence and the merchants of Lucca. He traded abroad, and also travelled overseas on pilgrimage in 1350 and again in 1367 to Rome. Pecche was a strong family man, who sought gentry status for his family in the countryside by purchasing property outside London from the 1350s onwards. The property which would become the family home for some 200 years was the manor of Lullingstone, Kent, which he purchased in 1360 from John Ruxley, grandson of Gregory of Ruxley, mayor of London during the reign of Edward I. At the time of his death he held land in Kent, Surrey, Middlesex, Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, Essex, Buckinghamshire, and London. His son and heir, William, was brought up as a member of the gentry, trained in the profession of arms, and lived at Lullingstone, not in London. 
By the 1350s Pecche was an established member of the London merchant community and city patriciate. He was alderman of Walbrook ward from 1349 to 1376, sheriff in 1352, and mayor in 1361. In 1351 he was appointed by the city government to raise 20,000 marks from London for the French war. He advised the king at merchant assemblies in 1356 and 1358, represented the city in parliament in 1361, 1369, 1371, and 1372, and in 1370 was a city representative at a royal council. Pecche provided the crown with financial support by contributing to loans supplied by the city, as in 1340, 1346, and 1371; by making a number of personal loans to the exchequer in the 1350s, ranging from $20 to $100; and by acting with Richard Lyons in raising loans for the king from the London money market in the 1360s and 1370s. Pecche also held a number of royal appointments, notably as commissioner of the peace against a robber gang operating in the woods around London in 1353, while in 1358 he was appointed to inquire into the nature and value of the London property of the Augustinian friars, and in 1366 into that of Giovanni de la Mare, merchant of Genoa, who had fled from the realm in debt to the crown. He was commissioner of array in London, Kent, and Essex for men-at-arms and archers in 1358, and for mariners in 1360. 
In 1376, however, Pecche was one of those Londoners impeached by the Good Parliament for financial corruption. This centred on his involvement with Richard Lyons and Adam Bury, London merchants and citizens, in the sweet wine monopoly of the city granted him by the crown in November 1373. Under the monopoly only three London taverns were permitted to sell sweet wines, and all of these had been leased from the city by Lyons during Bury's mayoralty in 1365. And when Pecche obtained the monopoly in 1373, Bury was again mayor. This association of Pecche, Lyons, and Bury came under scrutiny in the Good Parliament and all three were found guilty on various corruption charges; Pecche was found guilty of exploiting the monopoly and deprived of his aldermanic rank and freedom of the city. The judgment was reversed in February 1377 and he was pardoned by the crown in April; but he was never restored either to office or to favour in London. However, the impeachment of Pecche, Lyons, and Bury caused divisions within the city which subsequently led to a brief period of constitutional experiment. 
John Pecche married twice. His first wife was Ellen, with whom he had a son, William, and two daughters, Katherine and Philippa. There may also have been another son, John, who was dead by 1360. William Pecche, who became a member of the Grocers' Company, had been knighted by May 1380, and in September 1380 married Joan, daughter of John Hadley, a grocer and alderman of London. Katherine Pecche married Thomas Holbeche, a draper who was a business partner of her father's, some time before 1347; when she died in 1349, her children, Alice and William, were entrusted to the guardianship of their grandfather, but both were dead by 1365. Philippa Pecche married her father's ward, John Constantyn, but the marriage was annulled in 1371. When John Constantyn died in 1379, their son, another John, was also placed in John Pecche's guardianship. John Pecche made his will on his deathbed, on 27 May 1380, and was buried in the parish church at Lullingstone. He was survived by his second wife, Mary, who afterwards married Sir William Moigne, a Huntingdonshire landowner. 


@@@@@


doc= 52213


Picard, Henry (d. 1361), merchant and mayor of London, was descended from a family of Picardy merchants settled in London possibly since the late thirteenth century. A vintner, royal financier, and shipowner, Picard dealt in wine, wool, cloth, and malt, and established a substantial overseas trade. He supplied the king's wardrobe and was closely involved with alien merchants resident in London, dealing with merchants of the Hanse of Germany, the town of Dordrecht, and the city of Florence. Trading overseas was not without its difficulties. In 1350-1 the mayor and aldermen of London protested on Picard's behalf to Edward III and the authorities of Florence concerning the illegal seizure of his goods during a time of political tension. Again, in 1359, the mayor and aldermen wrote to the town authorities at Dordrecht demanding the release of a ship owned by Picard and Thomas Nottingham, mercer and London citizen, that had been seized in payment of an alleged debt disowned by Picard and Nottingham. 
Picard had property interests in London and Calais. Thanks to his marriage to Margaret, daughter of Thomas Gisors, pepperer, and granddaughter of John (III) Gisors (died 1351), twice mayor of London, he inherited all the property belonging to John Gisors in the parish of St Martin Vintry, including Gisors's main residence called The Vintry, and the rent of 100 marks charged on Gisors Hall in the parish of St Mildred, Bread Street, which later became known as Gerard's Hall. In the will of John Pulteney (died 1349) Picard was left the right of first refusal on the purchase of Coldharbour Mansion in Vintry ward. It was in this mansion that Picard's legendary entertainment of the five kings -- Edward III of England, Jean I of France, David of Scotland, Waldemar of Denmark, and Peter of Cyprus -- took place. This famous event, variously dated by Stow to 1357 and 1363, is most likely to have occurred in the former year, when Picard was mayor of London and a mayor crown financier, when Edward III was not on campaign, and when David of Scotland and the French king were prisoners in England awaiting ransom. Stow's account involved the kings of England, France, Scotland, and Cyprus only. The king of Denmark and other nobles who attended were later additions to the story by Joshua Barnes, in his 'History of Edward III' of 1688. In memory of this feast the tradition was established that the toast of the Vintners' Company be followed by five cheers -- a tradition still maintained in the late twentieth century. 
Picard was alderman of Bishopsgate ward from 1348 to 1361, sheriff in 1349, and mayor in 1357. He represented the city at royal councils and merchant assemblies in 1349, 1351, 1356, and 1358. A very wealthy man who provided the exchequer with no less than fifty-eight loans, ranging from a few hundred pounds to $13,333 6's'. 8died, Picard supplied many of these sums alone, but the more substantial loans were made in collaboration with other merchants, both English and foreign. In 1346 he also contributed to a city loan to the king. Picard regularly acted as a middleman between the crown and the alien merchants resident in London when they lent money to the king, and he also acted as guarantor. In January 1346 he was involved in the negotiations between the crown and the merchants of London and Bruges when the crown of England was pledged as security for a loan of $13,333 6's'. 8died Undoubtedly his financial support to the crown gave him influence, for example when in November 1360 he obtained a royal pardon for Gilbert Wendlinburgh, a German merchant and one of Picard's business partners, for various offences, including the rape of Marguerite, wife of Jacques de Navarre. He held a number of royal appointments, including collector of the cloth custom throughout the realm in 1350, king's butler from 1350 to 1359, clerk of recognizances in London from 1356 until his death, and commissioner of array in London, Kent, and Essex in 1360. In May 1358 he was granted an annual pension of $50 for life from the customs revenue of London. He acted as an executor with Adam Fraunceys, mercer and mayor of London, of the will of Henry Causton, mercer. 
Henry Picard died before 3 July 1361, but his will was not enrolled until July 1365. In his will he left property to a John Picard senior and a John Picard junior, possibly his sons. One son, John, predeceased him. Both John Picard senior and John Picard junior were dead by 1368 when the London letter-books describe William Picard, a kinsman, as Henry Picard's heir. 


@@@@@


doc= 52214


Pyel, John (c.1315-1382), mayor of London, was probably born in Irthlingborough, Northamptonshire, in the second decade of the fourteenth century. He was descended from a family of bondsmen of Peterborough Abbey, and his father, also John, was a minor landholder in the area. His younger brother, Henry, was educated at Oxford and went on to a career in the church, becoming archdeacon of Northampton. John the younger, however, was sent to London to be apprenticed to trade. He was evidently successful, and his first appearance in the records, in 1345, shows him lending the sum of $40. The following year he was a commissioner appointed to sell off or lease the property of non-resident alien clergy in the diocese of London, for whose profits he was to account to the king. 
Pyel was a supporter of the syndicate of customs farmers headed by Walter Chiriton, which ultimately collapsed in 1349, and Pyel's involvement in questionable practices before the collapse led to his trial and imprisonment for debt. He was bailed by his friends and associates, John Wesenham and Adam Fraunceys, in the spring of 1350, and shortly afterwards appears to have undertaken some diplomatic service for the king in Spain. Besides dealing in wool Pyel seems to have been specifically concerned with trade in the east midlands. He was connected with John Garlekmongere, member of a prominent mercantile family of Northampton, and in 1370 was appointed to a commission which had been established to inquire into the construction of new mills and ponds which were blocking the passage of merchandise along the River Ouse between Huntingdon and St Ives. In the same year he was granted a licence to buy and ship cereals from the east midlands and Sussex to London. 
Pyel was also a financier, but apparently not on the same scale as some of his contemporaries. He lent to religious houses, fellow Londoners, and the rural gentry, but only much later in his career to the crown. Many of his loans to the gentry, especially those living in Northamptonshire, were made with the intention of, or at least in the hope of, acquiring land. Some landholders, like Sir Thomas Wake of Blisworth, became indebted at the time of the Calais expedition of 1346-7, when large sums had to be spent on equipment for the campaign. Sir Thomas died while on service, and his manor of Cransley was evidently insufficient to redeem his debts, for it passed to Pyel on the eve of the black death in July 1348. Cransley was the first substantial estate in Northamptonshire which Pyel obtained, and its acquisition may well have been fortuitous. His other lands, principally the two fees of Irthlingborough and the manors of Sudborough, Cranford, and Woodford, were acquired during the following two decades from landlords who found themselves impoverished in the aftermath of the black death, or at least unable to keep up estates in which they themselves were not resident. By 1370 Pyel had carved out for himself a coherent landed estate in Northamptonshire centred on Irthlingborough, his birthplace. 
It was about this date that Pyel turned his attention back to London. Despite his relative affluence and status he had held no major office in the city. He had been a common councilman and MP in 1361, but it was not until 1369 that he was elected alderman of Castle Baynard and sheriff, and he became mayor in 1372. He bought a house in Broad Street from Adam Fraunceys in 1374. His connection with the court party also dates from this period. He was involved in diplomatic activities in Flanders between 1371 and 1375, and was associated with John of Gaunt. In 1372 and 1374 he made two large loans to the crown, the second of them with Richard Lyons, a London merchant with close court connections. This loan of 20,000 marks was repaid as $20,000, a profit to the creditors of 10,000 marks, or 50 per cent interest. During the Good Parliament it was cited as an example of the corruption of Lyons, who with other members of the court faction was being impeached by the Commons. Pyel, who by foresight or good fortune was sitting in this parliament, successfully managed to distance himself from Lyons and so escaped censure. Nevertheless he was forced to resign his aldermanry in 1376 under the new regulations governing the election of aldermen in London, and although re-elected in 1378, he apparently left the city shortly afterwards and retired to Irthlingborough. In his will, dated 1379, he gave orders for a college to be established at St Peter's Church in Irthlingborough (where he was later buried), an act of piety which his widow successfully completed. He died in 1382 and was survived by his wife, Joan (died 1412), and his second son, Nicholas (died 1406). 


@@@@@


doc= 52215


Radford, Nicholas (d. 1455), lawyer, was the son of Robert Radford of Okeford, Devon. Radford first appeared on the scene in 1420 when he stood as surety for the lessees of two Somerset manors, was appointed a feoffee for a London goldsmith, and attended the shire elections at Exeter Castle. In 1421 he was elected MP for Lyme Regis; his only other election to parliament was in 1435 for the county of Devon. A justice of the peace in Devon from 1424 until his death, Radford also served as escheator of Devon and Cornwall in 1435-6, and on numerous royal commissions of inquiry in Devon, Cornwall, Somerset, and Wiltshire. Married by 1431, he became a wealthy man and purchased lands in Devon at Grantland, North Yeo, Babbadon, and Cheriton Fitzpaine along with the manors of Cadeleigh, Poughill, and Ford. At his death he had goods worth well over $1337 and a minimum of $780 in cash. 
Described at his death as 'one of the most notable and famous' apprentices-at-law (Radford, 'Nicholas Radford', 274), Radford's legal skill and reputation are evident in his wide client base. He was retained by several Devon boroughs, especially Exeter which he served in the office of city recorder from 1442 until his death, at a salary of $3 per annum plus other fees. During the mayoralty of John Shillingford in 1447-50 Radford was Exeter's chief representative in London, and its legal adviser in a suit brought against the city by the dean and chapter of Exeter Cathedral and by Edmund Lacy, bishop of Exeter, over their jurisdictional claims in Exeter. Many prominent members of the gentry, especially in Devon, also sought Radford's legal advice. Cardinal Henry Beaufort, John Holland, earl of Huntingdon, Humphrey Stafford, earl of Stafford, the duchy of Lancaster, members of the Carew family, and the Courtenay earls of Devon were among his more notable clients. 
Radford's contact with the Courtenays began in 1423, when he was appointed joint steward of the estates of the earldom of Devon until the heir, Thomas Courtenay (died 1458), came of age 'c'.1435. Radford became close enough to the family to act as godfather to the earl's second son, Henry. Radford's relations with the Courtenays later soured, however, as he came more and more to be associated with Sir William Bonville (died 1461), Lord Bonville from 1449, a Devon landowner who, with the support of William de la Pole, earl of Suffolk (died 1450), from the 1430s contested the pre-eminence in south-west England hitherto enjoyed by the earls of Devon. An increasingly bitter struggle led to serious disorders, and Bonville's success in avoiding their consequences probably owed much to Radford's counsel. 
Whether the earl authorized the killing of Radford is uncertain, but he certainly sheltered the murderers and participated in the ensuing cover-up. The murder and subsequent events are related in several contemporary accounts. Late on the night of 23 October 1455, Sir Thomas Courtenay (died 1461), the eldest son of Earl Thomas, arrived at Radford's manor house in Upcott Barton (about 11 miles north of Exeter) at the head of an armed band of some ninety men. Woken by the noise, Radford agreed to come down and talk only after Sir Thomas had promised as a knight and gentleman that no harm would come to him or his goods. But once inside the house Courtenay distracted Radford while his men broke open Radford's coffers and stole valuable goods worth 1000 marks along with a good deal of cash; they even rolled Radford's invalid wife, Thomasina, out of her bed to take the very sheets on which she lay to bundle up some of their loot. Courtenay then lured Radford out of the house by telling him that the earl wished to see him; only a stone's throw away, however, Courtenay rode off saying 'Farewell, Radford' and leaving behind several followers who then stabbed Radford to death. 
The Courtenays' injuries against Radford did not stop there. Four days later Henry Courtenay, the earl's second son and Radford's godson, came to the chapel at Upcott where Radford's body lay, and held a farcical coroner's inquest which declared Radford a suicide. Henry Courtenay then ordered servants to bear Radford's body to the nearby churchyard of Cheriton Fitzpaine, where Courtenay's men cast the naked corpse into a pit and threw stones Radford had purchased for his own grave onto the body, crushing it beyond recognition. A few days later on 1 November the earl and his two sons marched at the head of some 1000 armed men from Tiverton to Exeter where they seized the gates of the city, set their own watch, and quartered in the city until 21 December. On 22 November the earl compelled the dean and treasurer of Exeter Cathedral to hand over goods worth $600, and $700 in money, which Radford had deposited with them. Two days later over a hundred of the earl's followers raided a house formerly belonging to Radford in Exeter and carried away more valuable plate, jewels, and money. Whether these actions of the Courtenays indicate that financial gain had been a motive for Radford's murder, or only show that they needed such plunder to pay their followers, is unclear. 
News of Radford's murder and of the Courtenays' subsequent actions quickly reached London where they gave considerable strength to a petition to the lords by a group of MPs that Richard, duke of York, should be appointed protector of the realm for a second time. York duly became protector, but the Courtenays and the three murderers nevertheless eventually secured royal pardons for their actions, in spite of the complaints of Radford's heir and cousin, John Radford. 


@@@@@


doc= 52216


Refham, Sir Richer (c.1260-1328), merchant and mayor of London, was the son of Ralph of Refham, vintner, and probably came from Reepham, a centre of the cloth-producing area of Norfolk, although the name was common in the county; he was a relative of a namesake who was a taverner of London. His alternative name Le Botoner suggests he was apprenticed to one of the prosperous Botoners, mercers of London. By 1294 Refham is known to have been buying large amounts of mercery from the Bellardi of Lucca and from Parisian merchants; the frequency of bonds to him may suggest he was a moneylender as well as a supplier to many lesser retailers. He was probably shipping wool from an early date, as he acted as collector of the wool custom from 14 May 1303 to 30 November 1306 (as well as collector of the new custom from 10 February 1303 to 30 November 1306). He was married by 1294 to Joan, the sister of Walter Furner; they had two sons: John, his heir and the only son mentioned in his will, for whom he arranged a prestigious marriage in 1307 to Margaret, daughter of Sir John Blund (mayor 1301-7), and Roger. His own sister, Joan, married another successful mercer, Robert Callere. 
Elected alderman and sheriff in 1298, Refham lost his aldermanry in 1300 after a quarrel with Henry le Waleys (died 1302); but he was re-elected in 1302 and was mayor 1310-11. He immediately had a collection of the city's customs read to an assembly of citizens, and gained support for his seeking the king's confirmation of the city's liberties; he endorsed the regulations of at least five guilds during his term; he put down nuisances and proceeded energetically against disturbers of the peace. His term coincided with the crisis between the ordainers and Edward II. The sparse evidence for the political activities of Londoners is hard to interpret, but as mayor Refham arrested the Frescobaldi on behalf of the ordainers, and subsequently released them at the order of the king. More critical for his civic survival, according to Andrew Horn's brief account, was his enforcement of the law in the matter of the estate of the heir of a mercer, Peter of Sparham, whose widow married William Hackford, one of the dilatory sureties arrested by Refham. Hackford, a politically active mercer who supported the ordainers, was able to sway his fellow mercers against Refham, ensuring that he did not achieve a second mayoralty and lost his aldermanry soon after (1312). 
Given Refham's exit from civic office at this time, it seems sensible to identify him with the Richer Refham who was active from 1315 to 1323 on royal commissions concerning such matters as shipwrecked merchandise, illegal trade in victuals to Scotland, and currency, in London, Southwark, and Norfolk (where he had lands), and who was sheriff of Norfolk, 1314-15. The full extent of his usefulness to Edward I and Edward II is not known: but it is on record that he was collector of the customs; that he contributed $100 of the city's 1000 marks for the war with Scotland in March 1311; that he administered the templars' property in London from December 1311 and the temporalities of the bishopric of London, 1316-17; and that he stood surety for the king's horse-dealer when the latter was admitted to the city's freedom during his mayoralty; between 1309 and 1314 he regularly described himself in essoins as in the king's service. He was knighted before October 1317, an honour given to few London merchants. He remained a powerful figure in the city despite his lack of office, not least because of his property there, and he was one of several wealthy citizens unsuccessfully attacked during the eyre of 1321. 
Refham was conspicuously successful, but his uncompromising personality made him many enemies. Andrew Horn described him as 'austere and swift to administer justice, sparing no one' (Stubbs, 175-6). This is borne out by the many complaints against him as collector of the new custom that were tried before the exchequer, though he was acquitted of any fraud. Other stories give a similar impression of a harshly just man: he complained of his fellow sheriff's allegation that Refham had defrauded him of 200 marks of their joint profits from office -- consequently the accusation was withdrawn and he was offered a cask of wine in propitiation. It is likely that it was Richer rather than his fellow sheriff who insisted on prosecuting no less a person than Henry le Waleys for 50 marks due to their office. 
Refham accumulated lands and rents in at least twenty-seven London parishes (including substantial holdings in and near the Mercery, and a great wharf in the Vintry which he sold in 1309) and Southwark, the manor of Stanford Rivers and land at Danbury and Little Baddow, Essex (for his heir, John), and the manors of Aylmerton and Cockthorpe in Norfolk. He died between 17 August and 17 October 1328. Refham's widow, Joan, died in 1343, and his eldest son, John, and grandson, also John, by 1352; much of his estate then passed via his second son, Roger, and great-granddaughter to Sir Adam Fraunceys (died 1375) and the Charltons of Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 52217


Romeyn, Thomas (d. 1313), merchant and mayor of London, was a man of unknown and apparently alien origins, remarkable for the ease with which he entered and rose within London's governing mercantile class. Another man called Romain, a citizen of Lucca, appears in London in 1305, but it is not known whether Thomas was a native or Italian-born. He became a citizen before 1280, was elected sheriff in 1290, alderman in 1294, and mayor in 1309. His career shows that London was not governed by such a closed 'patriciate' of established families as some historians have claimed, before Edward I forced the city in 1285 to admit aliens of good repute to the citizenship. Rather it demonstrates that Londoners were ready, on certain conditions, to welcome the alien merchants who were so important to the city's growing trade. They had particular reason to do this from 1280 onwards, when Romeyn first appears in the records as a citizen and pepperer purchasing a shop in the pepperers' trading quarter of Sopers Lane. Flemish merchants were that year expelled from England, and the Italians who took their place as the chief wool exporters began increasing their imports of spices and other luxuries in order to pay for their wool. Only London was capable of providing a rich enough market for these imports and its citizens became their chief distributors to the provinces. By this means London was able to increase its trade at the expense of the east-coast ports and the fairs which had been used by the Flemings. Hence such men as 'le Roman', as his name is once spelt, and his Provencal associates were welcomed by London's pepperers, even though they competed in their retail and distributive trade. 
Romeyn sold spices in London to members of the nobility, such as Bogo de Clare (died 1294), and to Westminster Abbey, which on various occasions owed him substantial sums, not only for spices, but also for cloth and furs. He also supplied Durham, and probably other provincial abbeys, and no doubt bought wool from them in return to sell to alien merchants in London, although there is no evidence that he himself exported it. He ran a hostel for alien merchants in St Mary Aldermary's parish, where he lived, and later he built a chapel dedicated to St Thomas in the parish church. He invested steadily in shops and houses in London and its environs, and in 1292 he was one of the top taxpayers in the city. In the previous year he served as sheriff with the pepperer, William Layer, and they antagonized London's brewers by their rigour in fining recalcitrant taxpayers. Their election as aldermen during that decade symbolized the economic and political advancement of the pepperers, which had been achieved through their co-operation with the Italians and Provencals who imported their goods and gave them credit. However, other Londoners resented the aliens' advancement, and as the economy slumped in the later 1290s because of the king's export of coin to finance his French war, the aldermen had to deal with violent protests and verbal abuse; Romeyn and his wife, Julia or Juliana, suffered from one such attack, by an armourer, in their house in 1298. 
Romeyn's greatest service to London was his skilful leadership in the political crisis which dominated his mayoralty in 1309-10. The barons' opposition to Edward II's favourite, Piers Gaveston, was on the point of bringing the kingdom to civil war, in which both sides strove to command the economic and strategic advantages of London. The king put pressure on the city in November 1309 to hand over the profits of the weighing beams to his favourites. Romeyn resisted these demands, but, fearful that the king would take over the city's government, he strove to avoid any excuse for royal interference. He redressed the grievances of alien merchants over the Londoners' manner of weighing, and preserved order in the city in a harsh winter when food was very short. He thus held the rival parties in check until the ordainers had established their power over the royal government. Under his leadership the Londoners then won from the ordainers the great concession of annulling the 'Carta mercatoria' of 1303, by which Edward I had granted the aliens special liberties in return for higher taxes. 
Romeyn died on 25 March 1313, bequeathing much of his property to his wife, and on her death to the chantries he had established in several churches including St Mary Aldermary and St Thomas the Apostle, in churches at Clapham and Lambeth where he held land, and at Waltham. Two of his daughters were nuns at Holywell, one married a London shoemaker, and the fourth, Roesia (Rose) Burford, married Romeyn's fellow pepperer, John Burford, a rich wool exporter who was also to be an alderman. Romeyn's wife, whom he had married by 1285, died in 1326. They had no surviving male issue. 


@@@@@


doc= 52218


Servat, William (d. 1318/19), merchant, was a native of Cahors in southern France; he was the last, and perhaps the wealthiest, of the prominent merchants from that city to engage in English trade and finance. He chose London as the base from which to operate a business extending from Montpellier to Bergen and with some connection to Paris. He was probably one of a group of 'men of Bordeaux' at Southampton in 1272, and was occasionally described as a merchant of Gascony. From 1273 onwards he was often named as a merchant of London, of which he had become a citizen by 1281. To the Sienese he was 'a Provencal dwelling in London' (Bigwood, 1, no. 28). 
The supply of Gascon wine to the north was one source of Servat's prosperity and, like other merchants from Cahors and its region, he also transmitted spices and silk obtained in Provence. In Britain the main axis of his trade was along the east coast, where he was a major exporter of wool to Flanders, above all through Boston, but also through Hull and London. With other Cahorsins he contracted to manage the wool crop of Pipewell Abbey, Northamptonshire, from 1288 onwards. Wool deals perhaps underlay his relations with leading clergymen and others, but he also provided purely financial services. His interests in shipping enabled him to organize an extensive distributive trade from London. In 1305, for example, he chartered a ship to take wine from London to Aberdeen, returning with coal from Newcastle to London or Southampton. North Sea trade drew him into diplomacy: he delivered the king's loan (supplied by his Riccardi bankers) to the king of Norway's agent at Yarmouth in 1286, and accompanied the bishop of Durham's missions to Norway in 1290 (when he provided the ship) and in 1294. He sold wine and sugar to Durham Priory. Perhaps associated with the coinage in 1281, he ran the bishop of Durham's mint in 1300-02. In London he was a dealer in bonds, and supplied spices to a pepperer and silk to a tailor; a dyer and a Cheapside vintner were heavily in his debt. 
Servat was already lending to the king by 1283, and helped finance the defence of Gascony after the fall of the Riccardi in 1294. By 1302 he had a lucrative contract to supply the royal wardrobe with spices, linen, cloth, and furs, and in that year, with partners from Montpellier and Provence, met almost a quarter of the wardrobe's demand for spices. In 1302-3 Flemish pirates in the channel seized his twelve-year-old son and a cargo of spices destined for the wardrobe, both in the care of his servant returning from Provence, and then seized another of his cargoes that was bound for Scotland. In 1303/4 Servat supplied wax to the wardrobe and contracted to supply 300 tuns of wine. In 1309 he agreed to supply 300 quintals of wax annually for five years, for which in 1312 an equivalent value of cloth was substituted. In 1311-12 he helped organize money and soldiers in London for the Scottish campaign, and in 1313 again supplied wine to the king. These debts were to be repaid out of the customs receipts at Marmande, in Gascony, and at several English provincial ports. At dates between 1305 and 1315 he had joint charge of the London customs and other royal interests in the city. 
These years marked the peak of Servat's career. In or shortly before 1302 he moved from Cordwainer ward to take over the former headquarters of the Riccardi in Bucklersbury, the heart of London's financial district. In 1305 he obtained licence to crenellate the house and to build a stone tower above its gateway, a notable symbol of success. Alderman for Walbrook from 1308 until his death, he represented the city in parliament in 1309 and 1313. The scale of Servat's dealings with the crown, however, did not match that of the leading Italians with whom he sometimes did business. Eventually he was eclipsed by Edward II's ambitious Genoese banker, Antonio Pessagno, who early in 1313 was rumoured to have purchased his tower; the deal was in fact completed by 1315. In the summer of that year, which perhaps marked Servat's effective retirement from business, the king's outstanding debts to him amounted to $2246. Almost half that sum had been contracted under Edward I, and in December 1318 a third of it was still due. William Servat died in London between 7 December 1318 and 18 January 1319. 
Servat had conducted his business through a kaleidoscopic network of servants, attorneys, merchants retained on contract, and partners. Those who traded while lodging at his London houses may also have been commercial associates. His connections with some of these individuals lasted for three or four decades. He spent his last years back in Cordwainer ward, at a house in a neighbourhood favoured by pepperers and Gascon wine merchants. There his chaplain received his income from the customs, traded in spices on his behalf, and tried to defraud him. Neither his wife, identified as Alice or (Alison) in 1302 and for whom a diamond ring had been purchased in 1305, nor his son is recorded as having been still with him. Despite his civic office, Servat seems to have identified himself primarily as the London-based member of a loose group of Gascon and Provencal partners for which, as a citizen of London, he provided crucial services. Thus his fortune, if he left one, may have been repatriated to Gascony, where the Servat family (its relationship to William is not proven) was soon to be prominent in the Agenais. In London his one memorial was 'Servat's tower', still renowned 250 years after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 52219


Leakey, Louis Seymour Bazett (1903-1972), archaeologist and palaeoanthropologist, was born on 7 August 1903 at Kabete mission station, near Nairobi, Kenya, the third of the four children of Canon Henry (Harry) Leakey (died 1940) and his wife, Mary (known as May) Bazett (died 1948), one of thirteen children of Colonel Bazett, who had retired to Reading after serving in the Indian army. Both his parents were missionaries with the Church Missionary Society working among the Kikuyu people in the Kenyan highlands. 
Louis (pronounced Lewis) Leakey spent most of the first sixteen years of his life at Kabete, and was educated initially by governesses and later by his father. His playmates were Kikuyu boys and he was initiated into the Kikuyu tribe along with his Kikuyu peer group. He spoke Kikuyu fluently and in the first volume of his autobiography, 'White African' (1937), wrote that 'in language and in mental outlook I was more Kikuyu than English, and it never occurred to me to act other than as a Kikuyu' (p. 32), also commenting that all his life he was to 'think and even dream' in Kikuyu ('National Geographic', Feb 1965, 200). 
During these early years Leakey developed a passion for everything to do with Africa, which was to last all his life. He was also inspired by a gift of an adventure story about Stone Age Britain and in 1916 decided to become an archaeologist. In 1919 he was sent to school at Weymouth College, and in 1922 was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge. He initially read for the modern language tripos, and achieved a first in French and Kikuyu. In 1923 kicks to his head during a rugby game left him with post-traumatic epilepsy. The advised rest period enabled him to initiate his fossil-hunting career by joining the British Museum east African expedition to Tanganyika to collect dinosaur fossils in 1924. In 1925 he returned to Cambridge to read the archaeology and anthropology tripos, with encouragement from his archaeology tutor, M. C. Burkitt, and, particularly, his anthropology tutor, A. C. Haddon. He gained a first in 1926 and was awarded grants which enabled him to organize his first east African archaeological expedition. 
Between 1926 and 1935 Leakey led four such expeditions to east Africa, which established the sequence of early cultures in Kenya and northern Tanganyika and laid the foundations for subsequent archaeological and palaeontological research in the region. In 1930 he was awarded a PhD degree by Cambridge University. From 1929 to 1934 he held a fellowship at St John's College, Cambridge, and in 1936 was Munroe lecturer at Edinburgh University. During this time he revealed himself as an enthusiastic and inspiring teacher and learned to knap flint. 
Contrary to the beliefs of most other contemporary scientists, Leakey was convinced, and determined to show, that human beings originated in Africa rather than in Asia. He claimed that hominid fossils he had found in 1932 at Kanam and Kanjera, on the north-east shore of Lake Victoria, were the remains of ancient creatures that would prove the antiquity of human beings in Africa. However, reports to the Royal Society and the journal 'Nature' by Professor P. G. H. Boswell in 1935 showed that Leakey had made serious errors in his fieldwork and interpretation. Even if some were due to circumstances beyond his control, the ensuing scandal dealt his credibility and scientific career a severe blow. Leakey's claims for the age of the Kanam fossil were later widely accepted, but the Kanjera remains are thought to be considerably younger than he proposed. 
At this time Leakey was also the subject of censure in his personal life. In 1928 he had married Henrietta Wilfrida [Henrietta Wilfrida Leakey (1902-1993)], known as Frida, the third daughter of Henry Avern, a cork merchant from Reigate, Surrey. She attended the Sorbonne in Paris and, from 1921 to 1924, Newnham College, Cambridge, after which she was employed as a French teacher at Benenden School. A daughter, Priscilla Muthoni, was born in 1931, and a son, Colin Avern, in 1933. She assisted Leakey in his fieldwork, in sketching stone tools found during his expeditions, and at Olduvai Gorge in northern Tanganyika discovered a side gorge named FLK (for 'Frida Leakey Korongo' or Gorge), where important fossil discoveries would later be made. 
Frida Leakey was granted a divorce on the grounds of adultery in 1936, and did not remarry. She settled with their children in Girton, near Cambridge, and became involved in BBC broadcasts and community activities, founding in 1936 an infant welfare centre in Girton, and acting as chief billeting officer for London refugees in Girton during the Second World War. During the 1960s she was chairman of the Women's Institute in Cambridgeshire and occupied a seat on the county council as an independent. She died on 19 August 1993. 
Shortly after the divorce from Frida, Leakey, whose conduct was disapproved by family and colleagues, married, on 24 December 1936, Mary Douglas Nicol (1913-1996) ['see 'Leakey, Mary Douglas], daughter of Erskine Nicol, artist, and his wife, Cecilia. Mary was to become closely involved in his work and recognized as an archaeologist in her own right. There were three sons of this second marriage, Jonathan Harry Erskine ('b'. 1940), Richard Erskine ('b'. 1944), and Philip ('b'. 1949). A daughter, Deborah, was born and died in 1943 when three months old. Richard was to follow in his father's footsteps and make many spectacular fossil hominid discoveries, as well as to serve as a member of the Kenyan parliament and director of Kenya wildlife services. Although often challenged by Richard, just four days before his death Leakey was delighted to see a roughly 2 million-year-old hominid fossil found by Richard, which vindicated his belief that large-brained human ancestors lived in Africa some 2 million years ago. 
From 1941 Leakey served as honorary curator, and from 1945 to 1961 as curator, of the Coryndon Memorial Museum (now the National Museums of Kenya) in Nairobi. In 1962 he established the Centre for Prehistory and Palaeontology under the trustees of the National Museums of Kenya, and served as its honorary director until 1972, when it was transferred to the National Museums of Kenya. Leakey's work was conducted with the support of many foundations, of which the National Geographical Society of Washington became the most important. 
Important discoveries during the 1940s included a remarkable scatter of handaxes at Olorgesailie, and remains of 'Proconsul', a Miocene ape considered a key to understanding the evolutionary split between monkeys and apes. During this period Leakey founded the Pan-African Congress on Prehistory and Quaternary Studies, of which he was secretary-general from 1947 to 1951 and president from 1955 to 1959. The first of its four-yearly meetings was held in Nairobi in 1947. 
But the work that will forever be associated with Leakey is that at Olduvai Gorge. In 1959, at a site in the Frida Leakey Korongo (FLK), Mary found the skull of a 1.8 million-year-old australopithecine, which Leakey named 'Zinjanthropus boisei', affectionately called Dear Boy. A film of the excavation of 'Zinj' reached a wide television audience, and the Leakeys became celebrities. Although Leakey was initially disappointed that the skull was of an australopithecine rather than an early human or 'Homo', in her autobiography 'Disclosing the Past' (1984) Mary notes that 'There was probably no one in the world better able than Louis to exploit the publicity value, and hence the fund-raising potential, of a find like Zinj' (p. 122), welcome news to the ever cash-strapped Leakeys. 
Important discoveries of hominid and animal fossils as well as early stone tools continued to be made at Olduvai throughout the following years at such a rate that colleagues referred to 'Leakey's luck'. In 1960, at Olduvai, the Leakeys' son Jonathan discovered the 1.75 million-year-old remains of a creature later named 'Homo habilis'. At the time, this creature was the oldest known fossil of the human genus, 'Homo', and is presumed to have used the first known stone tool technology, which Leakey named the Oldowan culture. 
While Mary directed excavations at Olduvai, Leakey was responsible for fund-raising and was a popular public speaker, described by a contemporary, Mary Smith, as a 'bear of a man' (Morell, 210), with a shock of white hair, a spring in his walk, and a gleam in his eye. 
Although Leakey was not the first to find early hominids in Africa, and was often criticized for being a headline-seeker rather than a cautious scientist, it was the discoveries at Olduvai Gorge and the publicity orchestrated by Leakey that firmly established Africa as the place where humans originated. It also led to the development of palaeoanthropology as a science, as well as an enormous ongoing research effort in east Africa, on which a great deal of current knowledge of human evolution is based. 
Phillip Tobias noted that 'Three abiding impressions of Dr Leakey are of his singular energy, his immense enthusiasm and his vision... He sparkled with an effervescent enthusiasm with which he was able to infect others' (p. 6). He became fascinated with primate evolution and launched the careers of Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and Birute Galdikas, who respectively undertook ground-breaking studies of chimpanzees, gorillas, and orang-utans. 
However, sometimes Leakey expressed his views violently, was intolerant of criticism, and was carried to extremes by his convictions. In the late 1960s his unfounded belief that there was evidence for early human beings at Calico hills in California was regarded by many as his ultimate folly. It resulted in serious disagreement with and virtual separation from Mary, who was also greatly upset by his womanizing and retinue of young female protegees. 
Leakey's talents and pursuits were wide-ranging. From 1937 to 1939 he undertook a detailed investigation of Kikuyu customs ('The Southern Kikuyu', published posthumously, 1977). During the Second World War he was an intelligence officer and handwriting expert in charge of a special branch of the Nairobi criminal investigation department. He also loved animals and served the Kenya national parks, the East Africa Wildlife Society, and the East Africa and Uganda Natural History Society; he was a dog judge and president of the East Africa Kennel Club, and an authority on birds and tropical fish. 
Leakey took a keen interest in Kenyan politics, and after Kenyan independence in 1963 became a Kenyan citizen. In 1949 his warnings to the Kenyan governor about a secret Kikuyu society, known as the Mau Mau, which allegedly aimed at the violent overthrow of the colonial government, initially went unheeded. Although he considered that 'I am in so many ways a Kikuyu myself' (Leakey, 'Mau Mau and the Kikuyu', viii), and sympathized with their land grievances and distrust of the government, he regarded Mau Mau as an 'evil campaign' rather than a nationalistic movement. The ensuing period of terror brought Leakey death threats and fears for the safety of his family. Leakey was the court interpreter at the trial which convicted Jomo Kenyatta (elected the first president of an independent Kenya in 1964) and five others of organizing Mau Mau. 
During the last four years of his life he continued exhausting fund-raising lecture tours in America, despite his failing health. He suffered a fatal heart attack and died at St Stephen's Hospital, London, on 1 October 1972. He was buried on 4 October 1972 at Limuru in Kikuyu country near Nairobi. 
Leakey's contributions did not go unrecognized. Among the awards and honours showered upon him were the Viking Fund medal of the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research (1961-5), the Hubbard medal of the National Geographic Society, Washington (jointly with Mary Leakey, 1962), the Royal medal of the Royal Geographical Society of London (1964, an award he particularly valued), and the Haile Selassie award (1968), as well as honorary doctorates from the universities of Oxford (1953), California (1963), East Africa (1965), and Guelph (1969). 
The Louis Leakey Memorial Institute for African Prehistory (TILLMIAP) established in Nairobi after his death merged with the National Museums of Kenya in 1980. The L. S. B. Leakey Foundation for Research Related to Man's Origin, which was founded by Leakey's supporters in California in 1968 to fund his work, now known as the Leakey Foundation, solicits funds and awards grants for new research in all fields investigating human evolution. 


@@@@@


doc= 52220


John Bowles (1701?-1779). He was under twenty-one years old when his father, Thomas [i] Bowles, died in 1721 and is said to have been born in 1701. He was made free of the Joiners' Company by patrimony on 7 May 1723. By his father's will Thomas [ii] Bowles was obliged to pay him $500 at age twenty-one, twenty-three, or twenty-five and another $500 later. He had set up at Mercer's Hall in Cheapside by May 1725 and was still there in 1731, but had moved to the Black Horse, Cornhill, by February 1734. His first notable publication was 'Several Prospects of the most Noted Publick Buildings, in and about the City of London' (1724) and maps and topographical views remained a principal speciality of the firm. Beginning with 'A Catalogue of Maps, Prints, Books and Books of Maps' (1728), John Bowles issued successive printed catalogues of his stock, facilitating trade with merchants and provincial shopkeepers. By February 1753 he was in partnership with his son -- presumably Carington -- and the partnership persisted until Carington took over his uncle Thomas's business during 1763. John continued at the Black Horse, subsequently no. 13 Cornhill, until he died in 1779. He married Mary Carington and at his death had four surviving children, John, Carington, Mary, and Margaret. His considerable fortune was divided between his children but John's was to be paid in small allowances to avoid: 'his submitting again to be gulled preyed upon and exhausted by those Monsters in imposture cruelty and wickedness who have already drained him of an handsome ffortune and regardless of the Misery and ruin they bring upon him are ready to assail him entising with diabolic artifice and to bubble him out of any bequest I might bestow. (will, PROB 11/1056/335)' Most of John Bowles's stock of plates and prints passed after his death to Robert Wilkinson. 



@@@@@


doc= 52221


Sturmy, Robert (d. 1458), merchant, was probably a native of Bristol, but nothing is known of his parentage, though a brother, John is recorded. His wife, Ellen, to whom he was married before 1438, and who traded as feme sole, survived him and was still alive in 1466. They had no children. Sturmy served as bailiff in Bristol in 1442-3, as sheriff in 1451-2, and as mayor in 1453-4. His first entry into the records, however, concerns trade. Apparently acting as a factor for the Londoners John Nanskilly, draper, and Stephen Titmersh, mercer, he imported dyestuffs and oil into London in 1433. As an independent merchant, Sturmy initially concentrated his activities -- not atypically for a Bristol merchant -- on Ireland and Gascony. But later his horizons expanded: imports of dyestuffs, fruit, and paper to London and Southampton between 1447 and 1457 indicate contacts with Italy and Spain, and this is confirmed by his exporting wool to Pisa in 1456. As an extension of his commercial activities in the Mediterranean, Sturmy transported pilgrims to Jerusalem (1445) and Santiago de Compostela (1451). All these activities were dwarfed, however, by the expedition to the Mediterranean that Sturmy mounted in 1457-8. On 8 February 1457 he obtained a licence to export thither tin, lead, wool, and cloth, worth some $37,000, via Bristol and Weymouth, and his will, dated 27 June 1457, bore witness to his high hopes: it contained legacies of at least $173 12's'. but these were to more than double (to $372 8's'. 8died) if his three ships returned safely to port. 
Commercial enterprise on this scale was far beyond the powers of any one merchant, and Sturmy managed to persuade not only a number of London and Bristol merchants, but also John, Lord Stourton (died 1462), and Richard, duke of York (died 1460), to invest in his expedition. At first all went well: the ships called at Pisa in September 1457 and Naples in the autumn, but once they embarked on their return voyage, via Rhodes and Candia (Crete), they were attacked off Malta by the Genoese freebooter Giuliano Gattilusio on 10 June 1458. Sturmy was killed, but his partner, the Bristol merchant John Heyton, managed to escape, collect depositions from local authorities, and make his way back to England, where on 30 October 1458 he charged the Genoese merchants in England with collusion in the attack. The ensuing council trial confirmed the dimensions of the expedition, and also demonstrated Sturmy's real purpose. Of the total of $18,166 13's'. 4died in damages claimed, sweet eastern Mediterranean wines, Turkish carpets, oriental fine cloth -- velvet, damask, satin -- and spices ranked prominently, but Sturmy's true objective is revealed by the claim for the loss of 152 tons of alum worth $3040. Europe's supplies of alum, a mordant required to fix dyes in fine cloth, had been cut off for the time being by the Turkish conquest of Asia Minor in 1453 and prices had soared. The monopoly of the alum trade previously enjoyed by the Genoese 'maona' of Chios (a Genoa-based company which had gained control of the administration of the island) was inevitably endangered, and Bristol and London merchants, heavily committed to exporting west-country cloth made of fine Cotswold wool, suffered. Sturmy seized the opportunity to deal directly with the Turks, buy up alum, and break the Genoese monopoly. Their commercial position gravely imperilled, the Genoese fitted out Gattilusio's corsairs in March and April 1458 and dispatched him to scuttle Sturmy's commercial ambitions. As an Aegean freebooter and a partner in the 'maona', Gattilusio was the ideal agent for such an enterprise, and indeed he did manage to capture Sturmy's ships and cargoes. The long-term consequences were, however, grave. Genoese merchants in England were arrested and their goods sequestered, and on 25 July 1459 the council condemned them to pay damages to the value of $6000 to Sturmy's English investors. Sturmy himself had perished in Gattilusio's attack, and his will was proved on 12 December 1458. 


@@@@@


doc= 52223


Leon, Jack de (1902-1956), theatre manager and impresario, was born on 12 August 1902 at Colon, Panama, the second of eight children of Michael de Leon (1868-1914), merchant, and his wife, May Miriam Maduro (1881-1964). His love of drama developed from when he operated a puppet theatre as a child. In 1911 the family moved to London where he was educated at University College School, Hampstead. After brief forays into the import trade and publishing, he was articled to the legal practice of Indermaur and Brown in London in 1923. On 30 August 1921, at the St John's Wood synagogue, he married Beatrice Lewisohn ['see below'], an actress and founder of a drama school. 
In 1924, encouraged by Beatie's mother and with financial help from his elder sister, Delia ['see below'], de Leon leased the Prince's Hall, Kew Bridge, Brentford, Middlesex, which had formerly served as a dance hall, a skating rink, and a cinema. It opened as the Q Theatre on 26 December 1924 with 'The Young Person in Pink', a comedy by Gertrude Jennings, and with Milton Rosmer as the production manager. Beatie was in the cast, making her professional debut. Although their first production had already achieved success in London's West End, the de Leons' intention was to specialize in wholly new plays in the hope that after a week-long trial at the Q, they would be taken up by West End managers. The policy proved sufficiently successful for the theatre critic James Agate to write: 'Clever Mr Jack de Leon that what you think today... the West End managers often think tomorrow' ('Sunday Times', 25 July 1926, 6). By now de Leon had surrendered his solicitor's articles. His own first play, 'The Man at Six', written under the name of Noel Doon and in collaboration with Steve Donohue, was produced at the Q on 16 January 1928. 
Criticism of the contractual arrangements with new writers and a series of practical problems led the de Leons to relinquish management of the Q in March 1929. Their association was renewed two years later when Beatie reopened the theatre for a season of plays performed by students from her drama school. 
Although he remained closely involved with the Q, de Leon's own future was expanding as a playwright and impresario associated increasingly with productions, including revues, in the West End and on provincial tour, and writing a number of film scripts. He also became an expert in stage lighting; his light cues were included in the publication of his version of Goethe's 'Faust' which he produced at the Q in April 1948. 'The Man at Six' was produced at the Queen's Theatre at Easter 1929. For a few months in 1929 he leased the newly built Duchess Theatre. In April 1930 'The Silent Witness', written again by de Leon and Donohue, opened at the Comedy Theatre. De Leon was involved with the production of Noel Scott's 'Traffic' at the Lyceum Theatre in July 1930 and with 'Rocklitz' by Marjorie Bowen at the Duke of York's Theatre in February 1931. 
Gradually the Q became re-established on a fully professional basis, but now with Beatie in overall charge, and reverted to including in its programme new plays, many of which transferred to the West End. Among these in 1933 was de Leon's most ambitious and untypical play, 'Francis Thompson', based on the life of the poet. It was said to have 'several scenes which catch at one's throat' but to 'emphasise too much the prostitute element' ('The Stage', 9 March 1933, 12). 
In the next twenty years the Q was a training ground for actors, producers, stage managers, and technicians. Among those whose careers began or were nurtured there were Richard Attenborough, Dirk Bogarde, Phyllis Calvert, Joan Collins, Joan Hickson, Vivien Leigh, Margaret Lockwood, James Mason, and Michael Wilding, and the director Peter Brook. Between 1938 and 1940 the de Leons ran the Embassy Theatre, Swiss Cottage, London, alongside the Q. In 1943 and 1944 de Leon put on summer seasons at the Savoy Theatre, Kettering. 
De Leon's role as impresario created such West End successes as 'See How They Run' at the Comedy Theatre in 1945, 'The Giaconda Smile' at the New Theatre in 1948, 'To Dorothy a Son' at the Savoy Theatre in 1950, and 'And So to Bed' at the New Theatre in 1951. His last West End production was 'The Count of Clerambard' at the Garrick Theatre in 1955. Competition from television and, more immediately, a leaking roof and insufficient financial support from the Arts Council and the local authority, led to the closure of the Q on 19 February 1956. De Leon died from a heart attack on 21 September 1956 at his mother's home, 254 Kew Road, Kew, Surrey, and was cremated at Golders Green on 23 September. 
De Leon was tall and elegant with a shock of black, later grey, wavy hair. He always dressed in dark suits or a black jacket, waistcoat, and striped trousers. 'He was a barrister manque... [with] that sort of investigative mind, a natural feel for the dramatic and an arresting voice' (Barrow, 67). 
His wife and co-founder of the Q Theatre, Beatrice Augusta de Leon (1900-1991), was born on 22 November 1900 at 26 Darnley Road, Hackney, London, the ninth child of Bernhard Lewisohn (1850-1906), boot manufacturer, and his wife, Lydia Moses (1865-1939). As a child she was taught by her widowed mother to recite and was often taken to the local theatre in Dalston and to the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, London. She was educated in London at Lady Hollis's School, Skinners' School, and Northfield high school. At thirteen she left to learn shorthand and typing and she worked until 1916 in clerical positions before she followed an older brother, Victor, to train at Herbert Beerbohm Tree's Academy of Dramatic Art (later the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art). With Delia de Leon she founded the London Academy of Dramatic Art in 1923. 
Beatie de Leon acted occasionally at the Q but suffered from chronic stage fright and was far happier training others or in management. After the closure of the Q and de Leon's death she and the couple's only child, Jean, ran the De Leon Drama School in association with Richmond Adult College for some thirty years. She retired in 1984. Subsequently she became an 'angel', investing in West End shows including the musical 'Oliver'. She was warm-hearted and had immense courage and drive. Dirk Bogarde compared her to a bright-eyed wren or robin, 'eager, alert, determined... [and] amazingly unsentimental' (Barrow, xv). She died of cancer on 16 February 1991 at the home she shared with her sister-in-law Delia, King's Lodge, Kew Green, Kew, Surrey, and was cremated at Golders Green on 19 February. 
Jack de Leon's sister Delia de Leon (1901-1993), actress, was born at Colon, Panama, on 10 February 1901. In 1909 she was sent to Jamaica to be educated at a school run by English women. She moved to London with her family in 1911. She had two ambitions: 'to be an actress and... to come to an understanding of God' (Barrow, 78). She appeared in a number of productions at the Q between 1925 and 1935, initially under the name of Delia Delvina, and was in 'The Children of the Moon' when it transferred from the Q to the Royalty Theatre, London, in October 1926. She became a disciple of the Indian avatar, Meher Baba (1894-1969), in the 1930s. She was both generous and impractical. Pete Townsend wrote of the 'passion, constancy, meticulousness, and enormous anxiety' which combined in an 'endearing eccentricity' (de Leon, xiv). She never married. Her autobiography, 'The Ocean of Love', was published in 1991. She died on 21 January 1993 at Abbeyfield, 4 Ennerdale Road, Kew, and was cremated at Mortlake on 31 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 52224


Wesenham, John (fl. 1333-1382), merchant, shipowner, and financier, was named after the Norfolk village of Weasenham, 6 miles east of Bishop's Lynn. In the early stages of his career his economic interest clearly centred on shipping and the grain trade, which in East Anglia went hand in hand; hence his earliest recorded venture, in the form of a licence of 20 March 1333 to export corn to Norway in his own ships and return with fish. Intermittently customs collector at Boston between 1335 and 1337, on 3 June 1335 he obtained a lifetime grant of wool tronnage duty in that port, but this was later revoked, since it already belonged to someone else. On 18 April 1337 he was released from the Tower of London pending inquiries into suspected breaches of shipping regulations; he was later cleared of the charges. From 8 June 1337 to 25 March 1338 Wesenham was in personal command of a heavily armed ship from Bishop's Lynn, which served in Gascony, and he continued to be active in naval affairs; on 20 July 1342 he and other men of Bishop's Lynn, then engaged in arraying ships for the king's northern fleet, were respited from an indictment alleging the plunder of a ship called the 'Taryte'. There is no evidence that he exported wool before the beginning of the Hundred Years' War, and he played no part in Edward III's attempt to monopolize the nation's wool trade in 1337 by using the prerogative right of purveyance. Not until 1340 did Wesenham, in partnership with Walter Chiriton, contract to buy 600 sacks of Warwickshire wool, part of the tax in kind granted to the king that year; in 1341 he bought 600 sacks in Norfolk. Wool was probably still peripheral to his interests, but the business led to his receiving a personal summons to an assembly of merchants in July 1340. Thereafter he was regularly summoned to other such meetings which distinguish the middle years of Edward III's reign. 
In August 1345 Wesenham seized the opportunity to move into the inner circle of royal financiers, when a syndicate of English merchants currently farming the customs duties was unable to meet the king's request for a loan. In partnership with his brother Simon and others Wesenham raised 20,000 florins in Bruges and was awarded the customs farm at the existing rent of $50,000 a year. At Michaelmas 1346 they were outbid by a syndicate led by Walter Chiriton, Wesenham's partner in 1340, but in April 1347 the rivals agreed to co-operate to dispose of a tax of 20,000 sacks of wool. In July 1348 Wesenham paid Chiriton $4000 and in return received a pledge on the king's great crown, then held by the latter. After the collapse of Chiriton's company in April 1349 Wesenham restored the crown to the king without immediate payment, but in June 1350 he was awarded rents in London belonging to members of the company, to be held until the debt was liquidated. Only part of Wesenham's advances to the king in this period came from his personal fortune; the rest was borrowed on Wesenham's own credit from other Englishmen and Hanseatic merchants; reimbursements came from remissions of export duties, assignments of lay subsidies, and the issues of alien benefices in the king's hands. It was a risky business, but it paid off and was the key to further royal favour. From 11 January 1347 to Michaelmas 1350 Wesenham held the office of royal butler and during the general recoinage, beginning at Michaelmas 1350, he served as exchanger of coins. 
Wesenham retired from the centre of royal finances after receiving, on 23 April 1352, a generous pardon for any and all offences he may have committed. He remained active in trade; on 28 July 1353 he was licensed to export wool without payment of the alien duty, then also paid by denizens; throughout the decade he received licences to export corn. At this period, like many other successful merchants, he was probably investing in land to create an inheritance for his posterity. The full extent of his estates is not known, but on 14 March 1350 he and his heirs were granted free warren in their demesne lands in Weasenham and eleven other places in Norfolk. He also farmed a number of lands from the crown, including the temporalities of the bishopric of Lincoln, held for 3740 marks a year from 1 February 1357 to 6 October 1360. He married his son, Hugh, to Agnes, daughter of John Bruis, whose wardship he bought from Simon Islip, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1366), for 500 marks. Hugh and Agnes received her lands in April 1353, but in 1358 had to surrender half to a sister, who earlier had been wrongly described as a nun. 
On 30 January 1360 Wesenham again became active in the king's service, undertaking to provide, equip, and man ships in the North Sea, for a lump payment of $4500. He commanded this fleet in person, and on 10 July payment was authorized from the proceeds of a lay subsidy. His last major service was as one of two mayors, heading a company of merchants formed to govern Calais from 1 March 1363. The intention was to stop a drain on the exchequer and make the town and garrison financially self-supporting, largely through duties imposed on wool passing through the staple which was established there. The experiment ended in failure after less than a year. For Wesenham one of the consequences was a spell of imprisonment in the Tower, together with Henry Brisele, master of the Calais mint, presumably for suspected coinage offences. They were released on 22 June 1365. Towards the end of his life Wesenham may have fallen on hard times. On 20 June 1380 he was granted a life annuity of $46 13's'. 4died and 2 tuns of wine, 'in aid of his estate', for good services to Edward III. This was charged against the customs collectors of Bishop's Lynn and Boston. An order to pay arrears, dated 18 November 1382, is the last known reference to Wesenham. 


@@@@@


doc= 52228


Whittingham, Sir Robert (d. 1452), merchant and financier, was perhaps the eldest of the four children of Alan Whittingham, who may have been a Londoner; more certainly, he was the nephew of Robert Whittingham, a rich London tailor, and the brother of Thomas, another tailor. Whittingham was established in London as a draper by 1407 and inherited city property from his uncle in 1413. He rose through trade in woad and pepper as well as wool, through links with Italians and deals with city magnates. By 1419 he could afford to pledge $20, the second largest amount, for the new Drapers' Hall. Elected MP for London and warden of his livery in 1416, he was alderman of Bishopsgate ward (1417-22) and of Walbrook ward (1422-38). He served as auditor of London in 1418-19 and 1424-5, and was sheriff in 1419-20, but never became mayor. In the 1420s Whittingham's service with John, duke of Bedford, brother of Henry V and regent of France, took him away from city politics and onto the national stage. 
By 1420 Whittingham had married Agnes, daughter of Richard and Joan Buckland. Buckland was treasurer and victualler of Calais (1421-36) and a councillor of Bedford. This connection no doubt led to Whittingham's appointment as Bedford's receiver-general in England by December 1426. He oversaw Bedford's great English estates and profits of office as admiral of England. He also shipped supplies, weapons, victuals, and wine, to the regent in France. His adherence to Bedford, and to the regent's uncle, Cardinal Henry Beaufort, was probably the cause of the reported anger of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, Bedford's younger brother and political opponent, following a meeting of the court of aldermen in May 1427. 
In 1432 Bedford granted Whittingham a substantial annuity ($26 13's'. 4died) on the manor of Salden, Buckinghamshire, and also the advowson of St Stephen Walbrook, Whittingham's London parish church. From 1433 to 1439 Whittingham was receiver-general of the duchy of Cornwall, another key source of Bedford's income. On his deathbed in 1435 Bedford appointed Whittingham an executor. Although he closed accounts as receiver-general of Bedford's former lands in England, Calais, and the Channel Islands in 1438, Whittingham was involved in Bedford's complicated estate for the rest of his life. From 1438, under Beaufort's direction, he collected tallies and paid creditors, recording his efficient administration in a 'boke of declaracion', which survives. Whittingham was trustee of the estates of other magnates, such as Beaufort, Henry, Lord Bourchier (died 1483), and John Holland, duke of Exeter (died 1446), for whom he also served as executor, and acted as banker to such veterans of the French wars as Bedford's chamberlain, Sir Andrew Ogard. According to William Worcester, Ogard left with Whittingham a chest with about 7000 marks in 'French gold'. 
In 1436 Whittingham succeeded Richard Buckland as treasurer of Calais and master of the Calais mint. At this critical time for Calais he embarked on a series of loans to the crown, none exceeding $133 6's'. 8died, which were repaid in full by 1446. A seasoned wool exporter, he arbitrated in at least one dispute between the mayor and merchants of the Calais staple. By 1439 he was himself mayor of the staple and was present in the Star Chamber when a fellow draper was convicted of concealing wool exports. His Calais responsibilities led to his appointment as ambassador to Flanders and Brabant, Holland and Zeeland, Burgundy and France, on a series of missions in 1438-41. He attended the Anglo-French peace negotiations in 1439, and in 1440-41 the negotiations surrounding the release of the duke of Orleans. Whittingham seems to have represented the mercantile interest, and to have worked for the resumption of Anglo-Flemish trade. He was treasurer of Calais until late December 1441, when a scandal erupted over the town's buildings and defences; Whittingham and his father-in-law were accused of neglect and of misappropriating bricks and timber. Whittingham was threatened with a suit in the exchequer court, but it was deferred from term to term. 
Whittingham had acquired his main London house in Walbrook in 1418. With purchases in 1437 and 1447 he came to own most of the east side of Walbrook, backed by a large garden. Besides investing in London property in at least three other London parishes, Whittingham became a country gentleman with five or more manors and other lands and reversions in Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Berkshire. He served on many commissions, and was sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire in 1433-4 and 1438-9. It is not known when he bought his main manor of Pendley in Hertfordshire, but it was probably before 1432, when he sat as MP for the county. Whittingham enclosed a park of 200 acres at Pendley in 1440 and built a chapel there by 1442. The date he acquired the neighbouring manor of Maudeleyns in Northchurch, where his uncle had established a chantry in 1413, is also unknown. Whittingham obtained two-thirds of Bedford's former manor of Salden in 1439 through the good offices of Cardinal Beaufort; he recovered it swiftly after the 'Act of Resumption' of 1450. Other properties he owned in Buckinghamshire included the manor of Moulsoe. He bequeathed Donnington manor in Berkshire to his eldest son. 
At Whittingham's death on 4 or 5 November 1452 he left life interests in his house in Walbrook and in Salden to his widow, along with the lion's share of his chattels, including all those at Pendley, and divided his other manors, lands, and chattels among his four sons. He elected to be buried at Ashridge Priory, Hertfordshire, which had a special connection with the duchy of Cornwall. Obits were kept for him and for his widow, who died in 1456. In 1575-6 his Verney descendants moved the Whittingham double tomb to the Pendley chapel in the church of St John the Baptist, Aldbury, Hertfordshire, where it survives. A drawing of 'c'.1600 shows the lost armorial glass in the south choir window of St Stephen Walbrook, where Whittingham had laid the third foundation stone of the new building in 1429. It depicts Whittingham's arms: party per fess argent and or a fess vert, overall a lion rampant gules, combined with the arms of Bedford, his principal patron, the ostrich plumes of Lancaster, the arms of England, and the Buckland arms of his wife. His eldest son, another Sir Robert, killed at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471, has often been confused with his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 52229


Wilford, Robert (d. 1396), merchant and mayor of Exeter, may have originated at Nottingham (where his illegitimate son John sold property in 1413), or at Wilford, a village a few miles south of Nottingham. But he came to be closely associated with Exeter, where he is first recorded in 1363, by when he had married Elizabeth, widow of John Hull, a wealthy and politically prominent draper of the latter city. John Hull left one daughter and three sons, one of whom, Henry Hull, served as Robert Wilford's apprentice, and also as executor for both Robert and Robert's son William ['see below']. No doubt his marriage provided the material basis for Wilford's trading career. He was the richest and most active merchant in Exeter during the last three decades of the fourteenth century. From 1367 he regularly imported wine, dyestuffs, iron, oil, salt, herring, and other commodities, often transporting these goods in one of three ships he co-owned. His exports of cloth and numerous imports of woad, madder, brasil, alum, and potash reflected his investments in the cloth industry, as did his regular business dealings with dyers, drapers, and merchants in Devon, Somerset, and London. He accumulated extensive property holdings in Exeter and its suburbs, including many shops in prime commercial locations. In 1377 he paid the highest murage tax in the city (15's'.); as Exeter's leading citizen he lent money to the city on several occasions, to finance such projects as the construction of a new barge and the paving of the streets. 
Not surprisingly Wilford came to dominate the city government of late fourteenth-century Exeter. He served as mayor an extraordinary thirteen times between 1373 and 1394, and also acted as receiver (the city's chief financial officer) twice, steward once, councillor fifteen times, and elector sixteen times. MP for Exeter in 1377 and 1381, he also officiated three times as mayor of the city's staple. His influence outside the city is evident in his appointment as controller of customs at the port of Exeter in 1364, collector of the poll tax in Exeter and its suburbs in 1377, justice of the peace, and member of several commissions of oyer and terminer in Devon. He enjoyed particularly close connections with the Courtenay earls of Devon; listed as an esquire of Earl Edward (died 1419) in the latter's livery roll of 1384/5, Wilford was also paid for unspecified services on several occasions between 1381 and 1396. Indeed his links with the family covered several generations; Earl Edward's grandmother, the dowager Countess Margaret (died 1391), named Wilford as one of her executors, and Wilford later made arrangements in his own will for prayers for the souls of Margaret, her husband Earl Hugh (died 1377), and their son William Courtenay, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1396). 
Robert Wilford died at Exeter between 7 July and 28 August 1396. In his will he left one third of his estate to be sold for prayers for his soul and for the souls of relatives and friends, another third to his wife, Elizabeth, for the term of her life, and the remaining third to his son William, who also inherited his mother's share when she died some time after 1404. His executors included John Wilford (died 1417), who was probably his natural son. Although John seems never to have married and to have died without heirs, his birth was no impediment to success as a merchant oligarch in Exeter, where he served in such high city offices as receiver, councillor, steward, and elector on many occasions between 1395 and 1414, and was constable of the staple in 1413 and member of parliament in 1414. 
Inevitably, however, John Wilford was overshadowed by his half-brother 
The Wilfords' standing in Devon allowed William to marry Margaret, widow of Robert Cruwys of Morchard, Rackenford, and East Anstey in Devon, and daughter of Sir Robert Cornu of Thornbury. When William Wilford died in 1413, probably before 26 April, he left a daughter, Elizabeth, who by then had married John Parker of Exeter, and an under-age son, Robert, who eventually received the bulk of his property, including 100 marks reserved exclusively for his support as a minor. His executors included his wife, Margaret, and his half-brother, Henry Hull. To another half-brother, William Hull, he left part of his share in a ship, while to his bastard half-brother, John, Wilford bequeathed a jewel worth 4 marks. His other bequests included $10 and the revenues from a croft outside the south gate to build and maintain a water conduit in Exeter, along with gifts to the local religious houses, and 4 marks for forgotten tithes. At his death, his goods were valued at $228 6's'. 8died; in 1412 his estates, which included extensive possessions in Exeter inherited from his father, as well as his wife's properties and lands he had acquired in Frogmore and Crediton, yielded an annual income of at least $22. 


@@@@@


doc= 52231


William Wilford (d. 1413), who enjoyed a political and commercial success similar to his father's. Elected mayor of Exeter seven times between 1400 and 1412, he too served the city as receiver, steward, councillor, elector, constable, and mayor of the staple, and as member of parliament five times between 1395 and 1411. Like his father he was appointed to commissions of inquiry and oyer and terminer, and had connections with the Courtenays, acting as a witness to a quitclaim of Sir Edward Courtenay, son of the Earl Edward whom his father had served, although William also wore the livery of Bishop Stafford of Exeter (died 1419). William Wilford continued his father's interests in the cloth trade, exporting cloth overseas and aulnaging it for domestic sale. His imports, however, were less varied, concentrating largely on wine and woad for dyeing textiles. A shipowner like his father, he was probably the same William Wilford who gained the attention of chroniclers for his exploits as admiral of a fleet of west-country ships which captured numerous French ships loaded with rich cargoes off the coast of Brittany in 1403. Besides seizing the cargoes and burning many of the ships, Wilford also landed at Penmarch on the south-west coast of Brittany, and led his troops some 18 miles inland, ravaging the surrounding villages and countryside. 


@@@@@


doc= 52233


Women traders and artisans in London (act. c.1200-c.1500) formed a significant group within the city's workforce at every social level. City custom allowed them considerable economic opportunities. No more than men are they commonly recorded before about 1250, but thereafter wills and the records alike of city government and of London's craft and trading associations bring their activities into ever sharper focus, in spite of the difficulties created by the instability of female surnames, resulting from migration and multiple marriages. The greater visibility of women in London's economic life in the later middle ages is not solely the result of the thickening of the records, however. The demographic decline which reduced the population of the city by half between 1300 and 1400 created an acute labour shortage which threw women more prominently into the trained labour force. So they are to be found not only at the poor and unskilled end of the labour market, but also training as apprentices, as independent artisans, managers of craft workshops, and heads of trading households. 
At the poorest end of the economic scale women were found in London selling a variety of goods, but particularly foods that they had grown or cooked themselves, or had bought in a city market, or from a wholesaler, and then sold on. Such women were known as hucksters, a word that appears about 1300 and which applied primarily, but not exclusively, to women. Hucksters appear in the mayor's court pursuing debtors or being pursued by their creditors. Most of them are only names, but 


@@@@@


doc= 52239


Lyon, Alexander Ward (1931-1993), politician, was born on 15 October 1931 at 60 Osmondthorpe Lane, Osmondthorpe, Leeds, the son of Alexander Pirie Lyon, master fish fryer and grocer, and his wife, Doris, 'nee' Ward. Both parents were devout Methodists. Rejected by Leeds grammar school, he attended West Leeds High School, from where he gained entrance to the law department of University College, London. While still a student he married, on 7 July 1951, Hilda Arandall ('b'. 1928/9), dress designer, and daughter of John Arandall, of Leeds; they had two sons and a daughter. He was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1954, and became a prominent figure on the north-east circuit. He later became chairman of the Society of Labour Lawyers. 
Lyon contested York for the Labour Party in October 1964, and in March 1966 succeeded in defeating the personally popular Conservative MP Charles Longbottom. He held the seat until 1983. In assiduously nursing the constituency, he displayed a foretaste of those very qualities -- tenacity, to the point of occasional obduracy, and a high-minded sense of principle -- which in subsequent years were to irritate senior colleagues. Once in parliament he became immersed in the long-running Rhodesian crisis, and was conspicuously brave in making clear to Harold Wilson that many in the Labour Party would not support him in moves which looked as if they were giving in to Ian Smith and racism. But the event which made a seminal contribution to his political perceptions was the 'cause celebre' of the Kenyan Asians. The number of immigrants from Kenya rose steadily each month throughout the winter of 1967-8. Some 13,000 arrived in Britain in the first two months of 1968, twice as many as in the whole of 1965. The tabloid press exaggerated the extent to which they were drawing bountiful assistance from the social services, and carried endless stories of boatloads of illegal immigrants being smuggled ashore on isolated beaches on the south coast of England. In April 1968 Enoch Powell -- Lyon's 'bete noire' -- made his notorious 'rivers of blood' speech and dockers marched to the House of Commons to support him. Lyon was prominent in the opposition to Powell's views, and acted as a focal point for resistance to harsh treatment of east African Asians. He voted against the government on the 'Commonwealth Immigrants Act' of 1968. 
In 1969 Lyon became an additional parliamentary private secretary at the Treasury, then parliamentary private secretary to the paymaster-general, Harold Lever. Following Labour's defeat in the general election of 1970 he became an opposition spokesman first on African affairs, then on home affairs. He supported Britain's entry into the EEC, and voted with the Conservative government in the crucial vote on 28 October 1971. He again defied a three-line whip on the 'Housing Finance Bill' of 1972 and was consequently dismissed from the Labour front bench. Nevertheless, following Labour's narrow victory in the election of February 1974, he was appointed by Harold Wilson minister of state at the Home Office, responsible for race relations and immigration issues. He was at this time considered by many contemporaries as a possible future leader of the Labour Party. Nevertheless, his eighteen months as minister of state were controversial, and were marked in particular by disputes between him and his senior officials over the application of the immigration rules. When James Callaghan succeeded Wilson as prime minister in April 1976, he dismissed Lyon, and divided responsibility for immigration and race relations between several other ministers. There was significant, and by no means ephemeral, public discussion of whether, by this act, Callaghan was showing himself illiberal over race and immigration, or whether Lyon had been too zealous in helping immigrants. Lyon's friends pointed out that, unlike many of his predecessors in this difficult ministerial berth, who had simply sat in their sepulchral room in the Home Office, he had at least ventured forth to India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, applying his razor-sharp QC's mind to the cause of delays in granting certificates of entry into Britain for dependants of people already settled. His critics -- in an age of Powellite rhetoric -- crudely, and almost certainly in error, thought that Lyon could single-handedly lose Labour a general election. 
Following his return to the back benches, Lyon was appointed, in 1978, chairman of the UK Immigrants Advisory Service, in succession to Lord Foot. He was a member of the select committee on home affairs and chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party home affairs group, both from 1979 to 1983. After his first marriage ended in divorce, he married, on 19 February 1982, Clare Margaret Short ('b'. 1946), daughter of Francis Gerard Short, headteacher. She was at that point director of Youth Aid and the Unemployment Unit, but in June 1983 was elected Labour MP for Birmingham Ladywood. At the same election Lyon lost his own seat. Shortly afterwards he was diagnosed as suffering from spinal muscular dystrophy. He resigned as chairman of the UK Immigrants Advisory Service in 1984. He bore a long illness with characteristic courage, and with enormous support from his wife, Clare. He died at the Westbury Nursing Home, Newport Pagnell, Buckinghamshire, on 30 September 1993; he was survived by his wife and by the three children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 52240


Mackendrick, Alexander (1912-1993), film director, was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on 8 September 1912, the only son of Francis Robert (Frank) Mackendrick (died 1918), shipbuilding draughtsman and civil engineer, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Doig. Both parents were Scottish. His father died in the influenza epidemic of 1918, and his mother, attempting to establish a career as a dress designer, agreed to Alexander's returning to Scotland with his grandfather. He was educated at Hillhead School, Glasgow, until 1926, when his outstanding drawing talents enabled him to enrol at the Glasgow School of Art. He left in 1929 without taking his degree, and travelled to London to work for the advertising agency J. Walter Thompson. He rose to become one of the agency's top art directors, but his fascination with the cinema led him to collaborate with his cousin Roger MacDougall on a script, 'War on Wednesday', that was filmed in 1937 as 'Midnight Menace'. For J. Walter Thompson he scripted and storyboarded five Horlicks commercials, which were filmed by the Hungarian animated film-maker George Pal. On 24 March 1934 he married Eileen Mary Ascroft (1914-1962), a women's magazine journalist. 
During the Second World War Mackendrick made propaganda films for the Ministry of Information, and in 1943 joined a psychological warfare unit headed by the future Labour minister Richard Crossman. In 1944 he was given the task of monitoring film production in Italy, giving official approval to Roberto Rossellini's 'Rome -- Open City' (1945) and organizing documentary reportage of the uncovering of the Fosse Ardeantine massacre for 'Giorni di gloria' (1945). When the war was over he spent a brief period with MacDougall making Ministry of Information documentaries and then joined Ealing Studios as a scriptwriter and sketch artist. After storyboarding and co-scripting Basil Dearden's 'Saraband for Dead Lovers' (1948) and Charles Crichton's 'Another Shore' (1948) he was given the opportunity to direct a low-budget comedy, 'Whisky Galore!' (1949), filmed on the island of Barra in 1948. The film was only modestly successful in Britain but was hugely popular in both America (as 'Tight Little Island') and France (as 'Whisky a Gogo'). His first marriage having ended in divorce in 1943, Mackendrick married Hilary Lloyd ('b'. 1924/5), a film publicity worker, on Christmas eve 1948, while the success of 'Whisky Galore!' was still uncertain. 
After acting as second unit director on Basil Dearden's 'The Blue Lamp' (1950) and Charles Crichton's 'Dance Hall' (1950) Mackendrick began work on his second film as director, 'The Man in the White Suit' (1951), based on an unperformed play by Roger MacDougall about a man who invents a material that never gets dirty and never wears out. Though it failed to emulate the international success of 'Whisky Galore!' it was generally well received, and its satirical attack on the timid obscurantism of British industry contradicts the idea of Ealing comedy as cosy, nostalgic, and reassuring. Three further films followed at Ealing: 'Mandy' (1952), 'The Maggie' (1954), and 'The Ladykillers' (1955), all projects over which Mackendrick was able to exert considerable personal control and all confirming him as a talented and original director. 
In October 1955 Ealing Studios was sold to the BBC, and Mackendrick went to Hollywood to make an adaptation of Bernard Shaw's 'The Devil's Disciple'. When casting problems delayed production he was assigned a tough New York black comedy, 'Sweet Smell of Success' (1957). Putting Tony Curtis in a role that destroyed his matinee-idol image did little for the film's commercial prospects but Mackendrick won critical admiration for his evocation of a dark, slick, sleazy world, and the reputation of the film has continued to grow. He returned to England for the filming of 'The Devil's Disciple' (1959) but disagreements with the film's two leading actors, Kirk Douglas and Burt Lancaster, led to his being replaced. Further disappointment followed when he was ousted as the director of the expensive wartime epic 'The Guns of Navarone' (1961). What had seemed an extremely promising career now looked in jeopardy. He was rescued by his mentor at Ealing, Michael Balcon, who entrusted him with 'Sammy Going South' (1963), an ambitious Technicolor epic about a ten-year-old boy's journey through Africa from Port Said (where his parents have been killed in a British bombing raid) to Durban. The film is unique in its uncondescending picture of Africa in the last days of British colonialism, but in 1963 it seemed irrelevant to the new world of the Beatles and Mary Quant, and failed to arouse much interest. 
After making an episode of the American television series 'The Defenders' ('The hidden fury', 1964) Mackendrick worked with John Osborne on a version of 'Moll Flanders' and with Tony Hancock on an adaptation of Eugene Ionesco's 'Rhinoceros'. Neither project prospered, but a long-standing ambition to film Richard Hughes's novel 'A High Wind in Jamaica' was unexpectedly realized in 1965. Mackendrick had proved his ability to inspire fine performances from children in 'Mandy', 'The Maggie', and 'Sammy Going South', and was a natural choice for a story that centred upon a group of children being kidnapped by pirates. Unfortunately what the film's backer, Twentieth Century Fox, wanted was a Disney-like adventure story that would ignore the sinister intimations of Hughes's novel, and Mackendrick needed all his patience, guile, and persistence to make a film that remained true to the spirit of the book. Twentieth Century Fox took their revenge by cutting the film down from 135 to 103 minutes, but it remained a disturbing, significant, and visually sophisticated film. 
Mackendrick's next -- and last -- feature film, 'Don't Make Waves' (1967), also suffered from producer interference, but here the script was much weaker and Mackendrick himself regarded it as irredeemable. In 1969, after his plans for a personal and idiosyncratic version of the Mary, queen of Scots, story was aborted by the abrupt withdrawal of American financial support from British film production, he accepted the post of dean of the California Institute of the Arts film school. He remained as dean until 1978, and after stepping down continued to teach there until his death, in Los Angeles on 22 December 1993. He was survived by his wife, Hilary. 
Mackendrick was always reluctant to regard himself as a victim, and blamed his inadequacy as deal-maker for his difficulties. He told one interviewer that: 'To spend, say 50 per cent of your time trying to get the job, and 50 per cent of your time doing the job -- that's a fair break. If you spend 95 per cent of your time trying to get the job, and only five per cent doing it, you're in the wrong business. (Kemp, 'Lethal Innocence', 236)' It remains a matter of shame and regret that a director of his stature should abandon film-making. But his decision to quit meant that for over twenty years he enjoyed a second career as a teacher of film, which brought both him and his pupils immense satisfaction.The variety of Mackendrick's work and the fact that his best-loved films -- 'Whisky Galore!' and 'The Ladykillers' -- were comedies has militated against his being considered one of the great film directors. He himself never made the mistake of not taking comedy seriously, arguing that 'To be frivolous about trivial things is childish -- but to make fun of things that really scare you, that if you like is the basis of truth in comedy' (Kemp, 'Saving grace', 149). Even his most congenial comedy, 'Whisky Galore!', has a sharp edge, and the affection for the quaint and eccentric in 'The Ladykillers' masks a thrillingly macabre story. Once they are set against a wider framework than that offered by Ealing, Mackendrick's comedies, together with 'Mandy', 'The Sweet Smell of Success', 'Sammy Going South', and 'A High Wind in Jamaica', can be seen as part of a body of work that is full of insight, wisdom, and humanity. 


@@@@@


doc= 52243


Cantelowe, Sir William (d. 1464), merchant, is first recorded in 1427, when a complaint was lodged against him and his wife, Margaret. He was then described as a mercer. A Thomas Cantelowe, mercer, mentioned in 1410, may have been his father. In the 1430s William Cantelowe achieved some prominence as an administrator appointed by the crown: in 1431 he was collector of lay subsidy, in 1432 collector of alien subsidy and custom on cloth, both at London; from 1436 to 1440 he was victualler of Calais -- a responsible and demanding post, after the French attack of 1436. In 1441 the council decided, apparently after some debate, to allow him to ship wool to Calais independently of staple regulations, presumably in order to recover money due to him as victualler, and in 1442 he had permission to recover $1506, a further sum owed to him as victualler. 
Cantelowe is recorded as having many dealings with alien merchants, which were evidently connected with his activity in royal finance. In 1434 he guaranteed that a consignment of wool exported by Milanese to Antwerp would go on to Milan, and in 1440 he guaranteed another consignment going via Middelburg to Milan. Between 1440 and 1443 he is reported as engaged in buying fabrics from Lucchese and Venetians and selling cloth to them. In 1445 he was giving credit at Calais as a stapler for wool purchases by Dutch merchants. In the following year he became alderman for Cripplegate, a position he held until 1461. It was at this time that his substantial financial advances to the crown began. In 1445 he had lent money for the journey of Margaret of Anjou to England, before her marriage to Henry VI. In 1449 he was a contributor to the staple loan of $10,700, and acted as agent for the other contributors in arranging assignments in repayment. Cantelowe was sheriff of London in 1448-9. In the latter year he paid 500 marks owed by the crown to Jean de Luxembourg, the Bastard of St Pol, and in 1450 he advanced $800 for the new college at Eton and was allowed, in return, to ship 300 sacks of wool from Southampton through the Strait of Gibraltar without paying customs or subsidies. This was apparently the background to an unusual shipment of 466 pokes of wool from Southampton to Pisa in 1451. The wool was handled on arrival by branches of the Salviati family and sold by them at Florence, the proceeds then being returned to their branch at London. Cantelowe had been dealing with the Salviati of London, to whom he had a debt of over $4200, built up over several years for payments to woolmen, exchange payments at Bruges, and even drafts of cash. This debt was now cancelled by the proceeds of the sale at Florence, and it is clear that the Salviati had in fact financed the shipment for Cantelowe. 
Cantelowe continued to be closely associated with the crown in the early 1450s. In 1450 he was one of those said in a political poem to be responsible for the corruption at court. In the same year he was master of the Mercers' Company, a post he also held in 1456 and 1462. In 1451 he was involved in a loan for the expenses of the king's household, while in 1454 he and others made a loan of $304. In view of his connections with alien merchants and royal finance it is surprising that he was punished as a result of the London riots against the Italians in April 1456. As master of the Mercers he promised the mayor on 3 May that they would keep the peace, and he was himself imprisoned in Dudley Castle from October to December. The reason for the mercers' conduct was no doubt displeasure caused by the commercial policy of the crown, the favour it showed to aliens, and its neglect of staple privileges. Whether this displeasure was really shared by Cantelowe is not known. In any case the position was changed by the accession of Edward IV, which resulted in Cantelowe's being knighted in 1461; in the same year he was exonerated from duties as an alderman on the grounds of age and infirmity. He died in 1464 (his will, dated 21 February, was proved on 11 May), leaving property for life to his second wife, Elizabeth, with remainders to his sons Thomas, William, and Henry, and his daughters Anne, Joan, and Katherine. He was described as being of St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, in London, and of Faversham. There were lands in Kent, Hertfordshire, and Bedfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 52244


Mais, Alan Raymond, Baron Mais (1911-1993), engineer and businessman, was born on 7 July 1911 at Rathmore, Winn Road, Southampton, the only child of Captain Ernest Mais, a master mariner, and his wife, Violet Geraldine, 'nee' Thomas. He was educated at Banister Court School, Hampshire, and later at the College of Estate Management, a part of London University, where he trained as a surveyor. Upon leaving he entered the construction industry, first with Richard Costain in 1931 and later, in 1936, with Parker Construction. After two years with Parker he established his own consulting practice, A. R. Mais & Partners. On 12 September 1936 Mais married Lorna Aline, the daughter of Stanley Aspinall Boardman, a wool merchant of Addiscombe in Surrey, with whom he had two sons and a daughter. 
As a young man Mais became interested in military affairs, and in 1929 he joined the Territorial Army, being commissioned in the Royal West Kent regiment. Two years later he transferred to the Royal Engineers (RE), and he remained a member of the RE throughout the Second World War and afterwards, again as a Territorial, until his retirement in 1958. The occasion of his transfer from the Royal West Kents merits comment. While leading a detachment of that regiment on a march, Mais was overtaken by a mounted column of sappers. The RE commanding officer suggested, perhaps not entirely seriously, that Mais would be better off in a mounted unit. This advice, Mais later admitted, tempted him, and the transfer duly followed. 
When war started Mais, by then a major, went first to France and then to Iraq and Iran with special forces. He was twice mentioned in dispatches and awarded the Russian order of Patriotic War for his efforts in keeping supply routes to Russia open. After returning to Britain late in 1943, he became involved in the Mulberry harbour project leading to what was perhaps the most daunting period in his military career. Two artificial harbours were to be constructed on the Normandy coast: a British one at Arromanches and an American one a few miles to the west. When construction began immediately after D-day (6 June 1944) Mais, by now a lieutenant-colonel, was in charge of constructing the pierheads and floating roadways at the British harbour under Colonel S. K. Gilbert of the Royal Engineers, who commanded the port construction force. 
Progress, though hectic, went well at first, but disaster struck in the form of a gale which raged from 19 to 23 June and was reckoned to be the worst storm in the channel for eighty years. Because of the determination and courage of those on site, with Mais playing a leading role, the British harbour, though badly damaged, was saved. Unfortunately the nearby American harbour had to be abandoned. For his services in Normandy, Mais was again mentioned in dispatches and appointed OBE (military division). 
Mais's beach task force had been part of the First Canadian Army, and he remained with the Canadians in the advance to the Rhine. Promoted full colonel, Mais became deputy chief engineer in Antwerp, and as hostilities came to an end he took charge of ports, waterways, and engineering in the twenty-first army group. 
Once the war was over Mais returned to his consultancy firm. In 1948 he joined the board of the contractors Trollope and Colls, becoming joint managing director and chairman in 1963 and retiring in 1968 when the firm was taken over by Trafalgar House. During this period he held numerous other directorships, mainly, but not entirely, in construction concerns. 
In the mid-1970s the affairs of the Peachey Property Corporation, then under the control of Sir Eric Miller, were found to be in some disorder and Mais, who had become a non-executive board member four years earlier, played a significant part in exposing Miller's mismanagement. The Department of Trade inquired into the company's activities but placed no blame on Mais, who, its inspectors reported, 'was largely instrumental in reforming the company'. After Miller's suicide in 1977, Mais became company chairman and, for a short time, its chief executive. He relinquished the latter role when a new managing director was appointed but remained chairman. 
As well as being an astute businessman, Mais was strongly inclined towards public service, and this marked the last thirty or so years of his life. From the 1960s onwards he served on numerous committees, mainly connected with the construction industry; these included the National Contractors' Group, the industry's 'Little Neddy', and governmental committees on the placing and management of contracts and works and on buildings emergency organization. He was also on the British National Export Council's committee for Canada and for two years was a member of the land commission. 
Although on the surface Mais did not appear to be a party-political enthusiast, he had a considerable political pedigree, especially in local government. At the general election in 1945 he contested the Orpington constituency for Labour but was unsuccessful. After that somewhat quixotic venture, it was perhaps less surprising than many thought that a Labour prime minister, Harold Wilson, should appoint him to a life peerage in 1967, in recognition of his services to the construction industry. He played an active, but not unduly prominent, part in the Lords until his death, sitting successively on the Labour, Liberal, and finally Liberal Democrat benches. 
In local affairs, especially in the City of London, Mais was more conspicuous, becoming master of the Cutlers' Company and a freeman of the City and of the Paviors' Company. He was an alderman in the Walbrook ward from 1963, a sheriff in 1969-70, and lord mayor in 1972, the first peer to be elected to that office since records began in 1192. He was a lieutenant of the City, a justice of the peace and, further afield, from 1976 deputy lieutenant of the county of Kent. 
Beside his contribution to politics and public service, Mais was committed to education, and during his term as lord mayor he served, as is customary, as chancellor of City University, which had been founded as the Northampton Institute, a pre-eminent engineering school. He had been a member of the university's governing council since 1965. The chancellor's duties were largely ceremonial, and at the end of his year in office Mais was appointed pro-chancellor, in effect chairman of the governors, a post he held until 1984. 
Apart from firm guidance as chairman, Mais's major contribution to the university was the setting up of a fund in his name which raised a substantial sum to establish a new banking and finance unit in the university's business school. The fund was generously supported by the Bank of England and by many leading British and foreign banks and other City institutions. This contribution is recognized by the annual Mais lectures, which are held at the university. Almost as an aside, Mais encouraged the foundation of the university symphony orchestra. 
In the course of a long and active life Mais earned many honours and distinctions. In addition to those already mentioned, he held the territorial decoration the ERD, the order of the Aztec Eagle and the order of merit of Mexico, as well as honorary degrees from several universities. In addition, he was a member of several learned societies, including the institutions of civil and structural engineers, and he was a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering. He died on 28 November 1993 at the Sloane Hospital, 125 Albermarle Road, Beckenham, Kent, survived by his wife and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52245


Eveske, Elias l' (d. in or after 1259), financier and leader of the Jewish community in England, was the eldest of the several sons of Benedict l'Eveske of London. Born before 1200, he became a prominent figure during the 1220s, and by the 1230s was firmly established as one of the leading members of the London Jewish community. In 1237 and 1241 he served the crown as a tax assessor and collector, and in 1238 was a commissioner against coin-clipping. It was also during these years that he began lending money and selling bonds to members of Henry III's court. In 1243 the king appointed him archpresbyter, thus establishing him as the administrative head of the English Jewish community and the chief Jewish official at the Jewish exchequer. 
The period of l'Eveske's archpresbyterate was disastrous for English Jewry. Savage royal taxation, crushing inheritance fines, and accusations of ritual murder devastated Jewish communities throughout the realm. As archpresbyter, l'Eveske was directly involved in implementing the king's destructive policies. He cannot have done so happily, and in 1254 he petitioned, unsuccessfully, for permission for the Jews of England to depart the realm. At the same time, however, he used his influence at the exchequer to secure tax reductions and exemptions for himself and his brothers, thus placing an even heavier burden of taxation upon others. 
The resulting divisions within the London Jewish community finally brought about l'Eveske's downfall. His favourable tax assessments were revoked. In 1249 and again in 1252 he was accused of malfeasance in office, but both times he was restored to office. In June 1257, however, he was accused of having fraudulently transferred several debts to Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), on which l'Eveske then continued to collect payment. He was convicted and deposed from office. Hagin and Cresse, sons of Master Moses of London, thereupon paid the king 3 gold marks on behalf of the English Jewish community for his promise never to restore l'Eveske to the archpresbyterate, and to allow the community in future to elect their archpresbyter. In February 1258 Hagin succeeded l'Eveske as archpresbyter. 
In December 1258, however, Elias l'Eveske was accused by Cresse, the brother of Hagin, of having ordered his servant, John Forncett, to make a murderous attack upon Hagin in a London street. Hagin was too gravely wounded to appear in court, but l'Eveske, with his two sons, did appear, and in January 1259 all three converted to Christianity, thus ending the case against them. As they were converts, their property escheated to the king, who sold it, for 400 marks, to Master Elijah Menahem (died 1284), brother to Cresse and Hagin. L'Eveske's sons took the baptismal names Adam and Nicholas, but his own new name is unknown, as is his fate after this date. His wife has not been identified. They had at least three children. Their daughter Hannah married Josce, archpresbyter from 1207 until 1236. One son, Isaac, was active in his father's business of lending money. The other son is unknown. No other sons are recorded; it may be presumed, therefore, that these were the two sons who converted with their father to Christianity. 


@@@@@


doc= 52246


Eyre, Simon (c.1395-1458), merchant, mayor of London, and civic benefactor, was the son of John and Amy Eyre of Brandon, Suffolk, where he was born. He was apprenticed in London to the upholder (second-hand clothes dealer) Peter Smert, but transferred to the more prestigious Drapers' Company in 1419, some six years after completing his apprenticeship. Unlike other successful merchants of this period Eyre did not make his money in overseas trade (his name never appears in the London customs accounts), but acted instead as a middleman, buying cloth in the countryside and selling it to the royal wardrobe and to other merchants, above all to Italians. At the same time he bought dyes and spices from Genoese and Venetian merchants, who were excluded by chartered custom from the retail sale of their imported goods in London, and distributed them throughout England. While other merchants bore the risks, Eyre made the profits. Such was his success that he was elected master of the Drapers in 1425-6, only six years after he had joined the company. He was sheriff of London in 1434-5, and master of the Drapers again in the following year. In 1437 he was an elected auditor of the accounts of London Bridge, and a common councilman by 1441. He was active in the latter role, serving on at least eight important joint committees of the common council and court of aldermen; in October 1444 he was elected an alderman of Walbrook ward. 
By this date Eyre was already involved in London's complicated negotiations to buy, or lease, land in Cornhill for the rebuilding of the old Leadenhall as the city's granary -- perhaps it was this which secured him an aldermanry. He pursued the scheme energetically, and in consequence was elected mayor in 1445, only a year after he joined the aldermanic bench -- an unprecedented dash to the top. In spite of a certain timidity on the part of the common council, anxious about the costs of this ambitious project, the work forged ahead. By 1453 the great quadrangle (80 metres x 150 metres), with its chapel projecting to the east, was completed, much of it at Eyre's expense. But after the completion of the Leadenhall, Eyre appears to have lost interest in his civic career; he served on his last committee in 1454, and attended only one further meeting of the court after 1456. Instead he concentrated on his own plans for the new Leadenhall, giving a different turn to a building which the city had intended solely for a granary. The codicils to his will show him as primarily concerned with the chapel and schools which he had lately constructed there. Teachers of Latin grammar, of writing, and of song were already in post, with an establishment of a master, five priests, six clerks, and two choristers to serve the chapel. Eyre left $2000 with which his executors were to establish the schools, maintain the buildings, and pay the salaries, estimated at $113 per annum. The Drapers' Company was to administer this great scholarly enterprise. The project was a remarkable one, comparable, if on a lesser scale, with Henry VI's contemporary foundation at Eton, but unique in providing for the teaching of (presumably vernacular) writing as well as Latin grammar and song. But Eyre's executors were unable to realize his scheme. Perhaps they encountered resistance from the ecclesiastical authorities, perhaps there was simply not enough money. The schools withered away, and Eyre's wealth was used to set up a modest chantry in the church of St Mary Woolnoth, where he was later buried. 
Eyre's energy and forcefulness also manifested itself in his dealings with his own family. He married twice, first, by 1419, Katherine, daughter of Thomas Mulling, a London brazier, and second, Alice, who was the mother of his son Thomas and who had died by 1457. In 1446 Eyre secured a well-endowed city orphan, Elizabeth the daughter of the mayor and mercer Robert Large, as his son's bride. Young Thomas may have found it difficult to establish himself in a city where his father was a prominent, and often quarrelsome, presence. Frequently in debt, by 1456 he had spent some time in the Fleet, and had to be bought out by his father. When Eyre drew up his will in December 1457 he tried to protect his estate from his son's profligacy by making his considerable legacy dependent upon Thomas's not vexing the executors and doing nothing contrary to the will. The rest of the will bears equal witness to Eyre's forceful and dominating personality, and in particular to his hopes of establishing a London dynasty and ruling it from beyond the grave. His three surviving grandchildren, Robert, Thomas, and Jane, were to continue to live in their grandfather's house in Lombard Street, under the rule of his executors, until they were twenty-four years old. Thomas and Robert were to receive their stipulated legacies only if they married women of whom the executors approved. And the grandchildren were to live in the dynastic home, ruled by their grandfather's executors, provided with food and clothing and served by their grandfather's servants. But Eyre's plans came to nothing, for within ten years of his own death on 18 September 1458 his son Thomas and all his grandchildren were dead. 
Eyre's memory was kept alive among Londoners by a plaque in the north wall of the Leadenhall Chapel, commemorating the 'famous marchant' Simon Eyre as the 'founder' of the great work. But as time passed he came to be seen in a different, and mellower, light. 'The Gentle Craft', published by Thomas Deloney in 1597, provides an amiable account of how Simon Eyre, 'being at first a shoomaker', with the invaluable assistance of his wife and apprentices, became, in the end, mayor of London and builder of Leadenhall. Thomas Dekker recycled Deloney's fanciful tale to form the play 'The Shoemaker's Holiday' (1600). But the story did not share the long-term popularity of the comparable success story of Dick Whittington and his cat. Deloney's tale surfaced once more 'c'.1810 in a chapbook pamphlet, but otherwise Simon Eyre has been lost to view. 


@@@@@


doc= 52247


Tanner, Dame Emmeline Mary (1876-1955), headmistress and educational reformer, was born on 28 December 1876 at 1 Locksbrook Place, Weston, Bath, the eldest of the seven children of Samuel Thomas Tanner JP (1849-1929), coal merchant, and his wife, Jeanetta Jane, daughter of George Fry of Lynton and his second wife. She was born into a lower-middle-class family, and her parents valued education as a necessary means to the employment of their children. Financial pressures, however, meant that Emmeline's schooling was very limited: from a small private establishment she went on, at the age of thirteen, to become a student teacher, then taught in private schools in Birmingham and Southampton before taking up an appointment in 1897 at the Ladies' College, Halifax, where she gained a valuable social education and training. From an early age she had had an ambition to succeed, and she continued her studies while working, taking the examinations of the College of Preceptors when thirteen and the Cambridge senior locals at fifteen. Unable to attend university as an internal student, she studied for an external degree of the University of London, graduating with first-class honours in history in 1904. Despite these inauspicious beginnings, she was appointed as history mistress to Sherborne School for Girls from the beginning of 1905. While there she wrote her only book (1908), a widely used text on the Renaissance and the Reformation. 
Emmeline Tanner's five years at Sherborne formed the introduction to what was to become a remarkable career. In 1910 she became the first headmistress of the new Nuneaton high school. There she was fortunate to have the encouragement and practical assistance of the county director of education, Bolton King, whose advice she valued throughout her life. She stayed there for ten years before moving to Bedford high school, a school desperately needing the change and reform that she was able to bring. In 1924 she reluctantly moved to Roedean, having been determinedly headhunted by Penelope Lawrence. She proved an able successor to the Lawrence sisters, and remained at Roedean for the rest of her teaching career. 
Tall, erect, dignified, neatly and simply dressed, with blue eyes behind pince-nez, Emmeline Tanner had a compelling physical presence. Magnanimous and caring, with a sense of humour and fun, she was said to be always smiling. She had a lasting memory for names, and a phenomenal grasp of detail, which was the root of her outstanding administrative ability. She put her stamp on all her schools, and earned a lifelong love and respect from both pupils and staff. By the 1920s her many gifts increasingly meant that she was holding office in regional and national organizations. She served on the education committees at Nuneaton, Bedford, and Brighton. A member for nearly thirty years of the executive committee of the Association of Headmistresses, she became first chair of committee (1923-5) and later president (1937-9), proving herself an able negotiator and policymaker; she then became chair of the Joint Committee of Four Secondary Associations (1940-42). In 1920 she was invited to become one of four women members of the consultative committee of the Board of Education, and in 1924 was reappointed for another six years. She was a signatory to several reports, notably the Hadow report of 1926. By the 1930s she was recognized as the leading representative and spokeswoman for girls' education, and was regularly called upon regarding educational matters. A member of the Board of Education (Fleming) committee on public schools from 1942 to 1944, she helped draft new educational policy and played an important role in the discussions leading up to the 1944 'Education Act'. Unlike many of her fellow headmistresses in this period, Emmeline had not only national interests but was actively involved in international causes. A dedicated supporter of the League of Nations, she served on many committees with international purposes, and listed travel as her sole recreation in 'Who's Who'. She was not afraid to become involved in politics -- as an independent Liberal -- nor to speak on political platforms. Though brought up as a member of the Swedenborgians, she became a member of the Church of England in 1913. 
One major plank of Emmeline Tanner's educational philosophy, mirroring her own experience, was that no one should be held back from education for want of money, and she strove to make this part of her practice and policy making. Her hope was to enable girls to develop their differing gifts through a varied curriculum which allowed for flexibility. Her philosophy, however, extended beyond classroom and curriculum to the individual child's relationship with the whole world outside: girls should learn to be members of a community and gain a sense of the corporate life, enabling them better to play their part in the world outside school. She believed in training her girls for useful work in the world, in the professions and other careers, including motherhood, and she encouraged them to become responsible citizens, using their votes in both local and national elections. 
Emmeline Tanner was a woman of courage, wisdom, and integrity, a great headmistress, an outstanding teacher and administrator, and an influential committee member. At a normal retirement age she was demonstrating her planning genius in the move of Roedean to Keswick at the beginning of the Second World War. She was not allowed to retire until 1947, when she was seventy-two. In that year she was created DBE for services to education and given an honorary MA from the University of London. Unwilling to face settling down, she set off for South Africa and India; on her return, in 1950 and 1952, she took on acting headships at Southwold and Harrogate respectively. After a long journey to southern Africa she moved at last into her retirement home in December 1954. Three weeks later she had a fall, which led to her death. She died on 7 January 1955 in Savernake Hospital, Marlborough, and was cremated at Oxford on 13 January. A memorial service at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 24 January was attended by a large congregation. 


@@@@@


doc= 52249


Hende, John (d. 1418), royal financier and mayor of London, is of unknown origins, but by 1368 he was active in the drapery trade and had made the first of three prudent marriages. His first wife, Isabella, was the daughter of John Southcote; her mother, Margaret St Edmund, came from a family of rich drapers with city property. Hende may have been Southcote's apprentice. His marriage settlement in 1368 endowed him with a shop and solar in Candlewick Street, which he had previously rented from the Southcotes. In the 1370s he may have been finishing cloth and he had links with the Lucchese in London. Hende's role in his livery is obscure; early drapers' records are fragmentary. His unsuccessful attempt in 1384 to secure the future site of the Old Common Hall in St Swithin's Lane may have been on behalf of his first wife's family, to whom he remained close for the rest of his life, rather than the livery. 
An expanding network of rich clients marked his increasing success in the next decades; Hende bought real property and acted as banker as well as draper. Traces of his efficient business methods survive in a cancelled bond with John, Lord Cobham (died 1408), in 1393, on security of plate. By 1392-4 Hende dominated the supply of cloth to Richard II's wardrobe. His sales of scarlet, long cloth dyed in grain, russet, and blanket, amounted to nearly $4150 in these years, more even than the value of the silks sold by his only near competitor, the mercer Richard Whittington (died 1423). Hende continued to supply cloth on a smaller scale to Henry IV and Henry V, but by this time his real interests lay outside drapery. 
Hende's rise in city government kept pace with his success as a draper. He served as a commissioner for the first time in 1369, as alderman of Candlewick ward in 1379, 1381, and 1384-92 and of Walbrook from 1394-1409. He was sheriff in 1381-2, during the mayoralty of the populist draper, John Northampton, and acquiesced in Northampton's condemnation in 1385. In October 1391 Hende was elected mayor. Conflict with Richard II over the city's refusal to lend money to the crown came to a head in May 1392. Richard moved the centres of government to York, and the city oligarchy was summoned to Nottingham before the king and council. On 25 June Hende and the sheriffs were stripped of office and imprisoned, Hende in Windsor Castle. The prisoners appeared before a commission of inquiry headed by the dukes of York and Gloucester at Aylesbury on 10 July, and at Eton eight days later, with the mayor and sheriffs of 1389-90. On 22 July the city was fined and lost its liberties, though the prisoners were freed on bail. The city conciliated Richard by a lavish civic reception and gifts of money and jewels. On 21 September Hende and the others were pardoned and the city liberties were provisionally restored on payment of a corporate fine of $10,000. It was not until 1397 that the liberties were fully confirmed. It is against this background that Hende's vast sales on credit to the royal wardrobe took place. Nearly $4350 for cloth supplied to Richard II's wardrobe remained unpaid until 1403 and 1404. 
During Henry IV's reign Hende became the leading royal financier. Between 1402 and his death in 1418, he lent a total of $14,514 to the crown. As security he controlled the London wool customs between 1403-10; his fellow collector in 1407-10 was Richard Whittington, another major crown financier. Unlike Whittington, Hende does not seem to have exported wool. His only known agent was based in Bordeaux, but could have been a partner in a syndicate. He lent smaller but still substantial sums to Henry V. In 1426 his executors accepted partial repayment and returned crown jewels pawned to Hende. 
Hende's second wife, by 1380, was Katherine, widow of Thomas Baynard, an Essex landowner; Katherine held a life interest in the inheritance of her son, the lawyer and MP, Richard Baynard. By 1407 Hende had married as his third wife, Elizabeth, perhaps daughter of Sir John Norbury. Besides her jointure, Elizabeth enjoyed in her own right city properties settled on her by Sir Adam Francis and a manor and lands in Essex. By 1419 she was the wife of Ralph Boteler, Lord Sudeley. The two sons of the third marriage were Hende's only surviving children. Both were called John and both were later sheriffs of Essex. At his death on 2 August 1418, besides property in London, Hende held twelve manors, and other lands, advowsons, and reversions in Essex and Kent. He had acquired the first of his eight Essex manors, Mascallsbury in White Roding, as early as 1370. In 1381 he began the disputed purchase of his chief manor, Bradwell-juxta-Coggeshall, securing title in 1383 and 1385. Geoffrey Chaucer and Ralph Strode, no doubt the common serjeant of the city and the 'philosophical Strode' ('Troilus and Cressida') of the dedication of Chaucer's 'Troilus', acted as mainpernors over Bradwell, a possible indication that Hende had literary tastes. Hende consolidated his Essex holdings through his second marriage. Hende bought three further manors in Essex and his four in Kent from the estate of Maud de Vere, countess of Oxford. In 1412 the value of his own lands, excluding his wife's, was declared at approximately $200 p.a., in 1418 at over $250 p.a., both no doubt underestimates. Besides his real property, Hende left his widow and sons $4000 in cash, to be recovered from his debtors, plate, and jewels; he left a further sum of approximately $420 in pious bequests, to his 'familia' and executors. 
Hende's marble armorial monument in Holy Trinity Church, Bradwell, was lost before 1768, but fragments of armorial glass survive. According to John Stow, Hende rebuilt St Swithin's, the drapers' church, where his arms could be seen in glass. The stained glass arms at Drapers' Hall are modern. Thomas Middleton included Hende as one of the nine drapers' worthies in the civic pageant, 'The Sun in Aries' Worlds', written to honour the new draper mayor in 1621. 


@@@@@


doc= 52250


Knolles, Thomas (d. 1435), merchant and mayor of London, enjoyed an extraordinarily long career and was one of the few Londoners to serve twice as mayor. It has been said that he was an immigrant from Cheshire, but his father could have been the Richard Knolles who left property in Cheapside, while the Alison Knolles who was one of the few women to be a member of the Grocers' Company, and who appears in its list in 1383, could have been either his mother or a kinswoman. However, Thomas's election as warden of the company in 1387, without any previous mention in the city's records, raises the possibility that he purchased citizenship, aided by his connection with Sir Robert Knolles (died 1407), whose executor and likely kinsman he was. In 1393 he was elected alderman for Dowgate, and the following year he served as sheriff. He transferred in 1397 to Cordwainer ward, where his house was in Watling Street, which was part of the grocers' trading quarter in St Antonin's parish. He was one of the leading parishioners who nominated chaplains to one of its chantries. 
There is no evidence that Knolles made his fortune, as the richest grocers normally did, by exporting wool or cloth; rather it would appear from two large debts owed to him by a provincial mercer and dyer that he principally distributed raw materials for the cloth trade. In the commercial depression of the early fifteenth century he ventured into tin, and was the partner of a prominent Cornish tin merchant, John Megre, who started manufacturing pewter in London in 1397. Knolles also invested in property in London and, moreover, had an estate at North Mimms in Hertfordshire. By 1412 his rents amounted to $38, making him one of the richest owners of property in the city, but this income was modest compared with the capital he amassed. 
Some of his property in Sopers Lane came to him as a reward for his services to the new Lancastrian dynasty. He may well have advanced in the grocers' ranks because his views coincided with those of the Chichele brothers who were committed Lancastrians. A lack of coin and a contraction of trade turned many Londoners against the government of Richard II, and it seems likely that Knolles was chosen as mayor in 1399 because he had been a leading supporter of the Lancastrian usurpation. At Christmas 1399 he rode out to Windsor to warn Henry IV of a plot by dissentient earls to restore Richard II, and afterwards he supported the new king with loans which helped to obtain the commercial policies Londoners wanted. Knolles's choice as one of the four treasurers appointed by parliament in 1404 to supervise expenditure on war demonstrates the public confidence he enjoyed, as indeed does his re-election as mayor in 1410. But by then the commercial recession was making men unwilling to accept public office, and Knolles's wealth was sorely needed by the city. He was the highest contributor to the city's loan for Henry V's campaign of 1417, lending $200; and he had represented London in parliament the previous year. 
Knolles was also a generous benefactor to the city, taking an active part in the rebuilding of the Guildhall in his second mayoralty. His religious orthodoxy is implied by his obtaining a papal indult to use a portable altar, by his appointment in January 1414 as one of the commissioners investigating Lollardy after Oldcastle's rebellion, and by his rebuilding of St Antonin's Church. He also acquired the advowson of the church of All Hallows, Honey Lane. His wealth funded many charitable works. With his son he provided fresh piped water for the prisoners of Newgate and Ludgate, and his wills show a concern for the poor of his mistery and for his estate at North Mimms. He was also a benefactor of the Grocers' Company, and with Robert Chichele he promoted the acquisition of its hall. They were two of the trustees who acquired its site in 1425, and Knolles contributed $62 5's'. in 1427 towards the building, while with his son Thomas he secured the company's incorporation in 1428. Among other gifts he paid for its almshouses in 1431. 
Knolles's family life and friendships seem to have reflected his generosity of spirit. According to the inscription his son had carved on his memorial in St Antonin's Church, he and his wife, Joan, were married for sixty years and had nineteen children, of whom four sons and three daughters survived their father's death at Watling Street between 29 June and 11 July 1435. His eldest son, Thomas, followed his father in the Grocers' Company, while William became a grocer in Bristol. Knolles's daughter Marjorie married the grocer John Chichele, whom he assisted in repaying a large debt. The quality of Knolles's friendship appears from his joint offer with Robert Chichele in 1413 of 10,000 marks as security for Henry Somer (died 1450), the chancellor of the exchequer, when he was impeached in parliament. He also brought up in his household, and was the guardian of, the son of a deceased fellow parishioner and grocer, John Oxney, whose widow he remembered in his will. A chantry was established for Knolles and his family in St Antonin's Church, in support of which Alderman William Gregory, a skinner, bequeathed an annual rent in 1461. Knolles clearly inspired a long-lasting affection. 


@@@@@


doc= 52252


Wesel, Gerhard von (c.1443-1510), merchant and administrator, was the second of three sons of the Cologne merchant Hermann von Wesel (died 1484) and his wife, Kathrinchen. Of Gerhard's education it is only known that he matriculated at the University of Cologne while still a minor (not yet fourteen) in 1457. Although Gerhard later spoke and wrote German, Latin, and English, and owned books in German and Latin, he was not marked out for a clerical or academic career, but followed in his father's footsteps. He was married three times: his first wife was Gertrud von Merle, whom he married before 1468; they had a daughter, Gertrud, who married a Cologne merchant, Konrad Rinck. Gertrud died on 8 August 1483. There were no children of either his second marriage, to Elisabeth Glidermann, whom he married late in 1483 and who died on 1 January 1486, or his third, to Adelheid Bischoff, whom he married in February 1489; she died after 27 July 1518. Gerhard von Wesel traded initially in his father's name, later on his own, along the main artery of Cologne's international commerce (Frankfurt-Cologne-Burgundy-London). 
Like his father von Wesel was a member of the Cologne town council. Co-opted for the first time on 24 June 1481, he served the usual one-year term eight times between 1487-8 and 1508-9. In this urban context he was to enjoy a distinguished career, serving during the same period, usually more than once, in a wide variety of administrative, judicial, fiscal, and military offices, and being four times chosen mayor of Cologne, for the years 1494-5, 1497-8, 1502-3, and 1507-8. In addition von Wesel represented Cologne at the reform diet of Worms (1495), which Maximilian I, the king of the Romans ('r'. 1493-1519), opened with an urgent request for an emergency loan -- to be repaid from the proceeds of an imperial poll tax ('gemeiner pfennig') -- in order to repel the French invasion of Italy. A committee of estates was formed to apportion the loan, and the imperial towns elected von Wesel and the mayor of Augsburg as their representatives. The proposal put forward by the princes on the committee proved explosive: not only the towns, but also the 'geselschaften' in the empire, were to pay up. The phrase was ominous: did the 'geselschaften' include mercantile corporations (in which case the towns would be subject doubly), or did the princes only have knights' organizations in mind? Von Wesel and his colleague demanded clarification, and, when their worst fears proved to be correct, persuaded the committee to drop the notion of taxing the 'geselschaften' and so reduce the towns' burden. The real issue was not the towns' reluctance to pay an ever-increasing share of imperial expenses (although that was certainly a factor), but rather the need for constitutional reform of the empire, which would reduce the power of the monarchy by establishing and funding independent institutions answerable to the estates. 
Von Wesel's role in English history had begun many years earlier. For almost a century Anglo-Hanseatic tension had built up over the issue of reciprocal rights. English merchants, who controlled Anglo-Prussian trade but still lacked a firm legal footing, demanded rights in Prussia equivalent to those enjoyed by the Hanse in England. While these demands were satisfied by the treaty of London (1437), Prussia's refusal to ratify the treaty led to a sustained campaign by the English crown, which twice (in 1442 and 1447) suspended Hanseatic privileges in England. Each time Cologne, whose merchants suffered disproportionately, managed to rescue the situation. Edward IV used different tactics, and only granted the Hanse members the use of their rights for a limited period, making confirmation of their charters dependent upon negotiations on reciprocity. Cologne, whose merchants had much to lose from any disruption of trade with England, led all the Hanseatic diplomatic efforts. In 1468, in a separate incident, the Danish king seized six English ships bound for Danzig as a reprisal for the depredations of English merchants in Iceland. Since the English had no hope of compensation from the Danes, they decided to use the incident for a different purpose. Seizing upon the fact that Danzig ships and seamen had been involved, they petitioned the crown to arrest all Hanseatic merchants in England and sequester their goods. 
When this storm broke in late July 1468, Gerhard von Wesel was acting alderman of the Steelyard (the Hanseatic headquarters in London), all the senior members having left for the continent at Easter. It was a terrible responsibility for a young man. While Gerhard led all the delegations to plead the Steelyard's case before the council, and took the lead in preparing its legal defence, he came under increasing pressure from Cologne to avoid entanglement in the difficulties of the eastern Hanse members. Cologne felt -- with considerable justification -- that since the 1440s its merchants had been made to bear the consequences of the rash actions of Danzig and Lubeck. If these hotheads had picked yet another quarrel with England, then they should resolve the difficulties they had brought upon themselves, without expecting Cologne to follow their lead or foot the bill. Von Wesel was initially loath to accept this view, though he must have been tempted, as the crown clearly favoured Cologne: while Hanse members had been imprisoned in July 1468 and condemned to pay compensation of $20,000 by the council in November 1468, Cologne merchants had been released from custody and acquitted. Nevertheless, von Wesel loyally acted in the interest of the imprisoned Hanse merchants until the spring of 1469, when he came around to the position of his elders in Cologne. On 16 May 1469, shortly after the Hanseatic diet had ordered a complete break with England, a separate Cologne Steelyard was constituted with von Wesel at its head. In that capacity he was instrumental in obtaining privileges for the Cologne merchants, and he continued to preside over the Cologne Steelyard until it became clear that its final act was being played out. Charles the Bold of Burgundy had used his good offices to establish diplomatic contacts between England and the Hanse, and in 1474 the treaty of Utrecht resolved the crisis in Anglo-Hanseatic relations. However, Edward IV was forced to break with Cologne, which -- as von Wesel noted bitterly -- had loyally supported him. The treaty and a separate note obliged the crown to deny Hanseatic rights to Cologne, which had been expelled from the Hanse in 1471. Despite his bitterness at Edward's breach of faith, von Wesel seriously considered becoming an English subject and a London citizen, should Cologne remain estranged from the Hanse. 
In the end events drove Cologne and the Hanse into one another's arms, and Cologne was readmitted in the concord of Bremen of 1476. However, the Steelyard could not bring itself to readmit Gerhard von Wesel, who was hated with particular venom. It required considerable efforts to overcome this enmity, but in the end von Wesel was successful, and in 1479 was allowed back, though he remained wary as late as 1487. Gradually, however, the bitterness faded, and the Hanse came to appreciate his expert knowledge of English affairs and his wide circle of powerful English friends. Until his death he was crucially involved in every round of Anglo-Hanseatic negotiations (at Antwerp in 1491 and 1497 and at Bruges in 1499). Thereafter von Wesel withdrew from international politics, though he remained active in the administration of Cologne. He died there on 4 September 1510 and was buried in the St Vincent Chapel of the Augustinian monastery in Cologne. 


@@@@@


doc= 52253


Soper, William (d. 1459), administrator and merchant, was the son of Robert and Clemency Soper. The family may have been connected with Salisbury: a John Soper traded with that city, and William himself had a house there 'c'.1445; another possible place of origin is the area round Totnes in Devon. Soper was probably apprenticed in Southampton, where he is recorded as town steward in 1410, and for which he sat regularly in parliament, being returned thirteen times between May 1413 and February 1449. In 1413 he was appointed collector of subsidy and other royal dues at Southampton, continuing as customer there for thirty years. Also in 1413, his 'annus mirabilis', he stepped onto the ladder of royal service after a vessel of his captured a Castilian vessel, which became the royal ship 'Holy Ghost'. He made this prize over to the crown, and his future career as a royal official at Southampton, and especially in connection with Henry V's navy, may have started from that transaction. Soper was certainly a key figure in the revival of the English navy under Henry V. In 1416 he administered the building of the 'Gracedieu', 'Falcon', and 'Valentine', all at Southampton. The 'Gracedieu' weighed 1400 tons, and was the largest and most impressive of King Henry's ships. Facilities for its building at Southampton under Soper, who was appointed surveyor of the king's ships at 1's'. a day in 1418, contributed to the creation of a dockyard workshop, which included a forge and storehouse costing $200 and made of ragstone and 'holyngston'. Southampton effectively replaced Greenwich as England's principal naval base after 1420. Following active service in 1420 the 'Gracedieu' came to Soper who managed it. The great ship was laid up at Hamble in 1432 and burnt out in 1439. Marine archaeology has shown it was 125 ft long and clinker-built. It was excluded from the sale of ships under Henry V's will. 
On 3 February 1420 Soper became keeper of the king's ships. His surviving accounts, now at Greenwich, have been published, and record the details of naval administration, maintenance, and equipment of the years around 1420 in the context of the development of the Lancastrian navy and of Soper's life. However, he also undertook a number of other tasks on behalf of the government. These included holding inquisitions and musters, and being a verderer of the New Forest, where he went to live. Trade in his own right -- recorded from 1412, when the commodity was La Rochelle wine -- probably became relatively less significant after he obtained royal preferment in 1413. But in 1417 he sent wool to Pisa, and in 1419 to Spain 'and foreign parts'. He owned the 140 ton 'Julian of Hampton' in 1418, and was sending wine to the dean of Salisbury and to the king's house at Guildford as late as 1440. There is evidence that the Southampton town government was aware of developments in financial practice as early as 1441, and was in the forefront of bookkeeping practice in England by the end of the century. Soper may have been influential in this area, since he was handling financial instruments and letters of payment in the 1420s and 1430s. 
With an annual income of $50, Soper was one of the wealthiest men in Hampshire in 1436. He certainly had cordial relations with Luca di Maso degli Albizzi, who was captain of the Florentine galleys in 1429. Albizzi visited Soper's rich New Forest home at Newton Bury (now Bury Farm), Hampshire, and declared of the 'Gracedieu' that 'in truth I have never seen so large and beautiful a construction' (Mallett, 259). His account of his visit provides a vivid view of the pleasures -- feasting, hunting, receipt of gifts -- which accompanied business with Soper. In 1436 Soper may himself have gone to north Italy on pilgrimage. He developed financial interests which may have included moneylending and banking, perhaps operating from properties he had in Southampton. This could help to explain his slackening interest in trade after 1413. He continued in royal service under Henry VI until 1442. Having become one of the new administrative squirearchy of late medieval England, he died in 1459 at his country house as William Soper esquire. His association with Southampton continued in death, as his will tells of his marble tomb at the town's Franciscan church. Recent excavations may have uncovered his remains, but not his tomb. He apparently left no children, though he married twice: first the pious, and perhaps older, Isabel, whose surname is unknown, and second, 'c'.1438, his former mistress, Joan Chamberlain. 


@@@@@


doc= 52254


Paycocke, Thomas (d. 1518), clothier, was a younger son of John Paycocke of Coggeshall (died 1505) and his wife, Emma. His father was described as a butcher, though this must understate the range and interest of his activities. There were many families of Paycocke or Peycocke in Suffolk and Essex from at least the thirteenth century. It is likely that Thomas was born and died in the small Essex market town of Coggeshall, where his brothers John (died 1533) and Robert (died 1520) also lived. Thomas and Robert may have been first-generation clothiers. On his memorial brass (which recorded the day of his death as 4 September) Thomas was described as 'clothworker', and by his will (dated the same day) he made specified bequests to named textile workers -- two shearmen and their families, a weaver, a fuller, and a former apprentice. The broader scale of his cloth-making operations is better suggested by some further provisions: 'Item, I bequeth to all my wevers, Fullers and shermen that be not afore rehersed by name xij d. apece, and will they that haue wrought me verey moch wark haue iij s. iiijd. apece. Item I bequethe to be distributed amonge my kembers, carders and spynners summa iiij li. (Beaumont, 324)' Nothing is known more precisely about the number of people he employed. He instructed his executors to give a broadcloth to the abbot and convent of Coggeshall, which perhaps indicates something about the sort of cloth he produced. The principal axis of Paycocke's trade, to judge from his will, was between Clare to the north and London to the south. 
Paycocke married first Margaret, daughter of Thomas Horrold of Clare, and second Anne, daughter of George Cotton. In 1505, under the terms of his father's will, he inherited a newly built house in West Street, Coggeshall, which survives in the custody of the National Trust and has been described as 'one of the most attractive half-timbered houses of England' (Pevsner, 200). The elaborate wood carving that decorates the house includes, as a repeated motif, the family's merchant mark, an ermine tail. The house must have been intended specifically for Thomas Paycocke and his second wife, since their initials (T. P. and A. P.) recur in the oak rafters of the hall; it was perhaps built for them when they married. Thus Paycocke's chief claim to fame is perhaps his father's generosity, though a similar benevolence towards family, friends, and dependants is evident in his own will. After the death of his second wife it would seem that for want of a direct heir, the house passed to his nephew, John Paycocke. Paycocke is not known to have owned land. 
Thomas Paycocke was a brother of the Crutched Friars of Colchester, whom he remembered in his will. He made numerous other bequests to local churches, as well as 6's'. 8died to St Paul's in London -- 'to the old warke in Pawlis and to Powlis pardone' (Beaumont, 323). He also left the substantial sum of $80 for repairing roads in Coggeshall and northwards towards Clare. He willed to be buried near his father, grandfather, and great-uncle in Coggeshall parish church. His monumental brass is lost, though that of his elder brother John survives. But he had the good fortune to be one of the six men and women commemorated in Eileen Power's 'Medieval People', first published in 1924 and many times reprinted, which has brought him a fame that his unremarkable career would never otherwise have earned for him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52255


Kahane, Jack (1887-1939), publisher, was born on 20 July 1887 at 59 Bury New Road, Broughton, in Salford, near Manchester, the seventh of the eight children of Selig Kahane (died 1893), a shipper, and his wife, Suzy, 'nee' Sufrin (died 1896). Although registered as Jonas, he was always known as Jack. His parents were of Jewish origin and his forebears had prospered in the cotton trade. Both Kahane's father and mother died when he was young and he was brought up by an elder sister. He was educated at Manchester grammar school from 1900 to 1903, and then went to work in a cotton trader's office before setting up his own successful business. A tall, good-looking man, Kahane indulged a natural taste for the good life with fashionable clothes and frequent visits to London. The archetypal Edwardian dandy, he carried a cane and wore a monocle. 
Kahane joined the army on the outbreak of the First World War and was gassed and wounded at the battle of Ypres. During his convalescence he met his future wife, Marcelle Eugenie Girodias, whose father was a French civil engineer and whose mother was Spanish, and they were married in 1917. In 1919 their first son, Maurice, was born and over the next seven years three more children followed: Nicole, Sylvie, and Eric. 
During a bout of tuberculosis Kahane wrote a light and slightly 'risque' novel called 'Laugh and Grow Rich' which was published in England, where it was banned by lending libraries. He sent a spirited letter defending the novel to a British newspaper, good and bad reviews followed, and the book sold well. Noting that spicy stories invoked censorship, which triggered protest, which produced sales, Kahane turned his attention to publishing. 
In 1928 Kahane joined a French publisher as a junior partner and persuaded Sylvia Beach, owner of the bookshop Shakespeare and Company, who had recently published James Joyce's 'Ulysses', to allow his firm to publish a 5000 word fragment of Joyce's work in progress, 'Haveth Childers everywhere'. In 1931 Kahane decided to set up his own publishing house, rented offices in the elegant place Vendome, and named his publishing house the Obelisk Press after the Egyptian obelisk in the centre of the nearby place de la Concorde. 
Aware of both the pitfalls and the opportunities created by censorship in Britain, Ireland, and the United States, Kahane devised a double-sided publishing strategy. He would publish popular and sexually titillating novels to pay the bills but also actively search for serious authors who could not have their works published in their own countries. It was this simple formula that underpinned the Obelisk Press during its short life in the 1930s, as well as that of its successor, the Olympia Press, founded and run by Kahane's son, Maurice Girodias, after the Second World War. Between them they published some of the landmark avant-garde novels of the twentieth century. 
In 1933 Kahane launched the new venture with 'The Young and the Evil' by Parker Tyler and Charles Henri Ford, an interracial homosexual novel set in New York; Radclyffe Hall's crusading lesbian novel, 'The Well of Loneliness'; and Frank Harris's four-volume 'My Life and Loves', an exaggerated and bombastic account of his literary, political, and sexual adventures. Kahane's great coup, however, was to publish Henry Miller's 'Tropic of Cancer' in 1934, followed by 'Black Spring' (1936), 'Max and the White Phagocytes' (1938), and 'Tropic of Capricorn' (1939). Through Miller, Kahane met Lawrence Durrell and Anais Nin. He published Durrell's first serious novel, 'The Black Book', in 1938 and Nin's 'Winter of Artifice' in 1939. He also put out Cyril Connolly's novel 'The Rock Pool', and wrote engagingly about his own life in 'The Memoirs of a Booklegger'. Jack Kahane died in Paris of a heart attack on 2 September 1939. A fitting epitaph came from Henry Miller, recalling the birth pangs of 'Tropic of Cancer'. 'It was something of a miracle', he said, 'that I found in Paris the one publisher... courageous enough to sponsor such a book: Jack Kahane and the Obelisk Press' (E. de Grazia, 'Girls Lean Back Everywhere: the Law of Obscenity and the Assault on Genius', 1992, 367). 


@@@@@


doc= 52256


Arnaud, Yvonne Germaine Jeanne (1890-1958), actress, was born on 20 December 1890 in Bordeaux, France, the daughter of Felix Leon Paul Arnaud, a colonel in the French army, and his wife, Antoinette de Montegu. Educated in Paris she won a first prize for piano playing at the Paris Conservatoire at the age of twelve. After training as a classical pianist, she toured in Europe and the United States as a child prodigy. Her first stage appearance was somewhat accidental. During a lull in her concert engagements in Britain in 1911 she went to see a musical comedy. Deciding on a career on the theatrical stage, though with no formal training, she made her debut the same year as Princess Mathilde in J. T. Tanner's 'The Quaker Girl' (with music by Lionel Monckton) at the Adelphi. 
Arnaud scored a big success the following year as Suzanne in 'The Girl in the Taxi' at the Lyric, a role she reprised in numerous revivals. With her natural charm and high spirits and a 'musical broken English-French accent', which she herself felt was something of a croak, she quickly became a firm favourite, and more successes followed as she turned her hand to anything from Shakespeare to farce. She appeared as Noisette in 'Oh, be Careful!' and Phrynette in the French mime play 'L'enfant prodigue', both in 1915; as Kitty Pearson in 'Jerry' (1916); as Georgette St Pol in 'Kissing Time' by Guy Bolton and P. G. Wodehouse (1919); and as Chiquette in J. Hastings Turner's 'The Naughty Princess' (1920). On 28 October 1920 Arnaud married Hugh McLellan ('b'. 1895/6), author and later farmer, the son of playwright C. M. S. McLellan; they had no children. 
Arnaud's portrayal of Mrs Pepys in James B. Fagan's 'And So to Bed' (1926) (which she also played in New York) received much favourable comment, as did her Elizabeth in Harry Graham's 'By Candle Light' (1928). Successes as Louise Allington in Will Evans's 'Tons of Money' (1922), Marguerite Hickett in Ben Travers's 'A Cuckoo in the Nest' (1925), Elma Melton in Frederick Lonsdale's 'Canaries Sometimes Sing' (1929) (again played in New York), and the Duchess of Tann in James B. Fagan's 'The Improper Duchess' (1931), were repeated in the film versions of these of 1931, 1933, 1930, and 1936 respectively. Other roles included Louise in 'Will you Love me Always?' (1932), Helene Lorimer in 'Doctor's Orders' (1933), Princess Katharine in 'Henry V' (1934), and Mrs Val Shannon in Peter Traill's comedy 'Tread Softly' (1935). 
Arnaud made her first films in 1920 ('Desire' and 'The Temptress') but then no more until 1930. She appeared occasionally thereafter through the 1930s and 1940s. She was seen in 'On Approval' (1930), 'Widow's Might' and 'Princess Charming' (1934), 'Lady in Danger' (1935), 'Stormy Weather' and 'The Gay Adventure' (1936), 'Neutral Port' (1940), 'Tomorrow we Live' (1942), and 'Woman to Woman' and 'The Ghosts of Berkeley Square' (1947). Her last film appearance was as the maid, Georgette, in Jacques Tati's 'Mon oncle' (1958). 
Yet Arnaud remained first and foremost a West End stage actress and she also played during the 1930s in 'Plan for a Hostess' (1938), and 'What Say They?' (1939). In the following two decades she had roles in 'In Good King Charles's Golden Days' (1940), which she had also played at the Malvern Festival the previous year, in S. N. Behrman's 'Jane' (1947), and also in 'Mrs Willie' (1955), 'Six Months' Grace' (1957), and 'The Big Tickle', her last role, which opened in May 1958. Roles of particular note were in Margery Sharp's 'The Nutmeg Tree' (1941); as Mrs Frail in William Congreve's 'Love for Love' (1943); as Lady Catherine 'Kitty' Champion-Cheney in W. Somerset Maugham's 'The Circle' (1944); in Arthur Macrae's 'Traveller's Joy' (1948); and as Denise in Alan Melville's 'Dear Charles' (1952). A rare failure was as Madame Alexandra in Jean Anouilh's 'Colombe' (1951), 'where her essential kindliness and good nature was ill-suited to the cruelty and egotism of Anouilh's ageing actress' ('Concise Oxford Companion to the Theatre', 22). She also broadcast in the early days of radio, later in both classical and straight plays, and went on to become a favourite on both radio and television panel games. Arnaud was always an actress whose abundant charm was impossible to resist, yet she was 'much more than a delightful creature with whom every playgoer fell in love: she was the wittiest of actresses, too' ('The Times', 22 Sept 1958). 
Arnaud died at the National Hospital, Queen Square, Holborn, on 20 September 1958, never recovering from a cerebral haemorrhage for which she had undergone an operation on 2 August. She and her husband, who survived her, had long lived in Effingham Common, Surrey. In 1965, two years after construction began, the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, on its island site on the River Wey in nearby Guildford, opened as a memorial. 


@@@@@


doc= 52260


Robinson, Sir William (c.1643-1712), engineer and architect, was descended from an 'ancient' (his word) but unidentified family in Yorkshire. Nothing is known about his youth and training. Without prior military rank he became engineer and surveyor-general of all fortifications and building in Ireland in 1671. Not long afterwards he obtained the position of clerk of the ordnance. Before 1675 he had executed building and repairs for the royal works at Chapelizod House, Phoenix House, and Dublin Castle. 
Robinson returned to England in 1677 and may have visited France, but was back in Ireland in the same year. Although the duke of Ormond thought Robinson very knowing in engineering, it was not Robinson but engineers employed under him, with some from the English Ordnance (Paulus Storff, Sir Bernard de Gomme, and Thomas Phillips), who planned or carried out major works on Irish fortifications. In 1679 Robinson again visited England, where he showed plans (probably those of the Royal Hospital, Kilmainham) to the king. This must have been one of the busiest years in his architectural career, for his largest projects, the fort at Rincurran and the Royal Hospital, coincided with smaller ones such as Lismore Cathedral, co. Waterford, and the erection of a presence chamber probably in Dublin Castle. 
After the disastrous fire at Dublin Castle in 1684, Robinson played a pivotal role in the redesigning of the building. In the same year he surrendered his patent as surveyor-general, and was granted a new patent which he shared with the experimental philosopher William Molyneux (1656-1698), who seems to have taken a less active role than Robinson in the royal works. After the accession of James II in 1685, Robinson retired to England. There warrants were issued to apprehend him, but he avoided imprisonment. At the outbreak of the Williamite wars he became the comptroller-general of the provisions for the forces and commissionary-general of pay and provisions (both of which, in 1689, he shared, with Israel Fielding and Bartholomew Vanhomrigh respectively) and served in Ireland. After the wars Robinson resumed his post as surveyor-general, but he resigned the position in 1700 on the grounds of infirmity. In that same year he was appointed trustee and overseer of the barracks in Ireland. As an architect Robinson played a major role in developing classicism in Ireland. In his designs for the Royal Hospital, and for the east window of St Mary's Church, Dublin, he introduced baroque features of a very high quality. 
Robinson amassed a considerable number of positions. Before the Williamite wars he held the following appointments: keeper of the parliament house (1677), auditor and registrar (1684), attorney and agent (1686) and acting governor from 1697 to 1707 of the Royal Hospital, Kilmainham, receiver-general of the revenue (from 'c'.1682), and first storekeeper of the port of Dublin (1683). After the Williamite wars he was rewarded with the positions of commissioner for the stating of the accounts of the army in Ireland (1690), commissioner for forfeited estates (1690), commissioner for the debt of the army (1691), held jointly with William Molyneux, and was made a freeman of the Company of the Royal Fishery of Ireland (1692). In 1701 or 1702 he was created a knight (not a baronet, as stated elsewhere). In the latter year he was sworn of the Irish privy council, and became a trustee for the development and preservation of linen manufacture in Ireland. He served as a commissioner for the Vaudois in Ireland. He represented Trinity College in the Irish parliament from 1703 to his death, having been MP for Knocktopher, co. Kilkenny, in 1692-3 and for the borough of Wicklow in 1695-9. Trinity College made him an LLD in 1703. 
As deputy receiver he submitted to the Irish parliament in 1703 a national debt of over $100,000, which was taken as a misrepresentation; a motion in the house to expel him was dismissed, but another declaring him unfit for any public employment 'in this Kingdom' was accepted on 16 October 1703, and he was ordered to be imprisoned in Dublin Castle during the pleasure of the house. In just over one month the House of Commons ordered his release to allow him to go to England to prepare the account for the Treasury. After 1709 Robinson seems never to have returned to Ireland, although at some time he was reinstated as deputy vice-treasurer, a post which he lost in 1710 in return for a pension of $600. In the same year he became a trustee of the duke of Ormond's estate. 
Robinson married in London on 18 January 1677 Margery Tooke, eldest daughter of John Tooke of Hertfordshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Dacres. The Robinsons left no children. His wife was buried on 7 July 1708 in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. He died in London on 27 October 1712 and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields four days later. 
During his last years Robinson was plagued by individuals who tried to succeed to his estate. During his lifetime he made a total of five wills, dated 1686, 1689, 1701, 1709, and 1712. At his death he was reported to be worth more than $50,000, but he left many legal tangles. His estate included Sherwood Park, co. Carlow, and he had also built a fairly large residence at Islandbridge, near Kilmainham; he was mentioned as having a house at Ormond Key, Dublin in 1702. In England he held the manor of Walton-on-Thames in Surrey, which he had purchased in 1698, and Fleetwood Hall in Lancashire. In London Robinson lived in a house between Albemarle Street and Old Bond Street, the site of which he had purchased in 1710. 


@@@@@


doc= 52261


Olney, Sarah Allen (1842-1915), headmistress, was born at Saltash, Cornwall, on 12 May 1842, the daughter of Henry Allen Olney, solicitor, and his wife, Jane Ann, 'nee' Carpenter, who became the proprietress of a successful private school in the west of England. She had at least three sisters and two brothers. She spent much of her early life abroad, studying in Italy, France, and Germany, and became an excellent linguist. On returning to England she passed the higher local examinations and the external LLA examination of the University of St Andrews. In 1879 she became assistant mistress at the Girls' Public Day School Company (GPDSC) School at St John's Wood, where her sister Rebecca Allen Olney (1846/7-1927) was headmistress. The company appointed her the first headmistress of Blackheath high school, which opened in 1880 with sixty-eight pupils, a figure which was to quadruple during her period of office. She taught both mathematics and English, encouraging an enthusiasm for Shakespeare and Milton. While she ensured that academic standards were high (girls won scholarships at Oxford and Cambridge), her ideas of a rounded education included an insistence on neatness, and she instilled a certain feminine style and elegance among her pupils, whose social skills she carefully scrutinized. Both she and her sister were among the signatories to the petition to the House of Lords in 1885 in favour of the 'Women's Suffrage Bill'. 
In 1886 Sarah Allen Olney resigned from Blackheath and with her sister, who also gave up her headship, set up a private school, The Elms, at Hampstead, which met a demand among better-off parents for a more socially exclusive type of school. The success of this venture, which had about 100 pupils, both day girls and boarders, illustrated the continuing vitality of privately run schools for girls at the end of the century, despite the challenge from the movement which backed public day schools for girls. Indeed, the new school caused defections from the St John's Wood School (renamed South Hampstead high school), alienating the Allen Olney sisters from the friendship of the GPDSC. In July 1894 Sarah Allen Olney gave evidence on behalf of the Private Schools Association to the royal commission on secondary education (the Bryce commission), having visited sixty-nine such schools in twenty-nine towns to gather information. She cited the views of parents who considered that schools made dependent on public provision and subject to state control 'would entail the loss of the originality, vitality, and stimulating force of schools carried on by private enterprise' ('Royal commission on secondary education', 15.1). In describing her own school, she emphasized the high standards which were maintained by entering girls for the Cambridge local and London matriculation examinations, but pointed out that the wealthier class of parents remained 'much averse to allowing their daughters to work for examinations' (ibid.). She was personally a strong supporter of teacher registration. 
After their retirement the Allen Olney sisters divided their time between their home at 18 Buckland Crescent, Hampstead, and travels abroad. Sarah Allen Olney, who never married, died at Ormea, Cuneo, Italy, on 10 September 1915. 


@@@@@


doc= 52262


Neligan, Dorinda (1833-1914), headmistress and suffragette, was born on 9 June 1833 in Cork, the fifth daughter of Thomas Neligan, a lieutenant in the army. She was educated at home by her mother, a woman of great culture, and later in Germany and Paris before becoming a 'finishing governess'. From August 1870 to March 1871 she served with the Red Cross in France during the Franco-Prussian War, being in sole charge of the wounded at Metz during the siege. In direct contravention of orders, she personally sawed up a supply of wooden desks, found in the basement of the makeshift hospital, for fuel to keep the frozen men warm. 
Just three years later, without ever having had either any formal higher education or experience of teaching in schools, Dorinda Neligan was appointed by the Girls' Public Day School Company (GPDSC), under the patronage of Mrs Maria Grey, to be one of the first headmistresses of a girls' high school in Britain. Croydon High School for Girls, undenominational and 'classless' like all GPDSC schools, began with eighty pupils in 1874. By 1876 the roll had already risen to 175. In the early days Miss Neligan had to run the gauntlet of criticism from ill-wishers. There had originally been objections to the very founding of the school: a local newspaper suggested that it would bankrupt existing private girls' schools in the area; neighbours feared intolerable noise disturbance from the girls in the playground; others simply did not want 'strong-minded' women encouraging girls to be dissatisfied with life at home. Once the school was in existence some parents objected to the teaching of physiology. In 1875 two local shareholders of the Croydon school alleged that Miss Neligan evaded the GPDSC's printed regulations and was not enough of a disciplinarian. She was fully vindicated, however, by the GPDSC's education committee and then by the council of the GPDSC, and continued with her school policy of no rewards and no punishments (Kamm, 61). She fully believed that girls would be sufficiently motivated by the joy of learning in itself and that their sense of honour would lead them voluntarily to admit to any shortcomings. Whereas Miss Buss looked upon girls as potential devils, Miss Neligan tended to treat them as potential angels ('GPDST Newsletter', 1958, 33). 
An enthusiastic teacher, Miss Neligan could inspire interest in subjects as diverse as German poetry, Italian art, foreign travel, Gladstone's politics, and the 'Bible'. 'There was nothing narrow, nothing conventional about Miss Neligan' ('Croydon High School Record', 1924, 9). She was gifted with a fine presence, a most beautiful speaking voice, and a lively sense of humour, all of which combined with her intelligence and practical ability to make her a commanding personality for her staff and pupils at Croydon for twenty-seven years. The close connection between her school and university education for women was made clear in 1890 when she invited Miss A. J. Clough, principal of Newnham College, Cambridge, to present the Croydon girls with their Cambridge local examination certificates. Most important of all, she transmitted to her women teachers and pupils her own values of compassion, moral courage, and independent-mindedness. 
After retiring in 1902 Dorinda Neligan devoted her time and energy to the struggle for women's suffrage. On one occasion, on refusing, as a voteless woman, to pay her rates, she had her silver teapot 'distrained'. On 18 November 1910 Miss Neligan, by then seventy-seven years old, volunteered, together with the scientist Hertha Ayrton, Dr Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, Dr Louisa Garrett Anderson, Mrs Cobden-Sanderson, and Princess Sophia Duleep Singh, to form the first group of a Women's Social and Political Union deputation headed by Mrs Pankhurst to petition Asquith, the prime minister, in the Commons. They met in Parliament Square with some very rough treatment, being 'thrown from side to side by police and hooligans alike' (Sharp, 220-21). Some of the 'hooligans' were very possibly plain-clothes police. Winston Churchill, when home secretary in 1911, refused to grant an inquiry into the allegations of police brutality on that 'black Friday' -- though urged to do so by Lord Robert Cecil, who had seen the medical evidence relating to the women's injuries. Miss Neligan was arrested for allegedly 'assaulting a police constable' that day, but no charges were brought. Her student, colleague, and friend of many years, Eleanor Roper, testified that Dorinda Neligan absolutely ''hated' war' ('GPDST Newsletter', 1958, 31). She died, of heart disease and acute bronchitis, at her home, Oakwood House, 5 Sydenham Road, Croydon, on 17 July 1914, just a fortnight before the outbreak of the First World War. There is a brass tablet to her memory in Croydon parish church and a portrait of her by Shannon in Croydon high school. 


@@@@@


doc= 52263


Ottley, Alice (1840-1912), headmistress, was born on 23 March 1840 at Acton, Suffolk, the fourth of the sixteen children (of whom two died in infancy, two when young) of Lawrence Ottley (1808-1861), vicar of Acton, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1902), daughter of the Revd John Bickersteth. In 1850 her father became rector of Richmond, North Riding of Yorkshire, holding a canonry from 1859. The family life was profoundly religious in the evangelical tradition and Alice was educated at home until after the death of her nearest sister, Bessie, in 1854, when she was sent away with two other sisters to a school in London kept by a former governess to the family. Unhappy there, she returned to Richmond in 1856 and devoted herself to her younger siblings, who included Henry Bickersteth Ottley (1850-1932), a clergyman prominent in sabbatarian organizations, Edward Bickersteth Ottley (1853-1910), canon of Rochester, Robert Lawrence Ottley (1856-1935), regius professor of moral and pastoral theology at Oxford, and Charles Langdale Ottley (1858-1932), a rear-admiral. 
Lawrence Ottley died in 1861, leaving twelve children, the youngest a boy of eighteen months. The family went south and settled in Hampstead, where Mrs Ottley took in pupils, and to these and to her family Alice gave up her next twenty years in the self-abnegating spirit that was always characteristic of her. In the 1870s she began attending lectures organized by the London Ladies' Educational Association at University College (doing much of the necessary reading on the bus since there was so little time at home), including those in English language and literature given by Henry Morley. In 1876 she gained her honours certificate in the Cambridge higher local exam. In 1877 she deputized for a few weeks for Ada Benson, first headmistress of Oxford high school, and enjoyed the experience, though at this stage she was not in favour of girls' day schools; they did not, she thought, provide enough scope for the character training that to her was the main aim of education. 
Mrs Ottley gave up her school in 1880, and Alice, the following February, went to teach at the school in Warrington Crescent, Maida Vale, run by Miss Margaret Clarke, whom she had met through her association with the Revd William Henry Cleaver, curate of St Mary Magdalene, Paddington. Her religious sympathies were now high-church (even when she was a child her father had described her as a little Puseyite), and she assisted Miss Clarke in the foundation (1872) of the Society of the Holy Name, an association for church teachers. In 1899 she became superior of the society, which held retreats for teachers. In 1883 Canon W. J. Butler (1818-1894), looking for a headmistress for a new high school in Worcester run on Church of England lines, was told by the head of Oxford high school that Alice Ottley would be the ideal choice, and Miss Clarke herself persuaded her to leave Warrington Crescent to take up the appointment. 
The school opened on 21 June 1883 in Britannia House, a fine early Georgian building, with ten children aged from ten to fifteen (later joined by one other) who were known as the First Brood. Two years later there were 125 pupils, whom she treated in those early days as an intimate family group and for whom she devised delightful treats. The school badge was a lily, the motto 'the white flower of a blameless life', and religious education and the spiritual development of the girls was Miss Ottley's paramount concern; she herself prepared them for confirmation. 'You are princesses in the Court of Heaven, and must behave as such', she told them (James, 70), and she insisted on very high standards of deportment and speech. Like Charlotte Yonge (though a generation junior to her) she upheld the ideals of a past generation, which wanted girls to be selfless home-daughters without personal ambition, ministering to their parents and family; the regime of the school was more like that of a convent than the ordinary high school. She became regarded as legendary in Worcester, though some thought her standards too high and her ideas visionary and unpractical. The school council, however, knew that she had a strong will and practical ambitions -- such as the wish to put the science teaching on a satisfactory footing and to change the school's constitution so that it was no longer a commercial enterprise. (This was achieved the year after her death.) 
Tiny, frail, exquisitely neat, white-haired, with an ivory white complexion, Alice Ottley had amazing powers of physical endurance despite poor health. She performed many good works outside the school, interesting herself in the Girls' Friendly Society, conducting 'Bible' classes, caring one summer for the inmates of an almshouse, and lavishing hospitality not only on old members of the school but on the factory girls whom she entertained every Christmas. In 1884 she was elected a member of the Association of Head Mistresses, becoming vice-president in 1896 and representing the association on Worcestershire education authority after 1902. She became a member of the archbishops' central church council on secondary education in 1899. 
Though dreading retirement, Miss Ottley had several times suggested to the school council that it was time she should go, but had always been persuaded to stay on. In 1912, however, after the opening of the summer term, she at last had to give in, exhausted and prematurely aged. Nevertheless, she helped appoint her successor, initiated her into the school's ways, and interviewed every member of the staff individually. Some she asked to stay on; others she advised to find new situations. She was not even well enough to attend the school's twenty-ninth birthday celebrations, though she sent lacrosse equipment as her present. She died at 47 Albany Street, London, of bronchial pneumonia on 18 September 1912, and was buried at Astwood cemetery, Worcester. On 7 February 1914 it was decided that the school's name should be changed to the Alice Ottley School. Two Alice Ottley scholarships, tenable by former pupils at the school, were established at St Hugh's College, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 52264


Willis, Olive Margaret (1877-1964), headmistress, was born on 26 October 1877 at 65 Thistle Grove, Kensington, London, the second daughter of the five children (one son, four daughters) of John Armine Willis (1839-1916), a school inspector (and later chief inspector of schools for the west of England), and his wife, Janet, daughter of James Coutts Crawford. Mrs Willis, more interested in the soul than in material matters, brought up the children austerely, and they were in awe of their father who dragged them on strenuous climbing holidays in Switzerland where they 'suffered from a surfeit of beautiful things on an empty stomach', Olive later recalled. Though the children were all baptized into the Church of England, the family attended the services (held in Swallow Street, Piccadilly) of the Theistic church founded by Charles Voysey. 
As an adolescent Olive Willis was fiercely argumentative, rebellious, and impatient of authority. With the hope that the Misses Lawrence could tame her, she was dispatched in 1891 to the recently founded Wimbledon House (later to become Roedean) in Brighton, where she stayed until 1895. She disliked the emphasis on games here, and also criticized the school for the absence of religious teaching. Much to the Unitarian Miss Penelope Lawrence's disgust, and to her parents' dismay, she became attracted by Anglo-Catholicism and was confirmed at St Cuthbert's, Earls Court, in her eighteenth year. She always remained a staunch Anglican, though her early high-church enthusiasm moderated. 
Olive Willis went up to Oxford in 1898 to read history at Somerville College, but achieved only a third. After she came down in 1901 she taught junior history for a year at Queen Anne's School, Caversham, where her informal approach was not appreciated, then went back for two years to her former school, now called Roedean and rehoused in splendid premises on the cliffs above Rottingdean. After that she worked as a supply teacher in London, and continued teaching practice in a variety of schools ranging from Chesterfield to the Haberdashers' Aske's School in Middlesex. (But curiously she was never to encourage her own staff at Downe to gain this sort of teaching experience.) 
In 1906, with a friend, Alice Carver, as a partner, Olive Willis embarked on a school of her own. Helped by money from her mother's marriage settlement, she raised enough capital ($1500) to rent Downe House (the Darwin family home) near Orpington, Kent. It opened in 1907 with five staff and one pupil (plus two temporary companions). Three more pupils were added before the following spring, and by 1910 there were thirty-two boarders and four day girls. Olive Willis taught English, Latin, scripture, and history; Alice Carver ran the house and acted as matron. The latter withdrew from the partnership in 1912, and from 1919 was replaced by Lilian Heather, who had been teaching science and maths on a part-time basis. 
The school was popular with discriminating literary and academic parents. In 1913, for instance, the annual 'Punch' cricket match was played at Downe, with E. V. Lucas (whose daughter Audrey was a pupil) captaining the home team and Sir James Barrie (whose team included A. A. Milne) the authors. Over the years, the school produced some distinguished authors of its own, including Elizabeth Bowen, Anne Ridler, Priscilla Napier, and the philosopher Mary Scrutton, and at least one novel -- Elizabeth North's 'Dames' (1981) -- was based upon it. Musically, too, Downe was to become outstanding. The composer Robin Milford taught there for many years, and the pianist Myra Hess gave recitals and played with the school orchestra; the oboist Evelyn Rothwell (Lady Barbirolli) was a pupil. The curriculum was strongly biased towards English, history, French, and music, and inspectors were to comment on low standards in maths, science, and geography. But the religious instruction, given by Olive Willis herself, was stimulating: 'she made Christianity seem exciting', a pupil later commented (Ridler, 101). Individuality -- even eccentricity -- was encouraged, but girly behaviour and silliness treated with contempt. 
Olive Willis was not always easy to work with; like her mother she was contemptuous of physical weakness, and she never understood the practical difficulties of housekeeping. But she attracted deep devotion from many of her staff, as from Lilian Heather, whose affection verged on the possessive, and from the famously eccentric Maria Nickel, who acted as architect, chauffeur, handyman, and engineer, and slept like a watchdog in Miss Willis's bathroom. Pupils admired and respected her, though some must have been dismayed by her acute insight into their characters, revealed in individual end-of-term interviews. 'Holbein should have painted her' Elizabeth Bowen was to comment, referring to her large, calm face as 'far from 'prettiness' of any possible kind' (Ridler, 1). 
By 1921 the Downe premises were becoming too small. Olive Willis was told of a large house called The Cloisters, Cold Ash, which had been built by a contemplative order on a hill near Newbury, Berkshire. With the help of a gift from an uncle and a loan from two parents of pupils she bought it and 60 acres of land for $11,976. Eighty-three girls assembled for the first summer term in 1922; three years later there were 118, and Downe had established itself as one of the leading girls' schools. 
Lilian Heather died in 1943, after thirty-six years' association with Downe, and in 1944 Olive Willis's ownership of the school was transferred to a public body. She retired in 1946, but proposed to go on living at Hill House, which had been built on the school site for her. This presented obvious difficulties for the member of staff who had been chosen to succeed her, and who instead elected to go to another school. In the event, Olive Willis was to spend only part of the year in Hill House, and the rest in London near Regent's Park. Here she welcomed and entertained old pupils, to whom as ever she was unfailingly generous with time and money. She also took a continuing interest in the Bermondsey Time and Talents Settlement, with which Downe House had long had a connection, in the Girl Guide movement, and in her parish church. Olive Willis died on 11 March 1964, of a perforated duodenal ulcer, at her home, 38 Tedworth Square, London, after many years of ill health. Her ashes were buried in the memorial garden at Downe. 


@@@@@


doc= 52266


Hadland, Selina (1838-1919), headmistress, was born on 18 February 1838 at 34 Holborn Hill, London, the daughter of Henry Hadland, a cheesemonger and one-time keeper of the Guildhall, and his wife, Sarah Ann Hadland 'nee' Matthews. Little is known of her early life and education. In her twenties she taught in private schools in London, moving to Malvernbury, Great Malvern, in 1871, to a school whose headmistress, Miss Cooper, she much admired. 
In 1873 Selina Hadland applied for the position of lady principal of the new Milton Mount College, at Milton, Gravesend, Kent, which was being established for the education of the daughters of Congregational ministers, under the leadership of the Revd William Guest (1818-1891) and a committee of management of leading Congregationalists. The term 'college' was used because the new institution was intended for the training of teachers as well as for the education of schoolgirls. Her application was supported by both Newman Hall and C. H. Spurgeon, and she was selected by the governors from fifty-eight candidates. At the opening of the college in May 1873 many of the pioneers of women's education were present, and Emily Davies was among the speakers. 
During the following sixteen years as principal Selina Hadland proved herself a pioneer of courage, ability, vigour, foresight, and religious faith. Her courage was shown in her struggle with some of the governors for appropriate authority within the school, at a time when many regarded women as incapable of public management. In these struggles she was well supported by her friends Dorothea Beale and Frances Mary Buss, and by others who were facing the same problems. Her administrative ability was amply demonstrated, not only in her running of the school, but as one of the first nine members of the Association of Headmistresses (of which she was the second vice-president, elected in 1880) and as one of the founders, and first honorary secretary, of the Teachers' Guild. In 1875 the annual conference of the Association of Headmistresses was held at Milton Mount. 
By the time Selina Hadland resigned from Milton Mount in 1889, and largely due to her initiative, there was attached to the college not only a training section for teachers but also a high school -- the first technical school for girls in England -- where the trainee teachers were given practical experience. The school itself had grown, and a new wing had been built to accommodate more pupils. Milton Mount was one of the first girls' schools to have a gymnasium, to gain recognition as a school of art, and to require practical work in every scientific subject. The academic standards had steadily improved, due in part to the many well-qualified teachers who travelled down regularly from London, and almost from the beginning the girls were prepared for the Cambridge local examinations. 
Selina Hadland's foresight was demonstrated in her concern for employment and public roles for women of all classes, with a particular emphasis on technical education. She wrote on 'Occupations of Women other than Teaching' (1891) and 'Technical Education for Girls and Women' (1891). She believed that women should be able to earn their own livelihoods if necessary, and, though reserved about women's suffrage, favoured their participation in local government. 
After her resignation, Selina Hadland moved with her sister, Ellen (who had helped her with domestic arrangements at Milton Mount), first to Hampton Hill, Middlesex, then in 1898 to St Leonards, in Sussex. Their home was a centre of generous hospitality for old pupils and others. An inheritance from their father enabled Selina Hadland to offer public service in a variety of fields for another twenty years. In 1893 she and her sister visited the United States and Canada in order to study schools, colleges, and technical institutions, particularly those which had their origin in Congregational traditions, and she subsequently published 'Education and Life in the United States' (1895). She served as one of the first governors of the new Battersea Polytechnic, on the committee of the Canning Town Women's Settlement (of which she was one of the founders), as a member of the Kingston board of guardians, and as a manager of a primary school. She was also active in Free Church Sunday schools and on the local Free Church Council. During all this time, she kept in touch with her former pupils, often gathering holiday parties in Switzerland, and paying herself for those unable to afford the cost. 
Selina Hadland died on 17 November 1919 at her home, Miltolino, 2 Combermere Road, St Leonards; and her funeral, attended by a large congregation, was held at Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road, London, four days later, followed by burial in Nunhead cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 52267


Croudace, Camilla Mary Julia (1844-1926), supporter of education for women, was born on 29 January 1844 at Marsh House, Homerton, Middlesex, the daughter of Thomas Croudace and his wife, Anne Hester Vignoles. She spent part of her early life in Kiev with her mother, her older brother, and her grandfather, the civil engineer Charles Vignoles, who was responsible for building a suspension bridge over the Dnieper River. Here she laid the foundations for her love of languages by learning French, German, and Russian. After returning to England, she attended a small school in Notting Hill Gate, in London, before entering the preparatory class of Queen's College, Harley Street, in 1856, where Dorothea Beale was one of her teachers. A year later she entered the college itself, which was to prove the centre of her life's work, and attended lectures given by F. D. Maurice, R. C. Trench, and E. H. Plumptre and others; Maurice particularly impressed her deeply, and she retained a vivid memory of his teaching to the end of her life. 
On leaving the college in 1861 Camilla Croudace spent seven years as a governess to several families. After a further four years of extensive travels on the continent, she and her mother settled in Hampstead, and she secured a teaching post at Kensington high school, the first of the schools of the new Girls' Public Day School Company (later Trust). But it was not long before she was invited to return to Queen's as 'lady resident' in succession to Eleanor Grove. From 1881 until her retirement in 1906 she served under five principals. Most of the teaching was done by the male professors; her responsibilities were for discipline and for the communal life of the students, though in addition she always took a deep interest in the students' intellectual progress and encouraged them to continue with further study. She led prayers in the morning, presided over lunch, and arranged social events after the hours of teaching. 
Camilla Croudace was much loved and respected by all who came under her care; they remembered her regal bearing (she always wore a lace cap), her generosity, her patience, and her sense of humour. She provided stability, a gracious atmosphere, and intellectual encouragement for generations of students, one of the most brilliant of whom was Gertrude Bell. Her very wide circle of friends from many walks of life were frequently entertained at the college, and students would often be invited to act as hostesses. At weekends she would sometimes invite girls to visit her country home in Surrey, and in the holidays she organized walking parties. It was due to her initiative that four Greek plays were presented at the college during her period of office. She was devoted to Queen's, to its tradition of liberal education, and to its founder, and it was due to her initiative that a fund was started to purchase the portrait of Maurice which was hung in the college library. At her retirement, representatives of every college generation since 1881 gathered to present her with the means to purchase an annuity. Her wide cultural and intellectual interests included a particular attraction to the ideas of Emanuel Swedenborg. 
Camilla Croudace divided her retirement between homes in West Liss, Hampshire, and Haslemere, Surrey. She took a few private pupils for a time, and kept closely in touch with the Old Queen's Society. She died at Keith Cottage, Park Avenue, Worthing, of senile decay on 3 April 1926, aged eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 52270


Buckton, Catherine Mary (1826/7-1904), promoter of household science teaching, was born in London, the daughter of John Morgan Williams, a surgeon, later of Llandaff, Glamorgan. On 22 March 1849 she married Joseph Buckton, a Leeds cloth merchant, with whom she had a son and a daughter. She was a founder member of the Leeds Ladies' Educational Association (1869), which promoted women's higher education and organized the Cambridge local examinations in the city. She was also active on the Yorkshire Ladies' Council of Education, a voluntary body which in 1871 began evening classes for working girls employed in factories, shops, and as domestic servants. Members of the Ladies' Council, drawn mainly from influential professional and business families, were supporters of sanitary reform, and they were concerned by the evidence which these classes brought to light of a widespread ignorance of the laws of health and domestic economy. Statistics gathered by a Leeds medical practitioner, James Braithwaite, exposed the comparatively high mortality rate in the city. During the winter of 1871-2 Catherine Buckton gave a course of lectures to working women and mothers at Holbeck Mechanics' Institute on 'domestic physiology and the laws of health', parallel courses being given by Emily Kitson and Mary Anne Baily. These culminated in a conference at Leeds town hall in November 1872 on the teaching of hygiene. 
In 1873, standing as a Liberal, Catherine Buckton was elected the first woman member of the Leeds school board, the second largest school board in the country after London. Industrious and intellectually able, she was an effective school board member, gaining re-election in 1876 and 1879 at the top of the poll. Her experience of evening classes convinced her that only by systematic teaching of hygiene in board schools could the health of future generations be improved. From 1874 she gave annual physiology and health lectures to the oldest board school girls, of whom sixty were subsequently chosen each year to attend the Yorkshire School of Cookery, founded in 1874 by the Ladies' Council, to gain practical instruction. In due course, health, hygiene and cookery instruction became an essential part of the Leeds school board curriculum. Catherine Buckton personally determined the syllabus, rebutting criticisms from some teachers that it was overloaded, and she was generally welcomed by head teachers into their schools to give practical cookery demonstrations. Few schools adopted her advice to establish specialist cookery rooms, but as most working-class homes did not have separate kitchens she acknowledged the need to teach girls to manage efficiently in a small space. 
From 1875 Catherine Buckton began to publish her health, hygiene, and basic cookery advice. 'Health in the House' (1875) and 'Food and Home Cookery' (1879) were also popular with school boards outside Leeds and continued to be reprinted into the 1880s. Her love of nature, combined with her desire to improve the children's home environment, led to hundreds of children growing and exhibiting their own plants. Her subsequent 'Town and Window Gardening', based on her lectures, was published in 1879. In due course all her works became required reading in the cookery training schools, giving her a national, as well as a local, reputation. 
A strong Unitarian, Catherine Buckton's educational interests extended beyond developing the quantity and quality of girls' schooling. Despite persistent and vociferous opposition from supporters of denominational schools on the Leeds board, including some of her fellow Liberals, she vigorously campaigned for free secular education. After visiting schools on the continent, she became convinced that the first stage of schooling was the most important. She persuaded the board to experiment with the new Froebel kindergarten method and to introduce the phonic system of spelling into all Leeds board schools. Sensitive towards children's needs, she managed to convince board members in 1876 of the need for a half-time day industrial school which could provide work, schooling, and daytime meals for difficult children. She subsequently monitored progress at the industrial school, condemning excessive punishments and objecting in 1882 to the appointment of a former prison gaoler as the school's superintendent. 
In 1882, overworked and worn down by the continual denominational battles over elementary education, Catherine Buckton retired from the board and moved to London, where she continued to write on health and hygiene issues. Before she left Leeds she produced an influential 'Address' on education in the city, which the Liberals used in their successful 1882 school board election campaign. Her concern for women's rights made her a keen advocate of equal pay and women's suffrage. Her last publication was 'Comfort and Cleanliness: the Servant and Mistress Question' (1894). 
Catherine Buckton has secured an important place in the history of the British domestic science education movement. With her contemporaries Fanny Calder, in Liverpool, and Edith Clarke, in London, she was responsible for the introduction of cookery and hygiene onto the school curriculum. In contrast to Miss Calder, who chose teachers with a good general education and then taught them about cookery, Mrs Buckton believed domestic science teachers should first and foremost be expert cooks. This approach tended to exclude some women who would otherwise have made good instructors. She died, a widow, at her London home, 27 Ladbroke Square, Kensington, on 20 May 1904. An obituary in the 'Yorkshire Post' praised her as a pioneer of 'much that is now esteemed as most useful and practical in the education of girls'. 


@@@@@


doc= 52271


Philip Malpas (d. 1469). Philippa, the other daughter, married Ralph Josselyn, draper and mayor (1464-5). Malpas was a younger son of a Cheshire family who had been apprenticed to a London draper and made a prudent marriage to Juliana, daughter of the wealthy chandler, John Beaumond, and widow of the grocer, William Middleton (an executor of Beaumond). Spectacularly successful, Malpas was notorious for his business methods: he was convicted of usury in 1421. He was sheriff in 1439, and MP in 1432 and 1441, but was alderman only for the years 1448-50, and apparently disliked office. He and the Cooks were associated from the 1420s. 


@@@@@


doc= 52273


Ellen Wordsworth Darwin (1856-1903)], a lecturer in English literature at Newnham College (where she had been a student in 1874-7), with whom he had a daughter, Frances, who became known as a poet under her married name of Frances Cornford. In 1884 he became university lecturer in botany in Cambridge, co-operating with S. H. Vines in teaching plant physiology. In 1886 he was elected to a fellowship at Christ's College. After the appointment of Vines to the chair of botany at Oxford, Darwin became reader in botany (1888), a position which he held until 1904. During these years Darwin's academic interests were the teaching of botany, the editing of his father's letters, and the study of the control of water loss by plants. 


@@@@@


doc= 52275


Mordan, Clara Evelyn (1844-1915), suffragist and benefactor, was born on 28 September 1844 at 2 Barkham Terrace, St George's Road, Southwark, London, the elder of the two daughters of Augustus Mordan (died 1901), manufacturer of mechanical pencils, and his wife, Elizabeth Jane, only daughter of James Thomas Hathaway, merchant, of Southwark and his wife, Mary. Clara Mordan's mother died in 1849. Augustus did not remarry, and it seems probable that Clara and her sister, Ada, were entrusted to the care of governesses, receiving the education traditionally given to girls of that period, mainly art, music, literature, and languages. Ada married, in 1870, Edmund George Johnson, and died in 1876 leaving a son and a daughter. 
Clara Mordan was an attractive young woman, as three portraits testify. She was at one time engaged to be married but broke off the engagement partly because of the legal disadvantages incurred by married women. Her lifelong interest in women's suffrage and education may well stem from attending, with her father, a lecture in 1866 in which John Stuart Mill advocated women's suffrage. From the 1880s onwards she was a member of various women's societies, including the London Women's Suffrage Society and the Central Society for Women's Suffrage. Not only did she make generous contributions to the funds of these societies but also donated her time and her administrative talents as a member of their executive committees. In 1906 she turned to a more militant form of suffragism when she joined the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), supporting the work of Mrs Pankhurst. She was the first subscriber to the WSPU campaign fund, gave practical help at by-elections, and was a welcome and fluent speaker at suffrage meetings. The 1908 WSPU procession was in part financed by Clara Mordan, who was one of the speakers at the Hyde Park rally. Ill health, in the form of tuberculosis, prevented her from further active participation, but much of her private correspondence up to her death was written on notepaper headed 'Votes for Women'. Her father clearly supported her views and apparently had no objection to her forming her own household and administering her own finances during his lifetime. He died in 1901, leaving an estate, of which she was co-executor, of $117,864. 
In 1897, after reading a paper by Annie Rogers, 'The position of women at Oxford and Cambridge', in which the need for endowments and scholarships for women was stressed, Clara Mordan, together with her friend Mary Gray Allen (1846-1925), visited the women's colleges in Oxford and decided that St Hugh's was most in need of financial help. Her first act of generosity was to endow a scholarship in her name, to the value of $40 per annum, the only stipulation being that the holder 'shall not perform or witness any experiment or demonstration on a living animal during her tenure of the scholarship'. The first Mordan scholar, Margaret Mary Crick, was elected in 1898, and Clara Mordan made great efforts to get to know all the holders of her scholarship. It may well have been her influence that caused so many members of St Hugh's, especially the Mordan scholars, to take part in the 1908 WSPU rally. She visited St Hugh's regularly and was remembered very vividly by one of the students, Helena Deneke, whose reminiscences, although written fifty years later, describe 'a queer bird-like little lady [who] might have stepped out of one of Dickens' books, her coal-black hair was worn looped and parted, her garments looked home-made and were old fashioned'. Clara became a close personal friend of the principal, Miss Moberly, sharing her vision of a purpose-built new home for the college. Despite her increasing frailty she wrote regularly to St Hugh's council in support of the proposed new building and, to the end of her life, took great interest in all the details of its construction. 
Clara Mordan died on 22 January 1915 at 18 Marine Mansions, Bexhill, Sussex, where she had lived almost exclusively in her final years to derive as much benefit as possible for her ailing lungs from the sea air. Her friend Mary Gray Allen had been her constant companion and support while Clara was bed-ridden and was described by Clara in a personal letter to Miss Moberly, written two months before her death, as 'my dearest friend, who never leaves me'. In her will Clara left to St Hugh's over $10,000, which enabled the college to continue its building despite the economic stringencies imposed by the war. She also made Mary Gray Allen a residuary legatee on condition that she in turn bequeathed this inheritance to St Hugh's. Miss Moberly testified to Miss Gray Allen's support of the college: '[Clara Mordan] has also left us the goodwill of her chief friend, Miss Gray Allen, who has taken her place on the Council... and is prepared to take a continued interest in St Hugh's' ('St Hugh's Club Paper', 23, Oct 1915). Mary Gray Allen, who had considerable means of her own, died in August 1925 and left to St Hugh's $36,000, the accumulated income from her friend's bequest, a sum which established Clara Mordan's position as the most important female benefactor of women's education of her time. 


@@@@@


doc= 52276


Arnorr Earls' Poet (fl. c.1046-1073), court poet in Iceland, was the son of the poet Thord Kolbeinsson and of Oddny Eykyndill. His father, who lived from the late tenth century into the early eleventh century and farmed at Hitardalr in western Iceland, was the lifelong opponent of the eponymous hero of 'Bjarnar saga Hitdoelakappa', as is told there in much picturesque and possibly fictional detail. Thord's paternal ancestry is given in two conflicting accounts in 'Landnamabok', the Icelandic 'Book of Settlements'; on his mother's side he is descended from a 'Meldun earl in Scotland' and from 'Myrgjol' (Muirgeal), daughter of an Irish king 'Gljomall'; these names are certainly Gaelic in origin and might contain or conceal an element of historical truth, since Iceland was partly settled from the viking colonies in the British Isles, and some scholars have seen Irish influence on Norse court poetry. 
Arnorr probably received poetic training from his father, but spent most of his career abroad, in the viking earldom of Orkney and in Norway, though little otherwise is known of his life. Poems are attributed to him about Earl Rognvald of Orkney ('Rognvaldsdrapa', three surviving verses) and about King Magnus the Good of Norway ('Hrynhenda', also known as 'Magnusdrapa', twenty surviving verses), both of which were composed 'c'.1046. A memorial lay was also attributed to him for Earl Thorfinn (II) Sigurdson ('the Mighty') of Orkney (died 'c'.1065), of which twenty-five verses survive; and a memorial lay, of which nineteen verses survive, for King Harald Hardrada of Norway, who fell in battle at Stamford Bridge in 1066. Two lines of a poem about the Icelandic chieftain Hermund Illugason, and five occasional verses, are also attributed to him. He is mentioned in the poetical treatise 'Snorra Edda', in the historical texts contained in 'Morkinskinna', 'Heimskringla', and 'Flateyjarbok' (and so in 'Orkneyinga Saga' as preserved in 'Flateyjarbok'), and in the sagas of Icelanders, 'Laxdoela saga' and 'Grettis saga'. Arnorr was not only an accomplished professional poet; his poetry sometimes has an unusually personal tone, as when showing his own conflict of loyalties between Rognvald and Thorfinn, or in his rather impassioned lament for Thorfinn's death. It is also, of course, an important contemporary witness to historical events. Arnorr seems still to have been alive in 1073, having probably returned to Iceland. 


@@@@@


doc= 52277


John the Old Saxon (fl. c.885-904), scholar and abbot of Athelney, was invited to England by King Alfred and contributed to Alfred's revival of English learning. In his life of Alfred, the Welshman Asser reports that John 'was a man of most acute intelligence, immensely learned in all fields of literary endeavour, and extremely ingenious in many other forms of expression' ('Life of Alfred', chap. 78); he further states that John was in origin an 'Old' Saxon (as opposed to an 'Anglo'-Saxon or Englishman), that is, from somewhere in Saxony, east of the Rhine. It is not known precisely where John originated; as a monk, he might have been raised in one of the Saxon monasteries such as Korvey or Gandersheim, but equally he could have come to England from western Francia, as did Grimbald, who came to Alfred from Rheims at approximately the same time as John, in the mid-880s. Asser's comment (chap. 97), that John had some experience in the martial arts, implies that he had a secular upbringing. 
In one of his earliest translations from the Latin, that of Gregory's 'Regula pastoralis', King Alfred acknowledged 'inter alia' the help of 'John my mass-priest'. John witnessed one of Alfred's charters ('AS chart.', S 348, a grant to Ealdorman AEthelhelm, dated 892), and presumably took a part in formulating Alfred's ecclesiastical policy. When Alfred founded the monastery of Athelney (precise date unknown), John was appointed abbot, with unfortunate consequences. As Asser relates, the newly established monks of Athelney included some who were of 'Gallic', or West Frankish, origin. Two of these plotted to kill John by paying two (Frankish) assassins to hide in the church until he entered to pray in private. One night they attacked John and wounded him severely, but his outcry caused them to flee and John was rescued by his supporters. He evidently survived, for he witnessed several charters of King Edward the Elder ('AS chart.', S 364, 372, 373, 374), the latest of which are dated 904. It may be significant that he witnessed as 'priest' rather than as 'abbot', so implying that he had by then relinquished the abbacy of Athelney; but since none of the charters is witnessed by anyone described as an abbot, the implication is vague. 
The date of John's death is unknown. William of Malmesbury preserves the epitaph of a 'Iohannes Sophista', buried at Malmesbury, but whose identity cannot be established (he cannot have been John Scottus Eriugena, who had died in Francia probably between 'c'.870 and 877). John the Old Saxon is not known to have had any connection with Malmesbury, but, on the other hand, it is difficult to think of another scholar named John who lived and died in England before the time of William of Malmesbury. So, maybe, Iohannes Sophista was John the Old Saxon. 
A small group of Latin acrostic poems may be attributed with some confidence to John the Old Saxon. The first is an eight-line hexameter poem, probably copied in English script during the 930s into a manuscript of continental (north Frankish) origin which later moved to England, and having the legend ADALSTAN as its acrostich, and IOHANNES as its telestich. The date of the writing, in combination with the spelling Adalstan (compare Old English AEpelstan, an apparent representation of an English name by a Germanic (probably Saxon) speaker, suggests that the author, Iohannes, is John the Old Saxon. The poem describes Adalstan as a prince, and is best understood as an encomium to King Alfred's young grandson AEthelstan, then aged no more than five, but subsequently king from 924 to 939. The diction of the poem is embellished with Greek words and archaisms, and so is a harbinger of the stylistic affectation which was to become dominant in tenth-century Anglo-Latin literature. Given the rarity of the acrostic form at this time, two further acrostics (preserved as early tenth-century additions to a late ninth-century manuscript, which has various links with Alfred) dedicated to King Alfred are possibly also the work of John the Old Saxon, and are thus evidence of the ingenuity which Asser recognized in him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52280


Mascall, Eric Lionel (1905-1993), Church of England clergyman and theologian, was born on 12 December 1905 at 2 Earlsthorpe Road, Sydenham, London, the second of the two children (his elder brother had died in infancy) of John Richard Strutt Mascall, commercial traveller, and his wife, (Susan) Lilian, daughter of William Grundy and his wife, Susan Anne. From Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith, he went in 1924 to Pembroke College, Cambridge, with an open scholarship in mathematics, eventually obtaining first-class honours in 1928. But his hope to go on to an academic career did not materialize. Nor was he at this stage contemplating ordination. His first employment was as senior mathematics master at Bablake School in Coventry. His three years there were the unhappiest of his life for, in his own words, he 'had no training in teaching,... was no good at athletics and... was a bad disciplinarian' (Mascall, 97). However, during his time in Coventry he published two articles on Christianity and science in 'Theology', and in 1931 decided to offer himself for ordination. He proceeded to Ely Theological College for one year. Mascall had already become a committed Anglo-Catholic while still at school. At Cambridge particular influence on his religious life was exercised by the dean of Pembroke, Edward Wynn, later bishop of Ely, and by Mascall's old school friend Christopher Waddams, soon to become chaplain of St Catharine's College. Mascall's lifelong involvement with the Eastern Orthodox church began towards the end of his student days, when he attended the Second Anglo-Russian Student Conference. By 1929 he was already chairman of the executive committee of the Fellowship of St Alban and St Sergius. 
Mascall served two short curacies, under the same vicar, at St Andrew's, Stockwell Green, and St Matthew's, Westminster. Especially in Stockwell, he was noted for his classes and talks on the Christian faith. He also published an article in 'Theology' entitled 'Three modern approaches to God', and his first book, 'Death or Dogma: Christian Faith and Social Theory' (1937), arose out of talks given to a study group at Stockwell. His introduction to the so-called Christian sociology of Maurice Reckitt and the Christendom Group began towards the end of his time in Westminster. 
In 1937 Mascall was invited to become sub-warden of Lincoln Theological College. He threw himself into the tasks of teaching ordinands and writing philosophical theology. His first major book, 'He who is: a Study in Traditional Theism', appeared in 1943. It was a lucid re-examination of natural theology and established Mascall's reputation as an exponent of Thomism. It was submitted for, and received, the Cambridge BD the same year. 
During vacations Mascall often stayed at All Saints, Margaret Street, London, and helped in setting up the Anglo-Catholic publishing house the Dacre Press, for which he wrote a short work on St John of the Cross and two paperbacks in the 'Signposts' series, which he jointly edited. One of these, 'Man: his Origin and Destiny' (1940), reflected his continuing interest in the Christendom Group. Soon after his move to Lincoln he made his profession as a member of the Oratory of the Good Shepherd, a society of celibate priests and laymen living under a rule. 
In 1945 Mascall was persuaded to apply for a short-term lectureship in theology, with some chaplaincy duties, at Christ Church, Oxford. In fact he was to remain there for seventeen years, as student (fellow), tutor, and university lecturer in the philosophy of religion. His steady stream of publications consolidated his position as one of the country's leading Anglo-Catholic theologians. Particularly noteworthy were 'Christ, the Christian and the Church' (1946), a study of the incarnation and its consequences; 'Existence and Analogy' (1949), recommended to all students of analogy; 'Christian Theology and Natural Science', the Bampton lectures for 1956, and for many years regarded as the standard work on the subject; 'The Recovery of Unity' (1958), a substantial contribution to ecumenism, commending, first and foremost, common study of the truth of Christian doctrine; and 'The Importance of being Human' (1958), the American Bampton lectures, offering a reasoned Christian anthropology. Mascall's works were hardly original. They were full of long quotations from other authors, but they constituted an unparalleled attempt to set out, rationally, the truth content of the classical Christian tradition and to relate it, without a hint of accommodation or reduction, to the discoveries of the sciences. In a broadcast review of 'The Recovery of Unity' Owen Chadwick observed that 'among the living thinkers of the Christian Church, Dr Mascall is in a minority of one', but also that he, like Hooker, exhibited 'the sane, clear-headedness of a devout mind'. The stature of his work was marked by further higher degrees, the Oxford DD in 1948 and the Cambridge DD in 1958. (Later honours included an honorary DD from St Andrews in 1967 and fellowship of the British Academy in 1974.) 
Mascall carried out his chaplaincy role as best he could, offering Cyprus sherry and tea, playing records, and appearing, rather implausibly, on the river bank and the touchline. His shyness made it difficult for undergraduates to get to know him, but those who persevered learned to appreciate his courtesy, his pastoral concern, and above all his quirky sense of humour, made public in two volumes of comic verse -- the first, 'Pi in the High', published towards the end of his Oxford time. In the intellectual fraternity of beleaguered Christians, Mascall was a natural member of the Socratic Club (dominated by C. S. Lewis) and the Metaphysicals, an informal group of Christian philosophers. 
Having already turned down the offer of the Ely chair at Cambridge, Mascall, in 1962, accepted the invitation to become professor of historical theology at King's College, London, where he remained until retirement in 1973. His writings during these years and well into his retirement consisted mostly of reasoned rebuttals of various widely publicized books by liberal theologians. 'Up and Down in Adria' (1963) was a response to 'Soundings' (1962), edited by Alec Vidler. 'The Secularisation of Christianity' (1965) contained a response to John Robinson's 'Honest to God' (1963). 'Theology and the Gospel of Christ' (1977) contained a response to 'The Myth of God Incarnate' (1977), edited by John Hick. And 'Whatever happened to the Human Mind?' (1980) contained a response to Geoffrey Lampe's 'God as Spirit' (1977). These books showed Mascall's polemical conservatism at its best. Less appealing were his extraordinary arguments against the ordination of women and his defence of literal belief in the devil and the controlled practice of exorcism. 
The one major, positive work during his London time was 'The Openness of Being', the Gifford lectures for 1970-71. This was a wide-ranging exposition of contemporary natural theology, especially noteworthy for introducing a whole generation of students to the work of the so-called 'transcendental Thomists' -- Karl Rahner, Emerich Coreth, and Bernard Lonergan -- and for advancing the influential metaphysical position known as critical realism. 
Mascall's London home was the clergy house of St Mary's, Bourne Street, in Pimlico. 'Whatever happened to the Human Mind?' was dedicated to the priests and people of this parish, 'who for many years have provided this grateful author with an altar and a home'. He was also at home, surprisingly, in the National Liberal Club and, later, the Athenaeum. 
Increasingly, Mascall was invited to lecture abroad -- Canada, the United States (nine visits in all), and South Africa -- and to visit church leaders and groups in Belgium, Romania, and Yugoslavia. But his favourite destination was Rome. His several visits 'ad limina Apostolorum' were assuredly more congenial than that of Karl Barth. Mascall remained, nevertheless, quintessentially a Catholic Anglican. Eventually illness forced Mascall to leave Bourne Street for a nursing home, St Mary's House, King's Mead, Seaford, Sussex, where he died on 14 February 1993. A memorial service was held in the chapel of King's College, London, on 4 May 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52282


Maud, John Primatt Redcliffe, Baron Redcliffe-Maud (1906-1982), public servant, was born on 3 February 1906 at Bristol, the younger son and last of the six children of the Revd John Primatt Maud (1860-1932), then vicar of St Mary Redcliffe, Bristol, and later bishop of Kensington, and his wife, Elizabeth Diana, eldest daughter of Canon Charles Wellington Furse, archdeacon of Westminster and rector of St John's, Smith Square, London. 
Maud was educated at Summer Fields School, Oxford; as a king's scholar at Eton College (of which he was a fellow, 1964-76); and as a scholar at New College, Oxford, where he won a second in classical honour moderations (1926) and a first in 'literae humaniores' (1928). In 1929, after a year studying economics at Harvard, he was appointed a junior research fellow in politics at University College, Oxford -- the first full-time politics don to be appointed in Oxford -- and made his speciality the subject of local government. Johannesburg invited him to write a history of its local government, and a visit in 1932 was to establish a lifelong link with South Africa. He became a tutorial fellow at University College in 1932, and dean in 1933. 
In 1939 Maud was appointed master of Birkbeck College, London. The war broke out just as he took up his appointment, but he managed until 1943 to combine the mastership with work as a temporary civil servant, for a few months in the office of the regional commissioner for the southern region of England, and then in the Ministry of Food. When Lord Woolton became minister of food in April 1940 he chose Maud to be his principal private secretary. Maud's rise thereafter was rapid: to deputy secretary in 1941 and second secretary in 1944, when he moved with Woolton to the newly formed office of the Ministry of Reconstruction, at first as its deputy head and soon, when Norman Brook became secretary of the cabinet, its head. 
Maud was so evidently fitted for the public service that he was invited to continue in it after the war ended. Still only thirty-eight, he was appointed permanent secretary to the Ministry of Education in 1945. This appointment engaged his concern for education as well as his knowledge of local government, and called for all his qualities of administrative skill, persuasiveness, and enthusiasm. In this period he was one of the founding fathers of UNESCO. 
In 1952 Maud became permanent secretary at the Ministry of Fuel and Power. The main thrust of policy during his time was to reduce dependence on coal by increasing the substitution of oil for coal and developing alternative energy sources: for Maud the prospects of nuclear power were particularly exciting. In 1956 his attention was diverted for a time to the response to the immediate energy problems created by the closure of the Suez Canal and the need to re-establish the administrative machinery for petrol rationing. 
At the beginning of 1959 Harold Macmillan asked Maud to go to South Africa as British high commissioner. After South Africa became a republic and left the Commonwealth in 1961 he became the first British ambassador to the new republic. It was the time of Macmillan's 'wind of change' speech. Wholly out of sympathy with the South African government's apartheid policies, Maud remained scrupulously correct in his behaviour and pronouncements, without compromising his integrity or betraying his convictions, and came to be widely respected in that country. He combined with his diplomatic appointment that of high commissioner for Swaziland, Basutoland, and Bechuanaland, and worked hard to promote the constitutional, economic, and educational advancement of those territories. 
In 1963 the wheel came full circle: Maud returned to University College, to serve as its master until his retirement in 1976. During this time he undertook the chairmanship of a succession of public inquiries on the organization, structure, and management of local government, above all the royal commission on English local government (1966-9); its recommendations for changing the structure of local government proved to be too radical for the 1970-74 government, whose own 'reorganization' Maud regarded as a child of no great beauty. But the college came first, and he devoted himself wholeheartedly to its interests and to the welfare of its members. It was not by mere coincidence that under his mastership University College became pre-eminent among Oxford colleges in reputation and success. 
Maud's publications included 'Local Government in Modern England' (1932), 'City Government: the Johannesburg Experiment' (1938), 'English Local Government Reformed' (with Bruce Wood, 1974), 'Support for the Arts in England and Wales' (1976), 'Training Musicians' (1978), and 'Experiences of an Optimist' (1981). 
Maud was (as he said the ideal permanent secretary should be) discreet, wise, entertaining, and incorruptible; and he had in high degree the traditional attributes of the distinguished public servant: intelligence, high-mindedness, dedication, and a capacity for sustained hard work. He believed in the power of enlightenment to hold back the tide of barbarism, and in the capacity and duty of individual men and women to bring about progress. In these virtues and beliefs he was true to his Christian faith and to the value which he derived from his education. There were some who found all this -- combined with his enjoyment of the rewards of his achievements, with his effortless charm and ease of manner, and with his seemingly inexhaustible zest -- old-fashioned and even a little too good to be true. There were many others, more responsive to his qualities and in tune with his values, who looked to him for friendship, help, and inspiration, and were never disappointed. 
Maud was a fine-looking man: tall, elegant, and distinguished. In his youth he loved and practised the art of acting, and his skill as a performer showed in his later facility as a public speaker and as a broadcaster: he had a gift for combining wisdom and wit in his matter with grace and felicity in his manner. 
Music also meant much to Maud -- as performer in his younger days as well as listener -- though in this part of his life he played a supporting role to his wife, Jean ['see below'], who was, and continued to be, a professional pianist. They married on 20 June 1932; and from then on his success and his serenity were sustained by fifty years of close and happy family life. There were four children of the marriage: three daughters (one of whom died in 1941 on the day before her fifth birthday) and a son, Humphrey, who had a distinguished career in the diplomatic service. 
Maud was appointed CBE (1942), KCB (1946), and GCB (1955). He was given honorary degrees by the universities of Witwatersrand (1960), Natal (1963), Leeds (1967), Nottingham (1968), and Birmingham (1968). He was FRCM (1964) and an honorary fellow of New College (1964) and University College, Oxford (1976). He was created a life peer in 1967, taking the title of Redcliffe-Maud. He took an active part in the work of the House of Lords, particularly relishing the committee work, until very shortly before his death in Oxford, where he lived, on 20 November 1982. 
Maud's wife, (Margaret) Jean Hay Maud, Lady Redcliffe-Maud (1904-1993), pianist and hostess, was born on 6 March 1904 in Melrose, Roxburghshire, the younger daughter of John Brown Hamilton, headmaster of St Mary's School, Melrose. Educated at St Mary's School, Melrose, St Leonard's School, the Royal College of Music, and Somerville College, Oxford, she also studied with the harpsichordist Wanda Landowska in Paris and with the pianist and composer Artur Schnabel in Berlin. She became a successful concert pianist. She met Maud in Oxford, and after their marriage she supported his career and continued to perform, entertaining troops and others during the Second World War, playing in London in the 1950s, and performing in South Africa and Oxford for charity. She was also a keen amateur painter and gardener. Between 1989 and 1991 she published four volumes of autobiography, based in part on her letters and diaries. She died in Oxford on 6 November 1993, survived by her son and two daughters. 
Robert Armstrong', rev. ' 


@@@@@


doc= 52284


Mellanby, Kenneth (1908-1993), ecologist, was born on 26 March 1908 at Chapellfield, Barrhead, Renfrewshire, the son of Alexander Lawson Mellanby (1871-1951), professor of mechanical engineering at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow, and his wife, Annie, formerly Maundel. His uncle John Mellanby (1878-1939) was Waynflete professor of physiology at Oxford; another uncle, Sir Edward Mellanby (1884-1955), directed the Medical Research Council. Mellanby was educated at Barnard Castle school, then read natural sciences at King's College, Cambridge, when his interest in medical entomology began. He moved in 1930 to the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine where he studied for a PhD on the susceptibility of human parasites to desiccation and overheating, and became interested in cockroaches and bedbugs. He married on 2 October 1933 Helen Neilson ('b'. 1910/11), daughter of George William Dow, a retired accountant. A daughter, Jane, was born but the marriage ended in divorce. 
Between 1936 and 1941 Mellanby was Sorby fellow of the Royal Society, which directed him to research in Sheffield. From October 1939, following advice from Patrick Buxton of the London School of Hygiene, Mellanby conducted research on head lice. He found that possibly 50 per cent of girls aged up to fourteen were infested with head lice. He correlated the incidence of head lice with poverty and with family size. At the prompting of medical officers, in December 1940 he set up a research unit to study the effects of scabies infestations. He gathered a group of conscientious objectors to serve as his human guinea-pigs. Among these was Walter Bartley, then a laboratory technician but destined to become professor of biochemistry and vice-chancellor of the University of Sheffield. Mellanby placed scabies in bedding to study how long it would take for persons to be infected, and was surprised to find that this took months. However, when a bed was shared, infestation took place. In order to make greater use of his volunteers he suggested dietetic experiments and he collaborated with Hans Krebs, the refugee biochemist, in research on the properties of 'national wheatmeal' flour. 
The scabies work led to extensive observation and treatment of military personnel in a special hospital for infested soldiers, and to the instruction of army medical officers. Mellanby kept volunteers (numbering forty-seven by May 1942) infested for months at a time, and he devised a successful treatment. The Ministry of Information produced a film on the experiments to advise on treatment of scabies. He conducted experiments on water deprivation in 1942, and on vitamins. He went on to propose infecting his volunteers with malaria in 1943, and at one stage suggested infecting them with typhus, albeit with their consent. The Medical Research Council prohibited what would have been a dangerous and unnecessary human experiment. He wrote up his experiences in 'Human Guinea Pigs' (1945), and concluded by proposing a permanent institute for human experiments. He was made an OBE for his scabies work. In 1945 Mellanby turned to scrub typhus research, which was relevant for the continuing war in the Far East. For this he went to Burma and New Guinea. In December 1946 Mellanby went to Germany for three weeks to hunt for medical documents, and attended the trials of Nazi doctors at Nuremberg and Dachau. It appears that he sifted through the reports of British intelligence officers at Frankfurt (presumably of the British branch of FIAT), and visited some former concentration camps. The exact documents which he brought to Britain have never been identified. He was accredited as correspondent of the 'British Medical Journal' with the brief of observing the Nuremberg medical trial. He published in 'The Lancet' on 7 December 1946 and in the 'BMJ', drawing attention to the scientific quality of some experiments, particularly those of the malariologist Claus Schilling, who was tried at Dachau in 1945, and to the typhus experiments of Erwin Ding at Buchenwald. Both sets of experiments involved deliberate infection of victims. While Mellanby roundly condemned Nazism, and the sadism of many of the experiments, he identified a legitimate scientific component and asserted (without providing a source) that Schilling had obtained prisoners' consent at Dachau. He also commended the typhus work as a 'useful evaluation of the various vaccines', overlooking the fact that about 1200 Russian, Gypsy, and French prisoners were killed in the experiments. Mellanby strongly believed that Gerhard Rose, a professor of tropical medicine whom he knew personally, was innocent, as were a number of the defendants, for example Handloser. The defence counsel of Becker-Freyseng cited Mellanby in the document book no. 20. The 'Daily Telegraph' of 11 February 1947 cited Mellanby in its report on Nazi medical experiments, quoting its correspondent as saying that Mellanby ''told me yesterday that some of the results of experiments by Nazis on inmates of concentration camps could be of great value to medical science''. Mellanby believed that the results should be made available to bona fide investigators. 
There followed a succession of appointments as academic administrator. Mellanby's work as principal of University College, Ibadan, from 1947 to 1953 confirmed his abilities as an academic organizer. He was appointed CBE in recognition of his achievements. On 17 May 1949 he remarried; his second wife was Jean Louie Copeland ('b'. 1915/16), who, with their son Alexander Robert Mellanby, survived him. In 1955 Mellanby became head of the department of entomology, Rothamsted Experimental Station. From 1961 to 1974 he was director of the Nature Conservancy's new experimental station at Monk's Wood in Hertfordshire. Mellanby was no conventional bureaucrat: he reflected on his own career: 'Ideas for practical research are more likely to come from active young scientists than from learned councils and committees. We need to find ways of encouraging such work and of interfering with its progress as little as possible. I was lucky; there was a war on, and the red tape that strangles so much initiative could be cut in a way that would be more difficult today.' He was drawn into controversy, first advocating environmentalist views but increasingly defending the use of chemicals in farming. He found some time for research, particularly on moles. He shifted to a defence of modern farming techniques. He was awarded an honorary DSc in 1970 from the University of Essex. 
In the 1970s Mellanby took a leading role at the International Conferences on the Unity of the Sciences, founded by Sun Myung Moon in 1972. He co-chaired with R. V. Jones the third conference held in London in 1974, and chaired committees at the fourth conference, on science and absolute values, in New York in 1975, at the sixth in San Francisco in 1977, and at the seventh conference in Boston in 1978. 
In retirement Mellanby continued to act as scientific consultant (as for the development of Gomera in the Canaries) and as a scientific author. He wrote eloquently on environmental issues, defending the use of pesticides and modern farming techniques, while also calling for a greater ecological awareness. 
Mellanby was a determined researcher, and a headstrong character, as when he was the only British delegate who attended a conference on 23 August 1939 in the Netherlands despite imminent war. He was talented as an organizer of research, and in presenting lucid analyses of scientific issues. His instincts were conservative, and he generally sided with the scientist as a dispassionate arbiter of biological and social problems. While major scientific awards and honours eluded him, he carved an outstanding career in applied biological research, and stirred some hornet's nests on controversial issues such as pesticides and experiments on human beings. He died at his home, 13 Wonford Road, Exeter, Devon, on 23 December 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52286


Chamberlain, Nathaniel (bap. 1612), linguist and physician, was the third son of the barber-surgeon Peter Chamberlen the younger (1572-1626) ['see under 'Chamberlen family] and his wife, Sara, daughter of William Delaune (c.1530-1611). He was baptized at the French church in London on 23 August 1612, and was educated at Merchant Taylors' School (1620-24). He entered Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1634, graduating BM in 1636. In his sole publication, 'Tractatus de literis et lingua philosophica' (1679?), he claimed to have conceived the idea of a universal language while at Oxford and to have had the benefit of advice from two of his contemporaries at Pembroke, William Hill (1619-1667) and Thomas Hunt (1611-1683). 
Chamberlain's first known employment, to which he was directed in 1643 by order of the House of Commons, was as a physician to the parliamentary army. After the civil war he lived in London for a time on friendly terms with the royalist Sir Thomas Urquhart, with whom, as he explains in the dedicatory epistle to the 'Tractatus', he frequently discussed the topic of universal language, Urquhart urging him to publish his ideas, even if they were not yet fully worked out. Chamberlain later moved to Dublin, possibly to join his elder brother Peter, who practised medicine there, and his former fellow student William Hill, now headmaster of the grammar school. The sixteen-page 'Tractatus' appeared with no date or place of publication, but has been identified as almost certainly printed in Dublin in 1679. 
The work consists of three parts: a dedicatory epistle containing biographical material, a section on orthography and pronunciation, and a third on the vocabulary and grammar of philosophical (that is, scientific) language. In the epistle, Chamberlain refers to some predecessors who had displayed an interest in universal language -- Francis Bacon, Thomaso Campanella, and Thomas Urquhart -- but he nowhere mentions the well-known 'Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language' by John Wilkins (1619-1672); and his ignorance of such an important work suggests that what he published in the 'Tractatus' was the result of conversations with Urquhart which took place many years before Wilkins's 'Essay' appeared in 1668. The work, however, is reasonably sophisticated, being more than a simplified version of an existing vernacular. Chamberlain intends to produce a language in which words are iconic, denoting in their structure the properties of the object signified. Chamberlain admits, however, that if every word must accord with the nature of the thing named, then the collaborative efforts of many learned men would be required, and the task would take them many years to complete. Thomas Hunt, however, suggested that Chamberlain should begin by producing a restricted vocabulary for the use of merchants who had to visit many different parts of the world, where a universal language would be so useful; but Chamberlain preferred a more theoretical approach, based on a limited number of 'radical' words supplemented by their derivatives. 
The 'Tractatus' is recorded as surviving in a single copy in Marsh's library in Dublin, and has not been translated or re-edited. The work is not of major significance in the universal language movement of the seventeenth century, but is of some importance in indicating that interest in the topic did not disappear after Wilkins's 'Essay' was published in 1668. Nothing further is known about Chamberlain's life. 


@@@@@


doc= 52289


Mikardo, Ian (1908-1993), politician, was born in Portsmouth on 9 July 1908, the son of Moshe (Morris) Mikardo, a tailor, and his wife, Bluma. Both his parents came to Britain in the massive Jewish exodus from the tsarist empire in the last decades of the nineteenth century and the first of the twentieth: his mother from the village of Yampol, in the western Ukraine, and his father (who arrived in Britain at the time of the South African War) from Kutno, a textile-manufacturing town west of Warsaw. When Morris Mikardo disembarked in London his total possessions consisted of the clothes that he stood up in, plus a little bag containing a change of shirt and underclothes, his accessories for prayer, and one rouble. He initially settled in the East End of London, intending, like many Russian Jews, to move on to the United States. He was, however, unable to scrape together the money for the fare, and left for Portsmouth (where there was work tailoring for the navy) with his wife in 1907. 
Mikardo recalled that the language of the family in those early days was Yiddish. When he went to school -- first the Beneficial Society school, then Omega Street school, both in Portsmouth -- he had only a few words of English, which put him at a disadvantage with his classmates. His mother wanted him to become a rabbi, and next sent him to Aria College in Portsmouth, which had been set up 'for the training and maintenance of young men, natives of the County of Hampshire, as Jewish Divines on orthodox principles' (Mikardo, 30). He attributed his capacity to draft a document, at which he was superb, to the rigours of Aria College and, subsequently, to an outstanding Latin master at Portsmouth southern secondary school for boys. 
Leaving school at 15, Mikardo shuffled from job to job, his greatest pleasure being to support a great Portsmouth football side. In 1930 he met Mary ('b'. 1907), the daughter of Benjamin Rosetsky, and as he put it, 'found a new family in hers' (Mikardo, 44). They married at Mile End and Bow District synagogue on 3 January 1932, and joined the Labour Party and Poale Zion, the Zionist workers' movement, which was affiliated to the party. All his life they were immersed in Jewish causes, and help for Israel, which they often visited. Nevertheless, Mik -- as he was universally called in the labour movement -- was very much an 'internal Israeli', worked with Mapam (the united workers' party), and abhorred anything which smacked of gratuitous provocation of the Palestinian Arabs. 
Mikardo's crucial break came when he stumbled on an advertisement for a seminar in 1931 on what was then called 'scientific management'. He had already seen enough in his various jobs in factories, warehouses, and marketing and distribution agencies, to satisfy himself that there was much room for improvement in the management of industries and commercial organizations. His enrolment in that seminar led to nearly sixty years of activity with the Association of Supervisory Staffs, Executives and Technicians (later the Association of Scientific, Technical and Managerial Staffs, of which he was president from 1968 to 1973). He spent the rest of the 1930s as a management consultant, and during the Second World War worked as an administrator in the aircraft-building industry. In 1944 he published 'Centralised Control of Industry', advocating the extension into peacetime of wartime controls on industry. 
In 1944 Mikardo was adopted as the Labour candidate for Reading, regarded at the time as a safe Conservative seat. He quickly introduced a more 'scientific' approach to canvassing, dividing the electorate into 'fors', 'againsts', and 'don't knows', and concentrating his activists' efforts on persuading the fors to vote and converting the 'don't knows'; the 'Reading system', as it came to be called, was subsequently adopted by all the major parties. In the same year as his adoption, he achieved overnight fame in the labour movement. At the London conference of the party he moved a resolution, in effect restating the fundamental principles of the party and committing a Labour government to extensive nationalization. 'If L Plates had existed in those days I'd have been wearing one', he later wrote (Mikardo, 76). His motion was supported by the formidable Bessie Braddock and was carried by a large majority against the wishes of the party leadership. As he left Methodist Central Hall, Herbert Morrison put a hand on his shoulder and said, 'Young man, you did very well this morning. That was a good speech you made -- but you realise, don't you, that you've lost us the General Election?' (ibid., 77). That 'misjudgement' was followed by Labour's victory in 1945 and Mikardo's election, by a majority of 6390, as MP for Reading. 
Despite his new-found prominence in the labour movement, Mikardo was not invited to become a minister in the Attlee government. Indeed, Attlee believed that both he and Austen Albu were unsuitable, apparently on racial grounds: 'They both belonged to the Chosen People, and he did not think that he wanted any more of them!' (B. Pimlott, 'Hugh Dalton', 1985, 596). Mikardo's chances of a ministerial career were further diminished by his close association with the Bevanite left of the parliamentary party: he often contributed to 'Tribune', was one of fifteen signatories of the 'Keep Left' pamphlet (1947), which criticized the government's timidity, and -- with Sir Richard Acland, Michael Foot, and others -- wrote its successor, 'Keeping Left' (1950) ['see also 'Keep Left]. He also wrote 'The Second Five Years' (1948), setting out a radical programme for a second post-war Labour administration. 
Mikardo held his Reading seat through the general elections of 1950, 1951, and 1955 -- and in the last year published 'Electioneering in Labour Marginal Constituencies' -- but in the general election of 1959 he was defeated by 3942 votes. He also lost his seat on the national executive committee of the Labour Party (to which he had first been elected in 1950) in the same year, though he returned in 1960, and remained a member until 1978. While out of parliament he focused his considerable energies on the development of his private business as an entrepreneur specializing in trade with the Soviet bloc, ably assisted by his secretary, Jo Richardson. His business activities led him to establish close relations with officials from the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, which reinforced the suspicion with which he was viewed by his Conservative opponents, and by many on the right wing of the Labour Party. 
Mikardo returned to parliament as MP for the safe Labour seat of Poplar in the East End of London in the general election of 1964. He retained the seat (renamed Tower Hamlets, Bethnal Green, and Bow in 1974, and Bow and Poplar in 1983) until his retirement in 1987. He took a special interest in the problems of the many Bangladeshi families arriving in his constituency, whose children often had only a very few words of English. He saw them harassed by having to study the usual range of school studies while still unfamiliar with the language of their teachers and textbooks. Mindful of his own problems as a Yiddish speaker half a century earlier, he persuaded education ministers in the Labour government to allocate extra funds to local authorities where lack of English among immigrant children was a substantial problem. Mikardo was a popular local MP, and very active on behalf of his constituents. He was much less popular with the leadership of his party, and with Harold Wilson in particular; he was highly critical of the latter's policy on the Vietnam conflict, steadfastly opposed all forms of income policy, and was a firm and highly effective opponent of Barbara Castle's proposals for trade union reform outlined in the government white paper 'In Place of Strife'. Indeed by 1970 'he had become -- from his power base in the Tribune group -- in effect the leader of the internal opposition to the government' ('The Times', 7 May 1993). Denied ministerial preferment, he nevertheless made a significant impact as chairman of the select committee on nationalized industries, from 1966 to 1970. In the opinion of one House of Commons clerk, he 'was simply the most skilful operator in committee that any of us ever saw' ('The Independent', 7 May 1993). 
Mikardo served highly effectively as chairman of the national executive committee of the Labour Party in 1970-71, and as chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party from March to November 1974; he was also chairman of the international committee of the Labour Party from 1973 to 1978, and vice-president of the Socialist International from 1978 to 1983. During the Labour administrations of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan in 1974-9 he was again marginalized, and in 1978 he lost his seat on the national executive committee to a younger firebrand of the left, Neil Kinnock. He re-emerged as campaign manager for his old ally Michael Foot, who in November 1980 defeated Denis Healey for the leadership of the party, by ten votes; but after the party's disastrous performance in the general election of 1983 under Foot, he had little sympathy either for his successor, Neil Kinnock, or for his predominantly Bennite opponents on the left. After his retirement from the Commons, at the general election of 1987, he published his beautifully written autobiography under the apt title 'Back-Bencher'. 
With heavy jowls, thick black-rimmed spectacles, and bushy eyebrows which remained stubbornly black long after the rest of his hair had gone white, Mikardo was a gift to caricaturists. Winston Churchill once quipped: 'I'm told he's not as nice as he looks' ('The Times', 7 May 1993). In fact, he was genial and approachable, with a sharp wit and a talent for self-parody. He was well known as a Commons 'character', and was for many years the house's unofficial bookmaker; fascinated by the mathematics of probability, he even published a pamphlet on the bookmaker's trade, 'It's a Mug's Game' (1951). He inspired devotion among his constituency activists, as two socialists from Reading testified after his death: 'At first we were not unduly impressed. No overwhelming charm of manner or appearance, a harsh, somewhat adenoidal voice, and yet, within minutes he had won our respect and, soon after, even a grudging affection. Whatever the topic -- the National Health Service, education, social deprivation, nationalisation or socialism itself -- he inspired others. He knew where he was going and we wanted to go with him... above all Mik had that rarest of qualities among professional politicians -- integrity. ('The Independent', 22 May 1993)' He was devoted to his wife Mary (who was progressively disabled after a major heart attack in 1959), and to their two daughters, Ruth and Judy. In his final years he moved to Cheadle, Cheshire, in order to be near the latter. Suffering from sarcoma and chronic obstructive airways disease, he died on 6 May 1993 at the Stepping Hill Hospital, Stockport, after a stroke. 


@@@@@


doc= 52291


Philipps, Wogan, second Baron Milford (1902-1993), political activist and artist, was born at Manor House, High Street, Brentwood, Essex, on 25 February 1902, the eldest child in the family of five sons and one daughter of Laurence Richard Philipps, first Baron Milford (1874-1962), businessman and company director, and his wife, Ethel Georgina (1879-1971), only daughter of Benjamin Speke, rector of Dowlish Wake, Somerset. His father came from a remarkable family, being the younger brother of John Wynford Philipps, first Viscount St Davids (1860-1938), Major-General Sir Ivor Philipps (1861-1940), and Owen Cosby Philipps, Baron Kylsant (1863-1937). Laurence Richard Philipps amassed a fortune based on shipping and insurance, and was created baronet in 1919 and Baron Milford in 1939, with the revival of a title which the Philipps of Picton Castle had held in the eighteenth century. 
Wogan Philipps was educated at Eton College and studied history at Magdalen College, Oxford, but left before completing his degree. He then joined the family shipping business, Court Line. On 21 November 1928 he married the novelist Rosamond Nina Lehmann (1901-1990), daughter of Rudolph Chambers Lehmann, journalist and Liberal MP, and former wife of (Walter) Leslie Runciman, second Viscount Runciman. Philipps and his wife had two children, Hugo ('b'. 1929) and Sarah Jane 
(Sally; 'b'. 1934)
. Philipps acted as his wife's typist for the novels she wrote during their marriage. Many artistic friends came to stay at their house in Ipsden, Oxfordshire, including Julian Bell, Stephen Spender, Lytton Strachey, and Dora Carrington, as well as Augustus John, with whom Philipps used to go on pub crawls (though he gave these up when he feared they were causing him to hallucinate). 
A holiday in Spain with Ralph and Frances Partridge early in 1936 began a fascination with that country and, when the civil war broke out later that year, Philipps was quick to volunteer his services to the Spanish Medical Aid office in London. He bought a van, filled it with supplies, and joined a convoy on its way to the Jarama front. Although he had no medical experience, he helped treat the wounded, and was made sergeant, despite not being a member of the International Brigades. He was wounded by shellfire and sent home to England, but soon returned to Spain, exploiting family connections in the shipping business to undermine the nationalists' blockade and acting as secretary for an organization of British shipowners trading with Spain. When Franco's victory became inescapable, Philipps organized the evacuation to Mexico of nearly 2000 refugees, including many children, on the SS 'Sinaia'. 
At the outbreak of the Second World War, Philipps was judged medically unfit for service in the merchant navy, and he spent the war years working as an agricultural labourer in Gloucestershire. He took a leading role in building up the National Union of Agricultural Workers in the county, serving on the county committee and representing his branch on the Cheltenham Trades Council. Meanwhile, his first marriage had broken down (his wife living for several years with the poet Cecil Day-Lewis), and ended in 1944 in divorce. On 17 January the same year Philipps married Cristina (1901-1953), daughter of the Marchese Casati, of the Palazzo Barberini, Rome, and former wife of Francis John Clarence Westenra Plantagenet Hastings, sixteenth earl of Huntingdon. Philipps and his second wife, an aristocratic communist, had met during the Spanish Civil War. Philipps's own political sympathies had begun to turn to the left during the general strike in 1926, but were confirmed rapidly by his experiences in Spain, and he joined the Communist Party in 1937. His father (who held office in local Conservative and Unionist associations) responded by disinheriting him. 
After the war Philipps bought a 180-acre farm at Colesbourne in the Cotswolds, where he grew cereals and raised pigs, poultry, Jersey cattle, and sheep. He claimed to have been the first person to introduce artificial insemination to Gloucestershire. In 1946 he became the only Communist member on the Cirencester rural district council; the otherwise exclusively tory membership reputedly went to great lengths to ensure that he lost his seat in 1949, albeit by only fourteen votes. He was the prospective parliamentary candidate for the Labour Party in Henley-on-Thames before the Second World War, and stood (unsuccessfully) as the Communist Party's candidate at Cirencester and Tewkesbury in the 1950 general election. 
Philipps's second wife, Cristina, died in 1953, and on 20 May the following year he married Tamara Rust, 'nee' Kravets (1913-2008), daughter of a Russian architect and widow of William Charles Rust, editor of the 'Daily Worker', the communist daily newspaper. In 1958 Philipps's daughter from his first marriage, Sally, died of polio in Jakarta. She was memorialised by her husband, the poet P. J. Kavanagh, in 'The Perfect Stranger' (1966). 
When his father died in December 1962 Philipps succeeded to the title as second Baron Milford. He took his seat in the House of Lords in May 1963 and used the occasion of his maiden speech to argue for the abolition of the second chamber. For three decades he was the only avowed communist to sit in parliament; as Earl Attlee observed, it was a curious irony that the Communist Party should owe its solitary parliamentary voice to the principle of hereditary representation. Milford's politics led him to be ostracized by many of his fellow lords, but he was active in the work of the house, speaking particularly on issues of foreign policy. He campaigned against repressive regimes, visiting Algeria, Chile, and Greece. He was no admirer of the Soviet system; he visited the Soviet Union on two occasions to study its agriculture, but was disappointed by what he saw there. 
Milford described himself in his 'Who's Who' entry as a 'farmer and painter', and although better known for his aristocratic communism, he wanted to be remembered 'for leaving a few good paintings to the world' ('The Art of Wogan Philipps'). He had studied briefly at the Ruskin School of Drawing, Oxford, and also worked with artists of the Euston Road School in London. He held his first solo exhibition in 1931, and throughout the 1930s showed his work frequently with the Artists' International Association and at the Leicester Gallery. He continued to exhibit until the late 1980s, with solo exhibitions at the Woodstock and Pentonville galleries in London, the Regent Gallery, Cheltenham, and the Einaudi Gallery, Milan; he also showed his work at the annual parliamentarians' exhibition at Westminster. His subject matter was often drawn from the landscape of the Cotswolds, interpreted in a modernist idiom. 
Following his retirement from farming Milford moved to a flat in Hampstead. He died in London on 30 November 1993, and was survived by his third wife, Tamara, and the son of his first marriage, Hugo, who succeeded him as third Baron Milford. His widow organized a memorial exhibition of his paintings in London in 1995. 


@@@@@


doc= 52294


Miskin, Sir James William (1925-1993), barrister and judge, was born in Hong Kong on 11 March 1925, the son of Geoffrey Miskin, general manager of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, and his wife, Joyce. The Miskins were of Huguenot origin, and had settled in Kent. He was educated at Haileybury College before seeing war service as a sub-lieutenant in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. After demobilization in 1946 he went to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he was senior Heath Harrison exhibitioner, and from where he graduated with a second-class degree in jurisprudence in 1949. On 28 April 1951 he married Mollie Joan Milne ('b'. 1927/8), daughter of Eric Ivan Milne of Crowborough, Sussex. They had two sons and two daughters. 
Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1951, Miskin joined the south-eastern circuit, and developed a good common law practice, mainly civil, principally in family and medical negligence work. He so impressed Desmond Ackner that he was invited to join the latter's chambers. He was led by Ackner in a number of important cases, and was given a red bag by Ackner in recognition of his outstanding contribution as an advocate, 'the like of which [Ackner] had not seen' (private information). Thereafter his career progressed well. From 1964 to 1967 and from 1970 to 1973 he served on the bar council, including service on a committee looking at the position of women at the bar. He was made a queen's counsel in 1967. From 1968 to 1971 he was deputy chairman of the Hertfordshire quarter sessions, in 1972 he became a crown court recorder (a part-time post entailing four weeks on the bench yearly), and from 1974 to 1975 he was leader of the south-eastern circuit. He succeeded Ackner as counsel for the children in the thalidomide tragedy. In the end the case against Distillers did not come to trial but was settled, those acting for the victims taking the view that there was no more than a 40 per cent chance of success in an action for negligence. 
In 1975, on the recommendation of Mr Justice Melford Stevenson, Miskin was appointed recorder of London, the senior judge at the central criminal court (the Old Bailey), and second citizen to the lord mayor. The appointment was something of a surprise as he had not been common serjeant, the deputy, and his practice had not been principally criminal. At the time it was believed in the profession that he was appointed in order to get the Old Bailey moving and to deal with complacency among those who regularly sat and practised there. He disliked waste of time and insisted that all courts start promptly at 10.30 a.m. With a considerable sense of humour, he was an outstanding after-dinner speaker and made many such speeches; indeed he was a sort of court jester for the City of London. 
The office of recorder of London is very arduous, involving the trial of many very serious cases, including murder, manslaughter, rape, grievous bodily harm, and robbery; it also involves considerable administrative responsibilities. Miskin enjoyed a reputation for fair summings-up ('straight down the middle') and was generally well thought of as a judge. Although he was outwardly tough in sentencing, it was said that his bark was worse than his bite; his sentencing, however, was often unpredictable and surprising. He was inconspicuously kind to young counsel. 
Like many good lawyers, Miskin was not good at administering his own affairs. He ran into tax problems, and had to sell his house in Wimbledon, to the great disappointment of his wife, Mollie. Being so involved in all his various activities he neglected his wife and the first marriage broke up. He married second, on 6 December 1980, Sheila Joan Collett ('b'. 1927/8), a widow, and the daughter of Harold Radcliffe Scott, schoolmaster. 
In his latter years on the bench Miskin's health declined, and he was reluctant to take medical advice; ill health converted his fine speaking voice to hoarseness, and he became known as 'Whispering Jim'. He became increasingly indiscreet and open to criticism. He was sometimes difficult with counsel, expressed himself unnecessarily forcefully, and told convicted criminals what he thought of them. Publicly he made a number of trenchant remarks and criticisms; these may have been justified but they were imprudent, indeed unwise, in a judge in office. He wanted the minimum age for jurors raised to twenty-five, and wanted capital punishment for premeditated murder. He cast doubt upon the innocence of the Guildford four after their conviction was quashed. He made unfortunate remarks about ethnic minorities, referring to a black man as a 'nig-nog', and to 'murderous Sikhs'. He wanted more money spent to increase the number of prison places. Some years previously he would have liked to move from the Old Bailey to the High Court, but consent from the lord chief justice was not forthcoming. The surprising deterioration in his personality and judicial performance was subsequently attributed to incipient, undiagnosed Alzheimer's disease, and a hitherto excellent reputation was spoilt. 
Miskin was involved in many extra-judicial activities. A keen boxer in his youth, he was appeals steward for the British board of boxing control from 1972 to 1975. He was also chairman of the board of discipline of the London School of Economics (1972-5), chairman of the inner London probation committee (1979-88), a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Furriers, an honorary liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Cutlers, and one of her majesty's lieutenants for the City of London (1976-93). He retired from the bench in 1990, having been knighted in 1983. He died of bronchopneumonia and senile dementia at his home, 25 Collingwood Road, Horsham, Sussex, on 21 November 1993, and was survived by his second wife, Sheila, and the four children of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 52296


Monson, Sir (William Bonnar) Leslie (1912-1993), colonial official, was born on 28 May 1912 at 2 Comely Bank Street, Edinburgh, the only son of John William Monson (1881/2-1929), tax inspector, and his wife, Selina Leslie, 'nee' Stewart (died 1958). His parents came originally from Ulster, but had settled in Edinburgh after their marriage. Monson's father died prematurely in 1929 before his son had completed his education. Fortunately, however, Monson was blessed with academic ability, and scholarships helped his progress through Edinburgh Academy and Hertford College, Oxford. He was dux at Edinburgh in 1930 with prizes in history, English, and classics (though under physical activity he could only record 'corporal in the OTC'). At Oxford he gained a second class in classical moderations, followed by a first in modern history in 1934. The following year he passed into the administrative grade of the home civil service and was posted to the Dominions Office as an assistant principal. In 1938 he became private secretary to the permanent under-secretary, Sir Edward Harding. In 1939 he transferred to the much larger Colonial Office as a principal, securing promotion to assistant secretary in charge of the production and marketing department in 1944. 
A chance to make a real mark came in 1947 with Monson's appointment as chief secretary to the west African council, based in Accra. This council comprised the secretary of state for the colonies and the governors of the British west African colonies, and their task was to co-ordinate British policy in west Africa. While based in Accra he married, on 2 October 1948, Helen Isobel, daughter of Roland Francis Browne, of Ceylon; she was at that time working for the British Council in west Africa (for which she was in 1949 made MBE). His quiet tact had previously been demonstrated by his promptly vacating a British Council house he had been lent which she claimed to be rightfully hers. His sensitivity to racial issues was demonstrated at this time when, producing 'The Pirates of Penzance', he arranged for the very modern major-general to have six white and six black daughters. District officers far up country were surprised but gratified to find that Monson, despite his wide-ranging task, knew of and encouraged their efforts to improve their districts. He was appointed CMG in 1950. 
On returning to the Colonial Office in 1951 Monson was promoted to assistant under-secretary, initially supervising the work of the production, marketing, and research departments, and leading colonial delegations to international conferences on sugar, rubber, and tin. In 1959 he returned to geographical responsibilities. His supervision of the east and central African departments was later extended to cover Aden and southern Africa, and Monson attended the relevant independence conferences at Lancaster House. At the conference leading to Zambian independence Kenneth Kaunda came to have great respect for Monson, and may have asked that he should be Britain's first high commissioner in Lusaka. At any rate he was so appointed, serving there from 1964 to 1966. He was appointed CB in 1964 and advanced to KCMG in 1965. As later high commissioners were to find, good relations between Britain and Zambia were hard to maintain because of the bedevilling factor of the declaration of unilateral independence by Southern Rhodesia. There was also the particular problem of the unpredictability of Wilson's government. For example, President Kaunda would hear on the BBC that Wilson's government was to hold talks with the Rhodesian rebels many hours before Monson had been officially briefed about such a change of policy. Kaunda would then refuse to see Monson. At other times Kaunda would press Monson for news of Wilson's intentions which he was unable to supply. It was not long before security grilles had to be installed at the high commission. 
On his return to London, Monson was advanced to deputy under-secretary in 1967, supervising the Commonwealth Office departments for sub-Saharan Africa. With the merger of the Commonwealth and Foreign offices in 1968 his responsibilities extended to all sub-Saharan departments from both offices. During this period the problem of oil sanctions against Rhodesia was prominent, and Monson and others were subsequently featured in the Bingham report on that subject, though without harm to Monson's career. His status as one of the most experienced and able members of the former Colonial Office was recognized in his next and last posting, in 1969, to supervise the remaining dependent territories (as the remnants of the colonial empire had been titled). There he was able to maintain continuity with the welfare outlook of his old department until his retirement in 1972. 
After retirement Monson was asked to serve on a commission on the future of the Gilbert and Ellice islands (now Kiribatu and Tuvalu), requiring some journeys by canoe. In 1975 he was made a knight of St John and director of the overseas relations branch of St John Ambulance, liaising with more than forty overseas branches and introducing regional conferences. He gave up this post in 1981. Former colleagues and friends continued to visit the Monsons at their home in Blackheath thereafter. 
In later life Monson acquired an avuncular aura: tall, moustached, pipe smoking, unthreatening in manner, and tactful but decisive. He was a man of considerable ability and humane in outlook, who played a significant but unobtrusive part in the largely peaceful transition of British colonies to independence. He died at his home, Golf House, Goffers Road, Blackheath, London, on 3 July 1993. He was survived by his wife. They had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52298


Elizabeth Alice Marjorie Montgomery (1902-1993). Sophia ('b'. 2 July 1900) and Margaret ('b'. 28 May 1904) -- known from childhood as Percy -- were raised in Hayes, Kent. Their father, William Harris (1867-1924), was a Lloyds' broker, and their mother, Kathleen (1873-1916), an unconventional woman who loved to dress up her children for photographs. Their happy childhood was disturbed, however, by their mother's early death and by the loss of their brother in the First World War. In 1921 they began to study art at the Chelsea Illustrators' School, where they met Elizabeth Montgomery, whose family had moved to Fulham from Cambridge. Elizabeth's father, William, was born in Liverpool, of Irish-Scottish parentage, and after attending London University joined the Presbyterian church. With his wife, Marta, he moved as curate to Kidlington, Oxfordshire, where Elizabeth was born on 15 February 1902. Subsequently he became a theology lecturer at St John's College, Cambridge, before moving to London in wartime to help to decode German messages. 


@@@@@


doc= 52301


Moore, Robert Frederick Chelsea (1941-1993), footballer, was born in Upney Hospital, Barking, Essex, on 12 April 1941, the only son of Robert Edward Moore, a railway signalman, and his wife, Doris Joyce, 'nee' Buckle. He was brought up in a typical street of working-class housing at 43 Waverley Gardens, Barking. After Barking primary school he passed the eleven-plus examination to the Tom Hood Grammar School in Leyton. Although not an outstanding schoolboy footballer -- indeed at one time it seemed he might be a more successful cricketer -- he had already been noticed by West Ham United and was taken to Upton Park for training. There he met and was influenced by Malcolm Allison, Malcolm Musgrove, Noel Cantwell, and his manager at West Ham in the 1960s, Ron Greenwood -- all of whom taught the importance of ball control, accurate distribution, and intelligent movement. As a young man he was also impressed by Ray Barlow, the cultured left half of West Bromwich Albion, by the penetrating passing of Johnny Haynes, and by the spectacular athleticism of Duncan Edwards, whom he once played truant from school to watch at Tottenham. He signed a professional contract with West Ham at the age of seventeen and played his first match for the first team against Manchester United in 1958. It took two years to earn a regular first-team place, after which he became the first footballer to experience the iconic status of the other stars of 1960s popular culture. On 30 June 1962 he married Christina Elizabeth Dean ('b'. 1942/3); they had a son and a daughter. 
Moore had already played eighteen times for the England youth team and eight more for the under-twenty-threes when at twenty-one he was chosen for the squad which went to the world cup in Chile in 1962. He returned an established international, having played in all four matches against Argentina, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Brazil. When Alf Ramsay became England manager in 1963, Moore became both captain and the second central defender in the new manager's new system. Their partnership was the key to one of the most successful periods for any England team. The world cup was won at Wembley on 30 July 1966, England finished third in the European championship in Italy in 1968, and in the 1970 world cup in Mexico England reached the quarter-finals, in which they played some of the most impressive football before losing 3-2 to West Germany after being two goals up. Moore had been voted player of the tournament in 1966 and appointed OBE in 1967, but was probably at his peak in 1970, when he gave a particularly assured performance against Brazil in Guadalajara which led Pele to say that he was the most accomplished defender against whom he had played. His international reputation was symbolized by a famous photograph of his exchange of shirts with the world's leading player after the match. Between 1962 and 1973 Moore played 108 times for England, 90 as captain. Of those 90 games 57 were won, 20 drawn, and only 13 lost. 
Yet success at club level proved elusive. The West Ham of the 1960s, often containing three members of England's world cup-winning team, could play exciting and effective football. They won the FA cup in 1964 and Moore was elected footballer of the year; they took the European cup winners' trophy in 1965, but they never finished higher than eighth in the first division. Local wags characterized the team as 'erratic as dock work'. Moore was disappointed not to win a league championship and annoyed that West Ham refused to release him when real contenders such as Brian Clough's Derby County and Tottenham made serious offers. Though an admirer of Greenwood's footballing philosophy, he was not always impressed by his signings or, as he got older, by his man management. Greenwood in turn sometimes suggested that Moore concentrated harder for England than he did for West Ham, and it seems clear that Moore relished the stiffer challenges of the international game. 
Moore eventually completed 1000 senior games, including 544 for West Ham and 124 for Fulham, whom he joined in March 1974. Ironically he found himself playing for Fulham against West Ham in the 1975 cup final, when West Ham won. He also played briefly for Herning Football Club in Denmark and San Antonio Thunder and the Seattle Sounders in the United States. After his retirement he was expected to have a successful career in football management, but it never happened. Brief spells at Oxford City (1978-81) and Southend United (1983-6) ended in disappointment. It is worth noting that the only member of the England world cup-winning team to succeed as a manager was Jack Charlton, perhaps providing support for the well-worn footballing cliche that good players do not necessarily make good managers. 
That Moore was a great footballer is beyond argument. His balance, timing, and anticipation, his ability both to win the ball with certainty and to deliver it to a team-mate tellingly far outweighed the lack of pace which severe critics pointed to as a fatal flaw. Moreover his skill reflected an unruffled temperament as well as intelligence. In the world cup of 1970 he played the game of his life against Brazil, when only a few days before he had been under house arrest in Bogota, his training watched by local policemen after he had been unjustly accused of stealing a gold bracelet from a shop. On the field he rarely appeared flustered or hurried, his play a byword for style, poise, and sportsmanship. If, in the late 1960s or 1970s, a recreational footballer won a tackle at the back and then strode forward, chest out, looked up and attempted a 40 yard diagonal pass inside the opposing full-back, there would have been no doubt whom he was trying to imitate. 
Life after football could never quite provide the same excitement or measurable achievement, though Bobby Moore's celebrity meant that he was in continual demand. A man who always enjoyed a drink, he part-owned pubs and clubs in east London, notably Mooros. He did coaching stints in Hong Kong and North Carolina and for three years from 1986 was sports editor of the 'Sunday Sport', perhaps the raunchiest of all the tabloids. In 1990 he joined Capital Radio as a football match analyst. He was also involved in a sports marketing and promotions company called Challenge, which went into liquidation in the early 1990s. Perhaps he needed longer to understand the ways of the business world. In 1986 Moore was divorced from his wife, Christina; on 4 December 1991 he married his partner Stephanie Parlane-Moore ('b'. 1948/9). In April 1991 he had an operation for suspected cancer of the colon. Only he and his closest family were aware that the disease was terminal. He continued his radio work until shortly before his death on 24 February 1993, at his home, 12 Seaton Close, Putney Heath, London. 
This sad event produced a public reaction that was only partly related to the fact that Moore was still only fifty-one. The powerful televisual image of the England team captain lifting the world cup at Wembley on 30 July 1966 was engraved on the minds of many people who would not have thought of themselves as followers of football. The moment when he wiped his grimy, sweaty hands on his shorts so that he would not soil the white gloves worn by the queen as she presented the Jules Rimet trophy to him particularly forced itself into the collective memory. It also symbolized this polite, cool, and composed young man, who seemed to represent the best side of a sport not always noted for its sensitivity. Compared to many professionals, Moore was the epitome of fair play, a man of exemplary character both on and off the field. He was a good-looking but modest star and one with a powerful sense of team identity. He was anxious not to let anyone down and did not like those who did. He was a hero as the English like them, a captain who led by example to the last, epitomized by the courage and dignity he showed in the face of death. 
Bobby Moore's many fans built a shrine of flowers, candles, cards, and scarves in West Ham's claret and blue colours at the gates of Upton Park, the first of many tributes paid to him. A memorial service was held in Westminster Abbey on 28 June; West Ham opened the Bobby Moore stand at Upton Park at a memorial match on 7 March 1994, and a bridge at Wembley Stadium was also named after him. This was followed in May 2007 by a statue at the new Wembley stadium. His widow, Stephanie Moore, set up the Bobby Moore Fund for Cancer Research UK, to support research into the disease which carried off 'football's greatest gentleman' at such an early age. 


@@@@@


doc= 52302


Eadric (d. 686), king of Kent, ruled for a year and a half. His violent bid for the kingship appears to have formed a precedent, for after his death, in Bede's words, 'various usurpers or foreign kings plundered the kingdom for a certain space of time until the rightful king, Wihtred, son of Ecgberht, established himself on the throne and freed the nation from foreign invasion' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 4.26). The first of these incursions came from Wessex. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' notes that in 686 King Caedwalla and his brother Mul ravaged Kent; in the following year Mul and twelve companions were 'burnt' in Kent, prompting another West Saxon ravaging of the kingdom. There is some evidence that Mul was installed for a short time as king of Kent, and that he was buried in the monastery of St Peter and St Paul, Canterbury, at that time the principal Kentish royal burial church. During the West Saxon occupation of the kingdom Caedwalla appears to have founded a monastery at Hoo. 


@@@@@


doc= 52304


Morley, Muriel Elizabeth (1899-1993), speech therapist, was born on 20 February 1899 at The Wells, Skircoat, Halifax, Yorkshire, the eldest daughter of Samuel Edwin Morley, a boiler composition manufacturer, and his wife, Helen Ann Monk, 'nee' Fletcher. Morley was educated at Halifax and Monkseaton high schools, then read physics and biology at Armstrong College, a division of the University of Durham located in Newcastle upon Tyne. She graduated in 1920 with a BSc and a certificate of education. She taught physics at the Church high school in Newcastle for ten years and then took a teaching post in India. While in India she contracted dysentery and, on her return to England, was advised that she was no longer strong enough for work in the classroom. 
Thus forced into a change of career, after a period working as a secretary, in 1932 Morley responded to an advertisement placed by William Wardell, a Newcastle plastic surgeon. Wardell had developed a new type of pharyngoplasty for children with cleft palate and wanted an 'educated woman' ('The Times') to assess the children's speech before and after surgery in order to determine the effectiveness of the operation. Morley, who had not even heard of the profession of speech therapy before applying for the post, was appointed and immediately immersed herself in her new job, reading everything available on the subject of cleft palate and also learning photography as a useful adjunct to her work. The work interested her immensely and she became a leading authority of international repute in this field. After some five years, patients with disorders of speech other than cleft palate were referred to her and she realized that she needed to further her knowledge. Unable to afford the part-time speech therapy training that was available in London, she devised her own scheme. This included working with speech therapy colleagues in hospital and school clinics in Liverpool and London. Her efforts were rewarded when she gained the diploma of the British Society of Speech Therapists in 1938. 
Now qualified, Morley was, in 1939, appointed as a speech therapist at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle. Initially she worked for just two sessions a week at the rate of 1 guinea per session and spent her spare time preparing a thesis on cleft palate. Her thesis, later the basis for her book 'Cleft Palate and Speech', was passed in April 1939 and she gained membership of the British Society of Speech Therapists; its members were admitted to the College of Speech Therapists, founded in 1945. The book gave thorough descriptions of the anatomy of cleft palate, surgery, associated speech problems, and practical suggestions for treatment. Published in 1945, it became a standard work in this field. 
It was during the early 1940s that people became increasingly aware of speech therapy and the profession gained more recognition. By 1945 Morley had set up Newcastle's hospital speech therapy service and was working full-time as a therapist in three hospitals, treating people with a variety of speech and language disorders, including former servicemen suffering from dysphasia as a result of head injuries sustained during the Second World War. Morley's practice grew apace and she was obliged to involve parents in their children's treatment in order to enable her to treat her ever-burgeoning caseload. She soon recognized the benefits of this, however, and became an exponent of parental involvement in speech therapy. 
Between 1950 and 1953 Morley's department researched into the normal and abnormal development of speech in a group of over 1000 children as part of the Newcastle family survey. In 1957 she published part of this study together with examples of her work in multidisciplinary clinics as 'The Development and Disorders of Speech in Childhood'. This work was regarded as a landmark in speech pathology in the USA and it was on the basis of this book that she was awarded the degree of DSc by the University of Durham in 1958. 
Morley made the first of many visits to the USA in 1951, finding that the standard of clinical work was below that of the UK but that academically the training was more extensive. In the hope that a university degree course might 'convince those concerned of the true status of the profession' (Morley, 3), she eventually persuaded the university in Newcastle, still then part of the University of Durham, to investigate the possibility of setting up such a degree. Her idea was finally realized in 1959 and Morley delayed her retirement, due at this time, in order to establish the course. She was appointed lecturer in speech and speech pathology in the departments of child health and education. Morley eventually retired in 1963 from what was by then the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. 
Morley's contribution to the speech therapy profession was considerable. In addition to her pioneering clinical work, her professional philosophy that language and speech must be taught in universities and that studies of speech pathology must always be based on sound knowledge of normal behaviours, was innovative at the time. She strove to convince people within the profession of the need for research into the origins and treatment of speech disorders and those outside it of the importance of speech therapy. Morley joined the ultimately successful campaign against registration under the 'Bill for Professions Supplementary to Medicine' because she was convinced that the profession, in order to survive, must exist as a discipline completely separate from general medicine. She also wrote numerous articles concerning speech disorders and their treatment. 
As a member of the College of Speech Therapists, Morley served many terms on the council as a fellow's representative and served as its third president from 1971 to 1973. In retirement she edited the college journal from 1967 to 1973, effecting significant changes and encouraging international distribution and contributions for the first time. She forged strong links with the speech therapy professions in Australia, New Zealand, and the USA, where she travelled widely as a visiting professor. She was involved in achieving reciprocal recognition of speech therapy qualifications with the USA and was made an honorary member of the American Cleft Palate Association and honorary fellow of the Australian College of Speech Therapists. 
Morley was appointed OBE in 1980 in acknowledgement of her pioneering work in research and education in speech therapy. Donald Court, professor of child health at Newcastle and her former colleague, described Morley in 1984 as a 'remarkable woman' who was 'fuelled and directed by her unwavering belief in the value of her subject and an unyielding commitment to its practice at the highest level' ('The Times'). 
For the last thirty years of her life, Morley lived in Northumberland, a place she loved. The photography that she originally learned as part of her cleft palate work remained a lifelong hobby; she also enjoyed painting with oils, baking, making carpets and tapestry kneelers, gardening, sewing, and knitting. Muriel Morley never married but was devoted to her family. She died of bronchopneumonia on 15 September 1993 at Greenfields, Powburn, Alnwick, Northumberland. 


@@@@@


doc= 52306


Moulton, James Louis (1906-1993), marine officer and military historian, was born on 3 June 1906 at The Terrace, His Majesty's Dockyard, Pembroke Dock, Pembrokeshire, the son of John Davis Moulton (died 1921), staff captain in the Royal Navy (also JP for Kingston, Jamaica, and later harbour master, Pembroke dockyard), and his wife, Beatrice Nutter, 'nee' Cox. He was educated at Sutton Valence School before being commissioned into the Royal Marines in 1923. After further education at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, and initial service in battleships, in 1930 he trained as a pilot and from 1930 to 1935 served in aircraft-carriers. On 19 June 1937 he married Barbara Aline ('b'. 1915/16), daughter of John Melville Coode, of independent means. They had a son and a daughter. 
Prior to the Second World War, Moulton was a student at the army Staff College, Camberley, and then in 1940 served on the staff of the British expeditionary force in France. He was one of the last officers to be evacuated from Dunkirk. After serving with the Royal Marine division in the seizure of Madagascar and with the directorate of combined operations, he assumed command of the newly raised 48 Royal Marines commando in March 1944, and led it during the Normandy landings in June 1944 and later during the combined assault on Walcheren Island in the autumn of that year. At the end of the war he commanded 4 commando brigade. Wounded in action (1944), he was appointed DSO (1944) and mentioned in dispatches (1946, for service with the British army of the Rhine). After the war his career continued to focus on amphibious operations. He was commanding officer of the commando school (1947-9) and of 3 commando brigade (1952-4, serving in the Middle East), and was chief of amphibious warfare from 1957 until his retirement in 1961; he also served as assistant chief of staff to the commandant-general, Royal Marines and as major-general, Royal Marines, Portsmouth (1954-7). He was made OBE in 1950 and CB in 1956. 
Moulton was an officer of diverse experiences, including sea duty, flying, and commanding infantry. This perspective proved invaluable in his later career, when he recognized that the amphibious assault was a truly joint and combined endeavour, requiring doctrine, training, and specialized shipping and equipment, such as helicopters and appropriate carriers for ship-to-shore movement. Stated another way, such operations could not be unique to or dominated by any single service, nor planned and executed in an 'ad hoc' manner. Although he served as chief of amphibious warfare between 1957 and 1961, a quarter of a century later he was credited with having ensured that Britain had the amphibious shipping necessary to conduct operations in the south Atlantic in 1981, during the Falklands War with Argentina. 
After his retirement, Moulton became a military analyst, historian, and editor. For two years (1966-8), he served as defence correspondent for the 'Glasgow Herald'. More important, he was first naval editor (1964-9) and then overall editor (1969-73) of 'Brassey's Annual'; under his name, he penned ten articles and three editorial forewords in this annual defence publication. He also wrote six books. 'Haste to Battle' (1963) told the story of wartime commando operations from the perspective of the commander of 48 Royal Marines commando, while also conveying the spirit of a combat unit. In 'A Study of War in Three Dimensions: the Norwegian Campaign of 1940' (1967), he analysed both joint and amphibious operations, candidly noting what the British did wrong in both approach and execution, and what the Germans did right. In 'Battle for Antwerp: the Liberation of the City and the Opening of the Scheldt' (1978), he described the joint and combined assault on Walcheren Island and the operations for the vital port of Antwerp, all placed within a larger strategic context. In 'Defence in a Changing World' (1964) he addressed the need to assess realistically what is in a nation's interest and to concentrate on the essentials, to have balanced forces, and to retain tradition and overseas commitments only if such are valid. Then, as Britain's role in the world changed and her military power declined, he analysed the NATO alliance, and within it the role and capability of the United Kingdom and the Royal Navy, in 'British Maritime Strategy in the 70s' (1969). Moulton also wrote an overview history of his corps, 'The Royal Marines' (1972, 2nd edn, 1981). Amid these diverse writings, his analyses remained relevant at the end of the twentieth and beginning of the twenty-first centuries. 
Moulton was born while the British empire was still in its ascendancy, was commissioned into the Royal Marines at its greatest height, and commenced his military career in an era still dominated by the big gun battleship. By the end of his military career, the empire was gone, Britain's commitments overseas continued to dwindle, and the naval services were a shadow of their former strength. Throughout all of this he was a consummate professional military officer, an exemplary leader of men in combat and peace, and a realist in assessing international affairs and supporting strategies, in recognizing the possibilities of harnessing technological change to military needs, and in comprehending the need for joint (multiservice) and combined (multinational) operations. He was an excellent example of the experienced, reflective professional which all armed forces need to accomplish effectively the tasks their political leaders assign to them. He represented at its best the dedication and professionalism of the British military officer corps. He died of cancer at St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, Surrey, on 22 November 1993, and was survived by his wife and two children. 


@@@@@


doc= 52307


Eadgifu (b. in or before 904, d. in or after 966), queen of the Anglo-Saxons, consort of Edward the Elder, was the daughter of Sigehelm, a Kentish ealdorman killed at the battle of the Holme in 903. She was the wife of King Edward the Elder and the mother of two kings, Edmund and Eadred, and of two daughters, Eadburh, who became a nun at Winchester and was venerated as a saint, and Eadgifu. 
Edward married Eadgifu 'c'.919; she was his third wife. When he died in 924, it was the sons of earlier marriages who came to the throne and Eadgifu disappears from court. By 939, however, all her stepsons were dead, apparently without offspring, and Eadgifu's sons now reigned in turn. Her triumphant return to court is signalled in her prominence in the witness lists of charters; during the reign of Edmund, the king, his mother, and his brother appear almost as a triumvirate. Eadgifu's influence remained great when her second son, Eadred, came to the throne in 946: indications from charter witness lists that her power waned slightly after 952 may simply reflect the special nature of these ('Dunstan B') charters. The death of Eadred in 955 saw another turn in Eadgifu's fortunes. In the course of the ensuing struggle for the throne between her grandsons, she was first deprived of all her lands by the eldest of them, Eadwig, who became king, and later restored by the younger, Edgar, after he came to the throne of Wessex in 959. These shifts suggest she may herself have taken sides in this struggle, probably against Eadwig. Her future was at stake; the marriage of Eadwig to AElfgifu threatened Eadgifu's position at court and required that her landed endowment be given to the new queen. Although she recovered some lands, and Edgar made generous gifts to his grandmother, his own marriages meant that her days as a queen were over. She was rarely at court after 959 and probably lived in religious retirement. Her last appearance has a typically familial context, at the great gathering of the royal family in 966, attested in the witness list of Edgar's charter for the refoundation of New Minster, Winchester. The presence of the elderly dowager queen added to the demonstration of family unity at such a potentially divisive moment. Eadgifu probably died and was buried at Winchester but the date is unknown. 
Eadgifu is remembered as a friend and ally of saintly churchmen; she persuaded AEthelwold to remain in England and she tried to get a bishopric for Dunstan. In one grant by Eadred to his mother, she is described as 'famosa famula Dei' ('celebrated handmaid of God'; 'AS chart.', S 562). This secondary supportive role is a cliche of saints' lives and only a partial picture. Eadgifu's wide interest in the foundation and endowment of churches -- she was remembered as a benefactor at Christ Church, Canterbury -- and in land acquisition, particularly in eastern England, show a queen actively involved in the extension of West Saxon power. Such an extension was the motive for her marriage, since she was a wealthy woman. Her father had left his 'ancestral inheritance' at Cooling and 'Osterland' in Kent to her: Cooling had been given a century earlier by Cenwulf, king of the Mercians, to his thegn Eadwulf, perhaps one of Sigehelm's forebears ('AS chart.', S 1211, 163). Farleigh, Kent, which Sigehelm received from King Alfred ('AS chart.', S 350), also passed through Eadgifu's hands ('AS chart.', S 1212). The augmentation of her wealth by her sons and grandsons is further testimony to her involvement in royal rule. Eadred, for example, gave her land at Felpham, Sussex, during his lifetime and bequeathed to her the royal vills at Amesbury, Wiltshire, Basing, Hampshire, and Wantage, Berkshire, and all his booklands in Surrey, Sussex, and Kent. She may even have acted as a sort of regent in Kent, where the will of one thegn ('AS chart.', S 1511) was apparently arranged before her, in company with Oda, archbishop of Canterbury (and so between 941 and 958). Eadgifu's political career, its peaks and vicissitudes, were shaped by dynastic politics. She is an example of the potential power, and of the accompanying vulnerability, such politics meant for an early medieval queen. 


@@@@@


doc= 52309


Murray, Keith Anderson Hope, Baron Murray of Newhaven (1903-1993), agricultural economist and university administrator, was born at 62 Great King Street, Edinburgh, on 28 July 1903, the third of five sons (there were no daughters) of Charles David Murray (1866-1936), judge of the court of session as Lord Murray, and his wife, Ann Florence (Annie), fifth daughter of David Nicolson, of Parsons Green, Edinburgh. He followed his father through Edinburgh Academy and Edinburgh University, taking a degree in agriculture with the intention of becoming a farmer. After a year with the board of agriculture, however, he was awarded a Commonwealth Fund fellowship for study in the United States at Cornell University, returning in 1929 with a PhD and a budding international reputation as an agricultural economist. After further postgraduate study at Oxford (collecting a BLitt), he joined the University Agricultural Economics Research Institute at that university, which was at that time contributing much to the development of Oxford economics. His first book, 'Land and Life' (1932), was immediately followed by another, 'The Planning of Agriculture' (1933), and he was on the road to a significant academic career. His work in agricultural economics culminated in the publication in 1955 of the 'Agriculture' volume in the official 'History of the Second World War'. In 1937 however he took a step into administration which he came to regard as the turning point of his career. He was appointed fellow and bursar of Lincoln College, which was going through a very difficult time financially. Only thirty-four, he injected new life into the college, transforming its economy and earning high praise from its junior members for his accessibility. 
On the outbreak of the Second World War, Murray was drafted into the Ministry of Food, but subsequently worked as a radar controller in the RAF for two years before being appointed director of food and agriculture in the Middle East Supply Centre, with the responsibility of ensuring food supplies not only for the allied forces in the region, but also for the civilian population. Meanwhile, in 1944 the fellows of Lincoln College elected him in his absence as their new rector. With characteristic energy he also remained as bursar, and in the immediate post-war years he transformed the college intellectually, socially, financially, and in sport. His achievements were noted widely outside Oxford, and he is said to have declined many offers of high positions in order to consolidate his work in the college. 
In 1952 however Murray yielded to heavy pressure from friends and colleagues within the university world, and accepted the chairmanship of the University Grants Committee at what was to be a critical period in the history of British universities. He served two full terms, retiring in 1963. During that decade were laid the foundations of the expansion and transformation of the university system. Murray himself was from the outset an expansionist -- not at that time a particularly fashionable view in academic circles. His decade in office saw annual capital expenditure on universities increase fifteenfold, and seven new universities planned and designated. In this period however the number of students had still not kept pace with the increase in the relevant age group, still less with the number of those qualified by their earlier education. Murray himself saw his job as providing the universities with the tools and physical structure they needed for what he perceived to be the unavoidable task of long-term expansion. He was also convinced that the universities would not tackle this satisfactorily unless they could be assured of autonomy in doing so. This implied control by the universities of the use of the resources allocated to them, as well as control over admissions, appointments, promotions, discipline, and above all over the content of teaching and research. With the financial, physical and organizational foundations in place Murray encouraged the government in the early 1960s to appoint what was to become the Robbins committee to map out the future expansion. Though he was not himself a member his influence was said (by the secretary of the committee) to have rivalled that of Lord Robbins himself, and almost every aspect of the committee's report affecting universities was developed from the foundations laid down by Murray's work at the University Grants Committee over the previous decade. 
Throughout his career Murray was always ready to add extra jobs to his already busy load. He was indeed a leading member of the 'great and the good', an 'all-purpose public man'. While still at Oxford he served as a city councillor, on the county education committee, and as a magistrate. On the international scene he was in the late 1940s a member of the committee of inquiry into disturbances in the Gold Coast, which led to a new constitution which was the first step to the independence of Ghana. While at the University Grants Committee he accepted an invitation from the government of Australia to chair a commission which led directly to the remarkable development and expansion of Australian universities in the 1960s. After his 'retirement' he spent eight years as director of the Leverhulme Trust (1964-72), and combined this with trusteeship of the other great private foundation concerned with research and education in the UK, the Wellcome Trust (1965-73). He also served on the boards of the Metal Box and British Aero companies, though the private sector never really engaged his enthusiasm. 
Murray was a large man in every sense: tall, genial, and energetic. He moved easily and confidently in government circles, both Westminster and Whitehall. In one sense he could be said to have presided over the last golden years of a University Grants Committee system, in which relations between British governments and universities were characterized by personal trust and mutual respect. He was, he admitted, fortunate in that all the key stages of his career -- Lincoln College, the University Grants Committee, and Leverhulme -- involved the management of growth and expansion rather than curtailment and retrenchment. 
Murray was honoured both by the government and by universities at home and abroad. He was knighted in 1955, appointed KCB in 1963, and created a life peer in 1964. Chancellor of the University of Southampton from 1964 to 1974, he received honorary degrees from Oxford, Cambridge, Bristol, Liverpool, Leicester, Edinburgh, Southampton, and Hull, as well as from California and Western Australia. He was a devout Presbyterian, with a firm commitment to his values, but in no way censorious of others. With a wide circle of affectionate friends, he did not marry, and spent the last decade of his life quietly in his small flat in Westminster. He died in London on 10 October 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52310


AEthelberht II (d. 762), joint king of Kent, succeeded to the kingdom of Kent with his brother 
By 731 Kent, along with the other kingdoms south of the Humber, appears to have acknowledged the overlordship of AEthelbald, king of the Mercians. It is impossible to say whether this degree of domination lasted until AEthelbald's death in 757. None of the Kentish charters issued by AEthelberht, Eadberht I, or Eardwulf has any reference to Mercian overlordship, but this does not prove that Kent was independent; in his dealings with the rulers of major kingdoms such as Kent, AEthelbald may simply have required the payment of tribute and some measure of deference, rather than control over routine land transactions. Eadberht at least is known to have attended AEthelbald's court, for he attests a charter of the Mercian king that was issued in London in 748 ('AS chart.', S 91). 
The death of AEthelberht II in 762 precipitated a succession crisis in Kent. Over the next few years an unusually large number of charters were issued, making it possible to identify no fewer than five kings of Kent, evidently jockeying for power and attempting to win support through land-grants. In east Kent AEthelberht was succeeded by 
Meanwhile, the new king of the Mercians, Offa, had taken advantage of the political turmoil to impose his overlordship on Kent; in 765 he issued a charter directly concerning land in Kent which was effectively a confirmation of a charter of Sigered ('AS chart.', S 105). But Offa's growing control over the kingdom seems to have received a sudden check in 776. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records that in that year a battle took place at Otford in Kent between the Mercians and the men of Kent, but does not mention the outcome. Most later medieval historians assumed that Offa was victorious, but it has been pointed out that there is no evidence for Mercian overlordship in Kent in the years immediately after that battle; instead, there are charters issued by King Ecgberht II in 778 and 779 and by a King 


@@@@@


doc= 52311


AEthelred (d. 911), ruler of the Mercians, took over the government of that portion of Mercia left to the English after the vikings had dismembered the kingdom in 877 and King Ceolwulf II had disappeared from the scene two years later. Nothing certain is known of how AEthelred attained leadership of the Mercians, nor of his family background. He first appears in 883, by which time he had recognized the overlordship of the West Saxon king, Alfred: he made a grant to Berkeley Abbey in that year with Alfred's assent. Although the chronicler AEthelweard (died 998), who used sources independent of the extant versions of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', calls AEthelred 'king', the title accorded to him by the latter texts is 'ealdorman'. He certainly seems to have remained in some form of submission to the West Saxon kings for the rest of his life. His allegiance predates the occupation of London in 886 by Alfred, to whom 'all the English people that were not under subjection to the Danes' submitted ('ASC', s.a. 886). Alfred's immediate concession to AEthelred of control over London, which had been in Mercian hands earlier in the century, perhaps reflects the king's need to maintain unity among those English peoples who remained outside viking territory. Even more important for cementing the bond between the West Saxon and Mercian rulers was AEthelred's marriage to Alfred's daughter and eldest child, AEthelflaed, which had happened by the time Asser was writing his life of the king in 893, and perhaps took place as early as 888. AEthelred was probably older than his wife, perhaps considerably so. 
The year 892 brought new viking invaders to England, and AEthelred took part in a concerted effort to oppose them. After the initial defeat of one viking leader, Haesten, he stood godfather to one of Haesten's two sons, while Alfred sponsored the other. In 893 AEthelred took reinforcements from London to join Alfred's eldest son, Edward (870s?-924), in pinning down one force at Thorney in Buckinghamshire. Finding themselves insufficiently strong to assault the army directly, AEthelred and Edward allowed it to leave English territory. Later in the year, a reinforced viking army set out on a raid up the Thames valley, and then up the Severn. AEthelred followed it, with a force that included the ealdormen of Wiltshire and Somerset, contingents drawn from every fortified settlement in English Mercia and Wessex east of the Parret, and a detachment sent by the Welsh princes. The raiding army was besieged on the Severn at Buttington near Welshpool, but eventually cut its way out and limped back to its base at Shoebury, Essex. The presence of Welshmen in AEthelred's force indicates the seriousness of the threat posed by the viking army. The relationship between the Welsh princes and the Mercian ruler was usually more hostile: Asser records that individual Welsh princes submitted to Alfred in order to obtain protection against AEthelred. 
AEthelred's role in the ensuing campaign is nowhere made explicit, though it is highly likely that he co-ordinated the Mercian response to further raids. Late in 893 part of the viking force in Essex, joined by men from East Anglia and Northumbria, established itself at Chester but was starved out and moved to Wales, which it devastated for nearly a year; on its return east it avoided Wessex and Mercia altogether. In 895 an English army was obliged to shadow a viking party across the midlands to the Severn, where the vikings over-wintered. The dispersal of this force marked the end of serious viking assaults during Alfred's reign. 
The construction of the defensive system of fortified sites ('burhs') which Alfred began was chiefly continued by Edward and AEthelflaed after AEthelred's death. Nevertheless, AEthelred and AEthelflaed were approached by Werferth, bishop of Worcester, to fortify that town for the defence of the people and the security of the cathedral. Of even more importance to the Mercian rulers, perhaps, was Gloucester, where there is evidence for a royal palace and mint and where the street pattern is strikingly similar to that of some of Alfred's 'burhs' in Wessex. AEthelflaed founded a new minster there, to which relics of the Northumbrian royal saint Oswald were translated in 909, and where, according to AEthelweard, both she and her husband were buried. 
At some time in the decade after Alfred's death in 899 AEthelred seems to have fallen ill. Leadership of the Mercians is then accorded to Edward the Elder or to AEthelflaed: the West Saxon version of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' credits Edward with sending the Mercian army against the vikings in 909 and 910, and the so-called 'Mercian Register' (embedded in texts B, C, and D of the chronicle) records that AEthelflaed built a fortified settlement at 'Bremesburh' in 910. AEthelred died in 911 -- the precise date is unknown. AEthelflaed was subsequently able to assume rulership of the Mercians herself. The title by which she was known, 'Myrcna hloefdige', 'Lady of the Mercians', was an adaptation of AEthelred's habitual title of 'Myrcna hlaford', 'Lord of the Mercians'. Her brother Edward, however, 'succeeded to London and Oxford and to all the lands which belonged to them' ('ASC', s.a. 911). 


@@@@@


doc= 52312


Ecgfrith (d. 796), by having the young man consecrated king. It is impossible to discover exactly what this involved, and whether it reflected a formal royal anointing or a less significant blessing, but it does seem very likely that Offa found inspiration in Charlemagne's arrangements to have his sons consecrated by the pope in 781. By associating Ecgfrith with himself in the kingship, Offa was asserting his legitimacy and paving the way for an undisputed succession. (He also seems to have used more reprehensible methods, for Alcuin mutters sadly about the blood which he shed to secure the kingdom for his son.) The other significant event of 787 was the division of the Canterbury province to create a second archbishopric in southern England, with the archbishop's seat at Lichfield, in the heartland of Mercia. This needed papal permission, and is probably to be connected with a fact-finding papal embassy sent from Rome to England in the previous year. There were good practical reasons for dividing the ancient southern province, which was one of the largest in Europe. But there may also have been a personal motive, for Offa is said to have been on very bad terms with the current archbishop of Canterbury, Jaenberht. The synod in 787 called to authorize the elevation of Lichfield was contentious, but Offa had his way, and obtained the services of a compliant archbishop in his own territory. Modern historians have been tempted to link this episode with Ecgfrith's consecration, and to see Jaenberht's humiliation as the consequence of his refusal to co-operate with Offa's plans for his son. A connection has also been made with a letter of Pope Hadrian to Charlemagne (undated, but written between 784 and 791), which shows that the pope had been unsettled by rumours that Offa was conspiring with the Frankish king to oust him and replace him with a Frankish candidate; it has been suggested that these reports were spread by Jaenberht's party, with a view to discrediting Offa. Clearly there was considerable diplomatic activity between Rome and England at this time, although it is unclear whether the most important bone of contention was the consecration of Ecgfrith or the division of the Canterbury diocese (which could be seen as a legitimate reform). The sources for the episode are deeply hostile to Offa and ascribe his actions to personal antagonisms; yet he must have had a serious practical case for persuading the pope to agree to the elevation of Lichfield into an archbishopric. 


@@@@@


doc= 52313


AEthelheard (d. 740), king of the West Saxons, became king in 726 after his predecessor, Ine, retired to Rome. The succession was disputed, but AEthelheard defeated the other claimant, an atheling named Oswald. AEthelheard's name does not appear in any extant genealogy of the West Saxon kings, and there is no direct evidence for his ancestry or connections. However, the inference, sometimes drawn, that he was an outsider, may not be correct. Since Ine had a long reign with a planned ending, it is likely that he designated his successor, and the most obvious person to have been so named is AEthelheard. It is quite possible that he was Ine's son, and that this was why no one thought it worthwhile to draw up a separate genealogy for him. 
AEthelheard married a woman named Frithugyth. Again there is no direct evidence for her antecedents, but it has been suggested that she was related to Frithuwold of Surrey, Frithuswith (St Frideswide of Oxford), and others of similar names active at this period. She appears to have enjoyed a position of some power and importance during AEthelheard's reign. She witnessed all of her husband's surviving charters, made grants of land both jointly with the king and independently, and travelled to Rome with Bishop Forthere in 739. 
AEthelheard and Frithugyth are recorded as making grants of land in Somerset and Devon to the monastery at Glastonbury. Two such grants were probably made in 729; others cannot be dated precisely. In 739 AEthelheard gave land at Crediton, near Exeter, to Forthere, bishop of Sherborne, for the foundation of a monastery. Apparently the West Saxons controlled at least part of Devon at this time, but wars against the Cornish were a feature of West Saxon history down to the tenth century, and it may be that the monastery at Crediton was intended to consolidate West Saxon power in a precariously held border area. 
During the later, if not the earlier, years of his reign, AEthelheard may have been subject to some sort of overlordship by AEthelbald, king of the Mercians. In his 'Historia ecclesiastica', Bede states that all the English kingdoms south of the Humber were subject to AEthelbald in 731, and the Mercian king's charters of the 730s make similar claims. In 733 AEthelbald occupied Somerton in Somerset, and charters furnish evidence for his continuing power in that area during the 740s. A reference (which may itself be authentic although surviving in a dubious charter) to AEthelheard crossing the Severn on an expedition against the Welsh suggests that the West Saxons were assisting the Mercians, though it is unclear whether they were subject to, or in alliance with, the Mercian king on this occasion. However, there are obvious motives for hyperbole in the Mercian sources, and the Crediton grant shows that AEthelheard continued to act as an independent king in at least some respects. AEthelheard died in Wessex in 740 and was succeeded by Cuthred, who was probably his designated successor and may have been his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 52314


Sir John Percyvale (d. 1503), merchant and mayor of London. Born probably 'c'.1430 in Macclesfield, Cheshire, Percyvale began his career in London as a servant in the mayor's household, becoming serjeant-at-mace in 1457. By the late 1460s, perhaps because of his marriage to Thomasine, he was active as a tailor and cloth merchant, becoming a liveryman of the Tailors' Company in 1468/9. He was elected master of the craft in 1485, and became an alderman, first for Vintry ward (1485-96) and then for Langbourn (1496-1503), serving as sheriff in 1486-7. He acquired property in both wards as he expanded his business interests as a general merchant. Percyvale was knighted by Henry VII when the king arrived in London in 1485. His election to the mayoralty in 1498 was controversial: he had been an unsuccessful candidate on three previous occasions, primarily because of the rivalry which existed between the tailors and other companies, particularly the drapers. A chronicler also blamed the 'hote apetyte' which Percyvale himself was rumoured to have for the post. He died in May 1503, shortly after founding a free grammar school in Macclesfield with the assistance of two Cheshire men, Thomas Savage, archbishop of York (died 1507), and Sir Richard Sutton. In his will, dated 4 March 1502, he made substantial bequests of goods and clothing to parish churches in London and Cheshire and left lands in London and Kent to his widow. In the absence of any children from his marriage to Thomasine, other lands in London were to revert to his nephew and heir, Richard Percyvale of Ipswich, after her death. 


@@@@@


doc= 52315


AEthelred (d. after 704), king of the Mercians, was the son of Penda (d. 655). He succeeded his brother Wulfhere as king of the Mercians, just after the latter's disastrous defeat by Ecgfrith of Northumbria 'c'.674. This seriously diminished Mercian hegemony over the kingdoms of southern England and AEthelred's first task was to restore the situation. Control in the south-east was established in 676 by a punitive raid into Kent, in which Rochester was sacked. AEthelred was married to Ecgfrith's sister Osthryth, but this did not prevent him from inflicting a decisive defeat on his brother-in-law, at the battle of the Trent, in 679. He thereby recovered control of Lindsey, signalled by his patronage of the monastery at Bardney, whither Osthryth translated the remains of her uncle St Oswald. AEthelred also asserted his lordship over the kings of the Hwicce and may have been instrumental in founding the monastery of St Peter's, Gloucester, about 681. It was perhaps his sister-in-law AEthelflaed, Osthryth's sister, who had, a little earlier, founded the short-lived monastery at Fladbury, in modern Worcestershire; the house was later in the hands of Queen Osthryth. AEthelred also kept up Mercian pressure on the West Saxon kingdom; his nephew Berhtwald administered a territory on the borders of the Hwicce and the West Saxons, and was able to dispose of land in what is now Wiltshire ('AS chart.', S 1169). 
Mercian relations with Northumbria remained poor. In 681, 'to flatter King Ecgfrith' (Eddius Stephanus, chap. 40), AEthelred prevented Berhtwald from assisting the exiled Northumbrian Bishop Wilfrid, but matters changed after Ecgfrith's death in 685; when Wilfrid quarrelled with his successor, King Aldfrith ('c'.692), AEthelred received him in Mercia and gave him the bishopric of the Middle Angles. Deteriorating relations with Northumbria are suggested by the murder in 697 of Queen Osthryth, 'by her own Mercian nobles' (Bede, 'Hist. eccl.', 5.24); it may be that her personal household was implicated but no further details are given. She was buried at Bardney. Soon afterwards AEthelred gave Fladbury to the bishopric of Worcester 'for the forgiveness of my sins and those of my late wife Osthryth' ('AS chart.', S 76). He may have married again, for a late source alleges that his son Ceolred was not a child of Osthryth (Macray, 73). In 704, however, he abdicated and retired as abbot to Bardney, whence he continued to advise his successor, Coenred, son of Wulfhere, and uphold the cause of Bishop Wilfrid. The date of his death is unknown; he was buried at Bardney, where both he and his murdered wife were venerated as saints. 


@@@@@


doc= 52320


Nash, Thomas Arthur Manly (1905-1993), entomologist, was born on 18 June 1905 at 22 Lennox Road South, Southsea, the younger of the two children of Llewellyn Thomas Manly Nash, a colonel in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and his wife, Editha Gertrude, 'nee' Sloggett. Tam (the nickname by which he was universally known) spent much of his early childhood in India, returning to England for his schooling at Wellington College. He obtained a BSc in entomology at the Royal College of Science (later Imperial College). In 1927 he was employed by the Colonial Office to work in the department of tsetse research and reclamation, Tanganyika Territory. There he undertook investigations on aspects of the biology of tsetse flies, the vectors of the trypanosomes which cause sleeping sickness in humans, and a related disease of domestic livestock in much of tropical Africa. After returning briefly to England he married Marjorie Wenda (1907-1988), daughter of Walter Alexander Wayte, dental surgeon, at Wadworth parish church, Yorkshire, on 22 February 1930. 
Nash continued working in east Africa until 1932 by which time he had been awarded a London PhD and DSc. The following year he moved to Nigeria as medical entomologist in the sleeping sickness service of the Ministry of Health. From 1937 to 1944 he was in charge of the Anchau rural development and settlement scheme, where he was able to put to practical use his research findings on the effectiveness of partial clearing of vegetation forming the flies' habitat as a method of tsetse control. He demonstrated that tsetse control, combined with development of the rural economy, could result in freedom from human and animal trypanosomiasis and an improvement in general health and living conditions. In 1948 the Colonial Office established the West African Institute for Trypanosomiasis Research, located in Nigeria with the mandate to conduct research on the medical, veterinary, entomological, and parasitological aspects of trypanosomiasis relevant to the then four British colonies in west Africa: Ghana, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and The Gambia. Nash transferred from the sleeping sickness service to the new institute, taking up the post of chief entomologist. Following the resignation of the founder director he became director of the institute in 1954 and remained in that position until his retirement in 1959. His achievements in Africa were acknowledged by appointment as OBE (1948) and CMG (1959). 
In 1962 Nash came out of retirement and founded, with funds from the department of technical co-operation, the Tsetse Research Laboratory located on the Langford site of the veterinary school of the University of Bristol. He was a research fellow of the university and director of the laboratory. He retired for the second time in 1971, having demonstrated the feasibility of maintaining colonies of the slow breeding tsetse fly in the laboratory, an achievement on which was based subsequent extensive research programmes at Langford and elsewhere on the insect and on the diseases that it transmits. 
Nash's publications included 'Tsetse Flies in British West Africa' (1948), 'Africa's Bane: the Tsetse Fly' (1969), 'A Zoo without Bars' (1984) -- a lighthearted look at his life in the wilds of east Africa in 1927-32 -- and numerous papers on tsetse flies and trypanosomiasis in scientific journals. He died, predeceased by his wife and only son, in the General Hospital, Weston-super-Mare, on 14 January 1993 of cerebral infarction and was cremated on the 22nd; his ashes were scattered in his much loved garden at Spring Head Farm, Upper Langford. 


@@@@@


doc= 52321


Lanczos, Cornelius (1893-1974), mathematician and mathematical physicist, was born on 2 February 1893 in Szekesfehervar, Hungary, the first of four children born to lawyer Karoly Lowy (1854-1939) and his wife, Adel Hahn. Lanczos attended a Jewish elementary school and graduated from the local Catholic school in 1910. From 1911 he studied at the University of Budapest under Fejer and Eotvos. After graduating in 1915 until 1920 he worked at the Technical University of Budapest as physics assistant to Tangl. In 1921 Lanczos received his doctorate at the University of Szeged under Ortvay (a student of Sommerfeld). 
Owing to antisemitism in Hungary, Lanczos spent the next ten years in Germany, first as a lecturer at the University of Freiburg in Breisgau, then, from 1924 to 1931, at Frankfurt am Main. 
In papers of 1922 and 1923 Lanczos was the first to show that the de Sitter solution could be written in a form which avoided singularity at the mass horizon. He wrote a significant paper in 1924 on the surface distributions of matter in Einstein's theory and, in a series of papers published in 1925, developed a new approach to the problem of radiation, using the general theory of integral equations. In the same year ground-breaking papers in quantum mechanics were published by Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan. Lanczos recognized that by reformulating the matrix theoretical method of Heisenberg-Born-Jordan into integral equations, he would have the method to construct physical problems within a fluid field theory. In December 1925 he showed how the techniques of matrix mechanics could be represented in terms of integral equations, but the form of the universal kernal function in the integral equations remained unsolved. Schrodinger solved this and published four weeks later (in January 1926), so preceding Lanczos's idea of the field-like representation of quantum theory. 
In 1928-9 Lanczos, who in 1922 had published a paper on the Einsteinian equations of gravity, was granted leave to work with Einstein at the University of Berlin. It was during this time that Lanczos met such people as Schrodinger and von Neumann and he continued a lively correspondence with Einstein throughout the following years. He married in 1927, Maria Rupp (died 1939); they had a son. 
In 1931 Lanczos was invited to the United States as professor of mathematical physics at the University of Purdue, Indiana. He had published his first paper on the quadratic action principle in relativity that year, but his main research area at Purdue was numerical analysis. In 1938 Lanczos developed his well-known theory of economization of polynomials (the Lanczos-Tau method). He also published two papers in 1942 on practical techniques of Fourier analysis which anticipated the Fast-Fourier Transform. In 1943-4 he was seconded to the National Bureau of Standards to work on the mathematical tables project in New York. 
In 1946 Lanczos left Purdue to become senior research engineer at the Boeing Company in Seattle. A year later he was appointed Walker-Ames lecturer at the University of Washington, Seattle. From 1949 to 1952 he worked at the Institute for Numerical Analysis at the University of California. In 1949 his first book, 'Variational Principles of Mechanics', was published and in 1951 he published the first exact method for obtaining all the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of an arbitrary matrix. 
It was in 1952 that Lanczos was invited to join Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies in Ireland as a visiting lecturer. He returned to the United States in 1953-4 as a computer specialist with North American Aviation, then took up a permanent position at the Dublin Institute as senior professor in 1954. He married Ilse Hildebrand in 1955. During his time in Dublin Lanczos held visiting professorships at a number of institutions in the United States. He was professor emeritus at Dublin from 1968 until his death. This period spent in Ireland was remarkably fruitful and productive. Lanczos wrote seven books on the topics of applied analysis, linear differential operators, Fourier analysis, number, geometry, and on Albert Einstein, in addition to over 120 papers during his lifetime. Significantly, Lanczos wished to be remembered for introducing a new type of mathematical textbook; he wrote with great clarity, possessing a very personal style. 
Lanczos's mathematical research centred on Fourier series, Fourier analysis and synthesis, Fourier transforms, matrix eigenvalues and eigenfunctions, Chebyshev polynomials, the gamma function and numerical analysis; in physics he worked on relativity theory, quantum mechanics, classical mechanics, and electromagnetism, and published about a hundred scientific papers. In 1960 he was awarded the Chauvenet prize by the Mathematical Association of America for his fundamental paper on the decomposition of an arbitrary matrix, first published in 1958. 
Despite his extreme humility Lanczos received much recognition throughout his distinguished career, including membership of the Royal Irish Academy and honorary doctorates from Trinity College, Dublin (1962), National University of Ireland (1970), University of Frankfurt am Main (1972), and University of Lancaster (1972). 
Lanczos was a member of many professional bodies, including the American Mathematical Society, the American Physical Society, the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, and the Mathematical Association of America. He was a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a member of Sigma Xi, and an honorary member of Sigma Pi Sigma. 
A devoutly religious man Lanczos was proud of his Jewish heritage and ministered as a Levite at the synagogue. He was fluent in three languages and was an accomplished pianist, holding regular ensembles at his home in Dublin, in addition to taking a keen interest in the arts. Towards the end of his life Lanczos was still active in research and had been working in the field of Fourier analysis in the days before he died. It was at the Roland Eotvos University in Budapest while on a lecturing visit that Lanczos suffered a heart attack, on 25 June 1974. His funeral was held on 5 July in Budapest, where he was buried. He was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 52328


Latham, Baldwin (1836-1917), civil engineer and meteorologist, was born on 6 December 1836 in Nantwich, Cheshire, the son of George Latham, architect and surveyor. After attending Nantwich grammar school he entered his father's office in 1851, and served the usual three-year pupillage as a civil engineer. He then moved to Sandiway, Cheshire, to work for three years with the contractors Douglas and Beckett before joining Joseph Glyn, a civil engineer and fellow of the Royal Society, in the fens at Ely. In 1860 Latham went into business on his own account in Ely, and on 24 November 1863 he married Ann Elizabeth, daughter of William Neal, draper, of Ely, with whom he moved to Croydon and raised a large family. 
In 1865 John Rennie proposed Latham for associate membership of the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE). The proposal form gave details of the many vestries, local boards, and town councils for which he had already worked, including Dorking, Merton, Rugby, Warwick, Reigate, and Croydon. By 1868 Latham had designed the sewerage, irrigation, and water works for fifteen English towns. He had also begun a series of nearly forty papers reporting on these and related matters. The minutes of the ICE 'Proceedings' show him to have been a regular attender of and lively contributor to the institution meetings. 
His professional interest in water, its supply, management, and disposal, led to Latham's involvement with many of the scientific societies of the day. He joined the British Association in 1870 and in 1876 he was elected a member of the Royal Sanitary Institute. In the same year he joined the Geological Society and the Royal Meteorological Society, becoming president of the latter in 1890 and 1891. He was particularly interested in rainfall, and encouraged many members of the Croydon Natural History and Philosophical Society to set up rain gauges. They sent the resulting reports to the British Rainfall Organisation set up by G. J. Symons. Latham was the first to devise a recording rain gauge. Latham became a well-known personality in the Croydon area, and his civic involvement extended to becoming a member of the Guild of Playing Card Manufacturers. His meteorological friends were startled to receive packs of playing cards instead of Christmas cards one year, with a portrait of their friend in the full regalia of the master of the guild set in the centre of the ace of spades. He belonged to the guild for forty-two years, being master twice. The guild assessed playing card design in an annual competition, and met regularly to dine together. More usefully, they acted as a source of help for families of members and, during the First World War, arranged for thousands of packs of cards to be distributed to hospitals for soldiers both in Britain and overseas. 
Latham is best remembered for his contributions to public water supply, particularly in the Croydon area. His book, 'Sanitary Engineering, a Guide to the Construction of Sewerage and House Drainage' (1873, 2nd edn, 1878) was regarded as a classic in its day. In the latter part of his life, he analysed the parish records of Croydon from their commencement in 1538 to identify deaths caused by water-borne diseases. He constructed from this a summary of the state of Croydon's water year by year to 1900. His interest in the characteristics of the district's hydrology continued undiminished, and they formed the subject of the last paper he gave, to the Croydon Natural History and Philosophical Society. It was in press when Latham died, on 13 March 1917, at his home, Park Hill House, Stanhope Road, Croydon, aged eighty-one; he suffered from phlebitis and a pulmonary embolism. He was buried at Croydon cemetery on 19 March. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 52330


Penfold, Charles (1798-1864), surveyor and valuer, was born on 26 May 1798 in Croydon, Surrey, the third of ten children of Thomas Penfold ('b'. 1771), Croydon vestry clerk (1796-1834), and his wife, Edith. On 16 January 1822 he married Catherine Mary Chrees (died 1866). His younger brother George, a solicitor, was vestry clerk from 1835 to his early death in 1852, by which time he was also clerk to the Croydon local board of health, established in 1849. 
Penfold was an authority on rating and road making, whose evidence to the select committee on turnpike trusts and tolls (1836) was drawn upon by Sidney and Beatrice Webb for their famous book on the king's highway. In 1824 he and John Maberley, MP for Abingdon, of Shirley Park, Croydon, were elected surveyors of the parish roads. Only Penfold received a salary, and from 1828 his name appears alone. He held the office until Maberley left the parish because of bankruptcy in 1833. Penfold complained to the select committee that, after he had reduced the annual expenditure on roads from $1500 to $470, the vestry proposed halving his salary of 100 guineas before taking up the offer of an amateur road maker, James Willoughby, to perform the work gratuitously. In 1837 Penfold was elected to the newly established board of highways, which employed Willoughby as surveyor, and continued as a member to Easter 1849, soon after which the board's functions were taken over by the local board of health. He was one of the surveyors of the Surrey and Sussex Turnpike Trust, responsible for about 100 miles of road, holding the post for thirty years, and was also surveyor of the Croydon and Reigate Trust. 
Penfold first published his views on road making in 1834, eventually being published for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge in the third volume, 'Husbandry', in 1840 as 'A practical treatise on the best mode of repairing roads'. He recommended county hundreds employing general surveyors to supervise parish surveyors, and advocated replacing statute duty by piece work, surfacing roads with a thin layer of hard, well-broken stones, and raking and watering the surface to keep it settled. 
The board of highways made him responsible for examining the plans of the London and Brighton Railway Company, whose lines crossed the parish, to see how they affected the roads and footpaths, while his brother was employed in instigating litigation. In January 1842, just before Lord Denman's judgment about railway companies paying the poor rate in 'R. v. London and South Western Railway Company', Penfold wrote a letter to the 'Railway Times' which attracted sufficient attention for him to write a series of letters on the rating of railways. He upheld Lord Denman's view that railways should be rated upon their total earnings, less expenses, not just upon tolls payable by any lessee. These letters were the start of a number of publications on the rating of railways, especially 'The Principle and Law of Rating', first published in 1847, which reached a fourth edition during his lifetime and, as 'Penfold on Rating', an eighth edition in 1893. Penfold believed in helping parishes benefit from the increased value of the land the railways occupied; as a valuer he assisted a number of parishes to make fresh valuations in the light of Lord Denman's judgment. The London, Brighton, and South Coast Company, later taken over by the South Eastern, appealed unsuccessfully against his valuation for the Croydon rate, by which the company paid a third of the total rates collected. 
When the local board of health was being established Penfold had hopes of becoming its surveyor. He gave evidence to the public inquiry led by William Ranger, superintending inspector of the General Board of Health, presenting his own plan for supplying Croydon with water and sanitation. In 'A letter to the Right Hon. the earl of Carlisle upon the drainage of the town of Croydon under the Health of Towns Act' (1849) he maintained he had been offered the post of surveyor and criticized the plans adopted by the board. His criticisms of the board may have been fuelled by the realization not only that his own standing in Croydon had been diminished -- the board had not shortlisted him -- but also that the dynastic rule of the Penfolds had been replaced by that of the Drummonds -- John Drummond being vestry clerk from 1852 to 1880, and his brother William chairman of the local board of health from 1853 to 1862. Penfold moved to Brunswick Square, near Holborn, about 1853, having had for some years an office in the City, first in Cornhill and then in St Helen's, Bishopsgate. He died on 23 May 1864. 


@@@@@


doc= 52331


Ranger, William (1799-1863), civil engineer and sanitary inspector, was the son of Richard Ranger (died 1839), a builder and later town commissioner, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Martin, who were married on 21 October 1798. He was born in 1799 and baptized on 23 November at St Mary's, Ringmer, near Lewes, Sussex. His father had established himself as a builder in Brighton during the prosperous Regency period, and was town commissioner before and after the 'New Town Act' of 1824. 
Details of Ranger's childhood are not known, but he joined in his father's building firm, Ranger & Son, established at 13 Crescent Street and 4 New Road, Brighton. When Charles Barry won the competition for building the new church of St Peter, Ranger was appointed contractor in 1823, the church opening in 1828. Again, when Barry was appointed the architect of the Sussex County Hospital in Brighton, Ranger received the contract to build it in 1825. He also secured the contract for building the Esplanade, which Henry Edward Kendal jun. had designed, and for landscaping the beach and building a tunnel under the Marine Parade. This work was undertaken between 1828 and 1830, and finished by Thomas Cubitt, the builder of Kemp Town. 
From the late 1820s Ranger also practised as a surveyor. He began by working for the commissioners of the Pevensey Level, and then gave advice about the draining of marshes in the neighbourhood of Worthing, though the Worthing town commissioners rejected his plans for their own town drainage. He provided the masonry for the Norfolk suspension bridge, designed by W. Tierney Clarke, which opened in 1833 at New Shoreham in the Adur valley, to carry the main Brighton to Worthing road. 
In 1832 Ranger patented a kind of cement known as Ranger's artificial stone. The principal ingredient was 'grey lime' from the South Downs. The invention was reported in 'The Times', and he moved to London about 1833 to set up a patent stone manufactory in Lambeth Palace Road. He secured a further patent in 1834 for improvements to the original invention. Barry used his artificial stone in the building of the College of Surgeons in Lincoln's Inn Square in 1836, and it was used earlier for the Wellington Barracks. 
Between 1836 and 1838 Ranger was employed by the Great Western Railway to carry out three contracts, two at Bristol and one near Reading, which included tunnelling, earthworks, and a bridge over the Avon. The contracts overstretched his financial resources and, despite borrowing from the railway company, he failed to meet deadlines. The company took possession of his machinery and materials in July 1838 for non-completion of contract, whereupon he filed a bill against it for fraud, claiming he was misled over the nature of the rock and over Brunel's dual role as engineer and shareholder. The court of chancery dismissed his initial injunction with costs and he was no more successful on appeal. The case of 'Ranger v. the Great Western Railway' was heard twice before the House of Lords, in 1847 and in 1854, but no judgment was given until 1854 because of the death of Lord Chancellor Cottenham. 
Ranger was also employed by the marquess of Bristol to make alterations at his country seat at Ickworth, Suffolk, and to design two modest churches in Early English style, both afterwards listed buildings: the first was St Mary's, Westley (1835), and the second St John's, Bury St Edmunds (1841), the opening of which was attended by a duke, an earl, and a lord, as well as by the marquess. 
Noble patronage probably accounts for Ranger's appointment in 1841 as professor of architecture and engineering at Putney College, founded in 1839 at Gordon House, near Hampstead, as the College of Civil Engineers. The college migrated via Battersea to Putney House in 1841, surviving until 1851. He was also a lecturer at the Royal Engineers establishment at Chatham. 
In December 1848 Ranger was appointed one of the General Board of Health's six superintending inspectors, who were paid 3 guineas a day. Their principal task was to carry out preliminary inquiries, holding open court to hear evidence about the sanitary state of the places they visited and making recommendations about drainage, sanitation, and water supply. Among the first places he investigated were Barnard Castle, Cambridge, Darlington, Southampton, and Tottenham. He was also consulting engineer for the local boards of Dartford and Croydon. He earned unstinted praise at the general board, especially for his dual role at Croydon, the board's showpiece, since it was the first completed scheme. But a typhoid epidemic there in 1852-3 lay both the general board and its inspectors open to charges of incompetence, resulting in a Home Office inquiry in which Neil Arnott and Thomas Page criticized the alterations Ranger had made to the local board's original plan, and also the division of responsibilities which had allowed Ranger to act as both superintending and consultant engineer. When the general board was reconstituted in 1854, its role much diminished, T. W. Rammel and Robert Rawlinson both declined the offer of becoming superintending inspectors, thus enabling Ranger to retain the position. Although he was forbidden to undertake consultancy work, Ranger was given a salary of $800 a year, and he continued to write reports until the board's demise in 1858. He was married to Sarah, who died in 1860. Ranger died three years after his wife, at his home at 39 St George's Square, Pimlico, on 12 September 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 52332


Thwaites, Sir John (1815-1870), public servant, was born on 24 May 1815 at Maulds Meaburn, Westmorland, the third son of Christopher Thwaites (1785-1864), yeoman farmer of Toddy Gill Hall, Warcop, and his wife, Hannah Smith (1789-1841). Educated at Reagill School, Thwaites moved to London in 1832 and found employment at Henry Bardwell's woollen draper's on Holborn Hill. He became a partner in the business shortly after his marriage, on 15 September 1835 at Holy Trinity, Cloudesley Square, Islington, to Harriott (1814/15-1860), the daughter of William Bardwell of Uggleshall, Suffolk. In 1842 Thwaites set up his own woollen drapery in Southwark, initially at 18 Blackman Street, and later at 61-2 Borough High Street. 
Thwaites was a Strict and Particular Baptist, preaching at the Surrey Tabernacle where he was deacon for sixteen years. He also undertook parochial duties at St Mary's, Newington Butts; St Paul's, Deptford; and St Saviour. These offered him scope for involvement in public affairs as overseer, guardian of the poor, churchwarden, and chairman of the board of guardians. He sought wider responsibilities by participating in the early closing movement, campaigning for Apsley Pellatt (the Liberal MP for Southwark), and representing Southwark on the metropolitan commission of sewers. He also helped (in 1849) to set up the Surrey Gas Consumers' Company, which aimed to secure cheaper gas by breaking local monopolies. 
When the Metropolitan Board of Works was established in 1855 Thwaites was elected to represent both St Saviour's and Greenwich. He wrote 'A Sketch on the History and Prospects of the Metropolitan Drainage Question' in the same year, and was elected chairman of the board. His salary of $1500 allowed him to work full time. Between 1855 and 1870 the board carried through the main drainage schemes for London (for which he was knighted on 18 May 1865) and the construction of the Thames Embankment which opened on 13 July 1870. In 1861 he was appointed a member of the royal commission on plans for embanking the Thames and he gave evidence to various select committees about London's gas supply, local government and taxation, and sewage. His concern that the gas monopoly worked against the consumers' interest elicited a 'Letter from Sir John Thwaites to Sir Stafford Northcote as to the proposals of the board for the future control of the gas companies of the metropolis' (1867) suggesting the board should buy out the gas companies. He was a member of the royal commission on water supply which reported in 1869. 
Thwaites's first wife died in 1860, and on 13 August 1861 he married Eliza Carrington, 'nee' Woodruffe (1815/16-1883), the widow of Benjamin Carrington (died 1851), resident medical officer of the Holloway and North Islington Dispensary. Thwaites was a magistrate for Surrey and both magistrate and deputy lieutenant for Middlesex. Ill through overwork, he succumbed to diabetes and English cholera on 8 August 1870 at his home, Meaburn House, Upper Richmond Road, Wandsworth. He was buried five days later near his first wife at Nunhead cemetery, Linden Grove. His second wife, three sons, and a daughter survived him. A self-made man, impassive in manner, Liberal in politics, and dissenting in religion, he had achieved a position of much influence across greater London. 


@@@@@


doc= 52334


McCall, Annie (1859-1949), physician and promoter of antenatal and maternity care, was born on 23 September 1859 at Dudley Bank Cottage, Whalley Range, Moss Side, Manchester, the third child of five born to William McCall (1810/11-1863), an insurance agent, and his wife, Mary (1831-1921), daughter of Andrew Meiklejohn, an indigo planter. Her father died of tuberculosis when she was four and in 1871 her mother took the children to Germany to extend their education and so that they could learn a second language. Mrs McCall was widely read, 'a walking gazetteer' (Barrass, 24), and a strong influence, encouraging her daughter's wish to qualify as a doctor, which was difficult for women at that time. On the advice of Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, a friend of her mother's, McCall studied at the London School of Medicine for Women from 1880 to 1884, specializing in midwifery, and afterwards at Bern, where she gained her degree as doctor of medicine in 1885, one of the first fifty women to do so. She studied obstetrics in Vienna before returning to England and taking an appointment in 1885 as medical officer at the Conference Hall, 143 Clapham Road, London, a mission hall and surgery run by Mrs Susannah Meredith. She was there for fifteen months and then continued the work of the outpatients' clinic for poor women and children from January 1887 at her own home, 131 Clapham Road. 
McCall had always intended to open a maternity hospital, and to prepare for this had established a committee of supportive women and opened an antenatal clinic in 1886, which, McCall said: 'set out to deal with the absolute needs of expectant mothers. It is my belief that it was also the first thing of its kind in the country. Here we dealt with such things as the occupation of the mother, food preparation, the question of rest, leisure and exercise. Eventually it embodied a kind of post-natal work too, which we called the 'Mother's Welcome'. (Barrass, 43)' Other outpatient establishments for women and children were at 2 Stockwell Road, 377 Wandsworth Road, and 2 Fentiman Road. 
The Clapham Maternity Hospital (renamed the Annie McCall Maternity Hospital in 1936) was opened in 1889 at 74 Jeffreys Road, Stockwell, moving to 41-3 Jeffreys Road in 1892 and rebuilt on that site in 1913. In 1931 there were fifty beds and fees were 3 guineas a week. It closed in 1970 and the adjacent road has been named Annie McCall Close. It was financed originally by private subscriptions and legacies; in 1898 income included McCall's temperance lecture fees, donations from Elizabeth Blackwell and Louisa Garrett Anderson, and the sale of caps made by Mrs McCall. Small mortgages were taken out and grants received from the King Edward's Hospital Fund for London. Priority was given to admitting single women, unusual at this time, when being an unmarried mother was considered a disgrace and could result in the mother being cast out of the family home and the baby being born in the workhouse. McCall believed in the importance of antenatal care, natural childbirth, and conservative midwifery. 'Masterful inactivity' was her watchword and she also emphasized diet, recommending that no meat or eggs be eaten in the last months of pregnancy. Internal examinations were avoided if possible and forceps were used in only 3 per cent of births. Great emphasis was given to training and high standards; the resulting maternal mortality rates were low -- 1.6 per 1000 -- from 1889 to 1942. The skills of midwifery and obstetrics were being developed in Clapham at a time when their importance was not recognized elsewhere, before midwives had to be registered. McCall had been shocked at the low standard of care she had experienced during her early training in London hospitals. She and Marion Ritchie did 'much for obstetrics especially during a period when this branch of practice was looked upon as beneath the notice of the physician and surgeon' ('The Lancet'). 
McCall had also established the Clapham School of Midwifery, which opened in 1887, with three students based at her home. It was run in conjunction with the hospital and set its own examinations, marked by external women doctors. The school trained midwives, monthly nurses, and doctors in midwifery. There was also a class in operative midwifery for medical students and missionaries going abroad. The examination was in three parts; written, 'viva voce', and practical on the wards. Only women, staff, and students, were admitted to both the school and hospital. Many women came from Christian missions abroad. The first Nigerian arrived in 1912; 'It is character, not colour, that counts', said McCall (Barrass, 75). She was a member of the Central Midwives' Board from its establishment in 1902 until 1931 and an examiner, as well as being vice chairman of the London county council committee for the 'Midwives' Act'. She was also interested in tuberculosis, running a clinic at the hospital and a sanatorium at her other home in Rudgwick, Sussex. 
McCall was confirmed into the Lutheran church while in Germany and believed in the power of prayer. She was fierce in her opposition to alcohol, and a vocal member of the temperance movement, bequeathing her house at 165 Clapham Road to the United Temperance Council. She was an autocrat, who expected her orders to be carried out in every detail, but was 'tender to the unmarried mother, even... a second time' (Barrass, 6). She worked until 1941 and one mother remembered her in the 1930s peering down to stitch up, as her eyesight deteriorated. She was described as an ardent suffragette and refused to write her degree dissertation about vivisection, requesting another subject instead. McCall was severe in appearance. One student wrote describing her clothes: black costumes, white blouses, black tie, woollen stockings, and boots. 'She seemed to us to have shed frills forever. I will say no more in that line' (Barrass, 117). For relaxation she enjoyed travel and her garden at her later home, 165 Clapham Road, with its mulberry tree. Members of her family lived near by at 56 Jeffreys Road; close friends included her cousin Marion Ritchie, who was an able hospital administrator and who until her death in 1931 softened McCall's forceful character, and Constance Watney, matron for a time, whom McCall described as 'my friend and close companion and business advisor' (Barrass, 107). 
McCall died on 9 September 1949 at her last home, Kings, in Rudgwick and was buried in the Holy Trinity churchyard at Rudgwick on 13 September. She left an estate valued at over $92,000, most of which was willed to the London School of Medicine for Women to set up an Annie McCall scholarship in midwifery; she cared passionately that all women should have the best possible maternity care. 


@@@@@


doc= 52339


Laurie, (Robert) Douglas (1874-1953), founder and first president of the Association of University Teachers, was born at 10 Laurel Road, Tranmere, Cheshire, on 27 October 1874, the only son of Robert Laurie, a bookkeeper, and his wife, Eleanor ('nee' Ord). He was educated at Birkenhead School and subsequently took a job at the Bank of Liverpool, where he remained until 1899. What prompted him to resume his studies is unknown; however, in 1899 Laurie left his job and enrolled as a student at University College, Liverpool. In 1901, at the comparatively late age of twenty-six, he matriculated at Oxford University, where he was an exhibitioner of Merton College, obtaining third-class honours in zoology. After taking his degree in 1905 he was appointed assistant demonstrator in the department of comparative anatomy at Oxford. In 1906 he became demonstrator and assistant lecturer in zoology at the University of Liverpool, where he remained until 1918; from 1911 onwards he was also lecturer in embryology and genetics. On 9 July 1912 in Wythburn, Cumberland, he married Elinor Beatrice, daughter of George Ord, architect, of Durham; they had one daughter. 
In 1909 Laurie and a fellow zoologist called a meeting of junior academic staff at Liverpool with the idea of forming an association. Laurie remarked that junior staff seldom had an opportunity to meet their counterparts from other departments, that, in fact, they were less well organized than the students. Originally conceived as a dining club, the association, like others forming at the other civic universities, soon turned its attention to the question of lecturers' pay. During the First World War the issue acquired great urgency as wartime inflation eroded already inadequate salaries. In 1917 Laurie, in his capacity as secretary of the junior staff association, called a meeting and, as an afterthought, invited representatives of other universities to come and help draft a memorandum to the Board of Education. These meetings, coupled with the refusal of H. A. L. Fisher, president of the board, to meet with junior staff, promoted unity among the university organizations and provided an opportunity for Laurie to demonstrate those powers of persuasion and tenacity for which he became legendary. In his role as chairman of the conference of university lecturers, Laurie compiled a detailed survey of the existing remuneration of university lecturers which he submitted to the Board of Education. Meanwhile, increasing dissatisfaction with the newly created pension scheme for university teachers added fuel to a move within the conference to include professors in its membership. In June 1919 the Association of University Teachers (AUT) was created with Laurie as its first president. Although he served for only a year, Laurie continued to run the AUT virtually single-handed as its honorary general secretary from 1920 to his death in 1953. 
In 1918 Laurie moved to the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, initially as an independent lecturer and head of department in zoology. In his first year the able and energetic Laurie impressed his superiors as deserving of a professorship, although he had to wait until 1922, when a private donation made possible the creation of his chair in zoology. The principal remarked that Laurie was: 'a man who knows what he wants and usually gets it' (Ellis, 220). In 1919 Laurie annexed space for his inadequately housed department in buildings recently acquired by the college which had formerly housed a slate works. In the absence of funding to make the structure usable Laurie, his staff, and students set out to remodel the buildings themselves, a task to which they evidently brought more enthusiasm than skill. By 1929 the college capitulated and agreed to finish the job. 'A thing of beauty it is not', wrote the principal, 'but as a triumph of enthusiasm over mere finance it merits great respect' (Ellis, 220). 
A man of formidable energy, Laurie was greatly respected both for his enthusiasm as a teacher and for his contributions to his own field. A former student remembered him as a friend who was always willing to help students and to find graduates posts most suited to their skills. She wrote that 'he was a keen field naturalist and some of us recall delightful days spent with him exploring the polluted waters of some of the north Cardiganshire rivers' (Newton, 'Universities Review', 36). His research interests included a study of the fauna of the sea floor of Cardigan Bay, collected using an apparatus known as the 'Petersen grab' which was worked from a motor boat. As a zoologist Laurie was interested in the application of science to social problems, he promoted the teaching of zoology in schools, and he taught summer courses in biology for teachers. He was an enthusiastic member of the Eugenics Society and vice-president of the Universities' Federation for Animal Welfare. From 1921 to 1923 he served as recorder of the zoology section of the British Association. He travelled widely both as a zoologist and as a representative of the AUT. 
In the inter-war period Laurie continued to serve the AUT, visiting universities abroad and participating in delegations to the government protesting against the recurrent grant cuts which bedevilled the universities in those years. The historian of the AUT points out that Laurie was largely responsible for its development as a professional association rather than as an academic trades union, although pay and pensions formed such a large part of its agenda in the early years. In 1940 Laurie retired from teaching but in 1943 he became honorary secretary of the International Association of University Professors and Lecturers (IAUPL), an interest which gave him 'great joy in the later years of his life' (Newton, 'Universities Review', 36). Laurie died in Amsterdam on 7 April 1953 while attending the conference of the IAUPL. 
Douglas Laurie has been described as the greatest amateur in an amateur professional body, and certainly the AUT was a personal project of Laurie's throughout his lifetime (Perkin, 51). It operated out of two rooms of his house in Aberystwyth, Tyn-y-gongl, and was staffed by Laurie and his devoted secretary; only after his death did it take on professional staff. This arrangement worked because Laurie possessed the skills necessary to run it: he coupled utter single-mindedness and tenacity with an appealing, tolerant friendliness that converted potential adversaries into allies, allowing him to rule with no serious challenge to his authority. One historian has called him a 'bonny, good-humoured fighter', an adversary whom no one could dislike (Ellis, 220). Laurie's modesty was such that he effaced himself from his own history of the AUT but he will be remembered as the association's single founder. 


@@@@@


doc= 52340


kings of the East Saxons (act. late 6th cent.-c.820), rulers in the area of modern Essex and London, traced their descent from Sledd, who must have flourished in the late sixth century. He was married to Ricula, sister of King AEthelberht of Kent, and their son 


@@@@@


doc= 52341


Sutton Hoo burial (early 7th cent.) is named from the place where a king or aristocrat probably lay buried in the barrow known as mound 1. Sutton Hoo, in the extreme south-east of modern Suffolk, is situated on a high bluff on the left bank of the River Deben some 7 miles from the sea, from which in the past it could have been visible. It is necessary to say 'probably' because no indisputable human remains were found there, though this is almost certainly attributable to the action of acid soil. This person's burial is of primary importance for early medieval history because it was accompanied by an untouched and exceedingly rich funeral deposit. Barrows at Sutton Hoo have been recorded (and too often robbed) since 1601. Modern archaeological investigation began in 1938. In 1939 a magnificent ship burial was discovered in mound 1. Further excavations were undertaken in the late 1960s and (in association with a wide programme of enquiry) in 1986-92. Very nearly all finds are in the British Museum. 
The man honoured in mound 1 was interred in a ship some 90 feet long. Although its wood had perished entirely, its rivets survive, and meticulous excavation of its impression in the sand has permitted detailed reconstruction of a big open vessel, rowed by forty oarsmen, in which a burial chamber had been constructed amidships. The king or aristocrat concerned had very rich personal accoutrements (including cloisonne gold and garnet shoulder-clasps, and a great golden buckle), weaponry (including a highly decorative parade helmet, chain mail, six spears of different types, and a unique 'axe-hammer' with an iron handle), silver and bronze vessels, objects of apparently great (but undoubtedly mysterious) significance (in particular a carved whetstone decoratively mounted in bronze), such domestic items as a cauldron with a suspension chain over 11 feet long, and the remains of textiles of many kinds. 
Mound 1 is one of up to twenty barrows. Most are unexplored by modern techniques, but some contained rich burials disposed in differing ways and apparently belonging to the same chronological horizon as that in mound 1. Thus mound 3 contained the cremated remains of a man and a horse, with important objects of Mediterranean origin; mound 2 contained a boat burial organized differently from that of mound 1. Twenty-seven entirely different burials have been found outside the mounds. These are of men buried without grave goods (apart from one accompanied by what may have been a plough), many of whom had died violently. The radial disposition of twelve of these around mound 1 strengthens the supposition that the burial of the man commemorated was accompanied by human sacrifice, though the question arises as to how far these burials may be those of a later 'execution cemetery'. 
The grandeur of some of the burials and the proximity of Sutton Hoo to a royal centre of authority at Rendlesham (4 miles north-east) indicate a connection between Sutton Hoo and the East Anglian royal house. It has been forcefully contended that mound 1 is the burial of King Raedwald. Dating is crucial here and depends on the coins in the burial (thirty-seven Merovingian gold tremisses). These include few regal coins capable of exact dating; but the most modern research suggests that the earliest coins are later than 582 (or more probably 595) and that the latest could be as early as 613. Thus the deposit could have been made in the 620s or even a little earlier. These dates permit the possibility of the burial's being that of Raedwald, whose reign ended between 616 and 627. But there is only a 'terminus post quem'; the written record for East Anglia is too meagre to give a secure framework; too few rich burials have survived to permit calibration of this one in a context in which a considerable number of men may have been powerfully rich, while not being kings as Raedwald was. It follows that, whatever Sutton Hoo's links to the East Anglian royal house, efforts towards specific identification must be inconclusive. A linked question is that of whether such an item as the grand, unused, mounted whetstone was (as has been suggested) 'regalia'. The most that can be said is that only a very important man could have owned such a thing and that it could have had numinous implications. 
Sutton Hoo demonstrates a rich availability of techniques and complication of contacts and resonances. Arguments as to whether the ship could have had a sail and on the significance of its lacking a real keel relate to the question, at present insoluble, as to how specialized a craft it may have been, but do not alter the plain facts of its scale and the skill of its construction. The jewellery demonstrates highly sophisticated techniques: an example is that the cloisonne gold and garnet items have the garnets backed by gold foil stamped with most minutely regular patterns, such that the best explanation for the production of the required dies is the deployment of a jig apparatus, not otherwise known for some centuries. The textile fragments have a wide variety of complicated weaves. 
A paradigm case of the range of relationships demonstrated is the elaborate parade helmet, with its mask and embossed figures. Such helmets are of a kind which the Romans imitated from their Sassanian (Persian) enemies in the earlier fourth century. Meaningfully close relations of the helmet (as with the shield) appear in Swedish burials at Vendel and Valsgarde of the seventh century and later; that these are also ship burials gives Sutton Hoo a dimension such as to suggest Swedish origins for the East Anglian dynasty. The largest silver dish bears a stamp dating it to the reign of the eastern Roman emperor Anastasius ('r'. 491-518). Other silver and bronze ware had come from the eastern Mediterranean much more recently. Three 'hanging bowls' were of Celtic origin. Some objects have Christian links: two silver spoons are inscribed respectively Saulos and Paulos in Greek lettering. The great gold buckle is probably a portable reliquary, to hang from, not fasten, a belt. 
Thus, although it is impossible to know who the man commemorated in mound 1 at Sutton Hoo was, its contents and location tell a lot about him. He was probably connected with the East Anglian royal house. The maritime implications of his being buried in a ship accord with the possible implications of rich grave goods with connections extending from Sweden to Byzantium. Although he was accompanied by objects of Christian significance his burial may have been attended by human sacrifice. He was a man such that objects at his disposal reflected varied craftsmanship of the highest quality. Some of them indicate the continued influence on such a barbarian grandee of the external pomps of Rome. 
The burial has been the subject of continuing close analysis and over-strenuous interpretation. Suggestions such as that it has to be regarded as a rearguard demonstration of grand pagan ritual are inconclusively interesting. The gift of the Sutton Hoo treasures to the nation by their owner, Edith May Pretty, following excavations by the amateur archaeologist Basil Brown, was a great and inadequately recognized act of generosity. 


@@@@@


doc= 52342


kings of the Hwicce (act. c.670-c.780), ruled over a people in the west midlands, in what is now Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, and part of Warwickshire. The kingdom of the Hwicce, assessed at 7000 hides in the short seventh- or eighth-century text known as the 'Tribal Hidage', emerges in the late seventh century, already under Mercian overlordship, and was completely absorbed into Mercia in the eighth. It was probably coterminous with the early medieval diocese of Worcester, which reached as far south as Bath; the first extant charter issued by a king of the Hwicce (Osric, with the Mercian king's consent) is the foundation charter for Bath monastery, on the West Saxon border, in 675 ('AS chart.', S 51). While Osric is styled 'rex', Ealdred, a century later, is described in a charter of Offa as 'my underking ['subregulus'], that is to say ealdorman ['dux'] of his own people the Hwicce' (S 113), and his brother Uhtred is described as 'holding a certain degree of rule over his own people the Hwicce' (S 57). 
The origin of the Hwiccian dynasty is obscure; the connection with the Northumbrian royal family asserted in twelfth-century sources, and in the 'Dictionary of National Biography', is implausible. Attempts to draw up a family tree for the kings of the Hwicce (as by W. G. Searle and H. P. R. Finberg) rely on guesswork and forged charters, but the recurrence of certain name elements and the uniform alliteration of their names make it certain that the kings listed below were all somehow related. The first known members of the dynasty, the brothers Eanfrith and Eanhere, are mentioned by Bede in his account of Wilfrid's conversion of Sussex in 680 or 681; Bede says that the South Saxon queen Eaba was the daughter of 


@@@@@


doc= 52343


kings of Kent (act. c.450-c.590), rulers in Kent, held power in the Anglo-Saxon kingdom roughly coterminous with the modern county of Kent, from its foundation to the accession of King AEthelberht I (d. 616?). The traditional founders of the Kentish royal house are the two brothers 


@@@@@


doc= 52344


Kings of the South Saxons (act. 477-772), rulers in the area of modern Sussex, with portions of Kent and Hampshire, are for the most part obscure, their names supplied by the occasional charter and their dates a matter for abstruse calculation. The traditional founder of the kingdom was AElle, said to have arrived on the South Saxon coast in 477 with his three sons, Cymen, Wlencing, and Cissa. The last that is heard of AElle is his storming of the Roman fort of Anderida, near Pevensey, supposedly in 491; his partner in the assault was his son Cissa. From the omission of any reference to the other two sons, it might be deduced that Cissa succeeded his father; but there is no firm evidence of this, and indeed nothing to show that AElle founded a dynasty. 
The next South Saxon ruler of whom anything is known is King 


@@@@@


doc= 52345


AElfstan of Boscombe (fl. 1043-1065), nobleman, is identified by 'Domesday Book' as a substantial landholder, with an estate of some 237 hides of land, scattered over eight shires, making him the fifth richest of the recorded pre-conquest thegns below the rank of earl. Most of this land was probably his inheritance, but the charter whereby King Edward gave him Sevington, Wiltshire, is still extant ('AS chart.', S 999). Clearly he was an important magnate; and he is probably the AElfstan who attests royal charters between 1043 and 1065, latterly as 'princeps', an appellation suggesting high rank. His largest concentration of land (just over 70 hides) was in Wiltshire; this included two minor estates held as a tenant of the abbot of Malmesbury and the bishop of Sherborne respectively. 
AElfstan also had a respectable holding (just over 50 hides) in Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire. In these shires he is described as a thegn of King Edward, which suggests that he was a royal servant. If he is identical with AElfstan 'wicgerefa' ('portreeve') who, between 1053 and 1066, attests a private grant of land in Bedfordshire to St Albans ('AS chart.', S 1235), he may have been reeve of Bedford; another St Albans memorandum is attested by Godwine, portreeve of Oxford ('AS chart.', S 1425). He may also be identical with the AElfstan the Staller, who attests a Kentish document of 'c'.1045 ('AS chart.', S 1471), for stallers are sometimes found well outside their own areas as agents for the king's interests. The name is not uncommon, however, and unless AElfstan is given the distinctive toponym of his estate at Boscombe, Wiltshire, his identity cannot be established with certainty without other indications. 
AElfstan may have died in or before 1066, for he attests no documents of the Conqueror's reign. The bulk of his estate, with some inconsiderable exceptions, passed first to Ralph de Limesey, who was perhaps sheriff of Hampshire early in William I's reign, and thence to the 1086 holder, William, count of Eu. 


@@@@@


doc= 52346


Asgar the Staller (d. after 1066), nobleman, was, according to the figures given in 'Domesday Book', the second-richest thegn in pre-conquest England below the rank of earl. His estate of over 300 hides of land was scattered over nine shires, the greatest concentration (some 160 hides) lying in Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire. For these shires and their neighbours 'Domesday' gives details of dependent relationships, showing how Asgar's wealth had attracted the commendation of many lesser thegns and free men. Even in Cambridgeshire, where he had no land of his own, such men had sought Asgar as lord. Indeed his two most interesting dependants are found there: the pre-conquest sheriff Ordgar, who sought Asgar's protection after 1066; and Asgar's steward, Sigar, who retained some of his land in 1086 as a tenant of Asgar's successor, Geoffrey de Mandeville, and was a juror in Thriplow hundred. 
Two of Asgar's manors in Middlesex (Enfield and Edmonton with South Mimms) had formerly belonged to his grandfather Tovi the Proud, patron of Waltham Holy Cross. The twelfth-century Waltham chronicle claims that much of Tovi's land had been lost by his son AEthelstan, Asgar's father, but gives no reason; he may have been involved in the rebellion of Osgod Clapa, an associate of Tovi the Proud, in 1046. Some of the forfeited land, including Lambeth, in Surrey, and Hitchin, in Hertfordshire, passed to Earl Harold, who also took over the patronage of Waltham Holy Cross. Relations between Earl Harold and Asgar seem, however, to have been amicable; Leighs, in Essex, is said to have been given by Asgar to the earl. Nor did his father's disgrace hamper Asgar's career. His position as staller implies that he was a member of the royal household and he attests the Confessor's charters from 1059 to 1066, on occasion as the king's steward ('dapifer') and as 'procurator' of the royal household; a number of royal writs also include him in their address-clauses. He may have had some official position in London, possibly as portreeve (an office later held, like Asgar's land, by his Norman supplanter, Geoffrey de Mandeville). The 'Carmen de Hastingae proelio' has an extraordinary story of Duke William's negotiations with Asgar at London in the aftermath of the battle of Hastings. Asgar, though so badly wounded that he had to be carried on a litter, nevertheless 'commanded all the chief men of the city and the affairs of the community' ('Carmen de Hastingae proelio', lines 685-6); and in order to gain access to the town, Duke William offered him the position of chief councillor in 'all the interests of the kingdom' (ibid., lines 689-90), provided that William himself had merely the name of king. While the details of this tale may be no more than poetic licence, the tradition that Asgar had authority in the city of London may be reliable. What became of him after 1066 is unclear, but the Ely tradition that he was imprisoned by King William might suggest that he was involved in the rising at York in 1069. 


@@@@@


doc= 52347


Beorhtric (d. in or before 1066?), magnate, was the son of AElfgar Maew, who was prominent in the reigns of both AEthelred II (died 1016) and Cnut (died 1035). Beorhtric was among the richest magnates in the time of Edward the Confessor (died 1066), with over 350 hides of land in Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, and Worcestershire. He acquired Bushley, Worcestershire, from Lyfing, bishop of Worcester, and attested charters of Bishop Ealdred in the 1050s ('AS chart.', S 1406, 1409). 'Domesday Book' mentions some of the men commended to Beorhtric, among them Dunning, a minor thegn with land in Devon, Gloucestershire, and Worcestershire, who was a benefactor of Winchcombe Abbey. 
Beorhtric was patron both of the minster at Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire, and of the abbey at Cranborne, Dorset, founded by his grandparents, AEthelweard Maew ('seagull') and AElfgifu. AEthelweard, who was dead by 'c'.1000, was allegedly related to the royal house. He may be identical with AEthelweard the Chronicler, ealdorman of the western shires (died 998); or, given the large estate held by his grandson in Devon, a descendant of AElfgar 'the king's kinsman in Devon' ('AS chart.', S 962 [text A]), who died in 962 and was buried at Wilton. AEthelweard's son, AElfgar Maew, who also gave land to Cranborne, attested charters of AEthelred II between 999 and 1009, and probably to 1014. In 1016 he fought on the Danish side at the battle of Sherston. AElfgar's support for Cnut perhaps enabled him to preserve his lands through the upheaval of the Danish conquest and he may be the 'minister' who attests charters of Cnut in 1019 and 1023 ('AS chart.', S 956, 960). 
The name Beorhtric appears on charters of 1019 and 1026 ('AS chart.', S 953, 962) but the first attestations which may be those of Beorhtric son of AElfgar appear in charters of Harthacnut in 1042 ('AS chart.', S 993-4). One of these is also attested by Ordgar, kinsman of AEthelred II, and Odda of Deerhurst, another possible descendant of AEthelweard the Chronicler and thus of the West Saxon kings. Thereafter Beorhtric (presumably the son of AElfgar, though there are other possibilities) attests the Confessor's charters fairly regularly between 1043 and 1065. He usually signs as 'minister' or 'nobilis', but in 1061 ('AS chart.', S 1034) he and Ordgar's brother AElfgar are described as 'consiliarii'. Although the implications of this designation are unclear, it seems that they should be numbered among King Edward's councillors. 
Most of Beorhtric's land passed after 1066 to Queen Matilda, which may account for Wace's romantic tale of how, as a young girl in Flanders, she fell in love with the handsome Englishman who had come on an embassy to her father and, because he spurned her, took revenge by persuading her royal husband to arrest him and confiscate his land. Beorhtric's actual fate is unknown. He may have died without heirs before 1066, leaving his land to be appropriated first by King Edward and then by the Conqueror, for Tewkesbury itself was originally given, perhaps as early as 1067, to William fitz Osbern, earl of Hereford, who died in February 1071. After Matilda's death in 1083, Beorhtric's lands reverted to the king and later became the core of the honour of Gloucester. In 1102 the community of Cranborne moved to Tewkesbury, which then became a Benedictine house; its twelfth-century 'Chronica' provides the clues to Beorhtric's ancestry. 


@@@@@


doc= 52348


Brorda (d. 799), magnate, was a Mercian, also known as Hildegils and perhaps of royal birth, who became King Offa's principal counsellor in the 780s and 790s. The name first appears in the witness lists of royal charters in the 760s, and in the 770s was borne by two men, the junior designated 'praefectus' ('reeve'), the senior 'dux' or 'princeps' ('ealdorman' or 'prince'). It was perhaps a family appellation. If so, the family may have been based in the area that is now north-eastern Northamptonshire and the soke of Peterborough. At an uncertain date, perhaps in the late 770s, a Brorda with the title 'praefectus' joined with Pusa, the abbot of Medeshamstede (later St Peter's Abbey, Peterborough), in requesting the king to confirm the possessions of the community's dependency of Woking. It may also be significant that in the late 780s or early 790s the 'praefectus' Brorda attested a royal confirmation not far away at Irthlingborough in the later county of Northamptonshire; the fact that his only fellow witnesses were the king, the queen, and the local bishop may indicate that Irthlingborough was home territory. 
After 780 the witness lists only once contain more than one Brorda. He almost invariably attests land grants at the head of the ealdormen, usually with the designation 'princeps', occasionally with some other title such as 'dux' or 'praefectus'. Whether he is to be identified with the 'praefectus' who was earlier the junior of the two Brordas is unclear. In the 790s, at the very end of Offa's reign, he was occasionally designated 'patricius' ('patrician'), a title of especial honour, probably confined to those of royal blood, and perhaps equivalent to chief minister or to the Frankish mayor of the palace. 
Brorda seems to have occupied a position of particular prominence during the brief reign of Ecgfrith, Offa's young son and successor (July to December 796), and in the first years of Cenwulf ('r'. 796-821), who was initially perhaps somewhat insecure since he was only distantly, if at all, related to his immediate predecessors. Almost certainly Brorda, rather than the mysterious Osberht named by William of Malmesbury, was the anonymous 'patricius', 'consiliarius' ('counsellor') of the Mercian kingdom (and indeed of the English as a whole), to whom Alcuin sent an important letter in 797. Alcuin's recipient, whom he claimed as a longstanding and loyal friend, was urged to distribute alms and elicit prayers 'through the places conferred on you by God' ('English Historical Documents', no. 202); to admonish his own king and the Northumbrian king Eardwulf on matters of sexual morality; to encourage the Mercian people as a whole to observe King Offa's good laws; to exhort the bishops and clergy to preach and set a good example to the people; and to require loyalty and right judgement of secular lords. Such responsibilities are what might be expected of an experienced chief minister or head of the royal household at the beginning of a new reign. 
Brorda seems to have remained senior ealdorman until his death in 799. By then only he and one other received the designation 'princeps'. Alcuin's expectation that Brorda could admonish the Northumbrian king suggests a northern connection which may lie behind the fact that his death in 799 is recorded, most unusually for a Mercian ealdorman, in the northern annals, where he is again accorded the title 'princeps'. After 799 the name Brorda disappears from the witness lists. It appears, however, among the kings and 'duces' listed on the opening page of the Durham 'Liber vitae'. 


@@@@@


doc= 52349


Eadgifu the Fair (fl. 1066), magnate, held over 270 hides of land (or the equivalent) on the eve of the conquest, making her one of the richest English magnates at that time and giving rise to her alternative name of Eadgifu the Rich. Most of her estates lay in Cambridgeshire, but she also held property in Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Essex, and Suffolk, and men whose lands were tributary to other magnates took her as their lord. Her estates passed after 1066 to Ralph de Gael. It has been suggested that Eadgifu was his mother, and wife to Ralph the Staller, but the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' specifically says that Ralph de Gael's mother was a Breton. One of Eadgifu's manors was Mentmore, in Buckinghamshire, and she might be the widow (or perhaps daughter) of Leofwine of Mentmore, whom the 'Domesday Book' mentions in passing. 
It has also been suggested that Eadgifu was the first wife (or mistress) of Harold Godwineson ['see 'Harold II]. The chronicle of Waltham Abbey, of which Harold was patron, describes how his body was identified on the field of Hastings by his former concubine, Eadgyth Swanneshals ('Edith Swanneck'). Although Eadgifu and Eadgyth are different names, the forms (Eddeua and Eddid or Edied respectively) are sometimes confused, and the abbey of St Benet of Hulme, Norfolk, which had close connections with Harold, remembered an Eadgifu Swanneshals among its patrons. An unnamed concubine of Harold's held property in Canterbury, but this need not be Eadgifu the Fair; he probably had more than one. 

'Domesday Book' gives some indications of a connection between Eadgifu the Fair and Harold: she held a manor in the vill of Harkstead, Suffolk, land which was attached to Harold's manor of Brightlingsea, Essex; and some of the Suffolk lands held by her men were tributary to Harold's manor of East Bergholt. Moreover, when Earl Ralph de Gael forfeited his property in 1075, most of Eadgifu's land went to Count Alan Rufus (Alan the Red), lord of Richmond, Yorkshire, who in 1093 carried off Gunnhild, Harold's daughter, from Wilton. When Count Alan died soon afterwards, Gunnhild became the mistress of his brother and heir, Alan Niger (Alan the Black), though Archbishop Anselm attempted to dissuade her. If Gunnhild was the child of Harold's first wife, and if the identification of that wife with Eadgifu the Fair is accepted, then she was the heir of Eadgifu, whose lands Alan Rufus held. It is odd that Gunnhild was not taken to Denmark by her grandmother Gytha along with her sister, the younger Gytha, in 1068; but Gunnhild apparently suffered from a tumour of the eyes, healed by Wulfstan of Worcester (died 1095), which might explain why she was left at Wilton. 


@@@@@


doc= 52350


Eadric of Laxfield (d. in or after 1066?), magnate, was one of the major landholders before 1066. All that is known of him comes from 'Little Domesday', the return of the Domesday commissioners for the East Anglian circuit, which reveals that he had held some 123 carucates of land in Suffolk and Norfolk. He had also attracted the commendation of large numbers of lesser thegns and free men; just how many it is impossible to say, since most of them are unnamed, but a minimum of eighty-two named individuals can be identified. 'Little Domesday' also records the outlawry of Eadric at some time in Edward the Confessor's reign, though unfortunately the reason is unspecified. His lands were confiscated by the king and his men sought other lords. When he was subsequently pardoned and reinstated, Edward issued a writ permitting Eadric's men to return to their allegiance, if their lord wished it ('Domesday Book', 2.310'v'-311). This was the cause of several disputes after 1066, when Eadric's lands were redistributed among the incoming Normans. In theory, commendation had no bearing on the ownership of the commended man's land, but many post-conquest lords appropriated the estates of men commended to their predecessors as well as those belonging to the predecessors themselves. Indeed it seems that many lesser thegns and free men, deprived of the support of their dead or dispossessed lords, actively sought the protection of those who had supplanted them; and, moreover, brought their lands with them, even if those lands had formed part of a manor belonging to a landowner other than the former lord. Thus the land of Stanwine at Heveningham was claimed by Robert Malet because Stanwine had once been commended to his predecessor, Eadric of Laxfield, even though the tenement in question was attached to the manor of Peasenhall, held by Northmann, the predecessor of Roger (I) Bigod; and Stanwine himself offered to prove that he had still been commended to Eadric on the day of King Edward's death, even though the local hundred jury testified that he was at that time the man of Earl Harold ('Domesday Book', 2.313, 332). 
Eadric's name is one of the commonest in eleventh-century England, and only where 'Little Domesday' gives him the distinctive toponymic from his estate at Laxfield in Suffolk (or refers to him as the antecessor of Robert Malet) can he be securely identified. For this reason the identification of Eadric of Laxfield with Eadric Cecus (Eadric the Blind), whom 'Domesday' records as a king's thegn in Wiltshire, must be regarded as dubious; especially as it seems unlikely that Eadric of Laxfield was living in 1086. Most of his land had passed either to William Malet, who was killed in 1071, and thence to his son Robert, or (in Norfolk) to Ralph de Gael, exiled in 1076, and thence to the king (Happisburg and probably Eaton) or to Roger Bigod (Sutton). All these men were in royal service, either as sheriffs of Suffolk or (in Ralph's case) as earl of East Anglia, and this pattern of distribution suggests that Eadric had died in or soon after 1066 and that his lands had been taken into the king's hand and used to endow the local royal officials. 


