@@@@@


doc= 52351


AElfgar, earl of Mercia (d. 1062?), magnate, was the son of Leofric, earl of Mercia, and Godgifu (Godiva). He married, perhaps in the late 1020s, AElfgifu, probably a kinswoman of Cnut's first wife, AElfgifu of Northampton. Her known lands lay in the east midlands and East Anglia, and in the 1040s AElfgar attested an East Anglian will at the head of the Essex witnesses ('AS chart.', S 1531). These connections perhaps explain why he was given the earldom of East Anglia, first during the exile of Harold Godwineson in 1051-2, and again after Harold succeeded to Wessex in 1053. In 1055 he was outlawed for treason; the E text of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' alleges his guilt but the other texts regard him as at most mildly culpable. Perhaps AElfgar was alarmed at the appointment of Tostig Godwineson, rather than Waltheof, Earl Siward's heir, as earl of Northumbria, and feared that he too might be displaced when his father died. He raised troops in Ireland, and, in alliance with the Welsh king, Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, attacked Hereford. The local levies were overwhelmed and the city sacked, and Earl Harold had to collect a force from 'very nearly all England' ('ASC', s.a. 1055, text C) to drive the invaders back into Wales. A peace was concluded on terms noticeably favourable to AElfgar, who was reinstated. In 1057 he succeeded to Mercia on his father's death; East Anglia passed to Harold's brother Gyrth. AElfgar's second exile, in 1058, must be seen against the continuing rise of the Godwinesons, for by now Harold had received not only Wessex but Hereford too, after the death of Earl Ralph in 1057. AElfgar again allied with Gruffudd, now husband of his daughter Ealdgyth (their daughter Nest later married Osbern fitz Richard ['see under 'Richard Scrob] and was reinstated once more. In 1062 he supported the election of Wulfstan ('c'.1008-1095) as bishop of Worcester, but is not heard of thereafter. He was probably dead before Harold launched his successful campaign against Gruffudd in 1063, for he would surely have tried to help his son-in-law had he been living. 

Eadwine, earl of Mercia (d. 1071), magnate, AElfgar's son, succeeded to his father's earldom. His widowed sister Ealdgyth married Earl Harold and in 1065 Harold supported the election of Eadwine's brother Morcar as earl of Northumbria, against his own brother Tostig. Eadwine and the Mercians in turn supported Harold's election as king the following year, though the Northumbrians had to be won over by the advocacy of Bishop Wulfstan. Tostig attempted to regain his earldom with the help of Harald Hardrada, king of Norway. They defeated a force led by Eadwine and Morcar at Gate Fulford, on 20 September, only to be killed five days later at Stamford Bridge. Losses among the northern levies probably account for the absence of Eadwine and Morcar from the battle of Hastings on 14 October. After Duke William's victory, they initially supported the election of Edgar AEtheling, but later submitted to William at Little Berkhamsted, and accompanied the king to Normandy in 1067. Both were confirmed in office, but the appointment of Roger de Montgomery as earl of Shrewsbury, probably in 1068, undermined Eadwine's position. He sought help from Bleddyn ap Cynfyn of Gwynedd, but a show of power by King William brought him to heel, and the brothers played no part in the English uprising of 1069-70. The merciless crushing of the revolt must, however, have affected their followers, and Eadwine's authority was further reduced by the establishment of the earldom of Chester in 1069-70. In 1071, Eadwine and Morcar 'fled away and travelled aimlessly in woods and moors' ('ASC', s.a. 1071, texts D, E). Eadwine was betrayed by three of his men, and killed, with twenty faithful knights, 'all fighting desperately to the last' (Ordericus Vitalis, 'Eccl. hist.', 2.258-9). Morcar joined other English dissidents at Ely and was captured when the isle fell; he spent the rest of his life as a prisoner in the custody of Roger de Beaumont. Neither Eadwine nor Morcar left descendants, but Godric of Corby, another Ely insurgent, may have been a son of their brother Burgheard, who died at Rheims in 1061. 


@@@@@


doc= 52354


Ralph the Staller, earl of East Anglia (d. 1068x70), magnate, was the son of a Breton father of the Montfort-Gael line. Since his brother was named Godwine, their mother may have been English and both Ralph himself and his son Ralph de Gael are styled 'anglicus' (Englishman) in Breton ducal charters. Ralph's first attestation is no later than 1034, and he may have been born 'c'.1010, supposedly in Norfolk (though this may be an inference from his later tenure of the East Anglian earldom). His unnamed father perhaps came to England with Emma of Normandy when she married AEthelred II in 1002. Emma made a Frenchman her reeve in Exeter, and perhaps gave Ralph's father the single manor which Ralph held in Cornwall, for his other lands, at least some of which he received from Edward the Confessor, were concentrated in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Lincolnshire. From 1050 he attested both royal charters and private transactions as 'staller', the title borne by important members of the king's household. His precise position is unknown: he is described in charters as the king's steward ('regis dapifer': 'AS chart.', S 1029), courtier ('aulicus': 'AS chart.', S 1036), and steward of the king's hall ('procurator': 'AS chart.', S 1042). 
Ralph's landed wealth in England can be reconstructed from 'Domesday Book', which also reveals the existence of his brother Godwine, who was living in 1069, and a nephew, Alsige, possibly Alsige of Landwade, Cambridgeshire, a benefactor of Ramsey Abbey. Ralph himself patronized the abbeys of St Riquier in Ponthieu and St Bene't of Holme, Norfolk, though the lands which he gave to the former did not belong to the church in 1086 and only one of his gifts to St Bene't was in its possession at that date. 
Ralph was one of those French followers of King Edward who were classed as 'Englishmen' after 1066; thus the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' correctly describes him as English. He entered the service of William I, who gave him the earldom of Gyrth (died 1066) in East Anglia. He is addressed as earl in a series of early writs relating to Bury St Edmunds and was charged, with William, bishop of London, and the royal priest Engelric, with overseeing the process by which the English redeemed their estates from the Conqueror. He was alive in February 1068, when he attested a charter of William I for St Riquier, but died before the deposition of AEthelmaer, bishop of East Anglia, at Easter, 1070. Ralph, styled 'comes', attests a charter of 1069 ('Reg. RAN', 1.28) but whether this was the father or the son is unclear; Orderic Vitalis, however, says it was Ralph de Gael who defended Norwich in the summer of that year, when it was attacked by the Danish fleet sent to aid the English revolt in the north. Ralph the Staller left two sons, Ralph de Gael and Hardouin. It has been suggested that his wife was the Cambridgeshire magnate Eadgifu the Fair, but the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' specifically says that Ralph de Gael's mother was a Breton ('ASC', s.a. 1075, texts D, E). 


@@@@@


doc= 52355


Tovi the Proud (fl. 1018-1042), nobleman and administrator, was probably of Danish descent. He is remembered as the founder of the college of secular canons at Holy Cross, Waltham, in Essex. The Waltham chronicle, composed between 1177 and 1189, describes the miraculous discovery of the 'Black Rood', a life-sized figure of the crucified Christ, at Tovi's manor of Lutgaresberi (Montacute), Somerset, and its removal to Waltham, described as Tovi's hunting-lodge. The foundations of three earlier churches have, however, been found beneath the present building, and the settlement may date back to the ninth century. Tovi established the rood, girded with his own sword, in the church of Waltham, endowed the church with land and treasures, and established livings for two priests. 
The Waltham chronicle exaggerates in describing Tovi as 'the first man in England after the king' ('Waltham Chronicle', 13), but there is no reason to doubt its assertion that he was a staller (someone with special functions in the royal administration), for in the reign of Cnut ('r'. 1016-35) he attended a shire-court at Aylton, Herefordshire, 'on the king's business' ('AS chart.', S 1462). He attests Cnut's charters between 1018 and 1035, often alongside Osgod Clapa (d. 1054), another man known to be a staller; in 1033 they are actually distinguished by their bynames ('AS chart.', S 968). In 1042 Tovi married Osgod's daughter Gytha, almost certainly as his second wife; it was at their wedding feast, held at Lambeth, that King Harthacnut collapsed and died 'as he stood at his drink' ('ASC', s.a. 1042, Texts C, D). 
In 1042-3 Tovi was among the executors of the will of AElfric Modercope, an east midlands thegn ('AS chart.', S 1490), but it is not certain that he is the Tovi who attests charters of Harthacnut and Edward between 1042 and 1044, in every case in a rather lowly position ('AS chart.', S 993, 998-9, 1003); his name is not uncommon and two men bearing it, Tovi the White and Tovi the Red, attest a charter in 1034 ('AS chart.', S 961). Tovi the Proud probably died soon after 1042 and may well have been buried at Holy Cross, Waltham. He is commemorated in the 'Liber vitae' of Thorney Abbey, as well as at Waltham itself. 
Apart from Montacute, Tovi's recorded lands (about 140 hides on the 'Domesday' figures) lay in Essex (Waltham, Loughton, and Alderton), Hertfordshire (Cheshunt, Hitchin), and Middlesex (Edmonton and Enfield); he also had property at Reading, Berkshire. Lambeth, which he gave to Waltham, was probably his wife's marriage portion. Gytha herself provided the rood with a golden crown and gem-encrusted girdle, as well as plate commissioned from the king's goldsmith, Theodoric of London. Tovi left a son AEthelstan -- possibly AElfstan the Staller, recorded 'c'.1045 ('AS chart.', S 1471), for the names were sometimes confused -- who lost much of his father's estate through incompetence. The beneficiary was Harold Godwineson (died 1066), who also took on Tovi's role as patron of Waltham: he increased the number of canons, greatly augmented the endowment, and rebuilt the church in the German style. Tovi's grandson Asgar the Staller was still a wealthy and powerful man around the time of the conquest. 


@@@@@


doc= 52356


Ulf Fenisc (fl. 1066), magnate, was a major landholder in England in 1066. According to 'Domesday Book' he was a king's thegn with land in nine counties that rendered $394 annually; only two other laymen below the rank of earl had more valuable estates. Most of his property was in Lincolnshire ($190), Yorkshire ($88), and Nottinghamshire ($49), counties in which he had jurisdictional rights; but in Nottinghamshire he had the exceptional privilege of retaining the third penny of royal revenues normally reserved for the earl. It is therefore remarkable that he rarely, if ever, attested charters of Edward the Confessor. 
There is little doubt that the byname Fenisc, recorded in several 'Domesday' entries, meant 'from [the Danish island of] Fyn'. It is not known when he came to England or how he acquired his property. The church at Aldborough in Yorkshire, one of his most valuable properties, has a mid-eleventh-century inscription 'Ulf had this church built for himself and for the soul of Gunvara', probably his wife (Okasha, 147). He is not named as one of those who rebelled against William the Conqueror, but a few years after the conquest most of his property was held by Gilbert of Ghent. 


@@@@@


doc= 52357


Wulfweard White (d. 1072x86), landowner, held eight estates in Buckinghamshire, amounting to 90 hides, with his wife, Eadgifu, on the eve of the Norman conquest. His name is not uncommon and only when his distinctive byname is used can he be identified with certainty, unless other indications are present, such as his connection with the queen (see below). Not all his land is listed in 'Domesday Book'; he is named as one of the leading thegns both in Kent and in Lincolnshire, but in neither case can his estates be traced, probably because they were in the hands of tenants. Nevertheless, his recorded holding, of 150 hides scattered over eleven shires, makes him the eighth richest of the thegns below the rank of earl whose lands are recorded in 'Domesday Book'. 
Much of Wulfweard's land seems to have been the fruit of royal service, though he also held as a tenant of the Old Minster, Winchester, the bishop of Sherborne, and the abbot of Glastonbury. In Middlesex he is called 'King Edward's thegn', but in other contexts he is associated with the queen. He was probably connected with the households first of Queen Emma and then of Queen Edith, for Emma left him a life interest in land at Hayling, Hampshire, which Edith confirmed ('Domesday Book', 1.43'v'); the land was to be held of the Old Minster, Winchester, and the agreement between the church and Wulfweard 'hwita' ('white') still exists ('AS chart.', S 1476). Wulfweard survived the conquest, for he is probably the Wulfweard who attested a royal charter of 1068, and certainly the Wulfweard 'hwite' who witnessed a private sale of land in 1072, the latter in company with Queen Edith; he also attested (as Wulfweard Wita) a memorandum on the customs of Taunton, which cannot be precisely dated. It has been suggested that he was alive as late as 1084, but he was certainly dead by 1086, though his wife, Eadgifu, was then still holding two of her former tenements ('Domesday Book', 1.87, 145). It is possible that Wulfweard predeceased Queen Edith (died 1075) for it was she who arranged the marriage of his daughter with her steward, AEthelsige of Bromham; by 1086 AEthelsige had lost the land which he had held at Bromham and elsewhere in Bedfordshire, but was holding three manors of the queen's gift, two of which, the former possessions of Wulfweard White, he had received with his wife ('Domesday Book', 1.153). 
The Wulfweard Cild, son of Eadgifu, who appears among the pre-conquest landowners in Buckinghamshire, has been identified as the son of Wulfweard White and Eadgifu; but these references may be to Wulfweard White himself, for Eadgifu was a common name, and may have been borne by his mother as well as by his wife. If Wulfweard Cild was indeed Wulfweard White's son, then he probably predeceased his father, for the redistribution of Wulfweard White's lands suggests that they reverted on his death to his lords, King William and Queen Edith. 


@@@@@


doc= 52358


Alan Rufus (d. 1093), magnate, was the second of at least seven legitimate sons of Count Eudo, regent of Brittany from 1040 to 1047, and Orguen, or Agnes, his Angevin wife. Alan was called Rufus ('the Red') to distinguish him from a younger brother, Alan Niger ('the Black'). His father, Eudo, was a brother of the Breton duke Alan III; the mother of Eudo and Alan III was an aunt of William the Conqueror. Eudo's status entitled his legitimate sons to bear the honorific title 'comes' ('count'). Alan first occurs, with his father and some of his brothers, in an Angevin charter given 'c'.1050. He was probably recruited into the service of his second cousin William of Normandy before 1066. A Breton contingent, probably including Alan and his brother Brien, played an important role at the battle of Hastings and settled in England thereafter. The list of Alan's brothers in the above-mentioned charter does not include Brien, nor either of Alan's successors, Alan Niger and Stephen. Alan Rufus was therefore probably older than Brien. Brien was certainly given lands in Suffolk, and probably also in Cornwall. 
After helping to defeat an attack on Exeter by the sons of Harold in 1069, Brien apparently returned to Brittany, leaving Alan as indisputably the most senior of the Bretons in England. Alan's position was further enhanced by the fall of Ralph de Gael in 1075, much of whose forfeited land in East Anglia he acquired. He held a great deal of land in Cambridgeshire, Suffolk, and Norfolk, and the earliest grants to him were probably in Cambridgeshire. Alan and two of his men, Aubrey de Vere and Harduin de Scales, figure prominently in two preliminary records of the Domesday survey, the 'Inquisitio comitatus Cantabrigiensis', and the 'Inquisitio Eliensis'. The kernel of the vast honour of Richmond (based upon land in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire and extending to Northampton and London), for which Alan and his successors are best known, was granted only after the revolt of the north in 1070. 
By 1086 Alan had settled some forty tenants on his lands, of whom all but two were Bretons. The grant of the northern lands was a measure of the Conqueror's trust. By 1086 Alan was one of the richest and most powerful men in England. He remained close to William I, accompanying him to Normandy and Maine on several occasions after 1066, and attested many of his charters. His importance is sometimes overlooked because his intense loyalty to William I, and subsequently to William II, meant that he was usually ignored by chroniclers, though he figures among those mentioned as helping William II keep his throne during 1087-8. He played an important role in the proceedings against William of St Calais, bishop of Durham. At his death in 1093 (perhaps in August) he was succeeded by his brother Alan Niger, of whom there is no trace in English documents before this date. Alan Niger died in 1098 and was succeeded by another brother, Stephen, who had also succeeded to their father's Breton lands. 
The obit dates for Alan Rufus and Alan Niger have caused much confusion, but can be established by reconciling references in documents of St Mary's Abbey at York with a letter written by Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury. The letter reveals that both Alans had an affair with Gunnhild, daughter of the former King Harold and living in retirement at Wilton Abbey. Because Anselm regarded Gunnhild as a nun, it is not known whether she was legally married to either brother, though clearly she willingly entered each relationship. Eadmer later alleged that Matilda, wife of Henry I, had been intended by her father, Malcolm, king of Scots, as the wife of Alan Rufus. No recognized wife, nor any children, is known for either Alan, though the tenants of both in England included three of their illegitimate brothers, Ribald, Bodin, and Bardulf, and their wet-nurse, Orwen. Alan Rufus was the founder of St Mary's, York (based upon an earlier refoundation of St Olave), and of a priory at Swavesey, Cambridgeshire, which was a cell of St Serge and St Bacchus, Angers. He was also a benefactor of St Edmund's at Bury and was buried there, though he was later translated to St Mary's, York, at the request of St Mary's monks. 


@@@@@


doc= 52359


Eustace (II), count of Boulogne (d. c.1087), magnate, was the eldest son of Eustace (I), count of Boulogne and Lens, and of Matilda, daughter of Lambert, count of Louvain. In 1036, and before his succession to the countship of Boulogne, Eustace (II) married Godgifu 
(or Goda; died 'c'.1047)
, daughter of King AEthelred II and formerly wife of Drogo, count of the Vexin (died 1035). The marriage fostered an alliance between Eustace and Godgifu's brother, Edward the Confessor, and the sons of her first marriage, Ralph, earl of Hereford (d. 1057), and Walter, count of Amiens and the Vexin (died 1063). Eustace and the counts of Ponthieu and the Vexin used the alliance with Edward to prevent annexation into the Norman or Flemish polities and Edward used the Boulonnais-Picard alliance to counter-balance Flemish aid to his Danish adversaries. Eustace's defence of his alliance with Edward against the newly allied counts of Normandy and Flanders prompted a conflict in 1051-2 with Earl Godwine and his sons, who favoured a pro-Flemish policy. In addition to pursuing ties with the English king to forestall Flemish incorporation, Eustace continued his father's strategy of allying with the nobility of Lower Lorraine. In 1047-9 Eustace joined his maternal kin in the war between Duke Godefroi of Lower Lorraine, and the Holy Roman emperor, Heinrich III. 
Shortly after the death of his first wife, Eustace about 1049 married Ida of Lorraine (died 1113), in order to strengthen his alliance to her father, the duke. The defeat of Eustace and his allies in Lorraine in 1049 and in England in 1052 encouraged the count's support of his Picard and northern Norman kin and allies in the rebellion of Guillaume d'Arques against his nephew the duke of Normandy. The failure of this rebellion led to a period of quiescence and limited co-operation with Count Baudouin (V) of Flanders. In 1066 Eustace changed his family's traditional hostility towards the Norman dukes and joined William of Normandy in the conquest of England. His contributions to the conquest were praised in the 'Carmen de Hastingae proelio' and portrayed on the Bayeux tapestry. It was here that his moustaches (giving rise to the epithet 'aux Gernons') were immortalized. After a brief estrangement, Eustace and William the Conqueror fought to oust Robert of Flanders, who had usurped the countship from his nephew in 1071. The coalition against Robert included Eustace's brother-in-law Duke Godefroi of Lower Lorraine and, initially, the French king, whose support was encouraged by Eustace's brother Godefroi, bishop of Paris. Despite Robert of Flanders's victory, William and Eustace remained allies and William restored to Eustace the extensive estates he had received shortly after the conquest of England. 'Domesday Book' reveals that the count held lands in eleven counties, with the majority of his holdings in Essex. These estates produced an annual income of approximately $770, placing Eustace among the wealthiest lay magnates. 
Eustace's marriage to Ida of Lorraine produced three children: Eustace (III), count of Boulogne; Godefroi de Bouillon, duke of Lower Lorraine and later defender of the Holy Sepulchre; and Baudouin I, king of Jerusalem. Eustace also had a bastard son, Geoffroi, who married Beatrice, daughter of Geoffrey de Mandeville. Ida worked to reform monasticism in Boulogne with the encouragement of Anselm of Bec and Hugh, abbot of Cluny, and was considered a saint by her contemporaries. She used her dower lands in Lorraine and well-placed monastic foundations to aid her husband and sons in the maintenance of the family's power. In the early 1080s a genealogy of the comital family of Boulogne was produced which stressed Eustace's Carolingian descent through his mother, Matilda, and his marriage to Ida of Lorraine, and also reflected the prestige the family had gained through Eustace's military prowess. At Eustace's death, 'c'.1087, he was the tenth largest landholder among the Anglo-Norman nobility and a wealthy and independent count in northern France. 


@@@@@


doc= 52360


Picot (fl. 1071x5-1092), administrator, was a leading servant of William the Conqueror. Little is known about his background or family: even the chronicler of Barnwell Priory, a house of Augustinian canons that owed its origins to Picot, knew only that he was a Norman and that his wife's name was Hugoline. None the less, 'Domesday Book' and a number of the Conqueror's writs make it clear that Picot prospered mightily under William, primarily because of his position as sheriff of Cambridgeshire. He was made sheriff some time before 1075, possibly as early as 1071, when Hereward the Wake's rebellion, centred on the Isle of Ely, was suppressed. 
At the time of the Domesday inquest in 1086, Picot held just over $140 worth of land. Almost all of it was in Cambridgeshire, although he did have some interests in Essex and Suffolk. He seems to have acquired his lands in four ways. First, he came into the holdings of the sheriff of Cambridgeshire of Edward the Confessor's time. Second, he held the land of dozens of English sokemen, and it looks as if he drove lesser men into his lordship, offering them protection in return for considerable rights over their lands. Third, Picot, who was probably in charge of the Conqueror's castle in the borough of Cambridge, ruthlessly exploited the burgesses there. Finally, at an inquest held between 1072 and 1075, he was found holding land that belonged by right to Ely Abbey. As a compromise, the king ordered Picot to retain the land he had taken, but as a tenant of the abbot. A decade later, however, Picot and the abbot were still arguing over rights to Ely's patrimony. In the 'Liber Eliensis', a history of Ely Abbey compiled in the twelfth century, Picot was remembered as 'a hungry lion, a prowling wolf, a crafty fox, a filthy pig, a shameless dog', who, when told he was stealing land from Ely's patron saint, AEthelthryth, replied, 'AEthelthryth? Who is this AEthelthryth of whom you speak?' ('Liber Eliensis', 211). Picot's predation was not limited to Ely: he was also holding land that had once belonged to Crowland Abbey and he suborned the testimony of local jurors in a famous lawsuit against Gundulf, bishop of Rochester. 
During the Conqueror's reign Picot did much to establish himself within local society. He married Hugoline, the daughter of an important Norman neighbour, Robert Gernon. He became the tenant of some of the most important lords in the region -- Count Alan of Richmond, Remigius, bishop of Lincoln, Guy de Raimbeaucourt, Peter de Valognes, William fitz Ansculf, and Countess Judith -- and two tenants-in-chief, Guy de Raimbeaucourt and Robert Fafiton, also held land from him. Picot, moreover, settled a dozen of his own followers as tenants on his estates, including his son-in-law Ralph de St Germains and his brother Roger. He also built a castle at Bourn, near Ermine Street, some 10 miles west of Cambridge. Probably in 1092 he and his wife founded a house of canons in Cambridge at the church of St Giles, which formed the core of the endowment of Barnwell Priory. The community was made up of six canons, and put under the charge of Geoffrey, a canon from St Mary's, Huntingdon, a foundation of the sheriff Eustace, which perhaps points to another of Picot's friendships. 
Picot continued as sheriff under William Rufus, but his son Robert rebelled against Henry I and was disinherited and exiled. The date of Picot's death is unknown; he was probably buried at the church of St Giles, Cambridge. Paine Peverel was given Picot's estates and took over the patronage of his foundation, both of which then descended to the Pecche family. 


@@@@@


doc= 52364


Hume, Hamilton (1797-1873), explorer in Australia, was born at Toongabbie near Parramatta, New South Wales, on 19 June 1797, the son of Andrew Hamilton Hume (1762-1849), superintendent of convicts, and Elizabeth More, 'nee' Kennedy (1760-1847), a clergyman's daughter from Kent who had emigrated in 1795 with her brother, a free settler, and had married in New South Wales on 29 September 1796. Hamilton Hume, the eldest of their five children, was educated at home by his mother. He made his first significant excursion at the age of seventeen from their home at Appin, about 40 miles south-west of Sydney. Such excursions put his services in demand for exploring parties. In March 1818 he accompanied the surveyor James Meehan (1774-1826) to the south-west, when the upper portions of the Shoalhaven River, Lake Bathurst, and the Goulburn plains were discovered. In 1819, with John Oxley and Meehan, he explored Jervis Bay, and returned overland to Sydney with Meehan by way of Bong Bong. Two years later he discovered the Yass plains. In 1822, with Alexander Berry and Thomas Davison, he climbed on to Captain Cook's Pigeon House Mountain from the Clyde River. For his early exploratory work, Hume was granted 400 acres at Appin. 
In 1824 Hume undertook the first overland journey from the central coast of New South Wales to the south coast of the continent at Port Phillip on Bass Strait. He was accompanied by William Hilton Hovell (1786-1875), a former sailor, born at Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, on 26 April 1786. A seaman from the age of ten, he had been master of trading vessels since he was twenty-two. His first wife was Esther, the daughter of Thomas Arndell, a surgeon on the first fleet, and his wife, Esther Foscari; they had two children, a daughter and a son. Hovell and his family arrived at Sydney in 1813. He was granted 700 acres at Narellan, not far from Appin, though he did not settle there until December 1816, when he forsook the sea to become a merchant. His investigation of the Burragorang valley in 1823 led Governor Brisbane to persuade him to join Hume on the Port Phillip expedition. 
The two men left Appin on 2 October 1824, accompanied by six convict assigned servants. They passed Yass plains and crossed the Murrumbidgee River on 19 October. Although they endeavoured to travel in a direct south-west line to Western Port, rugged mountain country forced them south, then at Tumbarumba they had no option but to turn west before weaving across the Murray and Mitta Mitta rivers. Near Tumbarumba, on 8 November, they became the first colonists to see the Australian Alps, clearly snow-clad, some 40 miles to the south. They then crossed the rivers Ovens, King, and Goulburn (3 December), naming the Murray and Goulburn rivers the Hume and Hovell respectively. Turned around by Mount Disappointment, they proceeded by a line further west and reached Corio Bay on the western side of Port Phillip Bay on 16 December, thinking it was Western Port. Hovell corrected this impression in February 1827 during his valuable exploratory probes around Western Port, when he accompanied the expedition which established a short-lived period settlement there. The faster return journey ended at Hume's station north of Lake George on 18 January 1825. Their diagonal trail through six degrees of longitude and four degrees of latitude had lifted the veil from what was to become one of the most vitally important portions of Australia. They each received a grant of 1200 acres, which they sold to defray expedition expenses. Hovell received a further 1280 acres for his later work at Western Port. He had kept a very good record of the route taken in 1824-5, which formed the essential data for William Bland's 1831 book of that journey. 
On 8 November 1825 Hume married Elizabeth Dight, the second daughter of John and Hannah Dight of Richmond, New South Wales. They had no children. Hume ably assisted Charles Sturt in the expedition from 7 December 1828 to 21 April 1829 which solved the mystery of the Macquarie marshes and discovered the great Darling River on 1 February 1829. For this and other exploratory work concerning routes over the Blue Mountains he received a further 3200 acres in grants, which he took near Yass. From 1839 he lived as a grazier there at Cooma Cottage, and eventually he held 18,000 acres in this vicinity. Resourceful, courageous, and a great bushman, Hume was jealous of sharing any of his laurels, and when Hovell was feted in Melbourne in 1853 he produced a lengthy pamphlet, 'A brief statement of facts in connection with an overland expedition from Lake George to Port Phillip in 1824' (1855), which was excessively unfair to Hovell. Hume became increasingly obsessed with what he believed to be a playing down of his importance, and a second edition followed in 1873. Hovell's published replies (1855 and 1874) had no effect on the tirade, which, with the publication of a third edition of Hume's pamphlet in 1874 and a fourth in 1897, sent influences well into the twentieth century. Hume was made a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1860, and was honoured by his countrymen. He died at Cooma Cottage on 19 April 1873 and was buried in Yass cemetery. 
Following the death of his first wife, Hovell married Sophia Wilkinson (died 1876) in 1848; they had no children. After his death, on 9 November 1875 at Sydney, she bequeathed $6000 to the University of Sydney to fund the W. H. Hovell lectureship in geology and physical geography. Hovell was buried at Goulburn. 


@@@@@


doc= 52367


Yerburgh, Robert Armstrong (1853-1916), politician, was born on 17 January 1853 at Sleaford, Lincolnshire, the third son of Richard Yerburgh (1817-1886), vicar of New Sleaford, and his first wife, Susan, daughter of John Higgin of Greenfield, Lancaster. The Yerburgh family had been settled in Lincolnshire since before the Norman conquest. Yerburgh was educated at Rossall and Harrow schools and at University College, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1877. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1880 and subsequently joined the northern circuit. On 8 August 1888 he married Elma Amy Thwaites at St Barnabas, Kensington. She was the only child of Daniel Thwaites of Woodfold Park, Blackburn, a former MP. There were two sons of the marriage. 
Yerburgh was adopted as Unionist candidate for Chester in 1885, having been Conservative candidate for Grimsby for two years. At the general election of 1885 he lost by 300 votes to the radical candidate, Dr Walter Foster, but narrowly won the seat in 1886. He was returned again at the elections of 1892, 1895, and 1900, but narrowly lost to the industrialist Alfred Mond in 1906. He regained Chester at the general election of January 1910, retaining the seat until his retirement in 1916. In 1885-6 he was private secretary to the patronage secretary, the Rt Hon. A. Akers-Douglas, and in 1887 was assistant private secretary to W. H. Smith, then first lord of the Treasury. 
A man of keen intellect, judicial temperament, and a charming manner, Yerburgh was widely respected as more than a mere party politician. He had many interests, especially imperial defence, agricultural organization, and the promotion of co-operative and co-partnership schemes. As president of the Navy League from 1900 until his death, he keenly promoted naval interests and reforms in naval administration. His strong belief in British naval supremacy was seen to be vindicated when war broke out in 1914. He was also an early advocate of national service and was a member of the council of the National Service League, which promoted universal naval or military training. 
Yerburgh's deep love of rural life was reflected in his wide interest in agriculture. In 1901 he founded the Agricultural Organisation Society, of which he was president until his death. He was also a vice-president of the central chamber of agriculture and of the English Beet Sugar Pioneer Association, and a member of the Scottish chamber of agriculture. His work for the regeneration of English agriculture led a contemporary, P. J. Hannon, secretary of the Navy League, to describe him as 'the father and the founder of agricultural organisation in England' ('Chester Courant'). 
As president of the Urban Co-operative Banks Association, Yerburgh helped to promote co-operative credit societies for the working classes. He supported many other social and philanthropic movements, including the Recreation Evening Schools Association, the National Home Reading Union, and the National League for Physical Education and Improvement. He was also a deputy lieutenant, justice of the peace, and county councillor for Lancashire, and a justice of the peace for Kirkcudbrightshire. 
Yerburgh's last years were clouded by failing health, which forced his retirement from parliament in February 1916. He died from heart failure at his London home, 25 Kensington Gore, on 18 December 1916. His funeral took place on 21 December 1916 at Sleaford, where he was buried in the local cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 52371


Birch, Samuel John (1869-1955), painter, was born on 7 June 1869 at The Cottage, Rudgrave Square, Egremont, Cheshire, the eldest of the nine children of John Birch (1839-1900), house painter and decorator, and Elizabeth Glover (1845- 'c.'1930). His early years were spent mostly in Manchester, where his family lived in acute poverty. He left board school at the age of twelve to work for an oilcloth manufacturer in the city. An eleven-hour working day left little time for art, but his mother encouraged him and at the age of fifteen he exhibited at the Manchester City Art Gallery. When he was nineteen he moved to Halton, beside the River Lune, near Lancaster, where he worked in a mill and lodged with a former river bailiff who taught him all he knew about fishing and the countryside. Encouraged by the philanthropic Storey family at Lancaster, he painted steadily at weekends and in 1892 settled in Cornwall as a full-time painter. The following year, while still only self-taught, he exhibited the first of 237 pictures at the Royal Academy, in London. 
Birch set up on his own in the countryside a few miles west of Newlyn, lodging with a farmer at the head of the Lamorna valley. The valley, where he lived for sixty-three years and where he founded his own colony of artists and writers, provided him with his working name, Lamorna Birch, which he adopted to avoid confusion with the painter Lionel Birch, and from 1896 he signed his work 'S. J. Lamorna Birch'. He became one of a second generation of Newlyn painters attracted to Cornwall in the 1890s by 'plein-air' artists working in the circle of Stanhope Alexander Forbes, founder of the Newlyn art colony. Urged by Forbes to study in France, Birch spent the first seven months of 1896 at the Academie Colarossi in Paris. In January 1902 he married his pupil, Emily Houghton Vivian (1869-1944), and moved to Flagstaff Cottage, overlooking Lamorna Cove. Two daughters, Elizabeth Lamorna Birch (1904-1990) and Joan Birch (1909-1996) were born there. 
Birch painted in oils and watercolours, working with 'plein-air' realism in the Barbizon tradition. He liked to begin work soon after day-break, cycling into the countryside where he stored his canvases in the barns of farmer friends. He had a strong eye for colour and atmospheric detail and was adept in observing the fleeting effects of light and shade. Estate owners who invited him as their house guest to give painting lessons introduced him to their friends and thus opened up lucrative outlets for his art. He went on to enjoy the attention of wealthy patrons such as Sir John Roberts, the Scottish tweed manufacturer, and Ranald Valentine, of the Dundee art-publishing house, both of whom acquired large collections of his work. Birch worked with terrier-like energy, producing about 20,000 pictures of all kinds, including etchings, over a period of seventy years. His pictures are represented in collections throughout Britain and overseas, notably in the former dominions where his work was admired for its quintessential Englishness. 'Cornwall', painted near Lamorna, was purchased in 1911 for the Brown memorial collection in Providence, Rhode Island, and in 1913 'Wengen Heights' was acquired for the Canadian national collection. 
Birch painted water with the understanding of both artist and fisherman and was fascinated by the force and thrust of swollen rivers, with water creaming around rocks and boulders or touching river-banks lined with snow. Sometimes he painted himself in an angling pose or used artist friends such as Robert Morson Hughes and Peter Moffat Lindner as models. About 1918 he produced a great number of pencil drawings touched in lightly with colour, and they included some outstanding sculptural compositions of hill and rock formations. His obituarist in 'The Times' thought that these pictures were technically his most successful, saying that 'in them his charm of line found unhindered expression' (8 Jan 1955). At the peak of his powers in the 1920s Birch's enthusiasm for bold juxtapositions of colour was given full rein. His river pictures and a love of landscapes with deep, dramatic skies and gilded clouds made him hugely popular, and tens of thousands of greetings cards and fine-art prints were produced from his work. In 1938 his 'St Ives, Cornwall' (Tate collection) was bought for the nation under the Chantrey bequest. He was a clever businessman, but his exploitation of popular themes such as snow and sunsets suggested that he was more aware of his customers than of what made good art. Moreover, his large output meant inevitably that inferior work reached the market under his signature. 
Birch travelled widely. His visit to New Zealand in 1936-7, the first by a Royal Academician, brought him up against nationalist sentiment among artists strongly opposed to his presence in their country, but he stoically survived their attacks. He was elected a member of the Royal British Colonial Society of Artists in 1905, and the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours and the Royal West of England Academy in 1914, and became an ARA in 1926 and an RA in 1934. He had a neat pointed beard and wore small round spectacles and heavy tweed suits with knickerbocker-style breeches, which gave him the bearing less of an artist than of a well-to-do country doctor. In keeping with his love of angling he often wore an old felt hat covered in fishing-flies and he readily acknowledged his idyllic life at Lamorna where he worked from a studio beside a trout stream. In his autobiography, 'An Artist's Life', Sir Alfred Munnings said of Birch: 'When he was not painting he was fishing; when he was not fishing he was painting' (1950, 295). He was boyish and fun-loving, and enjoyed tap-dancing and entertaining friends with his pranks and jokes, but underneath was a serious painter determined to succeed through hard work. After suffering a mild stroke Lamorna Birch died at his home on 7 January 1955. He was buried on 10 January in the old cemetery at Paul, near Newlyn. 


@@@@@


doc= 52372


Douglas, John (1830-1911), architect, was born at Park Cottage, Sandiway, Cheshire, on 11 April 1830 and baptized on 16 May that year at St Mary's Church, Weaverham, the only son of John Douglas ('c'.1798-1862), builder, and his wife, Mary Swindley (1792-1863), daughter of John Swindley of Aldford, Cheshire. He was articled to E. G. Paley (1823-1895), architect, of Lancaster, and after completing his articles became Paley's chief assistant. He established himself in practice in Chester in either 1855 or 1860. In the latter year he moved into 6 Abbey Square, which served as his office for the rest of his life, and married Elizabeth (1827/8-1878), daughter of Mr Edmunds, farmer, of Bangor Is-coed, Flintshire; they had four sons and one daughter, of whom one son and the daughter died in infancy. Another son died at the age of twelve, and the eldest son, Colin Edmunds Douglas ('b'. 1864), who trained as an architect, died in 1887. The only surviving child was Sholto Theodore Douglas (1867-1943). 
From Paley Douglas learned to build in a Decorated Gothic style in accordance with the precepts of A. W. N. Pugin and the Cambridge Camden Society. His decision to set up practice in his own county town is not surprising, and he must have been attracted by its many ancient buildings, and especially those in half-timber, the revival of which had begun in the 1850s. His earliest patronage came from Lord Delamere, whose seat, Vale Royal, he greatly enlarged in 1860-61, and for whom he built St John's Church, Over (1860-63). In 1865 he carried out his first works for the Grosvenor family, being commissioned by the second marquess of Westminster to design the architectural works for the Grosvenor Park, Chester (1865-7), and a new church at Aldford (1865-6). Another important early patron was R. E. Egerton-Warburton, of Arley Hall, who also employed William Eden Nesfield (1835-1888) for some of his many architectural projects: Douglas was clearly much influenced by Nesfield and the 'Old English' domestic revival. 
Douglas showed, in some of his works of the 1860s, a remarkably bold high Victorian style. These include the polychrome brick Congregational (now United Reformed) chapel at Over (1865), a substantial stone country house, Oakmere Hall, Sandiway (1867), and the strikingly radical brick St Anne's Church, Warrington, Cheshire (1868-9; now adapted for another use), with its broad aisleless nave. Douglas's chief patron was the first duke of Westminster (1825-1899), son of the second marquess; he carried out an astonishing number and variety of works, including lodges, farms, cottages, schools, and churches on the duke's estates in Cheshire and north Wales, and in Chester itself. These included large houses at Eccleston, Cheshire, for the duke's agent and secretary: one of these, The Paddocks (1882-3), shows the romantic side of Douglas's genius, with its Germanic conical turrets. The duke was particularly keen on the use of half-timbering, although Douglas's own tastes moved towards a preference for stone and brick. This is clearly shown by the intriguingly complex terrace he built at his own expense at 6-11 Grosvenor Park Road, Chester (1879-80), whereas for the east side of St Werburgh Street, Chester, which he also built as a private speculation ('c'.1895-7), the duke persuaded him to substitute half-timber for the Flemish-style brick and stone scheme which he first designed. This is one of a number of Douglas's contributions to the streets of Chester which have become well loved. The best-known is perhaps the Eastgate clock (1899). 
Douglas was particularly gifted as a church architect. He showed an outstanding talent for adapting earlier churches, such as: St Mary's, Whitegate, Cheshire (1728; remodelled 1874-5); St Paul's, Boughton, Chester (1830; rebuilt 1876; enlarged 1902); and Maentwrog, Merioneth (1814; remodelled 1896). He sometimes used half-timber, uniquely for a whole church at St Michael's, Altcar, Lancashire (1879). At Halkyn, Flintshire (1877-8), he used stone for a sophisticated church with a fine tower. His churches are characterized by broad naves and narrow aisles, with comparatively short, well-raised chancels. He had a particular fondness for crossing towers. Good examples include St Paul's, Colwyn Bay, Denbighshire (1887-8), St John's, Barmouth, Merioneth (1889-95), and Christ Church, Bryn-y-Maen, Denbighshire (1897-9). 
Douglas was responsible for several country houses, the largest being the Elizabethan-style Abbeystead, Over Wyresdale, Lancashire (1885-7), for the earl of Sefton. Outstanding among his public buildings is St Deiniol's Library, Hawarden, Flintshire (1899-1906), built in memory of W. E. Gladstone. Towards the end of his life, in 1896, Douglas built for himself a very large sandstone house, dramatically sited above the River Dee, and called Walmoor Hill. It seems to have been intended to instil into his only surviving son, Sholto Theodore Douglas, a sense of family pride. 
Douglas was especially knowledgeable about timberwork, having received instruction in joinery in his father's workshop, and he put this knowledge to excellent use in the fitting-up of his buildings. His maternal grandfather was a blacksmith, and he also showed great skill in the design of ironwork. His buildings were characterized by 'sure proportions, imaginative massing and grouping (with tendencies to verticality and attenuated forms), immaculate detailing and a superb sense of craftsmanship and feeling for materials' (Hubbard, 210). In 1884 Douglas took into partnership Daniel Porter Fordham ('c'.1846-1899), and, on Fordham's retirement in 1897, Charles Howard Minshull (1858-1934). 
Douglas is one of a number of nineteenth-century architects who, although preferring to practise in the provinces, was fully the equal of his London contemporaries. This was recognized both by British critics and by foreign writers on architecture. Maurice B. Adams said that he 'well deserved the Royal Gold Medal [of the RIBA] which he did not get' ('Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects', 3rd ser., 19, 1911-12, 644); both Paul Sedille and Hermann Muthesius illustrated and praised his work. At the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1889 Douglas and Fordham were awarded a gold medal for their drawing of Abbeystead. 
Douglas died on 23 May 1911, at his home, Walmoor Hill, Dee Banks, Chester, and was buried on 25 May in Overleigh old cemetery, Chester. 


@@@@@


doc= 52373


James Bland (1798-1861) sang as a bass from 1826 at the Lyceum (English Opera House) and then at Drury Lane, and from 1831 at the Olympic Theatre in burlesque and extravaganzas. His success in these led to his performing kings and fathers in pantomimes by Planche and others. He died at the Strand Theatre on 17 July 1861. Another son, 


@@@@@


doc= 52374


Charles Bland (b. 1802, d. in or after 1834), was a tenor who first appeared in 1824 as Don Carlos in Thomas Linley's 'The Duenna'. He created the title role in Weber's 'Oberon' under the composer at Covent Garden on 12 April 1826. Planche, the opera's librettist, thought him 'happily gifted with a voice which enabled him to execute at least respectably the airs assigned to the King of the Fairies', but Sir Julius Benedict wrote that he was 'a bad actor with an offensive voice', and he was not well received. His appearances outside London included Manchester in 1831; he then sang in London at the Olympic Theatre in 1831-2 and Astley's in 1833-4. 


@@@@@


doc= 52381


McCance, Robert Alexander (1898-1993), physician and research physiologist, was born on 8 December 1898, at Woodbourne, near Dunmurry, south-west of Belfast, the third son of John Stouppe Finlay McCance (1865-1926), barrister and linen merchant, and Mary Letitia, 'nee' Bristow (1865-1948). (Through a mistake on his father's part, his birth certificate wrongly recorded his birth date as 9 December.) He had a younger sister, Elizabeth. At the age of eight he began his formal education at Mourne Grange, a preparatory school near Kilkeel, co. Down, and when he was thirteen he entered St Bees School, Cumberland, where his brothers Finlay and Harry had preceded him. In 1947 he was appointed a governor of the school, and he held this office for thirty-five years. 
On leaving school in 1916 McCance applied for a commission in the Royal Naval Air Service. He was called up in 1917 and trained to fly single-seater aircraft (Camels), but later flew two-seater aircraft from a wooden platform mounted over the midship gun turrets of the battle cruiser 'Indomitable'. He was demobilized in 1919 and, deciding to make agriculture his career, was advised to obtain the diploma in agriculture at the University of Cambridge. After six months working on a farm in northern Ireland he entered Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in 1919. On his tutor's advice he took the natural sciences part one course first, and obtained first-class honours in 1921. He gave up the idea of agriculture as a profession, and took the part two physiology course under Sir Joseph Barcroft, achieving second-class honours in 1922. In the same year he married Mary Lindsay (Mollie) MacGregor (1898-1965), daughter of Dr Duncan Otto MacGregor, physician, of Glasgow, and a student at Girton; they had one son and one daughter. McCance spent the next three years in the department of biochemistry under Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, which led to a PhD in 1926. By this time McCance had decided to study medicine, and his next move was to King's College Hospital, London. He obtained his MB in 1927 and MD in 1929, and was made MRCP in 1930 and FRCP in 1935. He was interested in diabetes, and spent a year assisting R. D. Lawrence in the new diabetic clinic. Although insulin had recently become available it was still important for diabetics to regulate the amount of carbohydrate in their diet. Because published values for the carbohydrate content of foods were unsatisfactory he analysed more than a hundred plant foods for available carbohydrate, and published the values with Lawrence as a Medical Research Council 'Special Report' in 1929. 
A new biochemical laboratory was set up at King's College Hospital in the early 1930s, and McCance was appointed as its head. Although he was responsible for the biochemical requirements of the hospital, he was able to spend time on research, and in the mid-1930s made his seminal studies of the effects of salt deficiency on the human body. The analysis of foods continued, and plant, meat, fish, and other common foods were analysed for ten constituents. The results were published by McCance and his colleague Elsie M. Widdowson in 1940, as a Medical Research Council 'Special Report' entitled 'The Chemical Composition of Foods'. 
In 1938 McCance accepted an invitation from J. A. Ryle, regius professor of physic in Cambridge, to return there as reader in medicine. He was allocated laboratories in the pathology department and beds in Addenbrooke's Hospital for patients with rare diseases. The laboratories were soon occupied by research and junior staff, and visiting scientists from the UK and overseas. 
Food analysis continued, and second and third editions of the tables, containing the composition of more foods, were published in 1946 and 1960. The Ministry of Food then took over the responsibility for updating the tables, which at the time of writing are in their fifth edition. They are the standard publication on the composition of foods in the UK, and are used worldwide. 
McCance (Mac or Prof to his colleagues) was not a lone worker, and always had one or more collaborators; he was interested in the physiology of the whole body, and the subjects of his research ranged widely. During the early part of the Second World War he was engaged with Andrew Huxley, James Robinson, Widdowson, and others in a study of rationing, which involved living on a diet extremely low in fat for three months before cycling the 200 miles from Cambridge to the Lake District, and walking 36 miles up hill and down dale in one day, in deep snow and with heavy rucksacks. The study concluded that such rationing was unlikely to lead to any loss of physical fitness; it was also the origin of the proposal to add calcium to flour used for bread-making to offset the effects of rationing of dairy products. Later in the war McCance chaired a joint Medical Research Council and Royal Navy committee on survival at sea which for the first time demonstrated conclusively that it was better to drink nothing at all than to drink seawater. Among other things, the committee's work led also to the development of new pills for seasickness, and a new design for covered inflatable life-rafts, which subsequently saved many shipwrecked seamen from death through exposure. In 1945 the University of Cambridge, jointly with the Medical Research Council, created a personal chair for McCance and, as a tribute to the French scientist Claude Bernard, he chose the title professor of experimental medicine, the first of such titles in the UK. 
In the years before his retirement, one of McCance's major interests was the physiology of the newborn infant. He found that at birth the kidneys are immature and an excess of certain nutrients in manufactured milk formulae may do harm. This work inspired others to study the physiology of infancy, which became a subject in its own right. The Neonatal Society was founded, with McCance as first president, and it now holds an annual McCance lecture. On his retirement in 1966 the Medical Research Council asked him to go to Uganda as temporary head of their Infantile Malnutrition Research Unit in Kampala. He spent two years there, and greatly enjoyed the experience. 
In 1968 he returned to Cambridge, where he spent the rest of his life. He was fond of walking, but his favourite mode of travel was cycling, which gave him 'uninterrupted time to think'. His bicycle was fitted with a cyclometer, and between 1939 and 1969 he cycled 200,000 miles, equivalent to eight times round the world. In the late 1970s he was knocked off his bicycle, fracturing a femur, which led to a shortening of his right leg. However, he continued to walk several miles a day until he had another fall about ten years later, which resulted in a fractured pelvis. He then became more and more disabled, and had to move to sheltered accommodation. His many friends, including past colleagues and students, visited him when they could, often seeking his advice. All had valued the years they spent working with him. He published more than 300 papers in scientific journals, six Medical Research Council 'Special Reports', and, with E. M. Widdowson, a book entitled 'Breads, White and Brown; Their Place in Thought and Social History' (1956). 
He died of a chest infection at the home where he lived, Shelford Lodge, 144 Cambridge Road, Great Shelford, Cambridgeshire, on 5 March 1993, and was cremated on 11 March at Cambridge crematorium; his ashes were taken to Sidney Sussex College garden. A memorial service was held in the college chapel on 16 April. His wife had died in 1965, but he was survived by a son and daughter, seven grandchildren and twelve great-grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 52382


Butler, Edward Dundas (1842-1919), linguist and librarian, was born on 15 October 1842 at 6 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, the son of Thomas Butler and his wife, Jane Isabella, 'nee' North. Having been educated at Blue Coat School, London, he joined the department of printed books of the British Museum as a transcriber on 31 December 1859 at the age of seventeen. When a separate department of maps was set up in 1867 he was transferred to it, and promoted in 1869, becoming second in command to the keeper. In 1880 he was promoted assistant, first class, and transferred with the map collection back to the main library. His duties included examining and arranging accessions to the collection of maps, preparing the map catalogue for printing, and cataloguing general works in the so-called 'difficult languages', which, in his case, included Hungarian, Finnish, and Romanian. He retired probably on his sixtieth birthday in 1902. 
It may be assumed that Butler's interest in the lesser literatures of eastern Europe originated in his training in the British Museum, where Thomas Watts laid special emphasis on acquiring material in neglected languages. Butler proved himself an able translator from Hungarian and Finnish in particular. His translations included a collection of poems and fables from the Hungarian (1877), which 'The Academy' (23 June 1877) found 'as suggesting a hope that the Museum still continues to Hungarian literature the enlightened patronage which distinguished it in the time of the late Mr Thomas Watts', as well as a longer piece by Janos Arany (1881). Butler was also responsible for the first history of Finnish literature in English, translated from the Finnish original of B. F. Godenhjelm (1896). His contributions to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (9th edn, 1875-89) and miscellaneous pieces in periodicals revealed the range of his interest. 
It is not known whether Butler ever visited the countries whose literature he studied; he certainly established good connections with Hungary, where his activity was followed with interest. As a result of his literary activity he was elected corresponding member of the Kisfaludy Tarsasag (2 February 1879) and external member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences (19 May 1881). Contemporary British opinion praised the 'conscientious and faithful rendering of both spirit and form of the original' in his translations ('The Athenaeum', 3 Nov 1877). 
Butler died of heart failure on 11 February 1919 at his home, 66 Whitehall Park, Islington, London, leaving at least one son, Frank. 


@@@@@


doc= 52384


Roe, Charles (1715-1781), industrialist, the youngest of the eight children of Thomas Roe (1670-1723), vicar of Castleton, Derbyshire, and his wife, Mary Turner, was born on 7 May 1715 at Castleton and baptized there on 2 June 1715. When he was eight, on the death of his father, Roe moved to Stockport with his family. At some time after his mother's death in November 1724 he appears to have settled in Macclesfield with his sister Mary and elder brother William, who was appointed curate of the parochial chapel there from that year. An education at Macclesfield Free Grammar School is suggested by his strong ties and later governorship of the school. 
At an early age financial circumstances forced Roe to enter the local button and twist trade, dependent on mohair, horsehair, oxhair, and silk and linen thread. His interest in silk increased, and, having become a freeman of Macclesfield in 1742, he built a small throwing mill on Park Green (1743-4), followed by the large silk mill, in partnership with Messrs Glover & Co., on Waters Green (1748). Both mills, modelled on Sir Thomas Lombe's original silk mill in Derby, were water-powered. 
Roe held the office of mayor of Macclesfield in 1747-8 and became an important merchant operating from his fine residence at 62-64 Chestergate. In 1764 he withdrew from the silk trade because of his increasing involvement with the copper trade. In 1756 he had begun mining at Coniston in the Lake District and about the same time at Alderley Edge, near Macclesfield, trading as Charles Roe and Copper Company. Permission was obtained to build a copper smelter on Macclesfield Common in 1758, after which Roe entered into a lifelong partnership with Brian Hodgson, innkeeper of the Old Hall, Buxton, who held coal-mining interests at Disley. The company was a great success, building rolling mills for copper sheets and a brass-wire mill at Havannah, in Eaton, near Congleton, in 1763, followed by brass battery and rolling mills at Bosley, south of Macclesfield, in 1766. Large quantities of copper ores were initially bought from the duke of Devonshire's mine at Ecton Hill in Staffordshire, but mining operations were extended to Penrhyn-Du in north Wales during 1763 and Parys Mountain on Anglesey in 1764. Purchases of Cornish ore began in 1765, but Roe's vigorous petitioning for a canal scheme linking Macclesfield to the Mersey estuary was in vain. Undaunted, Roe, supported by John Walker of Liverpool, built a copper smelter on Liverpool's south shore in 1767. However, due to pressures from an unknown source claiming pollution, Roe & Co. were fined and operations were moved further along the Mersey estuary to Toxteth Park. Roe received permission from Lord Molyneaux for this in 1770 (although the indenture was not completed until 1 May 1772). 
A remarkably large find of copper ore at Parys Mountain by Roe's Derbyshire mining agent, Jonathan Roose, on 2 March 1768 ensured the continuing success of the company. Welsh miners celebrated the discovery annually for many years thereafter. 
Together with other major brass and copper concerns, Roe & Co. successfully petitioned parliament in 1767 against a royal charter to the Warmley Brass Company, run by William Champion. In 1774 a new partnership with the additional name the Macclesfield Copper Company was created, comprising Roe, Brian Hodgson, and thirteen other partners. This became one of the three greatest brass concerns of the late eighteenth century, using calamine from Shropshire, Somerset, Yorkshire, and north Wales. 
Roe died intestate on 3 May 1781 at his home in Macclesfield after a winter in Bath. He was buried with great pomp and ceremony on 8 May in the family vault at Christ Church, Macclesfield, the church he had built at his own expense, costing 'upwards of six thousand pounds' in the years 1775-6. The officiating minister was Revd David Simpson, chosen by Roe as the first incumbent of Christ Church because of his more evangelical stance. 
The first of Roe's three marriages was on 26 May 1743, to Elizabeth (died 1750), the daughter of Samuel Lankford, a button merchant of Leek and later Roe's silk mill partner. The eldest son of their three surviving children, William (1747-1827), took on responsibility for the business after his father's death, at the same time serving as a bailiff for Liverpool and commissioner of customs. On 25 April 1752 Roe married Mary Stockdale of the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, who died in 1763, having had eight children. His third wife, whom he married on 23 October 1766 at Prestbury, Cheshire, was Rachel, whose father, John Harriott, owned an estate in Jamaica. Their only child, John Harriott Roe (1767-1833), was recorder of Macclesfield (1804-33). 
Roe was a high-principled and hard-working man prone to an occasional outburst of temper. His fine portrait, painted in Liverpool in 1769 by Wright of Derby, depicts an apparently kindly and shrewd man. 


@@@@@


doc= 52385


Garnett, Lucy Mary Jane (1849-1934), folklorist and traveller, was born in Sheffield, the daughter of Thomas Garnett, surgeon, and his wife, Lucy Sarah, 'nee' Roberts. Lucy Garnett travelled extensively in the Balkans and Middle East, recording the customs of the people among whom she lived. In Smyrna, and later in Salonica, she learned Greek and Turkish; her familiarity with demotic Greek led to a collaboration with the folklorist John Stuart Stuart-Glennie, with whom she translated and published her first compilation, 'Greek Folk-Songs from the Turkish Provinces of Greece', in 1885. Later books included 'The Women of Turkey and their Folk-Lore' (1890), 'Mysticism and Magic in Turkey' (1912), 'Ottoman Wonder Tales' (1915), and 'Balkan Home-Life' (1917). She also published in reviews and magazines such as the 'Fortnightly Review', 'Good Words', 'The Nation' (New York), the 'Scottish Review', and the 'Nineteenth Century'. In the 1890s she lived for a while in Manila, and published several articles on the ethnography of the Philippines. 
Lucy Garnett's most important achievement was the documentation and comparative study of Balkan folk literature, which is still valuable when detached from the dubious theories of 'scientific' folklore with which Stuart-Glennie tended to preface and gloss her work. She was particularly interested in the lives and status of women, and took advantage of her access to the women's quarters of remote Christian and Muslim communities to supplement the accounts of earlier travellers for whom, as she noted, 'the female sex may be said not to have existed... at all' ('The Women of Turkey', 1, 1890, lxxvii). She was also drawn to Gypsies, monks, and dervishes, observing them with a crisp protestant detachment. In 1893 she was granted a civil-list pension for services to literature. She died at St Margaret's Nursing Home, Twickenham, Middlesex, on 24 February 1934. 


@@@@@


doc= 52386


McLean, David (1833-1908), banker, was born on 4 February 1833 at Scotswalls Farm, Crossgates, near Dunfermline, Fife, Scotland, the fifth of the six children of James McLean (1791-1851), farmer, and his wife, Isabel (1790-1882), daughter of James Pettie and his wife, Jannet Reddie. As the son of a poor farmer, McLean's early education was erratic, but he became apprenticed to William Beveridge, manager of the Dunfermline branch of the Western Bank of Scotland, from whom he learned his banking and with whom he established a lasting personal relationship. When the Western Bank failed in 1857, McLean determined to follow his elder brother to New Zealand. On reaching London, however, he checked with the Oriental Bank Corporation (then the most important British overseas bank), to which he had written previously, and learned that a position in India or China had just been offered him. Abandoning his plans (and passage money), he accepted the China offer and, after training, went east to Hong Kong, where in 1862 he became acting manager. Transferred to Shanghai, he became acting manager of that branch in 1864. 
The promoters of the Hongkong Bank were impressed by McLean and attempted to poach him, but he initially could not be tempted. Months later, however, McLean, convinced that he would not be confirmed manager by the Oriental Bank, applied to become, and in 1865 was appointed as, the Hongkong Bank's first Shanghai manager. There, he was particularly successful, both professionally and personally. The board of directors offered McLean the chief managership of the bank in 1870, but he considered managing the Shanghai branch of virtually equal importance. 
Despite sending regular remittances to support his mother and other members of his family, McLean had been able to save $50,000, and in 1873 he returned to Britain, accepting the sub-managership of the bank's London office. Within a few months he had uncovered improper transactions by the manager; and in consequence McLean was appointed to replace him. In 1874 he returned to Scotland to marry Elizabeth Livingston (1852-1929), daughter of John Manson, banker, of Fingask, and Elizabeth Livingston Blaikie, and sister of Sir Patrick Manson. The McLeans had four children. 
By 1874 the Hongkong Bank was in difficulty, and McLean was once again offered the top executive position. Now fully settled in London, he declined, but agreed to act as inspector to reassure shareholders. In this he was successful, and was able to ensure that his protege, Thomas Jackson, became the new chief manager. McLean continued to act as virtual tutor, not only to Jackson but also to other, more isolated, managers; and the surviving correspondence constitutes a major source for an understanding of the intricacies of exchange banking. In addition, McLean had a positive effect on recruitment policy. Banks on the China coast had on occasion employed local 'Europeans' with dangerously mixed results; but McLean developed a 'service' of young British staff, trained in London and sent east as needed, with the intention of lifetime careers with the bank. 
The Scottish McLean was in no way awed by the City of London and its financial institutions. The Hongkong Bank acted from time to time as agent for the Chinese government, and McLean in 1874 successfully introduced the first public China loan on the London market. With the advice of the London and County Bank, and through Panmure Gordon & Co., McLean gained confidence. In 1885, during the Sino-French War, the Hongkong Bank was prepared to act as agent for the Chinese 6 per cent gold loan of $757,000. Barings, and Matheson & Co., were also agents for a second loan; intent on retaining market control, they urged McLean to permit them to issue both, but without mention of the Hongkong Bank. After obtaining authority from head office, McLean refused. Quietly, he had prepared his own prospectus; it was ready for mailing, and the Hongkong Bank's loan was, in fact, oversubscribed. In 1887 McLean turned down a proposal from Rothschild's that the Hongkong Bank join with a German group, but the concept was in any case premature. McLean would first establish his bank's independence and prove its capabilities. This in turn would provide the experience and credibility necessary for its later key role in China's public borrowing. 
In 1889 McLean retired from the London management to make way for the return -- temporary as it turned out -- of Thomas Jackson, accepting instead membership of the bank's London consultative committee. McLean had been an expert witness before the royal commission on gold and silver in 1886, but he now seriously underestimated the long-run weakness of silver by accepting a directorship in the newly formed Trust and Loan Company of China, Japan, and the Straits, a company established to finance China's anticipated modernization. Suitable projects did not materialize; the company, with its funds in the East, speculated as silver continued its fall. As the company did not itself operate in the London-China exchanges, McLean, although remaining on the Hongkong Bank's London Committee, saw no conflict of interest, but in 1893 the Trust and Loan Company, reorganized as the Bank of China, Japan, and the Straits, changed policy. McLean, deciding that his honour required his remaining with the failing enterprise, severed all connections with the Hongkong Bank. 
In 1889 there were two innovative companies with complementary products -- the financially liquid Lamson Store Service Company, and the expanding, but capital-short Paragon Check Book Company. The chairman of Lamson, John M. Kelly, had known David McLean in the East and now sought his advice. Together they obtained a majority interest in Paragon, and in 1889 established through merger the Lamson Paragon Supply Company Ltd, with a registered capital of $30,000. McLean was a director until his resignation in 1907, by which time the company had become a successful multinational with a capital of $400,000; his son Alan became chairman in 1912. 
David McLean remained a director of the Imperial Bank of Persia and a successful venture capitalist, with interests in rubber and tin. An enthusiastic sportsman, he rented in 1884 a shooting estate, Littlewood Park, above Kirkton of Forbes, near Alford, Aberdeenshire, where he was noted for his prizewinning herd of Aberdeen cattle. He retired there, and he died on 18 June 1908 at Littlewood Park. He was buried in the cemetery of Kirkton of Forbes. 
David McLean was one of the most important overseas bankers of his generation. As Shanghai manager, first of the Oriental Bank Corporation and then of the newly established Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, McLean successfully developed the techniques of exchange banking and related trade finance in the most commercially important 'treaty port' on the China coast. On return to London as manager for the Hongkong Bank, he proved that the bank, although based in Hong Kong, was competent to act as agent for the issue of Chinese government loans. His system of executive staff recruitment for service in the East was an influential model, which prevailed at least until the 1950s. By the time of his retirement the Hongkong Bank had become the largest British overseas bank. 


@@@@@


doc= 52387


Rothschild, Anthony Gustav de (1887-1961), merchant banker, was born on 26 June 1887, at 5 Hamilton Place, London, the third child of Leopold de Rothschild (1845-1917), merchant banker, and his wife, Marie (1862-1937), the daughter of Achille Perugia of Trieste. He was head of school at Harrow and attained a double first in history at Trinity College, Cambridge. After leaving Cambridge he joined the family firm of N. M. Rothschild & Sons, which his great-grandfather Nathan Mayer Rothschild (1777-1836) had founded. 
From 1915 to 1918 Rothschild served with the 1st Royal Buckinghamshire hussars, rising to the rank of major. He was wounded at Gallipoli and later served in France on the general staff. By the time he returned to the bank at New Court, London, the three pre-war partners, Leopold, Alfred, and Nathaniel Mayer de Rothschild, first Baron Rothschild, had died. Anthony and his surviving brother Lionel had been made partners on their father's death in 1917, and they joined Lord Rothschild's son Charles, who was himself to die in 1923. The two brothers alone, therefore, bore the burden of seeing the bank through the difficult inter-war years. 
After Lionel's death in 1942 Anthony de Rothschild, by nature a traditionalist, strong-minded in his views and preferring consolidation to change, nevertheless took on as sole partner the task of introducing essential structural changes to the bank. He led the way in such major new initiatives as the re-establishing of a presence in the United States, and he was responsible for a substantial involvement, through the British Newfoundland Company, in the development of an extensive area of Labrador and Newfoundland. In essence he laid the groundwork for the bank's later resurgence. In 1949 a long-standing link between the bank and the Alliance Assurance Company was reinforced by his appointment as chairman of the latter. 
In 1926 Rothschild married Lydia Louise Yvonne, daughter of Baron Robert Cahen d'Anvers of Paris. They lived in London at Hill Street, Mayfair, and at Ascott, the Buckinghamshire house inherited from his father. There were three children of the marriage, Renee Louise Marie ('b'. 1927), Anne Sonia (1930-1971), and Sir Evelyn Robert Adrian ('b'. 1931), who was to become chairman of the bank. At Ascott, Rothschild continued the family tradition of collecting. He added a substantial range of English furniture and indulged his passion for Chinese ceramics of the Ming and Kangxi dynasties, on which he became a respected authority. The house and much of the collection was given to the National Trust in 1950. Rothschild's other passion, for horse-racing, had been inherited, along with Palace House, Newmarket, and a stable of horses, from his father. He was elected to the Jockey Club in 1925 and later became a trustee. His successes included the Grand Prix de Paris and the One Thousand Guineas. In 1944 he sold his entire stable, and two years later he gave Palace House to the Jockey Club for the use of the royal family. 
Rothschild had a deep and eminently practical commitment to public service, particularly for his fellow Jews. When Nazi persecution of German Jewish families began in 1933, he and his brother Lionel were at once active in planning the reception and support of refugees. The inaugural meeting of what was to become the Central British Fund for German Jewry was held at New Court, and Rothschild worked tirelessly behind the scenes of the fund, a resolute fund-raiser and diplomatist. Eventually he took up the chairmanship of the fund, in 1939, and saw it through the war years and beyond. Other work for the Jewish community included the chairmanship of the Four Per Cent Industrial Dwellings Company, set up by his uncle to provide homes for Jewish immigrants; the presidency of the Jews' Free School; and, from 1918 to his death, the presidency of the Jewish Orphanage at West Norwood. 
Rothschild also served as chairman of the governors of St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, in London, from 1948 to 1956, seeing it through the birth pangs of the National Health Service. At that time his views on funding and management were sought, both at the hospital level and at national level (he was a friend of Aneurin Bevan), by the founding fathers of the service. From 1955, when he suffered a stroke, Rothschild's health forced him to withdraw from most of his public and business roles. He died in St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, on 5 February 1961. 


@@@@@


doc= 52388


Sheavyn, Phoebe Ann Beale (1865-1968), literary scholar and feminist, was born on 16 September 1865 in Long Street, Atherstone, Warwickshire. Her birth was registered nearly six weeks later by her mother, Jane Elizabeth Sheavyn, 'nee' Farmer. Her father, William Sale Sheavyn, was a draper in Long Street and the family lived over the shop. As happens in folklore, a younger child was in the end the luckiest. In old age Phoebe (who was the fifth of eight children) would affirm angrily that the early death of an elder sister was due to the conditions she had suffered as a living-in assistant at another draper's shop. 
Phoebe was to be a school teacher. After a male inspector had examined her needlework through a magnifying glass she was set on the lowest rung of the pedagogical ladder, as an uncertificated teacher in a board school. Soon she failed to satisfy another inspector: she was thrown out, to make what living she could, at first exploited in a series of private schools. At last she found a post as governess to the children of an architect. Noticing her talent for drawing, he gave her lessons and advised her how to sit for the Cambridge local examinations. A scholarship to the University College of Aberystwyth followed. At the age of twenty-four she had a London BA and was teaching English in Haberdashers' Aske's School for Girls, Hatcham, where she remained from 1889 to 1892, when she returned to Aberystwyth to study for an MA degree in English and French, which she obtained in 1894. She then crossed the Atlantic to become a fellow and reader in English at Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania, in 1894, returning to England in 1896. She briefly held a post in Oxford working with the philologist Joseph Wright on the 'English Dialect Dictionary' before being appointed in 1897 as the first resident tutor in English at Somerville College, Oxford. 
Miss Maitland, then principal of Somerville, had seen the necessity to appoint a body of resident women tutors in order to change Somerville from a hall of residence into a college. In appointing Phoebe Sheavyn the college for the first time ventured outside Oxford or Cambridge. Phoebe admitted in later life that she had been 'prickly' at Oxford. At Aberystwyth she had learned that women could not only sit beside men as students but could also teach men. In the USA she had seen the generous provision for women's education. The position of women at Oxford dismayed her. There was compensation in the daily companionship of young, brilliant, forward-looking women, some of whom became lifelong friends. In 1905-6 she took a year's sabbatical leave to complete the thesis, for which she gained a London University DLitt degree in 1906, which was the basis for her book 'The Literary Profession in the Elizabethan Age', published by Manchester University Press in 1909. 
Miss Sheavyn stayed at Oxford for ten years before moving, in 1907, into the bracing academic air of Manchester University as university lecturer, tutor to women students, and warden of Ashburne Hall, the hall of residence for women students, opened by Miss Penrose, principal of Somerville. A few months before Phoebe arrived, a group of seventeen women had met in Manchester to form the Federation of University Women. By 1909 the federation was ready to widen its field: a conference was held in Manchester for delegates from universities and colleges in England and Wales. The two Manchester delegates were Ida Smedley DSc, the virtual founder, and Phoebe Sheavyn. When in 1922 the federation became international, Sheavyn was again a delegate to a conference in Paris. In the same year she produced a pamphlet for the International Federation of University Women (since reorganized in the UK as the British Federation of Women Graduates). After a rather sketchy history of women's education, she surveyed the educational provision and the career opportunities open to girls and women in 1922. Sheavyn regretted that the apparent opening of spheres of work for women in the 1914-18 war had not proved permanent. She also observed that the recognition given to women as wardens of university hostels was 'not always entirely satisfactory' (P. Sheavyn, 'Higher Education for Women in Great Britain', 1922, 17), and reflected that the position of women university teachers was one of 'comparative subordination'. 
Phoebe Sheavyn had already, in April 1917, resigned her wardenship, though she remained tutor to women students. Although illness played a part in her decision not to continue in both posts, there was also an element of frustration at the obstacles to improving the position of women in the university. The promoters of Ashburne Hall had hoped that it would become a college but it had remained a hall of residence. Sheavyn had been made a member of the university senate in 1912 'for administrative reasons' (Tylecote, 97): this position was not offered to her successor. Some feared that the fierceness of her feminism would not in the end benefit women (ibid., 139), though it was admitted that she had charm, and her Somerville friend Margery Fry spoke of her 'endless kindness'. In a paper, 'Professional women', which she contributed to a collection entitled 'The Position of Woman: Actual and Real' (1911), Sheavyn argued the case for utilizing women's capacities in all areas of professional employment, and suggested the creation of residential halls where 'disengaged' women (those without maternal responsibilities) could live together independently. 
In 1925 Phoebe Sheavyn entered on what proved to be more than forty years of retirement. How she occupied this is something of a mystery. Margery Fry equipped her for oil painting and handed on techniques she had learned from her brother Roger. In her seventies Phoebe was exhibiting and selling landscapes and flower pieces. In later old age Margery introduced her to the new game of Scrabble. When Margery was in hospital in London in 1957, Phoebe, then ninety-two and nine years Margery's senior, was able to visit her. At that time Phoebe expressed something of her religious belief: she had never had a religious 'experience' but was convinced that her being 'did not need her body'. She could not, however, believe that old friends would meet again. 
The great event of Phoebe's old age was the republication of her book by Manchester University Press in 1967. As its sensitive editor, J. S. Saunders, pointed out, she had, by excluding controversial writers, excluded the true professionals, the best-sellers of the Elizabethan age; but her book had been in 1909 one of the earliest works of contextual literary study. Phoebe Sheavyn's meticulous scholarship had not been superseded and her forthright, simple style was still readable. She herself conducted the correspondence about the publication. The proofs came to her in her retirement home, Bryony House, Selly Oak, Birmingham. She died there a few months after the publication, on 7 January 1968, in her 103rd year. 


@@@@@


doc= 52389


Sidgwick, Rose (1877-1918), university teacher, was born at 13 Bilton Road, Rugby, Warwickshire, on 9 January 1877, the second daughter of Arthur Sidgwick (1840-1920) and his wife, Charlotte Sophia Wilson (1853-1924). Her father, an assistant master at Rugby School, became a classical tutor at Oxford, where he was a strong supporter of the movement for women's higher education. Her uncle was the Cambridge philosopher Henry Sidgwick, and his wife, Eleanor Sidgwick, became principal of Newnham College, Cambridge. 
Rose therefore grew up in a circle not only of academic distinction but of involvement in educational, social, and religious issues. On leaving Oxford high school she remained at home in north Oxford, registering with the Society of Oxford Home Students (which in 1952 became St Anne's College), and gaining first-class honours in modern history in 1899. She took as her first post a lectureship at the Oxford Pupil Teacher's Centre, and in 1903 she was awarded the Oxford diploma in education with distinction. She then became for a year a temporary tutor in history at Somerville College, where the impressive library building, designed by Champneys, was nearing completion. Rose helped Margery Fry, the librarian, to arrange the books, and when Margery left to become warden of a small residence for women students at Birmingham, Rose became librarian, receiving among other gifts 2000 volumes from the library of John Stuart Mill. 
In 1905 Rose Sidgwick obtained a lectureship in history at Birmingham University. She joined Margery at the Hagley Road Women's Residence, which moved in 1908 to new premises, University House, in Edgbaston. The friendship was deeply emotional on Rose's side, as happened at a time when academic life for women had become almost exclusively celibate. Early in her life at Birmingham, however, she composed for herself 'a New Decalogue'; the first line was 'Thou shalt not cling, thou shalt not clutch'. The friendship was invaluable to both women: Rose found Margery 'a kind of spiritual sea-side' but Margery's mind, sternly nurtured by her father and brother, was widened by Rose's feminine culture. Rose's sister Ethel Sidgwick had published her first novel in 1910: a collection of Rose's verse was published posthumously, 'Writings by R. S.' (1920). 
Rose Sidgwick was above all a teacher, at a time when universities did not demand research and publication. The records of her twelve-year lectureship are scanty. She was an enthusiastic supporter of the Workers' Educational Association, founded in 1903. She joined Margery Fry on the Staffordshire education committee. In 1914 University House, the fine building which Rose had seen built and helped to plan, was commandeered as a military hospital. The students were temporarily housed, and Margery and Rose rented a house: they bought furnishings from Roger Fry's Omega Workshop in Bloomsbury. For several months the house was lent to Belgian refugees. Margery left to organize relief work with British Quakers in the Marne: Rose joined her in vacations. 
In 1918 Rose Sidgwick took Margery Fry's place on the British Universities Mission to the USA. She was a great success, 'the master-bowman of the group' said Sir Henry Jones, professor of philosophy at Glasgow. She died at New York of the influenza that was sweeping through Europe and North America on 28 December 1918, while on the homeward journey. Alumnae of all the American universities she had visited founded the Rose Sidgwick memorial scholarship to enable a British woman graduate to study in an American university ('Times Educational Supplement', 19 June 1919, 308). 
Rose Sidgwick was forty-one when she died, young in appearance and fresh in mind according to Margery Fry, who recalled 'her gentle and dignified manner with its slight but ineradicable touch of the academic' (Fry, 136). People spoke of the sweetness of her nature, as they had of her uncle, Henry Sidgwick. Like him, she had an indestructible faith in some form of personal survival, though she had grown up among people who wanted to apply the tests of reason and science to religion. She sometimes found their iconoclasm hard to bear. Her own religion seems to have been a Wordsworthian natural piety. 


@@@@@


doc= 52390


Trew, Ethel Mary (1869-1948), headmistress, was born on 24 April 1869 at Lilliput Hall, Oystermouth, Glamorgan, the sixth child of Thomas Trew ('b'. 'c'.1830), a grocer and later a coal and corn merchant, and his wife, Ellen Mary, 'nee' Bradford ('b'. 'c'.1836). Although the family was living in Wales in the year that Ethel went to high school they considered their family home to be the Somerset village of South Petherton. She entered the new Manchester high school about 1880, and reputedly lived in lodgings nearby. She appears to have started her teaching career immediately upon leaving school, and in 1894 she was teaching mathematics at the West Cornwall College, in Penzance. There she was influenced by the charismatic headmistress Marion Waller, and when in 1894 Waller became head of Queenswood -- a new Methodist girls' school in Clapham Park, London -- Trew went with her as an assistant mistress. Miss Waller left the school in 1897, to marry, and Miss Trew was offered the headship. She approached the job reluctantly and seems to have realized that in accepting it she was making a choice between the school on the one hand and marriage and a family of her own on the other. Under pressure from the directors to accept she gave in: 'with a pang of sorrow I realised even then how much I was giving up' (Watson, 20). In future she channelled all her considerable dynastic ambitions and maternal feelings into the making of Queenswood. 
Ethel Trew involved herself in every detail of the developing school. Whether it was the minutiae of school management (it was said that she knew the location of every piece of furniture in the school), or the spiritual (she compiled the school prayerbook), or the pastoral -- as witnessed by her desire to get to know every girl personally and her habit of kissing them goodnight -- she was in complete command. She became the matriarch, the school her extended family. In return for her devotion she demanded unquestioning obedience from staff and students alike. 
In her early years at Queenswood Miss Trew's dynamic personality served her well. While still at Clapham Park the school was already noted for its music, but practice sessions brought complaints from the neighbours and on one occasion the matter came to court. Accompanied by several of her girls Miss Trew won the case, apparently by shamelessly charming the judge. This charm worked on fathers too and was often deployed to persuade them to enrol their daughters in higher education. Though she accepted that marriage was the likely career for the majority of her pupils she believed firmly that each should be educated to the highest level permitted by her abilities. Fathers usually gave in to her -- she was furious on those rare occasions when she failed to convince them. Under her leadership the school moved in 1925 to its new, more spacious premises in Hatfield, Hertfordshire, and she presided over its building programme, characteristically devoting most attention to the chapel. She also convinced the trustees to establish a preparatory school for the youngest girls. 
Miss Trew ruled over her extended surrogate family with a firm but loving hand -- one girl described her as 'the benevolent despot... a bit of an emotional blackmailer' (Watson, 27). Her staff was completely at her mercy and she was known to demonstrate her power over them by belittling them in the girls' presence. Yet she was kind in time of illness or family trouble and valiant in her own conduct, surviving both a fire that destroyed her house in 1936 and a bomb that brought down her ceilings in 1944. She had endless supplies of sayings to encourage the development of character: 'find your niche and fill it', 'when you have put your hand to the plough, never turn back', and most famously, 'do your duty and a little more'. Like most teachers of her generation she placed great emphasis upon physical health, mental purity, social conscience, lady-like manners, and especially self-control. Her interest in the latter probably stemmed from her own battles to control her quick temper and impulsive tongue (ibid., 32). Some of her edicts, such as her successful ban on coughing in chapel, reflected her own formidable will-power, which kept her at her post despite frequent bouts of ill health. She recruited a talented staff and generally left them to get on with the business of teaching. Though the quality of instruction was high she never quite appreciated the importance of science teaching. However, this weakness in the curriculum did not prevent many of the girls choosing careers in nursing, although teaching was always the most common choice for Queenswood graduates. 
The world moved on between the wars and Miss Trew did not. Increasingly the ageing headmistress, for all her powerful and contradictory charm, was losing touch with the realities of running a modern school. In 1935, under pressure from the trustees, she appointed an assistant headmistress, but allowed her little power. Though she had built a small house for her retirement (on the school estate) she was emotionally too involved with the school to be able to give it up. Her retirement was accomplished in slow and painful stages. She ceded the academic side of the school to her successor in 1943 but kept control of the domestic, social, and spiritual side. She also maintained control of the management of the estate even after she had formally retired in 1944. This proved disastrous, since a plausible estate manager cheated the school. Her final resignation took place in September 1948. She died shortly afterwards, at her home, Mymfield, Kentish Lane, Hatfield, on 7 December 1948 and was buried at South Petherton. 
Memoirs of Miss Trew focus on her personality and her sayings rather than on her actions, for it was through the former that she exercised influence. Small in stature, she was nevertheless imposing. With her elegant furs and clothing (she favoured purple) she projected a regal dignity and was often likened to Queen Mary: 'she used to sail around the school' accompanied by her two Cairn terriers (Watson, 24). She had a distinctive voice, rather sharp, with the dropped 'h' peculiar to the west country. She was imperious, charming, cruel when crossed or angered, kind, generous, and unexpectedly forthright and practical. Her rule was benevolent but absolute -- when she spoke of 'my girls', 'my staff', and 'my school' she meant precisely what she said (ibid., 22). Her tragedy was in staying on too long when changing times and her own failing powers of judgement let her down. In her prime she could madden with her certainties and her imperious manner, but she built a modern school, working within a social system that often limited girls' opportunities, using her force of personality to create openings for those who showed promise, and moulding her pupils to fit happily into the world as she found it. She subordinated her entire personality to the school and it is not unreasonable to say that for fifty years Ethel Trew was Queenswood. 


@@@@@


doc= 52391


Browning, Louisa (1807-1887), school proprietor, was born in London, the sixth child and fourth daughter of Robert Browning (1749-1833), principal clerk of the bank-stock division at the Bank of England, and his second wife, Jane Smith (1771-1848), whom he married in 1794. Robert's eldest son by his first marriage to Margaret Tittle (1754-1789), also Robert, was the father of Robert Browning, the poet; thus Louisa was half-aunt to the poet, with whom she maintained cordial but not close relations. 
Equipped by her father with an initial capital of $200 Louisa set up a boarding-school for ladies at 4 Dartmouth Row, in Blackheath. She was assisted by her sister Sarah, and another sister, Jemima, also appears to have helped out before her marriage in 1845. Among the pupils were Sophie and Annie Crow, daughters of an alkali manufacturer from Gateshead, and five of the six daughters of Newson Garrett, corn and coal merchant of Aldeburgh, including the future Dr Elizabeth Garrett Anderson and Dame Millicent Garrett Fawcett. Elizabeth met Emily Davies for the first time when staying with the Crows in the school holidays. 
The Browning establishment seems to have had more pretension and less rigour than some other successful schools of this period. Elizabeth Garrett recalled 'the stupidity of the teachers... with shudders' and Miss Browning's insistence that French was the language of all school transactions meant that she became fluent in the language 'as spoken in Blackheath' (Anderson, 33). At least the experience did not destroy her appetite for learning. Millicent Garrett, on the other hand, recalled Louisa Browning as 'a born teacher', writing approvingly of her thoroughness and method. She noted also her refusal to be overawed by institutionalized religion and her distinct unconventionality in refusing to have needlework taught in her school. This, Louisa thought, should be taught at home, and if she saw a girl with a needle in her hand, 'would call out in her most commanding tones, 'A guinea a stitch, my dear, a guinea a stitch!'' (Fawcett, 38). Both Elizabeth and Millicent agreed on Louisa's ample size, powerful presence, her passion for bright colours in dress, and her enthusiasm for fresh air. By the time Millicent left in 1862 the school had changed hands, and Louisa and her sister Sarah retired to live at 1 Maitland Park Crescent on Haverstock Hill in north London. Louisa died there on 6 September 1887. 


@@@@@


doc= 52392


Hurlbatt, Ethel (1866-1934), college head, was born in Bickley, Bromley, Kent, on 1 July 1866, one of seven children of Charles Hurlbatt, mining engineer, and his wife, Sophia Margaret Smith. She was educated at Minshall House, Beckenham, and at a private school in Bromley. She studied modern history at Somerville College, Oxford, between 1888 and 1892, gaining a second in 1891. She stayed on in Oxford for another year as a student, during which time she also started work calendaring medieval charters and rolls for the Bodleian Library. Her BA and MA were conferred upon her by Trinity College, Dublin, in 1905, and she received an honorary MA from Oxford University in 1925. 
In 1892 Ethel Hurlbatt became principal of Aberdare Hall, the residence for women students at Cardiff University College. During the next six years, as well as running Aberdare Hall, she was a member of the committee of the Training School of Cookery and Domestic Arts, Cardiff; she was a governor of Howell's School, Llandaff, and honorary secretary of the South Wales Association for Promoting the Education of Women in Wales. 
Ethel Hurlbatt became principal of Bedford College, London, in 1898. She also taught economics at the college. During her period as principal, the college became one of the recognized schools of London University, and she became a member of the college council and all college committees. Her time at Bedford left her with many happy memories, but it took its toll on her health. Though in appearance robust, she suffered all her life from what her obituarist Susan Vaughan referred to as 'certain constitutional weaknesses, especially in the nervous system'. She was forced to take extended leave before resigning in 1906. 
In 1907 Ethel Hurlbatt began work as warden of Royal Victoria College, the women's college in McGill University in Montreal, having travelled to Canada with the founder of the college, Lord Strathcona. She remained in this post until her retirement in 1929. As warden of the college she promoted the study of the French language, and the French government showed their gratitude for her services to education in Montreal during the First World War by appointing her 'officier de l'instruction publique' in 1918. The Serbian government also acknowledged her war work by awarding her the cross of mercy. Illness continued to affect her work, and she was admitted to hospital in 1928. When she retired she was presented with $2000 which had been raised by the Alumnae Society of Royal Victoria College to fund the travels designed to restore her to good health. Her service to the college was further recognized in 1930 when she received an honorary LLD from McGill University. After her death the Alumnae Society paid tribute to her by establishing the Ethel Hurlbatt scholarship. 
Ethel Hurlbatt's commitment to the higher education of women and to the place of women's colleges within universities was unwavering. She believed that women's colleges should make every effort to conserve their early records, and hence their history. She acknowledged that she had 'done something near' (Hurlbatt) to pioneering work in women's education; but Susan Vaughan noted that she did not generally hold radical political views, and was not a rebel, giving her allegiance to long-established institutions. During her retirement Ethel Hurlbatt travelled widely, and pursued her interest in sketching. She spent her last days in Tours in France, where she enrolled as a pupil at the Institute de Touraine. She was a tall, imposing figure whose presence commanded attention and respect among her students at Royal Victoria College. She suffered a series of heart attacks, complicated by influenza, in the year before she died. Ethel Hurlbatt died peacefully in her sleep at Tours on 22 March 1934. Her sister, Kate Hurlbatt (1865-1957), college head, was born on 24 March 1865. She attended Somerville College, Oxford, from 1884 to 1887 as a clothworkers' scholar, gaining a pass in the university examination for women in 1886. She undertook teacher training at Somerville for two terms, and went on to become a governess for several families, and assistant mistress at St John's College for Girls in St Leonards and at Wimbledon high school. She was lady superintendent of Queen Margaret Hall at Glasgow University from 1895 to 1897. In 1898 she succeeded her sister as principal of Aberdare Hall, a position she held until her retirement in 1934. Her contribution to the higher education of women in Wales was recognized when she was awarded an honorary MA from the University of Wales in 1933. Like her sister she remained unmarried. Kate Hurlbatt died at the General Hospital in Monmouth on 17 January 1957. 


@@@@@


doc= 52393


Staveley, May Christophera (1863-1934), university teacher, was born at Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, on 14 May 1863. She was the fourth daughter of Eastland Staveley, a schoolmaster, and his wife, Ann, who educated her largely at home, though she may have attended a school in London. She entered Somerville College, Oxford, in 1895 at the age of thirty-two. She obtained a second class in honours modern history in 1898 and the Dublin MA available to women not yet granted degrees at Oxford. Later Bristol awarded her an honorary MA. From Somerville she went to Birmingham to become the first warden of its women's university settlement. In 1905 she became head of the women's hall of residence, at Liverpool University, and lecturer in history there. In 1907 she moved to Bristol University as lecturer in history and tutor to women students. 
At Somerville she had been an older contemporary of Eleanor Rathbone; some were disappointed that in Liverpool she held aloof from the political campaign for women's suffrage. Nor did she, as a Quaker, play an active part in specifically Quaker movements. (As a member of Somerset education committee she eventually became a governor of Sidcot, a Quaker school.) She became known, however, as a courageous and strenuous worker for women's causes. Women had been admitted to University College, Bristol, from its opening in 1876. May Staveley was determined to encourage women from outside the city to enter. She got together a committee including members of the Fry and Wills families, and when Clifton Hill House came on the market in 1909 took what its historian calls 'the almost reckless initiative' of persuading her committee to buy it. Fifteen students came into residence in September 1909, before the house had been paid for or its equipment fully provided. During the two years before the university took it over, Clifton Hill House was run independently. The warden's salary was paid out of profits and would not exceed $100. 
May Staveley's venture succeeded. Anonymous donors made it financially secure. By the time the university took over there was constant pressure for more accommodation. Clifton Hill House itself had been built in 1750 in the Palladian style. More recently it had been the greatly loved home of John Addington Symonds, who believed both house and garden had 'a special grace'. May Staveley remained its warden for the rest of her life, combining her duties with her lectureship and her office as tutor of all the women students of the university. She became president of the Bristol branch of the Federation of University Women. It is said that she actively supported sixteen causes, including animal welfare. It is also said that she spent much of the night answering letters from former students. 
May Staveley's wardenship lasted from the Edwardian period through the First World War to the depression of the 1930s. In a long period of immense social change legends accumulated: of her disapproval of smoking, of her devotion to Pekingese dogs, of her supposed opposition to the plan to open a men's hostel near Clifton Hill House. She may have been less permissive than other wardens in the Somerville tradition, but increasing numbers of women students came to Bristol. Residents of Clifton Hill House recalled the grace and kindness of the warden, and the beauty of their surroundings. There was a general impression of unsophisticated fun. May Staveley died there, after a long illness, but still in office, on 20 December 1934. The vice-chancellor asked for the funeral to be on Saturday so that members of the university could attend. There was a large gathering at the simple ceremony at the Quaker burial-ground at Kingsweston. 


@@@@@


doc= 52394


Edgell, Beatrice (1871-1948), psychologist, was born on 26 October 1871 in Church Street, Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire, the youngest daughter of Edward Higginson Edgell, a bank manager, and his wife, Sarah Ann, 'nee' Buckle. She attended Notting Hill High School for Girls, London, and the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, obtaining in 1894 a BA with second-class honours in mental and moral science awarded by the University of London. She earned a BA with first-class honours from London in 1897, followed by a BA (first-class honours), and then an MA, from the University of Wales during the following two years. She also obtained a PhD from Wurzburg, in 1901, and a DLitt in 1924 from the University of Wales. In 1897 Edgell was appointed lecturer in philosophy and head of the department of mental and moral science (renamed the department of philosophy and psychology in 1906) at Bedford College for Women in the University of London, holding the latter post until her retirement in 1933. She became reader in psychology in 1913, professor of psychology in 1927 (attracting much newspaper attention as the first female holder of a chair in psychology), and, on her retirement, emeritus professor of psychology. Edgell held many other appointments in the college and the University of London, including a time as a member of senate (1906-11) and external examiner in psychology (1913-19). 
The turn of the century was a period of intellectual discovery for Edgell, since the academic year 1900-01 saw her in Oswald Kulpe's psychological laboratory at Wurzburg working on experimental studies of the 'higher mental functions'. That she retained an interest in this area for all her professional life is indicated by her well received 'Theories of Memory' (1924) and her presidential address to the Aristotelian Society in 1930 on the topic of 'Images'. Indeed, her cross-disciplinary interests in experimental psychology and philosophy meant that she was equally at home as president from 1929 to 1932 of the British Psychological Society (of which she had been an active member almost from its inception), as she was as president of the Mind Association in 1927, and (in 1932) of section J (psychology) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. She was also the first female president of each of these four organizations. 
It is, however, as a teacher and standard-bearer for psychology, not least within her college and the University of London, that Edgell is best remembered. An anecdote from 1933 records the response to the enquiry, 'What did Miss X get?' as an indignant 'Get? Why a first, of course. Miss Edgell's students always do.' She was by all accounts a conscientious and painstaking teacher who cared deeply about the education, welfare, and future careers of her students. Colleagues and former students alike spoke of her personal qualities, such as her kindness and generosity, her diplomatic skills, and sense of humour, as well as paying tribute to her considerable intellectual achievements. Her practical approach to teaching led to two successful textbooks. 'Mental Life' (1926) was especially designed for social science students at Bedford College, while 'Ethical Problems' (1929) was meant primarily for nurses and social workers -- professions in which she took a special interest. Edgell was also successful in building up the laboratory and lecturing facilities serving psychology within Bedford College, although it was not until the college moved to its spacious Regent's Park site in 1913 that her more ambitious teaching and research plans were realized. 
After her retirement, Edgell worked in a child guidance clinic and acted as a teacher and examiner in psychology for the nursing profession. Her brief history of the British Psychological Society (1947) is notable as much for its personal and candid reminiscences of the early years of the society as it is for the quality of its easy scholarship; it is perhaps typical that she made no mention of her own part in shaping the society during this period. Edgell died from cancer on 10 August 1948 in the Ash Priors Nursing Home, Pittville Circus, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire. Her funeral service was held in Tewkesbury Abbey on 13 August 1948, after which she was cremated and her ashes buried. She was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 52395


Holt, Emma Georgina (1862-1944), philanthropist and supporter of women's higher education, was born on 10 January 1862 at Bradstones, Sandfield Park, West Derby, Liverpool, the only child of George Holt (1825-1896), merchant and shipowner (co-founder of the Lamport and Holt Line), and his wife, Elizabeth (1833-1920), daughter of Samuel Bright, merchant, of Liverpool, and his wife, Elizabeth Anne Bright. Educated at home by a governess, she was brought up to a life of cultured and elegant gentility; she produced her first specimen of needlework at the age of four and could speak French at eight. She was a day student at University College, Liverpool (of which her father was a major benefactor), during the Lent and summer terms of 1884 and spent two further terms in 1900-01 attending lectures on the history of architecture at the college. (She later endowed a travelling scholarship in the university's school of architecture.) She was born into a family whose members were prominent Liberals and Unitarians and her religious, moral, and educational development was strongly influenced by the Revd John H. Thom (1808-1894), minister of Renshaw Street Unitarian Chapel, Liverpool. Described by Thom in 1894 as 'almoner' to the chapel's 'decayed members or families', she was one of the leaders of the chapel and of its successor, Ullet Road (Unitarian) Church. 
On her father's death in 1896, Emma Holt became joint tenant, with her mother, of his estate, and continued his public work. A life governor of both University College and the University of Liverpool (which received its charter in 1903), she was also, unusually for a woman, a member of the university's council from 1909 to 1915 and from 1916 to 1934. She took a particular interest in the welfare of women students and was a founder (together with her cousins Eva Melly and Jane Herdman, wife of Professor W. A. Herdman) and the principal benefactress of a hostel for women students at the college, University Hall, which opened in 1899 and was presented to the university in 1921. Besides her substantial donations to the hall and its building fund, there were her gifts of furniture, paintings, and books, in order to provide the hall with a collegiate life in surroundings of beauty, dignity, and comfort. She contributed generously to the cost of the women's wing of the university's students' union (completed in 1913), including paying for the installation of an oak staircase. Besides her substantial gifts to University Hall prior to 1921, her recorded monetary gifts to the university over the period 1904-42 total $33,813 (of which $8950 was given jointly with her mother). In recognition of 'the large and far-reaching benefactions, in which she has maintained the princely practice of her family', the university in 1928 awarded her the degree of doctor of laws, 'honoris causa'. 
In 1910 Emma Holt persuaded the university's council to appoint a committee to consider the advisability of increasing the proportion of women on the university's staff; the report of the committee (whose members included Emma Holt and Eleanor Rathbone, also a member of council) supported the case, which was also accepted by the council but taken little notice of by the senate. In 1915 she supported the recommendation, accepted by the university court, that Latin should cease to be a compulsory subject at matriculation for medical students, recognizing that women students were particularly handicapped by the regulation. 
Emma Holt also contributed her services as counsellor and voluntary worker to a number of Liverpool charities. Of the Liverpool Queen Victoria District Nursing Association, she was not only a subscriber from its foundation in 1898 but also joint, later sole, lady superintendent of one of the busiest districts from 1915 to 1943. The Holt and Rathbone families were closely associated with both this association and other charities including (in the persons of Eleanor Rathbone and Emma Holt) the Liverpool Council of Social Service and the Liverpool Personal Service Society. Emma Holt was an early supporter of the Victoria Women's Settlement, whose honorary secretary from 1904 onwards was Eleanor Rathbone. She took a particular interest in the Girls' Own Club of the Liverpool Domestic Mission (one of whose founders was the Revd J. H. Thom) and was lady president of the Liverpool Home for Incurables. During the First World War she converted the former Liverpool residence of an uncle, Alfred Holt (1829-1911), into a war hospital and supported it when afterwards it became a women's hospital. 
In 1940 failing health led Emma Holt to leave Liverpool and spend her last years at her Lake District home, Tent Lodge, in her beloved Coniston, at whose parish church she worshipped. She died there, unmarried, on 19 December 1944 and was buried on the 22nd in the Holt family burial-ground, Toxteth Unitarian Chapel, Liverpool. She bequeathed her Liverpool home, Sudley, Mossley Hill, to the city to be used as a public garden and park; a total of 146 paintings in Sudley, collected by her father, were also left to Liverpool, to be kept together as a collection, on condition that the public were allowed to view them free of charge. Besides bequests to relatives and servants, she left $13,500 to named Liverpool charities, including the university and University Hall. 
Of short stature, Emma Holt was plain featured, with a long face. Portraits of her in later life show a stately and gracious lady but inadequately convey her character. 'Modest, simple, invariably kind and friendly, yet with a shrewd judgement of men and things', wrote Eleanor Rathbone of her in the 'Liverpool Daily Post' of 21 December 1944. A devoted Unitarian, her inherited wealth was regarded as held in trust, to support those not so fortunate as herself. 


@@@@@


doc= 52396


Rackstraw, Marjorie (1888-1981), educationist and social worker, was born in Highgate, Middlesex, on 24 June 1888, the second of five daughters of Matthew Rackstraw and his wife, Fanny ('nee' Blofeld). The early death of his father obliged Matthew Rackstraw to abandon professional ambitions and enter trade. The Blofeld family were dealers in Smithfield; several of them became liverymen of the Butchers' Company. Matthew Rackstraw bought two small shops in Upper Street, Islington, then a fashionable neighbourhood, and with his sister in charge of staff welfare built up a thriving department store. He sold it when trade began to move westwards to new stores such as Selfridge's. The family lived in a handsome house in Cholmondeley Park on Highgate Hill, moving as the girls left home to a smaller but still substantial house in North Grove, Highgate village. Matthew had been a paternalistic employer. He was also a good father of daughters, giving each educational opportunities and a share of his fortune, enabling her to choose her way of life. 
During her schooldays at the Grove School, Highgate, Marjorie Rackstraw developed spinal trouble, possibly undiagnosed polio. She was sent to a school for invalids at Margate and spent long periods on her back. A spinal disability remained throughout life but she never accepted it as an impediment to service. Her elder sister Frances (Nancy) went from the Grove School to Somerville College, Oxford. Marjorie, it is said, was offered a place at Somerville on returning from a year in France, but her parents judged that Birmingham was a healthier place than Oxford. In Birmingham, Margery Fry, fourteen years older than Marjorie, was warden of University House, a fine purpose-built residence for women: they became lifelong friends. After studying history, Marjorie in 1912 took the undifferentiated arts degree then available and went for a year to Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania. She returned to Birmingham to assist her friend at University House, but when the older woman left to work with the Friends' War Victims Relief Committee among refugees on the Marne, Marjorie soon followed her. 'She is champing to be off', wrote Margery Fry in July 1915. In 1920 Marjorie volunteered for relief work in Russia and remained there through the famine, beloved, it was said, by both colleagues and Russian peasants. 
From 1924 to 1937 Marjorie was warden of Masson Hall, Edinburgh University, and adviser to the women students. She gave advice on accommodation and future careers, and took a close interest in the social life of the women students. It seems that she was hoping to plan a new hall. Proposals for this appear as early as 1931 but the new hall was not opened until 1965, long after she had left. She was a generous contributor: a part of the hall and a bursary bear her name. She had while in Edinburgh joined the Fabian Society. 
In 1937 Marjorie bought 1 Keats Grove, Hampstead, her home for the rest of her life. Spare rooms were soon occupied for long or short periods by former students, refugees, and friends from a wide circle. She became involved in voluntary and public work, much of it linked with her local Labour Party. In 1944 she volunteered for work abroad with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, and was in the first team to enter Germany from France. But in the following year she was back in Hampstead, having been elected during her absence as a Labour councillor. She served on many committees before she retired from the council in 1951. 
Marjorie's special concern for elderly people who, during the war, had lost their homes through bombing in eastern and southern parts of London and had been rehoused in makeshift accommodation in an unfamiliar district, led in 1947 to the foundation of the Hampstead Old People's Housing Trust, of which she remained chair until her eightieth year. Large houses, standing empty, were bought and converted into homes for elderly people. Marjorie, who valued her own garden, insisted that the gardens should be brought back into cultivation, often by the residents themselves. One house was a bequest from a lady who wished it to accommodate 'gentlefolk'. The historian of the association says, 'No difficulty arose over the interpretation of that phrase.' 
After visiting a former housemaid in the newly furbished attic which she had once shared as a bleak bedroom with other servants, Marjorie remarked, 'You could hardly find anyone gentler.' The association's first purpose-built block of flats, occupied in 1968, was called Rackstraw House; Marjorie, who had resisted the idea of naming it after her, finally agreed because the family name would die out with her. 
Marjorie Rackstraw was tall, and angular in her movements because of her disability. 'She peeps out of her house like a good kind witch,' said a child. Her strong features bore a habitual expression of happy benevolence, and she had a memorable ringing laugh. Though she had worked with Quakers, she did not attend their religious meetings. She remained an Anglican, though not a regular churchgoer. She died at home, in her sleep, on 28 April 1981, and was cremated at Golders Green on 5 May. 


@@@@@


doc= 52397


Marvin, Francis Sydney (1863-1943), educationist, positivist, and historian, was born at 11 Finsbury Pavement, London, on 6 August 1863, the son of Francis Bentham Marvin (1831-1919), businessman and churchwarden, and his wife, Julia, 'nee' Chase (1836-1865). He had a sister, Anna Sophia (1865-1957), who became an educationist in Jamaica. In 1876 his father married Anne Paine, with whom he had a further six sons and one daughter. 
Marvin grew up in London, where he attended Merchant Taylors' School and made the acquaintance of the leaders of English positivism, including Frederic Harrison and J. H. Bridges. At St John's College, Oxford, where he graduated with a first in 'literae humaniores' (1886) and a second in modern history (1887), he continued to explore positivist thinking. Jointly with his tutor Sidney Ball and fellow classics scholar Gilbert Murray he set up an Auguste Comte discussion society. By the end of his time at St John's his original plan to enter the clergy had faded along with his religious beliefs. With hindsight Marvin commented that he turned to educationism as 'the nearest bit of social and religious work' he could think of (Kunitz and Haycraft, 924). In 1890, after teaching for two years at elementary schools in Oxford and in the East End of London, he embarked on a career as a school inspector with the Board of Education. Through his engagement with the question of how education could make a difference to the problems of modern society he also met his future wife, Edith Mary Deverell ['see 'Marvin, Edith Mary (1872-1958)], likewise a school inspector and an advocate of women's suffrage. They wed at Tetsworth parish church on 25 June 1904, after Edith rejected the idea of a positivist ceremony on the grounds that it emphasized the subordinate role of women. The Marvins had three sons, one of them the financial journalist John Deverell Marvin (1906-1983). 
Marvin was an active member of the positivist circle in London, writing many of the Greek and Roman lives in Frederic Harrison's 'New Calendar of Great Men' (1892) and contributing over a hundred articles to the 'Positivist Review' between 1893 and 1925. One of the key ideas he appropriated from the Comtean legacy was the vision of historical synthesis as a precondition of future societal advance. His first book, 'The Living Past' (1913), offered a concise 'sketch of Western progress' from the Stone Age to the early nineteenth century. The work passed through several editions and had the widest influence among his writings. H. G. Wells later acknowledged it to have inspired the 'Outline of History' (1918-19), Wells's own effort to deliver the world from nationalist strife by re-educating it in internationalist perspectives. The principal theme that pervaded 'The Living Past' was that history manifested social virtue. Marvin portrayed the ascent of man as a story of 'the unity of mankind' and its fundamental 'sociality of reason', attributing progress not to individual genius but to man's unique powers of co-operation. In a Comtean reading the truest expression of this type of moral behaviour was ultimately science. Marvin's account of Western progress foregrounded scientific activity, presenting it along with all discovery as an essentially fraternal achievement. Much of this resonated with the programme of a new humanism that was being launched at the time by the positivist founding fathers of the modern historiography of science, Charles Singer in the United Kingdom and George Sarton in the United States. 
In addition to his work as an inspector of schools and training colleges, Marvin pursued his ideas on internationalism and the improvement of society in a variety of arenas. From 1914 he organized summer schools for teachers, aptly named the Unity History Schools. The series was mooted on the outbreak of the First World War at a settlement of the Society of Friends and continued until 1939, usually convening in England but on occasion also abroad. The schools drew on the expertise of major scholars and public figures. Over the decades they covered a broad range of themes, spanning art, music, science, and civilization, recent developments in European thought, law, race, world peace, and much else. Marvin became an enthusiastic supporter of the League of Nations, whose foundation he celebrated as a first attempt at a new world order. In 1925-6 his campaigning on behalf of the League of Nations Union took him on a lecture tour of India. Out of this grew 'India and the West: a Study in Cooperation' (1927). Another of his platforms was the Historical Association, which in this period became the leading organization of history teachers. From 1919 Marvin chaired its propaganda committee (later renamed 'development committee'), founding and lecturing to branches of the association for nearly a quarter of a century. A commission on history teaching in schools that had been appointed by the president of the Board of Education (the historian H. A. L. Fisher) provided him with further opportunities to bring his mission to bear on teachers and the school inspectorate. The resulting report, 'The Teaching of History' (1923), explored how history could be used at the grass roots, to ensure that 'science boys' received a liberal education and that no pupil would leave secondary school without learning 'something of the history of scientific discovery'. Marvin was not scientifically trained. Nevertheless, the editor of the key science periodical 'Nature' frequently turned to him for reviews. Here too Marvin's zeal as an improver came to the fore as he used these occasions to interrogate the texts under review for their potential to deliver the lessons of co-operativeness. 
Marvin retired from his majesty's inspectorate at the rank of staff inspector in 1924. In 1929-30 he held the chair of modern history at the University of Cairo, Egypt. His literary output included the edited volumes of the Unity History Schools; a sequel to 'The Living Past', 'The Century of Hope' (1919), covering the period 1815-1914; with Florence Melian Stawell, 'The Making of the Western Mind' (1923); 'The Nation at School: a Sketch with Comments' (1933), on which he collaborated with his son Alfred Noel Marvin; 'Auguste Comte, the Founder of Sociology' (1937), in the Chapman and Hall 'Modern Sociologists' series; 'The New Vision of Man' (1938); and numerous articles in edited volumes and periodicals. He lived latterly in Welwyn Garden City and died of heart failure on 14 November 1943 at The Limes nursing home, Hadley Green, Barnet, Hertfordshire. He was cremated on 19 November at Golders Green crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 52398


Mellanby, Sir Edward (1884-1955), medical scientist and administrator, was born at West Hartlepool, co. Durham, on 8 April 1884, the youngest of the four sons and six children of John Mellanby, manager of the shipyard of the Furness-Withy Company, and his wife, Mary Isabella Lawson. Elder brothers were John Mellanby (1878-1939), the physiologist, and Alexander Lawson Mellanby (1871-1951), who became professor of civil and mechanical engineering at the Royal Technical College, Glasgow. From Barnard Castle School, where he was head boy and captain of cricket and football, Mellanby gained an exhibition to Emmanuel College, Cambridge. Having been placed in the second class in part I of the natural sciences tripos (1904), and the first class with physiology as his special study in part II (1905), he obtained a research studentship at Emmanuel, which he held until 1907, working under the guidance of Frederick Gowland Hopkins, his former tutor, whose influence largely determined the rest of Mellanby's career. He completed his medical studies at St Thomas's Hospital, London, where between 1909 and 1911 he was a demonstrator in physiology, and during 1910-12 held a Beit memorial fellowship for medical research. In 1913 he became a lecturer in and later professor of physiology at King's College for Women, London, where he remained until 1920. He maintained a distinguished association with Cambridge, where he graduated MD in 1915 and was awarded the Walsingham medal (1907) and the Gedge (1908) and Raymond Horton-Smith (1915) prizes. 
In 1914 Mellanby married May Tweedy, who had been a fellow student at Cambridge, and was herself engaged in physiological research at Bedford College, London ['see below']; they had no children. 
The research work for which Mellanby was perhaps best known was his investigation of rickets, begun in 1914 at the request of the Medical Research Committee. His first major publication on the subject was 'An experimental investigation on rickets' ('Lancet', 196, 15 March 1919, 407-12). Mellanby established that the main cause of the disease was deficiency of a fat-soluble vitamin, which came to be known as vitamin D. At a later stage he demonstrated the rachitogenic action of certain cereals. His researches, however, extended over a wide range and he was recognized as an outstanding expert in the biochemical and physiological field. 
Mellanby was appointed in 1920 to the newly founded chair of pharmacology at the University of Sheffield and as honorary physician to the Royal Infirmary. In 1931 he was appointed chairman of an international conference for the standardization of vitamins. In 1933 he succeeded Walter Fletcher as secretary of the Medical Research Council, having been a member of the council for two years; and shortly after this appointment he accepted the Fullerian professorship of the Royal Institution (1936-7). He was also the chairman of the international technical commission on nutrition in 1934, and in the same year published 'Nutrition and Disease: the Interaction of Clinical and Experimental Work'. Before and during the Second World War he was involved in schemes concerning wartime diet, as well as the welfare of service personnel and civilians, and was chairman of the royal naval and the flying personnel research committees, a member of a similar committee relating to the army, a member of the scientific advisory committee of the cabinet, and chairman of the colonial medical research committee. The Medical Research Council, under Mellanby's direction, and the Ministry of Health were jointly responsible in 1939 for the setting up of an Emergency Public Health Laboratory Service, which after the war became the Public Health Laboratory Service. He retired from the Medical Research Council in 1949. The previous year the new Institute for Medical Research, with the planning of which Mellanby had been closely concerned, opened at Mill Hill, London. 
Mellanby was appointed KCB in 1937 and GBE in 1948 and received a number of foreign decorations. From 1937 to 1941 he was an honorary physician to George VI. He was elected FRS in 1925, FRCP in 1928, and honorary FRCS Edinburgh in 1946. In 1935 he and his wife were jointly awarded the Charles Mickle fellowship of Toronto University. 
Among Mellanby's other awards were the Royal and Buchanan medals from the Royal Society and the Bissett-Hawkins, Moxon, and Baly medals from the Royal College of Physicians; the Halley-Stewart prize for medical research from the British Medical Association; and the Cameron prize from Edinburgh University. He was elected an honorary fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge (1946), and received honorary degrees from a number of universities. He gave many special lectures on medical and scientific subjects, including the Croonian lecture of the Royal Society; the Oliver Sharpey and Croonian lectures and the Harveian oration of the Royal College of Physicians; the Linacre and Rede lectures of Cambridge University, published as 'Recent Advances in Medical Science: a Study of their Social and Economic Implications' (1939); the Ludwig Mond lecture (Manchester University); a special bicentenary lecture at the Royal College of Surgeons; and the Robert Boyle, Stephen Paget, and Hopkins memorial lectures. In 1947 he held the Abraham Flexner lectureship at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, which involved a period of three months' residence in Nashville. 
During the last year or two of his secretaryship of the Medical Research Council, Mellanby attended meetings abroad on behalf of the British government and the Colonial Office and at the invitation of the South African Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. After his retirement he undertook two further advisory missions, the first to India (where he played a significant part in the establishment of the Central Drug Research Institute at Lucknow and was its first director for a few months in 1950-51) and the second to Australia and New Zealand. For the most part, however, he spent his retirement at work in his laboratory at Mill Hill and it was there that he died, quietly and unexpectedly, on 30 January 1955. 
Mellanby was tall and handsome, friendly and unaffected, with a great sense of fun and a certain boyishness. To those who did not know him well, his more endearing personal qualities were sometimes masked by his brusque, forthright manner; generally, however, this was due to a wish to stimulate argument and, if his help was being sought, to find out what was in the mind of his inquirer, so that he could advise to the best of his ability. 
Mellanby's wife, May Mellanby, Lady Mellanby (1882-1978), physiologist, was born in London, the eldest daughter of George Tweedy, a businessman, and his wife, Rosa. She spent part of her childhood in Russia, where her father was involved in the development of the oil industry and, after being educated at Hampstead and Bromley high schools, went up to Girton College, Cambridge in 1902. She sat both parts of the natural sciences tripos in 1905 and 1906, achieving the equivalent of a second-class degree. Appointed a research fellow and then a lecturer at Bedford College for Women, London University, she held the latter post until her marriage in 1914. 
While at Bedford College, May worked with her future brother-in-law J. S. Edkins on gastric secretion. Following her marriage, she collaborated with her husband on a range of nutritional studies, but also developed her own research on the nutritional influences on dental development which was carried out for the Medical Research Committee and its successor body, the Medical Research Council. May published a number of research papers, which were summarized in a chapter of her husband's 'Nutrition and Disease' (1934), as well as three 'Special Reports' for the MRC (1929, 1930, 1934). She was awarded the honorary degree of DSc by the universities of Sheffield (1933) and Liverpool (1934) and was elected to the Physiological Society in 1956. She died in London on 5 March 1978. 


@@@@@


doc= 52399


Osman, Efendi (b. before 1800, d. 1835), guide to travellers in Egypt, was originally William Thomson, a native of Scotland. Details of his life, gleaned from passing remarks by the many travellers who knew him in Cairo, are scant and occasionally contradictory. This sometimes leads to confusion, as with Osman's original identity: he signed his name both as William Thomson and as William Taylor, and he has been misidentified by others as Donald Thomson and Donald Donald. 
Thomson enlisted in the 78th highlanders, a regiment that was sent to Egypt in 1807 as part of an unsuccessful expedition to suppress Mehmet Ali's newly established regime. Captured in a disastrous rear-guard action at Rosetta, Thomson was sold into slavery; he was subsequently compelled to profess Islam, forcibly circumcised, and given the name Osman. Though his initial years of servitude were harsh, his skills, including a reputation for medical knowledge, earned him better treatment. When he was making the 'hajj', or pilgrimage, in Arabia in 1814-15 Osman met the celebrated Swiss traveller John Louis Burckhardt, who later persuaded the British consul-general in Egypt, Henry Salt, to arrange Osman's freedom. A good businessman, Osman took an inheritance from a former master and managed it so successfully as to achieve affluence. He rose high in Egypt's elite Turkish society and was accorded the title of efendi, or gentleman. Hence it is not surprising that he refused to return to Scotland, though many of his British acquaintances encouraged him to do so. Osman also became a 'dragoman', or interpreter, at the British consulate in Cairo, but his lifestyle, manners, and religion remained thoroughly Eastern. He had several wives, sometimes concurrently, but no details of them are known. 
What brought Osman to the attention of so many British travellers in Egypt was his function as an intermediary between them and Egyptian society. As increasing numbers of British arrived in Egypt during the early nineteenth century, they frequently sought out Osman for aid in dealing with the myriad aspects of Eastern life, there being scant support services for travellers in those days. His help, for which he received commissions, was considered essential: 'In short', one traveller wrote, 'nothing is to be accomplished without Osman, who keeps the rogues in order' (Hay, fol. 37). Osman performed a great service to scholarship by helping the informal group of British orientalists and Egyptologists that assembled in Egypt during the early nineteenth century, a group that included Edward William Lane, Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Robert Hay, Joseph Bonomi, Frederick Catherwood, James Burton, Algernon Percy (Baron Prudhoe, who later became the fourth duke of Northumberland), Major Orlando Felix, and others. Without Osman, it is difficult to see how they could have accomplished as much as they did. 
Osman Efendi died from dysentery on 8 November 1835 at his home in Suq al-Khushab, Cairo. His adherence to Islam had always fascinated his British acquaintances, many of whom doubted his sincerity, but in his final hours Osman refused Christian attention and died as a Muslim. He was buried shortly after his death in Cairo's Bab al-Nasir cemetery in the grave of his friend J. L. Burckhardt. 


@@@@@


doc= 52400


Frank Edward Tours (1877-1963), music director and composer, was born on 1 September 1877 at 210 The Grove, Hammersmith. He received musical training from his father and at the Royal College of Music from Charles Stanford, Walter Parratt, and Frederick Bridge. He was organist at St John's, Hammersmith, and, after conducting Stanford's opera 'Shamus O'Brien' in 1897, for several years musical director at Daly's, the Prince of Wales's, Gaiety, Aldwych, and other theatres. He contributed additional numbers to numerous Edwardian musical shows, collaborated with Paul A. Rubens on 'The Dairymaids' (1906), and composed the score of 'The Dashing Little Duke' (1909). He also wrote many independent ballads, of which it was above all his setting of Kipling's 'Mother o' Mine' (1903) that made his name as a composer and which has remained his most performed work. He collaborated closely with Jerome Kern in the latter's early days in London, and from 1912 Tours began to divide his time between London and New York. During the 1920s he was for a time conductor at the Plaza Picture Theatre in Lower Regent Street, but increasingly he concentrated on work in the USA. He conducted on Broadway for several editions of the 'Ziegfeld Follies' as well as for George M. Cohan and other American impresarios. A companionable, witty 'bon vivant', Tours was regarded by his friends as a confirmed bachelor until, in his mid-forties, he married an American, with whom he had six daughters and a son. With the coming of musical films he moved to Hollywood, and he spent the final years of his life as an orchestral consultant to various film companies. He died in Los Angeles on 2 February 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 52407


Maclagan, Myrtle Ethel (1911-1993), cricketer and soldier, was born on 2 April 1911 in Ambala, India, the elder daughter and second of four children of Robert Smeiton Maclagan (1860-1931), army officer, and his wife, Beatrice Ethel, 'nee' Duperier. She moved to Britain in 1919 and lived at Haileybury College, where her father became bursar following his retirement as a colonel in the Royal Engineers. The family had a long connection with the Indian army. Both her grandparents, Robert Maclagan and Henry William Duperier, were generals. Maclagan was also a cousin of Sir Charles Oman, the historian. She was educated at the Royal School, Bath, from 1922 to 1929, captaining and playing in numerous sports teams. She was the youngest and smallest pupil there, but this did not inhibit her in any way. In a school cricket match against Cheltenham Ladies' College she took five wickets in five successive balls. She also won the senior and middle school maths prizes and the knitting prize. In 1929 she went on to the Harcombe House Domestic Science College, where she won a first-class certificate with the Devon board. 
In 1931 Maclagan went to the Colwall cricket week and took ten wickets for 22 runs in her first match. Two years later she played for England against the rest and was selected for the first women's cricket team to tour Australia and New Zealand in 1934-5. On 7 January 1935 in Sydney she scored the very first women's test match century, reaching a total of 119. It was the second test of the series against Australia. During the first, in Brisbane the previous month, she had taken seven Australian wickets for just 11 runs, a record which stood until 1958. She also scored the first test match century in England, at Blackpool, when Australia made the return visit in 1937. She went on to become a legend of the game. In fourteen test matches she scored 1007 runs at an average of 41.9, and her 51 wickets came at a cost of 16.9 runs each. She became the first player to score 1000 runs and take 50 wickets in women's test match cricket. Also a brilliant fielder, she took twelve catches in tests. Although never happy in the role, she also captained England in two test matches in 1951, when Molly Hide was injured. 
Maclagan's qualities were many but, as a batsman, she was a tower of strength and particularly difficult to dislodge. She saw it as her duty to be there when the first 50 of the innings was posted; in the twenty-five innings she played in test match cricket, she herself passed 50 eight times. She played her county cricket for Surrey, and was an imposing, perhaps daunting, figure. Her strength of character was exemplified when, at the age of fifty-two and having been retired from cricket for eleven years, she emerged to play for the combined services against the Australian touring side of 1963. It was, of course, no idle whim; Maclagan made 81 not out. 
Maclagan, who had served in the ATS between 1939 and 1945, rejoined the army in 1951, and was appointed supervising officer for physical training, eastern command. In 1963 she was promoted major and stationed in Aldershot as inspector of physical training, Women's Royal Army Corps. She played hockey, cricket, tennis, squash, and badminton for the army. Army squash champion for six years, badminton champion for five, she captained the army and the combined services cricket elevens between 1952 and 1963. 
In retirement Maclagan lived in Camberley, Surrey, and applied herself vigorously to her many hobbies, which included carpentry, metalwork, and gardening. Her way of life was spartan and she made no concession to age. She had a constant stream of visitors from all over the country and on her eightieth birthday so many people turned up to congratulate her that she had to make a speech from the top of a stepladder. This she announced with the blast of a whistle. She did not marry. She died of cancer at the Phylis Tuckwell Hospice, Farnham, Surrey, on 11 March 1993. There was a memorial service at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, on 22 April 1993. 


@@@@@


doc= 52408


McMichael, Sir John (1904-1993), cardiologist, was born on 25 July 1904 at the High Street, Gatehouse of Fleet, Kirkcudbrightshire, the third son and fifth child of James McMichael (1854-1933), and his wife, Margaret Livingstone Sproat (died 1929). His father was a butcher and small-time farmer who struggled to make ends meet but was, to use his son's words, 'a gentle God-fearing man of the kindest nature'; both parents were committed to the moral precepts of the Church of Scotland and this had a strong influence on his early life. 
McMichael's first teacher at Girthon School was William Learmonth, father of Professor Sir James Learmonth, the distinguished Edinburgh surgeon. It was he who recognized McMichael's intellectual qualities at an early age and convinced his parents that he should go on to Kirkcudbright Academy -- where he was dux in 1921 -- then, supported by local and Carnegie scholarships, to Edinburgh University, where he graduated in medicine in 1927. After a period in junior posts he was appointed as first assistant to Professor Stanley Davidson, who held the regius chair of medicine in the University of Aberdeen. On 3 June 1932 he married Joan Katherine Macpherson (1906-1989), then a medical practitioner at Crichton, Midlothian. They had two sons, who were evacuated to Canada during the Second World War, but the marriage ended in divorce and on 7 April 1942 McMichael married Sybil Eleanor Blake (1914-1965), a radiographer, with whom he had another two sons. 
In 1932 McMichael went to London as Beit memorial fellow to work in Professor T. R. Elliott's department at University College Hospital. There he met the leading clinical research worker of that era, Sir Thomas Lewis. He was helped by a fellow Scot, John W. McNee, who made his remarkable collection of spleens available to him, and he wrote his MD thesis on liver and spleen fibrosis (1933). This won him a gold medal from Edinburgh University, to which he returned as a lecturer in human physiology under Professor I. de Burgh Daly. He was now to work on the physiology of the heart, a lifelong interest. In 1937 he moved back to clinical work, being awarded the Johnstone and Lawrence research fellowship by the Royal Society. This assured his appointment as assistant physician to the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh. 
In 1938, however, Professor Francis Fraser, a remarkable talent scout who was the first director of the department of medicine at the newly established British Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital in London, had the foresight to appoint McMichael as his reader. With the outbreak of war a year later Fraser left to direct the Emergency Medical Service in London so that McMichael became effectively the director of the department. There were major contributions to clinical research at Hammersmith during those war years. Crush injuries and their sequels, suffered by air-raid casualties, were described by Eric Bywaters and his colleagues. McMichael worked closely with Peter Sharpey-Schafer, grandson of the Edinburgh physiologist Sir Edward Sharpey-Schafer, who had been his teacher. Together they introduced cardiac catheterization in Britain for the study of the circulation and the effects of blood loss directly in man, an important topic in times of war. McMichael also introduced percutaneous liver biopsy for the first time in Britain for investigating jaundice, a common problem for the military. He was assisted in this work by a new recruit from Edinburgh, Sheila Sherlock, who thus took her first steps towards a remarkable career in hepatology. 
The introduction of these invasive methods of clinical investigation, soon to become routine procedures, required great courage on McMichael's part, for they were not welcomed with enthusiasm in the traditional teaching hospitals in London. In those days, however, before the introduction of ethical committees to supervise research, the clinical investigator made his own judgements and McMichael was not to be deterred. 
In 1946 McMichael succeeded Fraser as professor of medicine at Hammersmith. By now, within little more than a decade of the foundation of the British Postgraduate Medical School, his department had achieved an international reputation for its outstanding if controversial research, for its encouragement of dissident views in a world of medical conformity and for the challenging nature of its teaching. Through those years, every aspiring clinical research worker from the Commonwealth and beyond came to Hammersmith. McMichael himself continued to work on mechanisms of heart failure and the mode of action of digitalis. In later years, he turned his attention to treating high blood pressure. 
McMichael's major achievement, however, was to create a clinical research environment, then unique in Britain, of free discussion and debate in which all, whatever the position they held, might join. It was, however, a freedom that was never allowed to degenerate into licence. He greatly encouraged the young, making the memorable comment at a meeting of the Association of Physicians of Great Britain and Ireland (of which he was then president) that 'we must have the young upon our shoulders, not trample them under our feet'. He was a fearless leader. Never afraid of the unconventional in medicine, he took the unfashionable view that anticoagulants should not be used to treat coronary attacks and in later life was never convinced that cholesterol was important as a cause of heart disease. He was elected FRS in 1957 and knighted in 1965. 
Following the death of his second wife, on 1 October 1965 McMichael married Sheila Mary, 'nee' Howarth (1920-2000), widow of his former colleague Peter Sharpey-Schafer. McMichael left Hammersmith in 1966, by which time he had become a towering figure in international cardiology and medicine. He now became director of the Postgraduate Medical Federation, responsible for all the postgraduate medical institutes in London. At the same time he was an influential Wellcome trustee. He had succeeded Sir Henry Dale in 1960 and until his retirement in 1977 he played a major role in ensuring that clinical research would be effectively supported. 
McMichael could be ruthless when necessary, but he always retained a Churchillian magnanimity in his dealings with his colleagues. He revealed little of his inner thoughts and emotions to his associates, yet his toughness was tempered with compassion and he always felt that his department and the medical school that he served with such devotion was an extended family. His support for those who had worked with him was legendary. He remained a Scot throughout his life, always faithful to his Scottish origins and upbringing. It was at Gatehouse of Fleet that in 1982 he suffered the stroke that left him hemiplegic, dysphasic, and dyslexic during his last years. He faced with courage and fortitude the afflictions of those years and in all his vicissitudes he retained that twinkle of the eye that was one of his most endearing characteristics. He died at Manor House, Merton, a nursing home near Oxford, on 3 March 1993, and was cremated at Headington, Oxford. The memorial service, held on 18 May 1993 at St Columba's Church of Scotland, Pont Street, London, was attended by numerous family members and representatives from most of London's medical establishments and societies. 


@@@@@


doc= 52413


Neustadt, Ilya (1915-1993), sociologist, was born on 21 November 1915 near Odessa, Russia, the youngest of five children of Nicolai Neustadt, a prosperous grain and sunflower seed merchant, and his wife, Maria. In the turmoil following the Russian revolution his family decided to cross the Dniester into Bessarabia, which in 1918 became part of Romania. Neustadt was educated chiefly in Bucharest, and his early interests were in biology. He considered training as a doctor or as a professional musician, being a highly talented violinist. However, as a Jew he found the political climate in Romania increasingly threatening, so he decided to continue his university education in a new country and in a new field, the social sciences. He travelled to Belgium and entered the Liege School of Economics, where he specialized in international politics and law. In 1939 he completed and published his doctoral thesis, 'Le probleme de l'organisation internationale en Europe centrale, 1919-39'. But events in Europe now forced him into the third migration of his life and in 1940 he found a place on one of the last ferries to leave Belgium for Britain. 
As a refugee in London, Neustadt managed to obtain a bursary from the London School of Economics, where he intended to continue his studies in politics under the supervision of Harold Laski. However, he was instead referred to Morris Ginsberg, professor of sociology, and in this somewhat haphazard way came to the subject that was thereafter to occupy -- in effect to be -- his life. Working with Ginsberg, he obtained his second doctorate with a thesis entitled 'Some aspects of the social structure of Belgium' (1944), which focused on the changing middle classes. 
In the immediate post-war years academic posts in sociology were hard to come by, and Neustadt (who was naturalized in 1948) stayed on for some time at the London School of Economics as a library assistant. Eventually his opportunity came, with his appointment in 1949 as lecturer in sociology in the department of economics at the University College of Leicester. It was an opportunity that he took with striking results. At first he taught single-handed all the sociology courses on offer at Leicester. In 1954, however, a department of sociology was established, Neustadt was promoted to senior lecturer, and he acquired a highly influential colleague in Norbert Elias. The department then slowly grew and in 1959, after Leicester received its university charter, Neustadt was able, with Elias's help, to devise a new sociology degree with a strong comparative emphasis. In 1962 a chair in sociology was created and Neustadt was appointed to it. Subsequently, he was able to promote a far more rapid expansion of the department. By the time of his retirement in 1981 it comprised over thirty permanent staff, making it one of the largest in Britain. 
The department that Neustadt created was distinguished yet more by its quality than by its size. In his selection of junior lecturers, as well as students, he showed a remarkable capacity for talent-spotting. As in the 1960s and 1970s the demand for sociologists increased in other universities, including Oxford and Cambridge, Leicester products were greatly sought after, and the department regularly lost its promising youngsters to highly attractive offers from elsewhere. Neustadt never resented this, but rather took pride in the role played by his proteges in developing sociology in Britain and in what T. H. Marshall aptly called 'the legacy of Leicester'. He was at least in part repaid by the many distinguished contributions to his Festschrift, edited by Anthony Giddens and Gavin Mackenzie, 'Social Class and the Division of Labour' (1982). Nevertheless, Neustadt could still be reckoned the victim of his own success. His time and energy were almost totally absorbed by his constant struggle to sustain his department and by his unwavering commitment to teaching, at which he excelled -- his inaugural lecture was entitled 'Teaching sociology' (1965). He was thus left with little opportunity to pursue his own academic interests. His one involvement in a major research project was begun in 1957-8 while he was visiting professor of sociology at Accra, and led eventually to his editing (with Walter Birmingham and E. N. Omaboe) the two-volume 'A Study of Contemporary Ghana' (1966-7). 
In retirement Neustadt hoped at last to be able to write his long-planned study of Auguste Comte. He received an invitation to spend a year as an academic visitor at Nuffield College, Oxford. Unfortunately, though, the Parkinsonism that had afflicted him for some years grew more severe and he became reluctant to move far from his house in Leicester. He died at Leicester General Hospital on 16 February 1993, and was buried in the Jewish cemetery, Leicester. He never married but to the end of his life kept a circle of devoted friends and for long maintained his reputation as a splendid host. 


@@@@@


doc= 52414


Newman, Edward Arthur (1918-1993), computer engineer, was born on 27 April 1918 at 9 Coleridge Road, Walthamstow, London, the elder of the two sons of Edward Charles Newman, a manual worker and later a postal sorter, and his wife, Amy Cecilia, 'nee' Harvie. He was educated at Kingsbury county school (1929-36), and at University College, London, from where he graduated BSc in physics in 1939. He then started research aimed ultimately at the degree of PhD, but this work was suspended because of the war and never completed, and after a brief period working for Masteradio Ltd he joined the research laboratories of Electric and Musical Industries Ltd (later EMI) at Hayes, Middlesex, in 1941. This was to prove a crucial move because he was assigned to work with a genius in electronic circuit design, Alan D. Blumlein, who was developing an airborne radar system known as H2S. Newman gained a thorough knowledge of Blumlein's distinctive rigorous approach to circuit design, and of the ingenious circuits he had developed to handle the streams of pulses of current which were used to generate the outgoing pulsed radio signal and to represent the reflected incoming signal. When Blumlein was killed in an air crash in June 1942 while testing H2S, Newman took over responsibility for part of the subsequent production of operational radar sets, and for the training of those testing them; after the war he worked on the development of advanced circuits for television cameras. Meanwhile, on 9 September 1944 he married a schoolfriend, Helen Maud Green (1920/21- 'c'.1988), daughter of Alfred Green, a clerk. There were three sons and one daughter of the marriage. 
In September 1947 Newman left EMI to move to the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in Teddington. There Alan Turing, later well known for his wartime work on code-breaking, had produced a brilliant outline design for a stored-program electronic digital computer in late 1945, which was ahead of all other such work in the world at that time. Newman was recruited to provide the specialist knowledge needed to implement these plans, in which streams of pulses of current, and sound waves in a mercury tank, were used to represent the data and instructions in the computer. Turing soon left the NPL for a period of sabbatical leave from which he did not return, but the two had a month to get to know each other, discovering a common interest in cross-country running which they practised together. This friendship was maintained, and Newman later visited Turing several times in Manchester; both enjoyed debate, unconventional ideas, and a comfortably disorganized lifestyle. After Turing's departure the NPL assembled a balanced team to design and build a prototype computer based on his plans. F. M. Colebrook led the group, which combined the logical design skills of J. H. Wilkinson, D. W. Davies, and others with the practical engineering experience of Newman and D. O. Clayden. Blumlein's techniques made an important contribution. The result was the Pilot ACE, one of the first stored-program electronic digital computers in the world, which ran its first program at the NPL on 10 May 1950; it went on to provide the world's first commercial computing service. Newman's key contribution to this achievement ensured him a permanent place among the founders of the computer revolution which was to sweep the world in the following fifty years. 
Newman's next task was to lead a group investigating the use of computers in office work. In 1957 the NPL held a course attended by twenty-four representatives of government departments, who then went out into the civil service to spread the new gospel of office automation. One of those who attended, Douglas Wass, later joint head of the home civil service, remembered forty years on how influential the course had proved to be in his career, and particularly commended 'the enthusiasm and dynamism of an electronics engineer called Ted Newman' (Yates, 54-5). 
Newman was an irrepressible, perceptive, cheerful man of wide interests and sometimes maverick originality. This combination of innovative ability (he held twenty-six patents) with a strong and friendly personality gained him rapid promotion, and he reached the grade of senior principal scientific officer in 1955 at the age of thirty-seven. This meant that he was responsible for several research projects simultaneously. At different times these included teaching machines, computer reliability, visual pattern recognition, and speech recognition. From 1963 he also helped to manage the advanced computer techniques project, which provided government support for the British computer industry. In all these projects there were others who did much of the detailed work; Newman loved discussion and argument and contributed in his own way, making comments and suggestions which provoked those more directly involved into new lines of thought. He published twenty-five scientific papers on computer engineering, pattern recognition, and related topics. He retired from the NPL in December 1977 and took up a visiting professorship in computer science at Westfield College, London. 
Outside work Newman's interests were active and practical. At various times they included running, cycling, building his family home (at Oxshott, Surrey), country dancing, and gardening. His marriage having ended in divorce, in 1982 he went to live with (Kathleen) Margaret Page, 'nee' Johnson ('b'. 1922), a teacher, and the widow of an NPL colleague. He died at their home, 113 New Haw Road, Addlestone, Surrey, from cancer of the stomach, on 7 August 1993, and was cremated at Woking crematorium. 


@@@@@


doc= 52417


Niven, Sir (Cecil) Rex (1898-1993), colonial official and author, was born on 20 November 1898 in Torquay, the only son of the Revd Dr George Cecil Niven, missionary, and his wife, Jeanne, 'nee' Rawlings. Educated at Blundell's School, Tiverton, Devon, he went up to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1916. Three defining memories of his youth never faded: his childhood travels with his mother from Japan and a lengthy visit to Egypt; the wartime interruption to his undergraduate studies at his beloved Balliol College, leading to service as a lieutenant with the Royal Field Artillery in France in 1917, where he won the MC in the last battle of the war before returning to graduate in 1920 in modern history on the unclassified shortened honours course; and his commitment to the Church of England, in which he had been reared. Like so many of his ex-officer generation, Niven saw in his wartime leadership and responsibilities the making of a likely career in the colonial service, then actively recruiting to make up its manpower losses. After three months' training, he was posted to Nigeria in 1921, at $500 p.a. 
During his forty years' service, all of it spent in Nigeria, Niven moved steadily, even rapidly, up the slow post-war promotional ladder, his reputation for being something of an intellectual as well as an extremely keen administrator growing all the time. In Maiduguri, bordering on the Sahara, he planted a million seedlings of the handy Indian shade tree the neem, for which amenity he was long gratefully remembered. His deep experience of field administration and the native authority system (that bedrock of the Lugardian policy of indirect rule), which earned him the residentship of the major emirate provinces of Kano and then Bornu, was matched by Whitehall-style experience of secretariat work not only in the regional headquarters of Kaduna but also in the central government in Lagos. Here, during the sensitive war years, the governor, Sir Bernard Bourdillon, assigned Niven the job of establishing a public relations office, the first of its kind in Nigeria. This Niven accomplished with characteristic flair, earning the bonus (which was to stand him in such good stead in the coming years) of getting to know personally many of the nascent nationalist leaders. He was appointed senior resident in 1947. Yet, to his chagrin rather than to the surprise of some of his colleagues, when the ultimate chance of gubernatorial office came within his reach in 1952, the hoped-for prize eluded him. Despite having twice acted as lieutenant-governor, Niven was not appointed to Kaduna. 
Though Niven retired from the colonial service in 1954, he continued his Nigerian career for another decade. For a while he represented one of the country's large commercial firms, persuading local authorities and the government to buy Land Rovers and Bailey bridges. Already appointed president of the Northern house of assembly (of which he had been a member since 1947) in 1952, he held the post until 1958, when he became its first speaker. Here was an office whose dignity Niven at once enjoyed and enhanced: 'he loved ceremony and was not against pageant' ('The Times', 27 Feb 1993). He personally chose the robes with Messrs Ede and Ravenscroft and was influential in the selection of the 'Northern knot' as the legislature's device. Succeeded by a Northern Nigerian at self-government, he accepted the invitation of the independent government to serve as commissioner on special duties, from 1959 to 1962. 
Niven finally retired in 1962. He spent the next six years serving Mervyn Stockwood as deputy secretary of the Southwark diocesan board of finance. In 1968 he was back in Nigeria, at the invitation of the federal government of General Yakubu Gowon, to advise them on how to present their case against the secession of Biafra, a public relations campaign which they seemed to be losing in the outside world. Back in Britain he settled in Kent, first at Deal and then at Walmer. From 1976 to 1980 he was a member of the general synod for the Canterbury diocese. He also served on a number of councils, including the Royal Society of Arts, and was a life member of the British Red Cross Society as well as a member of the Britain-Nigeria Association. His wife, Dorothy Marshall, the daughter of David Marshall Mason, MP and banker, whom he had married on 9 June 1925 and who had shared all his Nigerian years, died in 1977, a few years after the death of their younger daughter in a sailing accident off Ramsgate. In 1980 Niven married Pamela, widow of Dr O. H. B. Beerbohm and daughter of G. C. Leach of the Indian Civil Service. A staunch Oxonian, at the age of ninety he 'mischievously', as he related the episode, put his name forward for the vacant mastership of Balliol. 
Everything Niven did was 'full of that zest, which was the touchstone of his personality' ('Balliol College Annual Record', 97). He had a lively sense of humour, sometimes bordering on the malicious and shading into the sarcastic when he told tales of his seniors in the service. 'No-one', he wrote of one governor under whom he served, 'could describe him as cosy or approachable' (Niven, 193). A prolific writer with a dozen books to his name, at one time his 'A Short History of Nigeria' (1937) and 'How Nigeria is Governed' (1950) were widely read in Nigerian schools. His long-concealed ghosting of the autobiography of Sir Ahmadu Bello, the sardauna of Sokoto and first premier of Northern Nigeria, 'My Life' (1960), resulted in an important and finely crafted book. While Niven's 'The War of Nigerian Unity' (1970) was too 'parti pris' to constitute a lasting contribution to the literature on the Biafran war, his memoir (in no sense an autobiography, for it opens with his departure for Lagos in 1921) 'Nigerian Kaleidoscope' (1982) remains in the front rank of colonial service reminiscences. 
Niven was appointed CMG in 1952 and knighted in 1960. He died at Buckland Hospital, Dover, on 22 February 1993. He was survived by his second wife and the elder of his two daughters by his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 52419


Norman, Leslie Armande (1911-1993), film director and producer, was born at 7A Dunraven Road, Shepherds Bush, London, on 25 February 1911, the son of Jacob Norman, a Jewish chiropodist, and his cockney wife, Evelyn Maria, 'nee' Wootton. After education at Cork Street elementary school, south London, until the age of fourteen, he worked at various short-term jobs until, at sixteen, he entered the film industry as a sweeper in the cutting-room at Ealing Studios, which had been sold to General Film Renters. He soon rose to become a film editor, and on 3 January 1931 he married Elizabeth Jessie Crafford (1908-1998), who also worked in the film cutting-rooms, as an assistant film editor. She was the daughter of Harry Crafford, boot and shoe dealer, and had for a time been the girlfriend of Ray Milland. They had two sons, Barry ('b'. 1933) and Richard ('b'. 1938), and a daughter, Valerie ('b'. 1946). 
Throughout the 1930s Norman edited films across the decade's characteristic range of genres: there were crime yarns such as 'Facing the Music' (1933), with Stanley Lupino; a mistaken identity comedy, 'I Spy' (1933), with Ben Lyon; a Dickens adaptation, 'The Old Curiosity Shop' (1934), for the veteran director Thomas Bentley; a Max Miller farce, 'Everything Happens to Me' (1938); and more than his share of Ruritanian or Viennese musical romances, including two with Richard Tauber, 'Blossom Time' (1934) and 'Heart's Desire' (1935). He won a high reputation as an editor, mainly for British International Pictures at Elstree and for Warner Brothers at Teddington. In 1939 he co-directed (with Anthony Hankey) a modest thriller, 'Too Dangerous to Live' (1939). 
During the Second World War, Norman became a major with the army's 'sonic warfare unit'. His skills as editor and sound editor enabled him to produce recordings of supposed military activity, which were then used to fool the enemy into thinking that British troops were where they were not. The actual army would then attack the deceived foe. After some quite dangerous manoeuvres involving the Japanese in the jungles of Burma, Norman was released from the army at the behest of the head of production at Ealing, Michael Balcon, who needed his skills as editor. Balcon later described him as 'one of the best film editors in the business' (Balcon, 156). The director Harry Watt had made a near-documentary film about a cattle drive across northern Australia (prompted by the threat of Japanese invasion) and Norman was called in to give it narrative shape and drama. The result was Ealing's highly successful 'The Overlanders' (1946). Norman was also associated with Ealing's next two Australian-set features, as associate producer and editor on 'Eureka Stockade' (1948), and as associate producer on 'Bitter Springs' (1950). Neither was as successful as 'The Overlanders' and Balcon cooled to the idea of an Australian production arm. 
By this time Norman had proved himself a very useful addition to the Ealing team. He produced two of its finest films in the early 1950s: the moving drama of the education of a deaf child 'Mandy' (1952), and the hugely popular war drama 'The Cruel Sea' (1953), both notable for their avoidance of cheap sentimentality or easy melodrama. (Norman was technically the assistant producer of both: Balcon always took the credit as producer but the associate producer did the real work.) He was back in the Commonwealth -- Africa this time -- as co-screenwriter and associate producer of 'Where No Vultures Fly' (1951), the royal command performance film of 1951, and its sequel, 'West of Zanzibar' (1954). Nevertheless he was slow in getting his first director's credit, and much later, in 1992, he struck an unusually acerbic note about Ealing, about which most recollections had verged on the cosy, in ascribing this delay to Balcon: 'I had a council-school education, hadn't been to university and Mick Balcon was a real academic snob -- anyone who had a degree 'must' be good, he thought. So that slowed me down' (McFarlane, 440). When he did get the chance, he made the thriller 'The Night My Number Came Up' (1955), a brilliantly unsettling account of a nightmare that seems to be coming true. His other Ealing films included Peter Finch's favourite among his films, the Australian-set adventure 'The Shiralee' (1957), about a swagman's growing affection for the daughter he had previously abandoned, and 'Dunkirk' (1958), a study in cross-class consensualism, in which the group matters more than the individual. It was a qualified success as a war film but very much a product of the Ealing ethos. 
Outside the protective confines of Ealing, Norman had variable success. He made the science-fiction horror film 'X the Unknown' (1956) for Hammer, which was cashing in on its box-office success with 'The Quatermass Xperiment'. He filmed Willis Hall's Royal Court stage success 'The Long and the Short and the Tall' (1960), for which he had wanted its theatre lead, the then unknown Peter O'Toole, rather than the star he got, Laurence Harvey, and had also wanted locations rather than a studio jungle set. He directed Max Bygraves in 'Spare the Rod' (1961), a mild British variant of 'The Blackboard Jungle', and the pop star Adam Faith in 'Mix Me a Person' (1962), a self-consciously contemporary drama of disturbed youth. He was back in Australia to film Ray Lawler's breakthrough play, 'Summer of the Seventeenth Doll' (1961), which foundered on eclectic international casting (including John Mills, Anne Baxter, and Ernest Borgnine), with only Vincent Ball and (from the original stage cast) Ethel Gabriel providing authentic indigenous resonances. 'That picture broke my heart', he said in 1992; he knew it wasn't ''Australian' enough' (McFarlane, 441). As the film was being made for the American company Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Norman would have had difficulty in holding out for what he saw as the play's strongly local qualities. 
Norman was replaced shortly after filming began on 'The Lost Continent' (1968), a Hammer horror adventure, and, disillusioned with trends in cinema in the 1960s, he found a new career in television. He directed episodes of such popular series as 'The Saint' (eighteen episodes from 1965 to 1968) and 'The Persuaders' (six episodes in 1971). He was forced to retire for health reasons in 1978, after directing five episodes of 'Return of the Saint'. He underwent a laryngectomy, and with considerable courage taught himself to speak again. He died of a heart attack at 27 Stevenage Road, Knebworth, Hertfordshire, where he lived, on 18 February 1993. He was survived by his wife, Elizabeth, and their three children, Barry, a popular film critic on BBC TV, Richard, a chartered accountant, and Valerie, script supervisor on several dozen film and television programmes. Few filmmakers of his generation could have boasted a more varied career than Norman, but his name is rightly associated with Ealing Studios, one of the most distinctive production centres in one of the most productive periods of British cinema history. 


@@@@@


doc= 52420


Norman, Sir Richard Oswald Chandler (1932-1993), chemist, was born on 27 April 1932 in Norbury, London, the only child of Oswald George Norman (1890-1941), bank manager, and his wife, Violet Maud, 'nee' Chandler (1901-1981). He was educated at Durston House preparatory school in Ealing, and St Paul's School, London. It was there that he became interested in science and caught an infectious enthusiasm for chemistry from Jack Strawson, who taught him in the upper school. He played cricket for the first eleven and subsequently became captain of the school. He won a Brackenbury scholarship in chemistry to Balliol College, Oxford, and matriculated in 1951. His career at Oxford was meteoric: he won the Gibbs scholarship in 1954 and obtained a top first in 1955. He then studied for his doctorate under W. A. (Alec) Waters, using continuous flow mixing techniques to study rapid free radical reactions. It was the influence of Waters and also of his other tutor, R. P. (Ronnie) Bell, that determined the course of much of the subsequent work that he did, both at Oxford and York. 
In 1957, despite opposition from the chemical establishment, Norman was made a fellow of Merton College and rapidly built up a high-class research team. He also became a brilliant lecturer and an inspiring tutor. His abilities were recognized by Eric James, who persuaded Norman to start the chemistry department at the newly founded University of York. There Norman established an international reputation for the quality of his work on the mechanisms of organic reactions. This was further enhanced by his publication (with Roger Taylor) of 'Electrophilic Substitution in Benzenoid Compounds' (1964) and (as sole author) 'Principles of Organic Synthesis' (1968); the latter became a standard undergraduate text for the next two decades. 
Norman was always intensely keen on teaching, both in the department at York and in the wider field of education in schools. 'Modern Organic Chemistry' (1972), written in collaboration with David Waddington, brought an up-to-date rigour to A-level school chemistry and helped to make the chemistry department at York one of the most sought after in the country. He consolidated this interest by his work with the Salters' Company, who set up research grants for teachers and financed the new A-level courses, first in chemistry and subsequently in all three major sciences. Nor were his interests restricted to York: he was president of the Royal Institute of Chemistry, and of the Royal Society of Chemistry, formed after the amalgamation of the institute with the Chemical Society in 1980. On 30 December 1982 he married Jennifer Margaret Tope ('b'. 1942), a university administrator whom he met at the University of York. It was characteristic that they married quietly when on holiday in Jerusalem. There were no children. She proved to be an ideal companion for the extensive entertaining associated with Norman's work. Her wide interests, particularly in music, also provided a contrast to Norman's scientific work and helped make him accessible to a wider range of people. 
In 1983 Norman became chief scientific adviser to the Ministry of Defence and it was there that his capacity for getting the best results out of committee work became apparent. For him the role of the committee was publicly to endorse a consensus that had been arrived at by detailed and persuasive discussion with the main protagonists. In this way he cut through unnecessary red tape, quickly produced results, and alienated few people. A colleague emphasized the even-handed and impartial way he treated everyone; he was not a prime mover and shaker but if there was a consensus for change he speedily brought it to fruition. After five years as a civil servant Norman returned to Oxford as rector of Exeter College. He loved being close to students and took personal responsibility for them as tutor for graduates. He and his wife offered hospitality to every student every year, a quite remarkable achievement. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1977 and appointed KBE in 1987. 
Norman was of an athletic build. The large horn-rimmed glasses that he wore throughout his life gave him an owlish appearance and contributed to his aura of scholarly wisdom. He was warm-hearted and friendly, a convivial host who always found time to talk to everyone, making each of them feel individually valued. Apart from being a stylish cricketer and an accomplished bridge player, he was a keen gardener and an expert photographer, particularly in portraiture. When asked how he managed to become competent in so many fields he replied that after 'reading' chemistry at Oxford, he could find out anything he wanted by using a book. His ability to digest large quantities of material, for example 'Chemical Abstracts', was phenomenal, and yet he tempered his intellectual powers with a humanity which made him accessible to a wide variety of people. He was a man of absolute integrity based on the Christian principles he learned early in his life. He had the happy knack of being at the right place at the right time, and could count on support from family, colleagues, and friends whenever he needed it. He had a happy and varied life, marred only by the shortness of time he had as rector of Exeter. He had an operation for cancer of the bile-duct in 1987 and this may have been the cause of the pulmonary embolism that struck him in June 1993. He died at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, on 6 June 1993. The chapel was so crowded at his funeral that many stood in the antechapel. He was cremated at Oxford on 14 June. On 27 September a memorial service was held in St Mary's, the university church, which was packed with friends, many going back to his schooldays. 


@@@@@


doc= 52422


Berlioz, (Louis) Hector (1803-1869), composer and conductor, was born on 11 December 1803 in La Cote St Andre, in the departement of Isere, France, the first of four children of Dr Louis-Joseph Berlioz and his wife, Marie-Antoinette-Josephine, commonly known as Josephine, the daughter of Nicolas Marmion of Grenoble. In adulthood he was 5 feet 4 inches tall, with striking looks which included an aquiline nose and deep-set, penetrating grey eyes surmounted by a broad forehead and a shock of auburn hair. His health was not robust, and he fluctuated between extremes of boisterousness and deep melancholia. These qualities were balanced by the wit and humour which reveal themselves in his 'feuilletons' and letters. On 3 October 1833 he married Harriet Smithson (1800-1854), an Irish actress with whom he had been infatuated for six years. The couple were separated by 1844, having had a son, although Berlioz cared for Harriet until her death on 3 March 1854, soon after which, on 19 October, he married his mistress, Marie Recio. 
Berlioz became established in the public eye with the first performance of his 'Symphonie fantastique' in Paris in December 1830. However, it was performances of his overtures 'Les Francs-juges', 'Le roi Lear', and 'Waverley' during 1840 that first aroused public interest in London. During the next few years he travelled with much success to Germany and Russia before venturing to London in November 1847 at the invitation of the impresario Louis Jullien. Berlioz was offered a contract to conduct the opening season of opera at Drury Lane in December, with the promise of a much needed handsome salary and the expectation of a six-month engagement for six years. Jullien went bankrupt in April 1848, and although Berlioz conducted the full season he went unpaid. He turned his attention to organizing concerts which included his own music; the two grandest were at Drury Lane on 7 February and at the Hanover Square Rooms on 29 June 1848. He was very successful and earned much praise, but in the absence of the offer of a suitable position he returned to Paris. During this visit he started to compile his 'Memoires', noting in the preface (dated 21 March 1848) that he had been received in England with much warmth and hospitality. 
Berlioz paid four further visits to London. In 1851 it was as a member of the French section of the jury adjudicating the musical instruments at the Great Exhibition. This was a busy and arduous time, and Berlioz took his duties very seriously: but by the end of the exhibition he was the only one of the twelve jurors left in the music section, and he remained unpaid. He attended the service of the charity children held in St Paul's Cathedral on 5 June, a performance involving 6500 children's voices, which made a deep and lasting impression on him; as a result he added a part for unison children's voices in the then unperformed 'Te Deum'. Before he returned to Paris on 28 July he had taken an apartment for the following summer season. A New Philharmonic Society was planned to promote new or hitherto unknown works of merit, and Berlioz was to be its director. 
The 1852 season saw Berlioz's greatest success in London, and between 24 March and 9 June he conducted six concerts at Exeter Hall with an orchestra of 110, the largest ever gathered in London, and one concert at the Hanover Square Rooms. All included his own music alongside other repertory, except the fourth, which was the first London performance of Beethoven's ninth symphony, the 'Choral'. For this he had managed to arrange five rehearsals, which was considered a great achievement as English orchestras had already earned notoriety for the paucity of their rehearsal time. This work was repeated at the final concert, with excerpts from 'La damnation de Faust' (1846); Berlioz's reputation as the world's leading conductor was secured. 
If 1852 saw Berlioz's triumph, the season of 1853 witnessed a disaster for his ill-fated opera 'Benvenuto Cellini' (1837) at Covent Garden. The second overture Berlioz wrote for the work, 'Le carnaval romain', had been well received in an all-Berlioz Royal Philharmonic concert, and rehearsals for the opera had been good. But on the opening night, 25 June, a very loud claque hissed the work from start to finish in protest at the encroachment of foreign works and artists into an Italian opera house. It was Berlioz's only failure in London, and he withdrew the work immediately. 
Berlioz returned to London for the last time in 1855 to conduct two New Philharmonic Society concerts of his own works at Exeter Hall and one concert of mixed repertory at Covent Garden. Despite rehearsal difficulties, the concerts were successful and plans were initiated for the following season, but they were later abandoned. Berlioz died at 4 rue de Calais, Paris, on 8 March 1869 and was buried at Montmartre three days later. 
The lack of a strong native tradition during Berlioz's visits helps to explain why London was more open to musical innovation than other European cities at this time, and accounts for the warmth with which Berlioz was received -- warmth which was notably lacking in Paris. Berlioz held London and his British friends in great affection, and would have considered a permanent residence in the city had the opportunity presented itself. Although his visits were not the source of any great compositional activity, the effect of his successes on his morale was certainly a positive one; and his articles for the 'Journal des debats' (substantially reprinted in 1950 by A. W. Ganz in 'Berlioz in London'), give a lively and colourful account of London's music-making and his experience of it during those years. 


@@@@@


doc= 52423


Peel, Thomas (1793?-1865), settler in Australia, was the second son of Thomas Peel (1768-1843) of Peelfold, Lancashire, a calico manufacturer and landowner, and his wife, Dorothy, 'nee' Bolton (1769-1837), and the great-nephew of Sir Robert Peel (1750-1830). He was educated at Harrow School (1806-11) and was then briefly put to an attorney's office, but apparently followed no occupation until his marriage in 1823 to Mary Charlotte Dorking Ayrton (1800-1857), the daughter of Mrs Bridget Ayrton ('c'.1758-1845) and possibly of Dr Edmund Ayrton; they had two daughters and two sons. Another son by an unknown mother was born in 1819. The Peels resided at Carnourie, near Forglen, Banffshire, from 1825 to 1827 or 1828, when Peel decided to claim his share of the family estate (probably $20,000) and emigrate to Australia. In London he met Captain James Stirling, who was vigorously promoting a new colony at the Swan River in Western Australia. With three fellow members of the Windham Club, Peel formed an association to bring 10,000 settlers to Western Australia in return for a land grant of 4 million acres. They proposed cultivating tobacco, cotton, sugar, and flax; none of these crops has ever flourished subsequently in the region, and none of the partners had experience of them. In December 1828 the Colonial Office responded, offering no more than a million acres. The other partners withdrew, but in January 1829 Peel found a substitute in Solomon Levey, a prosperous ex-convict who had returned from New South Wales to his native London. With Levey as financier and Peel as front man they formed a partnership in April 1829 with the more realistic goal of bringing 400 settlers to Western Australia for a land grant of 250,000 acres. The scheme was unfairly attacked in the London press as a piece of political jobbery undertaken on his cousin's behalf by the home secretary, Robert Peel (1788-1850). 
Peel left Plymouth on the 'Gilmore' in August 1829 with the first party of settlers, arriving at the Swan River on 15 December, too late for the deadline prescribed by the Colonial Office for selecting his first choice of land. His settlers were disembarked at Woodman's Point, 7 miles south of Fremantle, at a town site named Clarence, and Peel accepted a land grant 40 miles further south on the Murray River. Morale was poor at Clarence, scurvy and dysentery broke out, the arrival of more settlers strained resources further, and Peel injured his right hand by gunshot, either accidentally or through a duel. By the end of 1830 Clarence was abandoned and Peel settled permanently at Mandurah at the mouth of the Murray. In 'England and America' (1833) E. G. Wakefield gave a highly coloured and inaccurate account of Peel's venture in support of his theory that cheap land led to labour shortages and an inefficient dispersal of settlement. Although refuted by writers with first-hand information, Wakefield's story influenced later writers such as Karl Marx, and discouraged investment and settlement in Western Australia. 
In April 1834 Peel's wife landed in Perth with her mother and children, and in October he took part in the 'battle' of Pinjarra, when Governor Stirling led a punitive expedition against the local Aborigines (the Pindjarup Nyungar) to clear the Murray region for European settlement. In 1839 he was elected to the General Road Trust and nominated a justice of the peace, and the following January he was appointed to the legislative council, but he resigned these offices in 1841, a year after his wife and daughters returned to London. Because of his cantankerous temperament he never subsequently played a prominent role in Western Australian public life, though he accompanied Governor Charles Fitzgerald to the Champion Bay district in 1852. He died, reputedly after a surfeit of ripe figs, at Mandurah on 21 December 1865 and was buried at Mandurah, where an Anglican church was built as a memorial to him. He was a large man of imposing appearance, but his ambitions were disappointed and his friend Henry Lefroy wrote later that he 'never saw corroding care so strongly marked on any man's face as his'. The Peel estate passed to the Colonization Assurance Corporation, and was bought in 1920 by the Western Australian government for a highly unsuccessful soldier settlement scheme. 


@@@@@


doc= 52424


Chopin, Fryderyk Franciszek (1810-1849), composer and pianist, was born at Zelazowa Wola, near Warsaw, probably on 1 March 1810, the second of the four children of the Frenchman Nicolas (MikoLaj) Chopin (1771-1844), a tutor, and his Polish wife, Tekla-Justyna Krzyzanowska (1782-1861). Musically precocious, his youth was spent in Warsaw, where he studied the piano privately with Wojciech Zywny and at the Warsaw conservatory with Jozef Elsner. From an early age his talents as a composer and pianist were much in demand in the leading aristocratic households in Warsaw, and he continued to move freely in such circles when he settled in Paris in 1831. Although he clearly drew much of his inspiration from a private, idealized image of Poland, Chopin found his lifestyle in Paris congenial, and he very quickly put to the back of his mind any thoughts of returning to his homeland. He made a comfortable living from teaching and from sales of his published music, and he enjoyed the friendship of some of Europe's most eminent artists and composers. 
In 1837 Chopin paid his first visit to Britain, a two-week trip to London in the company of the piano manufacturer Camille Pleyel. It was while in London that he learned of the failure of his plans to marry Maria Wodzinska, a Polish girl of good family, and this no doubt coloured his unfavourable impressions of the city and its climate. Shortly after this visit he found himself increasingly involved with the novelist Aurore Dudevant (George Sand), and the next ten years of his life were dominated by that relationship, though it seems that they were lovers in the accepted sense for only a very short time. These were productive years for Chopin, and after the relationship ended in 1847 (partly as a result of intrigues involving Sand's children) he composed little more. 
It was at this point -- in the immediate aftermath of the February revolution in Paris -- that Chopin visited Britain for the second time, responding to an invitation from his wealthy Scottish pupil, Jane Stirling. He arrived in London on 21 April 1848 and spent the next seven months in the country. While in London he gave private concerts at Lady Gainsborough's, at the home of the marquess of Douglas, and at Stafford House, home of the Polish sympathizer the duchess of Sutherland; Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were present at the last of these. There were also semi-public concerts at 99 Eaton Place, the home of the singer Adelaide Sartoris, and at 2 St James's Square (Lord Falmouth's), thanks mainly to the assistance of Henry Broadwood, who had become a good friend. At the end of the season Chopin was physically shattered, and had reaped few financial rewards. 'What are my plans for the future?', he wrote to friends in Paris. 'I wish I knew'. 
Against this background Jane Stirling's invitation to Scotland seemed as good an idea as any. He spent several months visiting her relatives at Calder House, Johnstone Castle, Keir House, Wishaw, and Hamilton Palace. He also fitted in a concert at Manchester, where he stayed with the Schwabes, whom he had known in Paris. This was a trying period, during which Chopin felt entirely out of his element, starved of the kind of conversation he loved, and increasingly ground down by the endless socializing. He wrote that 'They bore me with their exaggerated attentions. I can neither rest nor work'. He was also beginning to discover something of Jane Stirling's larger plan; but, as he told Wojciech GryzmaLa, 'I am closer to a coffin than a marriage bed' (30 Oct 1848). 
This was literally true. When Chopin returned to London on 31 October he weighed less than 7 stone. His tuberculosis was at an advanced stage, and he was relieved to return to Paris on 23 November, though exactly a week earlier he had managed to play at a charity concert on behalf of Polish refugees. Jane Stirling helped him out financially during the last year of his life and joined the procession of people who called on him in the knowledge that his time was now limited. The soprano Pauline Viardot remarked cynically that 'all the grand Parisian ladies considered it 'de rigueur' to faint in his room'. On 12 October 1849 Alexander Jelowicki, an old acquaintance from Warsaw days, who had since taken holy orders, persuaded Chopin to partake of the last rites, though he was initially reluctant to do so. His death came in the early hours of 17 October, at about two o'clock, at 12 place Vendome. He was buried in Pere Lachaise cemetery on 30 October. 
In the half-century following Chopin's death his music played its part in shaping the repertory of the Victorian drawing-room. The external features of his nocturnes and mazurkas proved especially vulnerable to imitation by Victorian composers. Technically this amounted to a reduction of Chopin's densely woven textures and delicately shaped phrases to a handful of easy gestures. And in due course his own music was lumped together with his progeny. The nocturnes appeared in collections called 'drawing-room trifles'; the preludes were described as 'pearls', the etudes as 'tuneful gems'. As Charles Halle remarked, 'Chopin has become the property of every schoolgirl'. He was, in short, domesticated in England, and as his music was increasingly commodified its unique features were smoothed out by their association with the surrounding lowlands of mediocrity. They became indistinguishable from their environment in a manner which strikingly foreshadowed some of the effects of the late twentieth century's culture industry. 


@@@@@


doc= 52425


Goyder, George Woodroffe (1826-1898), surveyor, was born on 29 January 1826 in Liverpool, third son and fourth of eight children of David George Goyder (1796-1878), doctor and Swedenborgian minister, and his wife, Sarah Etherington (1794-1886). Educated at Glasgow high school, Goyder worked for firms making precision and surveying instruments in Glasgow, Liverpool, and Warrington. He migrated to Sydney, New South Wales, in 1848, and to Adelaide, South Australia, in 1850, as a government draughtsman. In January 1851 he joined the lands and survey department, and on 10 December married, in the Anglican pro-cathedral, Christ Church, North Adelaide, Frances Mary Smith (1825-1870), daughter of John Smith, who had come to Adelaide from Bristol in 1849. His dedication to his work often parted them. About August 1853 he became a chief clerk, in January 1857 assistant surveyor-general, and on 29 May 1861 surveyor-general. He held this post for thirty-three years, and was thus 'king of the Lands Department' when it was South Australia's most important department, and when the colony's chief public activities were land exploration and settlement, and debating whether to favour large landholders or small. 
Goyder travelled tirelessly, each year riding thousands of miles, often at his own expense, to supervise his field staff and to value or survey land. In June 1857 he wrongly reported the Lake Torrens region in South Australia's north to be well watered; he was misled by floodwaters from further north. In 1866 he published a map showing the southern limit of those pastoral runs which needed rent relief because of recurrent drought. 'Goyder's line' still effectively divides South Australia into agricultural and pastoral land, but from 1874 aspiring farmers crossed it to grow wheat in the north. In the few wet years that followed they did well; when the normal dry years returned they were forced from their farms. 
In 1868-9 Goyder took 131 men by sea to the Northern Territory, then under South Australia's jurisdiction, to select a site for a capital. He recommended Palmerston (now Darwin) on Port Darwin, surveyed the site and a further 665,000 acres, and wrote an extensive report on the region's pastoral, agricultural, and mineral potential. He was by then considered the colony's ablest public servant. His travelling, voluminous official writing, and command of his multiplying tasks earned him the nickname Little Energy. He had been inspector of mines and valuator of runs since 1861. In 1874, as the colony's railway system began a rapid expansion, he became chairman of the railways commission. In 1875 he was chief of those who established a forest board, perhaps the first in the empire, for the economic management of trees, and until 1881 was its chairman. He saw the value of water regulation, introducing a wide range of storage and drainage measures. He drew a model town plan, based on Adelaide's, on which most of the 160 South Australian towns laid down in his time were established. He combined such wide-ranging activities with meeting ceaseless demands for closer settlement surveys until he retired on 30 June 1894. 
Goyder possessed the essential qualities of a pioneer: energy, judgement, health, and a good eye for ground. He was strict but fair, and most of his subordinates liked him; and while anyone connected with the disposal of public land will make enemies, in October 1894 his fellow colonists showed their regard by giving him 1000 sovereigns. He was appointed CMG in January 1889. His wife died on 8 April 1870 in Bristol, England, of an accidental overdose of laudanum; they had nine children. On 20 November 1871 he married, in St Luke's Church, Adelaide, her sister, Ellen Priscilla Smith (1834-1899); they had a son and twin daughters. Goyder died of cerebral embolism at Warrakilla, his home at Biggs Flat, near Adelaide, on 2 November 1898, and was buried in Stirling cemetery, Adelaide. 


@@@@@


doc= 52426


Mendelssohn Bartholdy, (Jacob Ludwig) Felix (1809-1847), composer, was born on 3 February 1809 at Hamburg, Germany, the second of four children of the Jewish banker Abraham Mendelssohn (1776-1835) and his wife, Lea, 'nee' Salomon (1777-1842). In 1811 the family moved to Berlin, where the precocious musical gifts of Felix and his elder sister Fanny (1805-1847) soon became evident. The children were baptized as protestants in 1816, and Bartholdy was added to the family name, although it was not used until 1822, when the parents also converted. 
Mendelssohn's association with Britain began in 1829, by which time his reputation as a composer was already securely established, with an output which included the masterpieces of the octet (1825) and the overture to 'A Midsummer Night's Dream' (1826), the latter inspired by recent acquaintance with Shakespeare's works through the German translation of A. W. Schlegel. Following his famous revival of Bach's 'St Matthew passion' with the Singakademie in Berlin in March 1829, he embarked upon the first stage of a three-year grand tour to complete his education, and arrived in England on 21 April. A rudimentary knowledge of the English language was soon transformed into complete fluency, both spoken and written. In London he renewed acquaintance with three German friends, Karl Klingemann, secretary at the Hanoverian chancery, the composer and pianist Ignaz Moscheles, and the orientalist Friedrich Rosen. Through Moscheles he gave his first concert with the Philharmonic Society, on 25 May, when he conducted his symphony no. 1 in C minor, replacing the original minuet movement with an orchestrated version of the scherzo of the octet. The symphony was subsequently published with a dedication to the society, to whom Mendelssohn also presented the autograph score; in return he was made an honorary member on 29 November 1829. The association with the Philharmonic Society, where he was always enthusiastically received, was to become the principal reason for many of his later visits to the country. Conducting with a white baton, still a novelty at the time, he was to produce a wholly beneficial impact on orchestral discipline in the capital. 
Mendelssohn was feted by London musicians and society; lasting friendships were formed with families such as the Alexanders, the Attwoods, and the Horsleys, and the congenial musical, political, and social atmosphere of England was to prove a lifelong attraction. Time was also found to study the Handel autograph scores in the Royal Music Library, and to play the organ at St Paul's Cathedral. Performances on the organ, often to large audiences, were to become a regular feature of his English visits, and his playing of Bach and improvisation in particular brought wide admiration from fellow musicians, and exerted an important influence in a country where the provision and use of a pedal division on the instrument was still in its infancy. In July 1829, following the end of the London season, he embarked upon a tour of Scotland with Klingemann, which took them via York and Durham to Edinburgh, and then, after a brief inconsequential meeting with Sir Walter Scott at Abbotsford -- the Mendelssohn family were devotees of his novels -- on up to Stirling, Perth, and Blair Atholl before crossing to Crianlarich, Glencoe, and Fort William, from where they took a steamer to Oban. At Tobermory on Mull on 7 August came the first inspiration for 'The Hebrides' or 'Fingal's Cave' overture, while they visited Staffa and the cave itself the following day, when Mendelssohn suffered badly from seasickness. After returning south by way of Inveraray and Glasgow to Liverpool, Mendelssohn continued alone into Wales as far as the Menai Strait, and then stayed for a week with the family of John Taylor at Coed-du near Holywell. Back in London in early September, he suffered a severe knee injury on falling from a carriage, which delayed his departure for Berlin until the end of November. 
At the end of his two-year stay in Italy, Switzerland, and France, Mendelssohn was in England again from April to June 1832, and 'The Hebrides' overture received its first performance at the Philharmonic Society on 14 May, as did the 'Capriccio Brilliant' for piano and orchestra, played by the composer at a concert of Nicholas Mori's on 25 May. Back in Berlin, Mendelssohn received a commission worth 100 guineas from the society in November 1832 for three new works, 'a symphony, an overture and a vocal piece' (Foster, 111). The 'Italian' symphony in A major (in progress since the winter of 1830-31), and the 'Trumpet' overture (a revision of an 1826 work) were ready for the following year, when Mendelssohn paid two visits to London (April-May and June-August), separated by a journey to Dusseldorf for the lower Rhine music festival, from which he returned accompanied by his ageing father. The third part of the commission, the first version of the scena 'Infelice', was completed only later in the year, and received its premiere in Mendelssohn's absence in 1834. In addition, several of the composer's other works owed their origins to English performers or music publishers, of which Novello, Mori and Lavenu, Ewer, and Coventry and Hollier were the principal ones. The works included the Morning and Evening Service, the motet 'Hear my prayer', the Ossianic scena 'On Lena's Gloomy Heath', and the six organ sonatas. 
The demands of his posts as music director in Dusseldorf (1833-5) and conductor of the Gewandhaus orchestra in Leipzig (from 1835) delayed another English visit until 1837, the year in which he married (on 28 March) Cecile Sophie Charlotte Jeanrenaud (1817-1853). He had accepted an invitation to conduct his oratorio 'St Paul' at the Birmingham music festival, and, reluctantly leaving his new bride (expecting the first of their five children), he travelled to London at the end of August before proceeding to Birmingham in September, where besides 'St Paul' he also gave the premiere of his second piano concerto and played the large organ of the new town hall. In the same year the music publisher Chappell commissioned an opera to a specially written libretto by J. R. Planche on the theme of the siege of Calais, but Mendelssohn's initial enthusiasm, as so often with his adult operatic ventures, waned and it came to nothing. The Birmingham festival was also the reason for his next brief visit in September 1840, when he conducted the first British performances of the 'Lobgesang' ('Hymn of Praise') and his setting of 'Psalm 114'. 
Mendelssohn returned to England in June and July 1842, accompanied for the first and only time by his wife. On this occasion the main event was the British premiere on 13 June of the newly completed A minor symphony ('Scottish'), the initial inspiration for which had occurred in the chapel of Holyrood Palace back in 1829. This visit also saw his first audiences with Queen Victoria and Prince Albert at Buckingham Palace, when he obtained permission to dedicate the symphony to the queen, one of his great admirers. An excursion was also made to see Cecile's relatives in Manchester. 
In 1844, increasingly frustrated by the musical situation in Berlin, where he had been Kapellmeister to the king of Prussia since 1841, Mendelssohn readily accepted another invitation from the Philharmonic Society, and arrived in May to conduct the last five concerts of the season. London heard the incidental music to 'A Midsummer Night's Dream', and 'Die erste Walpurgisnacht' for the first time, and on 27 May Mendelssohn conducted Beethoven's violin concerto with his protege the twelve-year-old Joseph Joachim as soloist. In addition he was involved at this time with the Handel Society, for whom he edited 'Israel in Egypt' (published in 1845). Mendelssohn's intense musical and social activities during this trip also included conducting two performances of 'St Paul' for the Sacred Harmonic Society, a meeting with Dickens, and a further visit to Manchester before finally leaving London on 10 July. 
In June 1845 the Birmingham music festival committee issued an invitation for Mendelssohn to act as chief conductor of the 1846 festival, together with a request for 'a new oratorio, or other music for the occasion' (Edwards, 29). Mendelssohn, already at work on 'Elijah', offered them its premiere, but declined to conduct the whole festival. In the event the oratorio was only just ready in time, thanks to the prompting of the translator William Bartholomew and his English publisher, Edward Buxton of Ewer & Co. Mendelssohn arrived in England a week before the performance on 26 August, which was greeted with enormous acclaim. After returning to London he went to Ramsgate for four days with his Benecke cousins, and crossed the channel again on 6 September. Despite the favourable reception of 'Elijah', Mendelssohn, as so often with his works, decided it needed revision before publication, and this he undertook over the following winter. During this time he was also in negotiation with Benjamin Lumley of Her Majesty's Theatre over an opera based on 'The Tempest' with a libretto by A. E. Scribe, but once again Mendelssohn found the text unsatisfactory. He returned to England for the tenth and last time in April 1847 and conducted four London performances of the revised 'Elijah' for the Sacred Harmonic Society, the second of which (23 April) was attended by the queen and Prince Albert, as well as single performances in Manchester (20 April) and Birmingham (27 April). After further concerts and visits to Buckingham Palace he returned to Frankfurt in the middle of May in an exhausted condition. The news of the sudden death of his sister Fanny on 14 May further weakened his health, which even a period of recuperation in Switzerland over the summer did not fully restore. Further requests for new compositions continued to come from England that year -- the Philharmonic Society wanted a symphony, and Liverpool a piece for the opening of the Philharmonic Hall -- but back in Leipzig a series of strokes in October led to Mendelssohn's death on 4 November 1847 at Konigstrasse 3. He was buried in Dreifaltigkeitskirche cemetery, Berlin, on 8 November. 
To honour his memory, fund-raising for a Mendelssohn scholarship was instituted in London in 1848, and the first scholar, Arthur Sullivan, was elected in 1856. Enthusiasm for his music in Britain, always warm in his lifetime and furnished with the seal of royal approval, reached its apogee in the decade following his death. Of his pupils, William Sterndale Bennett was to prove the most outstanding, possessing enough individuality to avoid wholesale subservience to his master's style. Mendelssohn's influence on other English composers, although it inevitably produced second-rate imitators, particularly in the field of oratorio and piano music, was not as dominant as sometimes claimed, being only one of many influences (including Mozart and Spohr) discernible in the more conservative aspects of mid-Victorian musical style. Mendelssohn's own two oratorios breathed new life into the Handelian inheritance, and, together with the 'Lobgesang', became part of the staple fare of the burgeoning amateur choral movement in the second half of the nineteenth century. This, and the enduring appeal of the 'Songs without Words' to the vast army of Victorian pianists, led, however, by the end of the century to a derogatory view of the composer in certain circles as a panderer to bourgeois tastes -- most famously articulated by Bernard Shaw when he mocked 'his kid-glove gentility, his conventional sentimentality, and his despicable oratorio mongering' ('The Star', 23 Feb 1889). A considerably more appreciative assessment of Mendelssohn's many-sided genius has begun to prevail in recent times. 


@@@@@


doc= 52427


Robinson, George Augustus (1791-1866), conciliator of the Tasmanian Aborigines, was born on 22 March 1791 in Stonecutter Street in the East End of London, the second son of William Robinson, a builder of Boston, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Susannah, 'nee' Perry, from Yeovil, Somerset. He probably attended a 'low-grade school' and left at the age of eleven to join his brother in the building trade. 
On 28 February 1814 at Christ Church Greyfriars, London, Robinson married Maria Amelia Evens, of a working-class family, and by 1823 they had four sons and a daughter. He decided to emigrate to Tasmania (Van Diemen's Land) and arrived in Hobart on the 'Triton' on 20 January 1824. There, he prospered as a builder. Even before his family joined him in April 1826 he had become committed to the social reforming ideas of Wesleyanism, and when Lieutenant-Governor Arthur advertised in March 1829 for a responsible person to take charge of the ration station for Tasmanian Aborigines on Bruny Island, and to teach them how to live in peace with white people, Robinson applied for and was appointed to the position. At that time the Tasmanian Aborigines were engaged in a guerrilla war with white settlers for control of land. Governor Arthur estimated that, from an original indigenous population of 5000 to 6000 when white settlement began in 1803, only a few hundred remained. 
In April 1829 Robinson arrived at Bruny Island, 25 miles south-east of Hobart, and met Truganini (Trugernanna) and Worraddy, her admirer, who became the core of the mission Aborigines he would use as conciliators. He began the first of four journeys in search of the other Tasmanian Aborigines in January 1830 and completed his mission four years later with more than 300 conciliated. Robinson's conciliation methods were original for Australia. First he went with the mission Aborigines into the bush, where they initiated contact with a particular group of Tasmanian Aborigines. Then, unarmed, he met the chief, explained the government's policy of conciliation, and negotiated their removal to Flinders Island, the designated sanctuary in Bass Strait. Robinson acknowledged that, without the mission Aborigines, the conciliation process would have failed. Indeed, his decision to live with them led Rae-Ellis to argue that his sexual liaison with Truganini was central to his success. Governor Arthur paid Robinson handsomely for his work, but the latter became increasingly concerned with his own fame and correspondingly less concerned about the fate of the Tasmanian Aborigines. At the Flinders Island Aboriginal establishment, where he was commandant from October 1835 to February 1839, he tried to convert them to Christianity, organize them into nuclear family groups, and engage them in agricultural labour, to become like white people: but the Aborigines resisted his programme and their numbers declined from 123 to 60. Robinson tried to take the survivors with him to Port Phillip (later in Victoria), where he became chief protector of the Aborigines in March 1839. However, the authorities considered they were too dangerous, and he had to leave behind all save fifteen mission Aborigines. 
In Victoria, Robinson tried to establish reserves for the Port Phillip Aborigines in four areas each under the control of a sub-protector, but white settlement spread too quickly for the plan to be effective and Robinson lost the support of the government. When the protectorate ceased operation in 1849 Robinson retired on a pension. His wife, Maria, had died in September 1848 after a long illness. She had borne two further daughters in Van Diemen's Land, and the rest of the children had scattered to other parts of Australia. Robinson returned to Britain on the 'Medway' in 1852 with his youngest daughter, Cecilia, and began a new life. He was elected to the Ethnological Society in 1853, and on 4 June the same year he married Rose, aged twenty-four, the daughter of Thomas Pyne, an accountant of Bridport, at St George's Church, Hanover Square. After touring Europe for five years they settled in Bath, where Robinson planned to write a book about the Tasmanian Aborigines. He died on 18 October 1866 at his home, Prahran Cottage, Prospect Road, Bath, and was buried in the abbey cemetery, Lyncomb Vale. He left two daughters and three sons from his second marriage and an estate of more than $5000. His book was not completed, but his Tasmanian journals were edited and published in 1966 and 1987. 
Robinson was the first in Australia to conciliate Aborigines without the use of force. Rae-Ellis and Plomley consider that he made his fame from Aboriginal misfortune, but others claim that he was a man before his time in that he recognized the Tasmanian Aborigines as a sovereign people with whom a negotiated settlement could be made. The Tasmanian Aboriginal community hold him in high regard for sympathetically recording their culture when it was most under threat. His journals stand as testimony to his labours and to his desire to save a people from extinction. 


@@@@@


doc= 52428


Shiels, William (1848-1904), politician in Australia, was born at Maghera, co. Londonderry, on 3 December 1848, the son of Robert Shiels, a farmer, and his wife, Patricia Sarah, 'nee' Kelly. Robert Shiels and the youngest of their four children died within weeks of the family's arrival in Victoria, Australia, early in 1855. Patricia Shiels married William Dickins in 1857. 
Shiels was educated at Scotch College, Melbourne (1862-6), and privately. He then had a brilliant career at the University of Melbourne (1867-73), where, despite interrupting his studies because of ill health, he took a double first, won the vice-chancellor's essay prize, and in 1873 graduated LLB. He began to practise, but overwork weakened his already delicate constitution and caused him to go as a private tutor to landed families in western Victoria and in South Australia. At Naracoorte, South Australia, he met Jane ('b'. 1857/8), the daughter of John Robertson, a prominent pastoralist of Struan House; they married on 6 May 1885 and settled in Melbourne, first at suburban Hawthorn, and later at St Kilda. 
Shiels had opposed the radical government of Graham Berry in 1877. Elected in 1880 to the legislative assembly for pastoral Normanby (which he held until the 1904 redistribution), from his maiden speech he established a reputation for liberal views, eloquently expressed. He supported breakaway liberal Presbyterians and opposed strict Sabbatarianism, and the Sunday Society published as its manifesto his parliamentary speech of 4 July 1883 supporting the Sunday opening of the Melbourne Library and Museum. In the interests of women, Shiels carried amendments in the 1880s to the divorce and married women's property acts, and to the law of slander as it concerned allegations of adultery and unchastity. Although his reform initiatives fell short of equal access to divorce for women, his 1887 bill became a test of Australian self-government when the imperial government refused assent. South Australia, New South Wales, Queensland, and Tasmania supported his 1890 visit to London, where his advocacy persuaded the Salisbury government to give way. 
Fiscal prudence was the keynote of Shiels's assault on the boom-time extravagances of the Gillies-Deakin ministries (1883-9), including vigorous attacks on the 1886 and 1889 budgets. When he became attorney-general and minister of railways in James Munro's government in November 1890, he wrested political control of railway expenditure from the commissioners and forced their resignations. As premier from 16 February 1892, Shiels -- the 'young man with a jaunty air' (Hoare) -- won a resounding general election victory on 20 April on a platform of retrenchment. Unable, however, to satisfy the electorate's mood for strict economy and the prosecution of fraudulent boomsters, his ministry was defeated on 18 January 1893. 
Ill health, diagnosed as angina pectoris, led to Shiels's frequent absence from parliament. In 1899 he re-emerged to overthrow the liberal Turner government. He became treasurer and minister for railways in the conservative McLean ministry (1899-1900) and again in the Irvine ministry (1902-4). His marathon budget speeches, delivered seated and sustained by draughts of whisky and champagne, excited much admiration. Shiels reduced the public service, cut salaries, raised income tax, provoked and crushed a strike of railway workers, and returned Victoria to solvency. His enemies named him 'Slippery' Shiels. 
Deteriorating health obliged Shiels to leave the treasury in July 1903 and retire as a minister the following February, and reduced him to invalidism from early 1904. After months of agony, courageously borne, he died at Struan House, his mother-in-law's home in Naracoorte, South Australia, on 17 December 1904, survived by his wife, three sons, and a daughter. He was buried on 19 December with Presbyterian forms and, according to his wishes, with no flowers or special mourning, in a spot he had chosen in the Struan private cemetery. 
Shiels the social liberal was a fiscal conservative. His democratic and egalitarian instincts, including support for women's rights, sat easily with his dedication to financial probity. He was a devoted parliamentarian, a gifted speaker, an able administrator, and a treasurer who possessed what William Irvine called 'the very rare fluency of making an array of figures live and move before his audience' (letter to Jane Shiels, Shiels papers, La Trobe L., Vic.). 


@@@@@


doc= 52429


Reibey, Mary (1777-1855), businesswoman in Australia, was born on 12 May 1777 at Bury, Lancashire, the daughter of James Haydock (died 1779), a yeoman, and his wife, Jane Law. Orphaned, and brought up by a grandmother, she was intelligent and literate, and was educated possibly at the free grammar school, Blackburn. On 18 August 1791, dressed as a boy and known by the name of James Burrow, she was arrested for attempting to sell a stolen horse. Her reckless role-play was perhaps rendered plausible by a snub nose and lively brown eyes, and Burrow was duly sentenced at Stafford summer assizes before Haydock's identity was discovered. She was committed to seven years' transportation. 
Molly Haydock arrived at Sydney, New South Wales, aboard the 'Royal Admiral' on 7 October 1792, optimistic, and pledged 'to make myself as happy as I Can in my Pressent and unhappy situation' (Haydock to Mrs Hope, 8 Oct 1792, Reibey MSS). Her immediate fate was to sew garments for the government. On 1 September 1794 she married Thomas Reibey (1769?-1811), a merchant seaman turned settler. Thomas qualified for a 30 acre grant at Mulgrave Place, an agricultural settlement on the Hawkesbury River, where their first child was born in May 1796. Besides farming profitably, Reibey carried grain to Sydney and shipped timber and coal along the New South Wales coastline. With a partner, Edward Wills, he later engaged in sealing and trading with the Pacific islands. The growing family moved to Sydney, where at Entally House, their fine home-cum-warehouse, Mary Reibey supervised the sale of merchandise and acquired a hotel licence. 
In 1811, shortly after returning with a cargo from India, Thomas died; Wills died a month later. Thomas had named Mary his sole administrator, 'well-knowing and confiding in the natural Love and Affection which she beareth unto her Children, and the steadfast assurance which he hath that she will always do the best in her power to provide for their future Welfare' (Thomas Reibey's will 1811, probates, Supreme Court of NSW, Sydney). Now the mother of seven children (the youngest barely twelve months old), Mary Reibey inherited control of an enterprise that included shipping, farms, and houses. Untypically she did not remarry, but advanced into the capricious frontier economy with assurance. In 1812 she opened a new warehouse in a premier position, and within five years had two ships plying to Van Diemen's Land (where she settled three sons and which later became the family base). She also proved equal to the problem of debt collection endemic in the colony: in May 1817 she was found guilty of assault, having taken her umbrella to a recalcitrant debtor. Her established reputation for 'strictest propriety' and increasingly respectable social status remained unaffected, and were reinforced by the favour of the governor, Lachlan Macquarie. 
After failing to find buyers for her assets, generally estimated at over $20,000, Mary Reibey decided in 1820 that her annual rent roll of $1205 would support a voyage to Britain with two of her daughters. In London, Glasgow, and Edinburgh they enjoyed the fashionable sights and entertainments, though, especially at Manchester and Liverpool, Mary Reibey visited factories and warehouses. At her childhood home in Lancashire she was relieved and gratified to meet with consideration and warm hospitality. Back in London, she discussed the future of 'our Colony' with others anxiously waiting for signs of political reaction to the reports of Commissioner Bigge. 
During the colonial boom of the 1820s Mary Reibey invested afresh, building and renting high-class property in Sydney and continuing to add to her landholdings, but by 1845 she found herself burdened by 'bereavements and embarrassments', and having to exercise 'the greatest prudence and economy' (Reibey to D. Hope, 20 June 1845, Reibey MSS). A governor of the free grammar school, she had a genuine interest in education, charity, and her Anglican faith. Survived by three of her daughters, whose provision in her will she specified 'shall be free from the... control of... Husbands', Mary Reibey died on 30 May 1855 at Newtown, Sydney, and was buried at Old George Street burying-ground. Disarming in lace cap and pince-nez, an unlikely confidante of sea captains and men of affairs, this small nonconformist remains one of Australia's most original capitalists: fittingly, her portrait appeared on the commonwealth of Australia $20 note from 1994. 


@@@@@


doc= 52430


Lawson, Louisa (1848-1920), newspaper proprietor and suffragist in Australia, was born on 17 February 1848 on Guntawang station, near Mudgee, New South Wales, Australia, the second of the twelve children of Henry Albury (1825-1908), a station hand, and his wife, Harriet Elizabeth, 'nee' Winn (1826-1895), a needlewoman, both English-born immigrants. Henry moved his family to Mudgee and later to New Pipeclay goldfield nearby, where he ran a bar. Louisa was educated at Mudgee national school. On 7 July 1866, at the Wesleyan parsonage, Mudgee, she married Niels Hertzberg Larsen (known as Peter Lawson), a Norwegian-born master mariner and goldminer. They went to the Grenfell goldfield, where their first son, Henry Archibald, was born on 17 June 1867. Living in harsh circumstances, with Peter often absent on contract work or fossicking, Louisa bore two other sons and twin daughters, one of whom died in infancy. She learned dressmaking, sold produce from Peter's small farm at Eurunderee, and became postmistress. 
In 1883 Louisa Lawson and her younger children moved to Sydney. Earlier her second son, Charles, had run away to his grandmother after being savagely punished by his father. Mrs Albury ran a boarding-house in Sydney, where Charles was shortly to appear on a stealing charge. Louisa took boarders, resumed dressmaking, and brought her son Henry to Sydney to work as a carriage painter. Peter Lawson occasionally sent money and on his death in 1888 left her $1103. Louisa encouraged Henry's literary ambitions. A brief flirtation with spiritualism brought them radical friends and together, under the name Archie Lawson, they edited 'The Republican' (1887-8). When it failed Louisa Lawson bought its press to publish 'Dawn' (1888-1905), a monthly newspaper for women. 'Dawn' survived a boycott initiated by the all-male Typographical Union, which refused membership to Louisa's women typographers. It became the longest running and most successful early feminist journal in Australia, offering a lively mix of news, commentary, and service items. Louisa wrote most of the copy. She challenged the male monopoly of law and the conventions which disadvantaged women: her criticism of the behaviour of husbands to wives was as pungent as her reporting of laws which failed to protect women and of women's exclusion from public office. She condemned drunkenness, blamed prostitution on bad law, and called for appointment of women warders in gaols. She had a vision of women's coming role, which required they abandon frivolousness, dress sensibly, lead healthy lives, and become informed on public affairs. 
There was a practical, even entrepreneurial, side to Louisa's preaching. To educate women she founded the Dawn Club, where 'bright clever papers', written by women in the interests of women, would be heard. She persuaded the Sydney Mechanics' School of Arts debating clubs to admit women, and encouraged women to join for experience in public speaking and also to attend its night classes. She was the first woman elected to its board of management. She took out a miner's right which carried entitlement to vote. She also ran a mail-order paper pattern and ready-made clothing business. 
When the Womanhood Suffrage League was formed in 1891, Mrs Lawson brought her Dawn Club members into it. She printed its publicity material free of charge, gathered signatures for its suffrage petition, joined its delegation to the premier, Sir George Dibbs, and became one of its most valued public speakers. When the women of New South Wales were enfranchised in 1902, tribute was paid to Mrs Lawson. She joined the executive of the Women's Progressive Association, but physical and financial difficulties hampered her. Neither her novel 'Dert and do' (1904) nor 'The Lonely Crossing' (1905), a collection of poems, was a financial success. She closed 'Dawn' in 1905 and became dependent on the sale of short stories. 
In 1900 Louisa Lawson was thrown from a tram and seriously injured. She anticipated economic independence from a patent she held on a mailbag fastener but after protracted legal action alleging conspiracy to defraud won meagre compensation. Her son Charles lived with her, but was unstable and sometimes absent; she was estranged from Henry whose writing she had originally promoted. As alcoholism gripped him and his marriage failed, his embittered relations with his wife reverberated in his writing. Misogyny fuelled a literary tradition which labelled Louisa an uncaring, self-absorbed mother, a blight on a talented son. 
With age Louisa Lawson's mind deteriorated and she refused food. She died on 12 August 1920 in Gladesville Hospital for the Insane and was buried on 14 August in Rookwood cemetery. Feminist historians in recent years have proclaimed her vigour in reform; Brian Matthews, in his prize-winning 'Louisa' (1987), rescued her from the obloquy of literary critics and acknowledged the 'power and inventiveness' of her poems. 


@@@@@


doc= 52431


Spence, Catherine Helen (1825-1910), writer and reformer in Australia, was born on 31 October 1825 near Melrose, Scotland, the fifth of the eight children of David Spence (1789-1846), a writer, solicitor, and banker, and Helen Brodie (1791-1887). Her parents were both Scots and members of the established Church of Scotland. She attended Miss Sarah Phinn's protestant day school, St Mary's Convent, in Melrose, but plans for her to attend an advanced school for girls in Edinburgh failed when financial collapse compelled the family to emigrate to South Australia in 1839. 
Determined not to add to the numbers she believed predestined to eternal damnation, and pleased at her first earnings from working as a governess, Spence decided against marriage and motherhood, though she brought up three families of other people's children in the course of her life. After a brief attempt to set up a school, she embarked upon the multifaceted career which led, by her eightieth birthday, to the announcement that she was 'the most distinguished woman they had had in Australia' (Sir Samuel James Way, quoted in 'Catherine Helen Spence'). 
Spence's career as a novelist stretched from the publication of 'Clara Morison: a Tale of South Australia during the Gold Fever', in 1854, until 1888-9, when her future-vision novella 'A Week in the Future' appeared in the 'Centennial Magazine' in Sydney. During the intervening years she produced five novels and a religious allegory. Neglected from the late nineteenth century, these works underwent critical reassessment during the 1970s and 1980s, and all but three were either published for the first time or reprinted. Spence was hailed as the founder of a genre of realist fiction in Europe as well as Australia, and 'Clara Morison' was described as 'the first colonial work that may fairly be compared with that of George Eliot or Elizabeth Gaskell' (Perkins, 146). Some, noting the critiques of gender-segmented labour markets in 'Mr Hogarth's will' (1865), and of conventions governing marriage, most particularly in 'Handfasted' (first published 1984) -- the judges of a competition to which Spence submitted this novel in 1880 rejected it on the grounds that 'it was calculated to loosen the marriage tie -- it was too socialistic, and consequently dangerous' (Spence, 63) -- have claimed for her a pioneering place in feminist writing. 
Her religious doubts banished by her conversion to Unitarianism in the 1850s, Spence embarked on work with the Boarding-Out Society, established in 1872, which led to her appointment to the new state children's council in 1887, and to the government destitute board in 1897. At the invitation of the new state education department, she composed 'The Laws we Live under' (1880), the first social studies textbook used in Australian schools. In 1878, after thirty years of publishing occasional press and journal articles under the pseudonym 'a Colonist of 1839', she was jubilant at being appointed 'a regular outside contributor' to the daily 'South Australian Register': 'I felt as if the round woman had got at last into the round hole which fitted her' (Spence, 55). This provided her not only with 'a very decent income' of around $300 a year, but also with a broad and influential canvas for the causes she wished to promote (Spence, 61). Principal among them was electoral reform, through the introduction of proportional representation, or, as she called it, 'effective voting' (ibid., 68). For this she took the skills in public speaking that she had developed as a preacher in the Unitarian church to public platforms throughout South Australia, in Melbourne, Sydney, and (in 1893-4) across the United States and in London. In promoting this cause she stood for election to the Federal Convention of 1897, thus becoming Australia's first female political candidate. 
A latecomer to the campaign for female suffrage in South Australia, in 1894 the first Australian colony to grant to women the right to vote and also to stand for election, Spence nevertheless provided active support to suffragists throughout Australia, in the United States, and in England, and to other feminist organizations around the turn of the century. In 1905, this short, stout, eighty-year-old announced: 'I am a new woman, and I know it' ('Catherine Helen Spence', 33). When she died, of heart failure, at her home in Queen Street, Norwood, Adelaide, on 3 April 1910 she was mourned as 'the Grand Old Woman of Australia' (Henry, 117). 'No more noteworthy woman ever lived in the Southern hemisphere', wrote the 'Adelaide Register' (4 April 1910). She was buried on the following day at the Anglican cemetery, Glenelg. Spence is commemorated by a statue in Light Square, Adelaide, a scholarship, a section of a school, and an occasional-care centre. 


@@@@@


doc= 52432


Burton, Sir William Westbrooke (1794-1888), colonial judge, was born on 31 January 1794 at Daventry, Northamptonshire, fifth son of Edmond Burton, solicitor, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of the Revd John Mather. When thirteen he left Daventry grammar school to be a midshipman. He was wounded in action in HMS 'Conqueror' off Toulon in July 1810, and sought a civil career when peace curtailed naval promotions. He entered the Inner Temple in November 1819, and was called to the bar in November 1824. Chiefly a special pleader, he showed judicial promise as recorder of Daventry between 1826 and 1827. 
In 1827 Burton was appointed senior puisne judge at the Cape, where Roman-Dutch law prevailed; he visited Holland to master the language. The Colonial Office, meanwhile, commissioned over his head a Scot, William Menzies, familiar with Roman law. Burton, chafing at his subordinate position (occupied from 1 January 1828), soon had to mediate in disagreements between his two seniors. The Cape's acting governor (later governor of New South Wales), General Richard Bourke, liked Burton and relied on his informal advice. 
In 1832 Burton was sent to New South Wales, again as junior of three judges, lamenting his enforced transfer to a judgeship 'not worth holding' in an expensive colony. Bourke, as incumbent governor, renewed their friendship. Sworn in on 22 December 1832, Burton was a competent sole judge, though 'overspeaking' in full court often in dissent. He influenced local legal practice to accord more with English practice. 
In 1834 Chief Justice Forbes sought sick leave. Burton so insistently claimed to act in his stead that Forbes deferred departing. Burton's grounds revealed a special pleader's skill, but the Colonial Office dismissed them. When Forbes retired in 1837, Burton pressed to succeed him, supported by Bourke and the Macarthur family with whose 'tory' policies Burton sympathized. He hampered his cause by injudicious court statements seemingly critical of Bourke's administration. James Dowling, who, as senior judge, invoked Lord Brougham's patronage to secure his own promotion, found in Burton an 'unfriend... sadly cut by his disappointment'. 
Burton took leave in 1839. In London he published his 'State of Religion and Education in New South Wales' (1840) and was presented to the queen. He returned in 1841 to judicial duties, revised the colony's bankruptcy statutes, and published a text on insolvency law. His transfer to Melbourne in 1843 was countermanded by Dowling who wanted a politically neutral appointee. 
In 1844 Burton left Australia to join the Madras court, and to receive a coveted knighthood. Soon disliking India, he became preoccupied with domestic concerns. His ailing wife, Margaret, daughter of Leny Smith of Homerton, London, whom he had married on 15 April 1827, went to England and died in September 1846. Likening his future to a 'London November fog', Burton became morose until marrying, on 11 June 1849, Maria Alphonsine, daughter of John Beatty West, MP for Dublin. 
Pensionable in 1855, Burton contemplated returning to Sydney but feared the expense. Friends encouraged him. He resigned from the Madras bench he had served well, went to Sydney, and, on 11 August 1857, was appointed to the legislative council, becoming its president in 1858. He added patrician qualities to his reputation as 'a Conservative of the Conservatives'. In 1861 he resigned when a 'swamping' of the legislature was attempted. 
An influential Church of England layman, Burton failed to secure establishment of the church in Australia, and attracted controversy because of his perceived religious bias as judge. He returned in frail health to England in 1861, and led a secluded retirement overtaken by blindness. He died, childless, in London on 6 August 1888. 


@@@@@


doc= 52433


Dvorak, Antonin Leopold (1841-1904), composer and conductor, was born on 8 September 1841 in Nelahozeves, to the north of Prague, the eldest of nine children of Frantisek Dvorak (1814-1894), musician, butcher, and innkeeper, and his wife, Anna Zdenkova (1820-1882). Recognition of his early musical talent led to his being sent at the age of twelve to Zlonice, where his studies continued under the local organist, Antonin Liehmann. At the age of fifteen he went to Ceska Kamenice in North Bohemia, to improve his German prior to entering the Prague organ school in 1857. Dvorak was an excellent pupil, and after graduating in 1859 he embarked on a freelance career in Prague as piano teacher, viola player, and composer. 
Although, thanks to the recommendations of Brahms, Dvorak began to have some small recognition outside Bohemia by 1876, it was his subsequent popularity in Great Britain which was to establish him as an international composer and brought him his later invitation to America. This came about through nine visits between 1884 and 1896, supported by special relationships with Henry and Alfred Littleton of the firm of Novello, Ewer & Co., as well the (Royal) Philharmonic Society. On 17 November 1873 Dvorak had married Anna Frantiska Cermakova. Under the impact of the tragic loss of their first three children between 1876 and 1877, he composed his 'Stabat mater' (op. 58; Burghauser 71), and it was this work which first brought him to England. Although a number of his orchestral pieces, including the 'Slavonic Dances' (op. 48; B83), piano concerto (op. 33; B63), and symphony no. 6 (op. 60; B112), had been heard in London at the concerts of Hans Richter and August Manns, the discovery by the great British amateur choral societies that Dvorak had written fine choral works increased the interest. In March 1884 Dvorak reached England for the first time, and conducted his 'Stabat mater' in the Royal Albert Hall as well as orchestral concerts at the Crystal Palace, both to great public acclaim. His success resulted in immediate commissions from the Philharmonic Society and the Birmingham and Leeds festivals. In September 1884 he returned to conduct his 'Stabat mater' and symphony no. 6 at Worcester, for the Three Choirs festival and the 800th anniversary of the founding of the cathedral. 
Dvorak's third visit was in April 1885, to conduct the first performance of his symphony no. 7 (op. 70; B141), commissioned by the Philharmonic Society, at St James's Hall, Piccadilly. In August 1885 he was back with another new work written for Britain, this time conducting the premiere of his cantata 'Svatebni kosile' ('The Spectre's Bride') (op. 69; B135) for the Birmingham festival. In October 1886 he conducted another new commission, his oratorio 'Svata Ludmila' ('St Ludmila') (op. 71; B144), for the Leeds triennial festival, followed by an orchestral concert in Birmingham. While in Birmingham, Dvorak accepted a further commission for a choral work for the 1888 festival, and 'The Dream of Gerontius' was suggested. In the event, it was not until 1891 that this commission was completed, and was to be not 'Gerontius' but his 'Requiem' (op. 89; B165). While, in the first part of 'St Ludmila', it is possible to trace Dvorak's debt to the English oratorio tradition from Handel, his own influence was to be heard later in some of the major choral works of Stanford and his pupils, as well as Elgar. 
The sixth visit was in 1890 for the Philharmonic Society, and in June 1891 Dvorak was made an honorary doctor of music by Cambridge University, proposed by Stanford. As a result he dedicated his new overture, 'V prirode' ('Amid Nature'; op. 91; B168), to the university. Later that year he returned to conduct the premiere of his 'Requiem' at the Birmingham festival, after which followed his American years (1892-5) as director of the National Conservatory, the direct result of a recommendation by Alfred Littleton. In March 1896 Dvorak came to England for the last time, to conduct the first performance of his cello concerto no. 2 (op. 104; B191), at a Philharmonic Society concert in the Queen's Hall. Thereafter he received further invitations, including a commission for the Cardiff festival. However, his family- and home-loving nature led him to refuse all other inducements to travel; he remained in his beautiful Bohemian surroundings, writing his late great operas and symphonic poems. 
From the outset Dvorak was a popular figure in Britain, and thereafter he always felt a great warmth for English audiences. After his first visit he wrote of his astonishing reception and said: 'The English are a good, cordial and music-loving nation, and it is well known that if they are fond of anyone they remain loyal to him. May God grant that this should happen in my case too' (Kuna, 1.400). The modest Dvorak remained amazed at his popularity in England. After the first performance of 'St Ludmila' he wrote: 'I confess that I have never seen the artists around me on the platform as well as the audience in such a state of enthusiasm' (Kuna, 2.184). Dvorak died of a pulmonary embolism following influenza at his Prague home, 14 Zitna Ulice, on 1 May 1904. The nation gave him a state funeral and he was buried on 5 May in Slavin at Vysehrad in Prague, where most of the great figures in Czech history since the nineteenth century lie today. 


@@@@@


doc= 52434


Richter, Hans (1843-1916), conductor, was born on 4 April 1843 at Raab, Hungary, the sole survivor of the four children of Anton Richter (1802-1854), an organist and choirmaster, and Josefine Czasensky (1822-1892), an opera singer and singing teacher. When his father died Richter was sent to Vienna as a choirboy in the Imperial Chapel and then to the conservatory. He graduated in 1862, joined the Karthnerthor theatre as a horn player, and in 1866 was sent to Wagner to copy the score of 'Die Meistersinger'. In June 1868 he assisted at the opera's premiere, and his musical versatility even enabled him to replace an indisposed singer at a performance. For a year he conducted in Munich, but in August 1869 he was sacked by King Ludwig for refusing to conduct Wagner's 'Das Rheingold' (the staging was poor). Instead he went to Brussels to conduct the premiere there of 'Lohengrin'. In 1871 he became music director at the Pest Opera, where he exerted a new musical discipline and raised standards. He stayed until 1875, when he went to Vienna. On 27 January 1875 he married Mariska von Szitanyi (1854-1926), a singing pupil, and by 1882 they had six children. In the period 1875 to 1900 Richter increasingly dominated the musical life of Vienna as music director of the Vienna Philharmonic, as first Kapellmeister at the court opera, as Kapellmeister at the court chapel, and as conductor of the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde from 1884. He gave world premieres of symphonies by Brahms and Bruckner and Tchaikovsky's violin concerto, and championed Dvorak, who dedicated his sixth symphony to the conductor. 
Meanwhile, Wagner's festival at Bayreuth began in 1876 with the first staging of 'The Ring' cycle, which Richter conducted under the composer's supervision. To recoup its financial losses, Wagner's London supporters organized a festival at the Royal Albert Hall in 1877, when the composer's conducting so confused the orchestra that Richter took over most of the programmes, and had great success with both players and public alike. He returned in 1879 to conduct the first of what became the annual Richter Concerts, which for twenty-three years took place in the summer and/or autumn at St James's Hall and (after 1893) the Queen's Hall. His programmes were dominated by Wagner and Beethoven -- the season usually concluded with the 'Choral' symphony -- and orchestra and chorus were reconstituted annually, though they invariably had the same personnel. During these visits he toured with the orchestra throughout Britain. He was a fastidious orchestral trainer and a hard taskmaster, whose ear and eye missed nothing; such musical discipline and lack of rostrum showmanship had hitherto rarely been encountered. Because of Richter's reputation in and influence upon the musical life of London and Vienna, it became vital for the careers of solo instrumentalists and singers to appear under his baton and for composers to get their new works performed by him. Richter duly obliged with compositions by Parry, Stanford, Mackenzie, Cowen, and Elgar, whose 'Enigma Variations' were first heard in June 1899. From 1885 to 1909 he led the Birmingham triennial festival, and in 1900 conducted Elgar's 'Dream of Gerontius' there. In 1904 he gave a London Elgar festival, an unprecedented tribute to a living composer. After his own Richter Concerts ended in 1902 he formed a close association with the new London Symphony Orchestra, which he conducted in its first concert in June 1904 and in his own last concert, at Eastbourne in April 1911. 
Richter loved the music of Wagner, whose operas from 'Rienzi' to 'The Ring' he conducted in both Vienna and London. From 1888 to 1912 he conducted either 'Die Meistersinger' or 'The Ring' at Bayreuth, and he gave the first 'Die Meistersinger' (1882) and 'Tristan und Isolde' (1884) in England. In 1903 he conducted at Covent Garden in the first of many German seasons, culminating in 1908 and 1909, when he gave 'The Ring' in English, hoping (in vain) to develop an English National Opera. He took over the Halle Orchestra in 1897, moving to Manchester in 1900 from Vienna, and introduced Strauss, Sibelius, Bartok, Debussy, and Glazunov to his programmes. He retired to Bayreuth in 1911 where he died on 5 December 1916. He was buried there on the 7th. 
Despite Richter's gruff manner, his players and audiences alike held him in awed respect and genuine affection. His impact on British concert life was explosive, for his expectations of playing standards and demands for accurate orchestral scores and parts were unprecedented. Nineteenth-century conductors, often regarded by contemporary critics as mere time-beaters, were generally also composers or performers, but Richter, with his prodigious memory, his talent for playing every musical instrument except the harp, and his ability to make his players give of their best, concentrated solely on conducting and, although he made no recordings, built for himself an enduring international reputation. 


@@@@@


doc= 52435


Weber, Carl Maria Friedrich Ernst von (1786-1826), composer and conductor, was born probably on 18 November (baptized 20 November) 1786 in Eutin, Holstein, the ninth of the ten children of the composer Franz Anton von Weber (1734?-1812), and the first with his second wife, Genovefa Brenner (1764-1798), an actress and singer. The baronial 'von' seems to have been misappropriated by his father, and was used in good faith by the composer. He was a sickly child who retained all his life a frail form and a pronounced limp. In 1817 he married the singer Caroline Brandt; they had three children, the second of whom, Max Maria, became his father's first major biographer. 
Weber's European fame dated from the triumphant premiere of 'Der Freischutz' in Berlin in 1821. By 1824 five different versions were playing in London, though these were travesties, burlesques, or other distortions. Nevertheless, the work's popularity led Charles Kemble, the manager of Covent Garden (where one of the versions was staged), to offer him a commission for an opera. Now mortally ill with tuberculosis, Weber accepted in the hope of making some money to keep his family after his death. He was further persuaded to accept and to go to England to conduct by his doctor's advice that he had only months to live, and hoped to supplement Kemble's niggardly offer of $500 plus expenses with concerts in wealthy London homes. He was in ignorance of the conditions of the London stage that made impossible the production of a continuously composed German opera such as he was pioneering. He realized his mistake only when he received the first drafts from his librettist, the pantomime writer James Robinson Planche, who persuaded him that an entertainment with lavish scenery and stage machinery, star singing, copious dialogue, and only an incidental role for music was what the English understood by opera. To help his task, he took 153 English lessons, and was not only able to express himself clearly ('my little bit of English is incredibly useful to me', he later wrote to his wife, Caroline) but made very few errors in setting the text of 'Oberon'. He was also commissioned by George Thomson of Edinburgh to contribute to the publishing venture of setting British folk-songs, and he wrote 'Ten Scottish Folksongs' in 1825. 
Weber arrived in England on 3 March 1826, and was made comfortable in Sir George Smart's house in Great Portland Street. On the 6th he visited Covent Garden, where the audience recognized him and cheered him repeatedly ('Are these the 'cold' English welcoming me?', he wrote to Caroline). Kemble further commissioned him to conduct some concerts, one of them of selections from 'Der Freischutz' (a lithograph by J. Hayter shows him in three positions and using a roll of paper, as was the custom). 
The first of sixteen 'Oberon' rehearsals was on the 9th, and after various difficulties, caused chiefly by the singers, the first of twelve sold-out performances took place on 12 April. It was a triumph, but the effort brought Weber's health even lower. Despite all Smart's solicitude, and the attentions of Londoners who had observed his weakness with sympathy and admiration, he continued to sink. The late, cold spring and thick fogs hastened his decline. He gave many piano recitals in aristocratic houses, though often barely able to stand or get his breath, and managed to write some small pieces for which he was asked, including, as his last composition, an English setting of Thomas Moore's 'From Chindara's warbling fount'. His letters home are cheerful, but his diary betrays his weakness and fright. His last concert was at a benefit for one of his 'Oberon' singers, Mary Anne Paton, on 30 May. He insisted on planning to set off for home on 6 June, but was found dead on the morning of the 5th at 91 Great Portland Street, London. 
The death certificate gave as the cause of death tuberculosis of the lungs and many secondary conditions. The body was embalmed and taken in a solemn procession on 21 June to Moorfields Chapel, where it rested until it was returned, largely at the insistence of Richard Wagner, to Dresden in 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 52436


Curr, Edward (1798-1850), politician and entrepreneur in Australia, was born on 1 July 1798 at Sheffield, England, the son of John Curr, a coal viewer at the duke of Norfolk's estate and coalmines, and his wife, Hannah Wilson (1759-1851). He was educated at Sedgley Park School and Ushaw College, and resisted parental pressure to enter a profession or move into business. His marriage to Elizabeth Micklethwait(e), daughter of Benjamin (1762-1798) and Mary Micklethwaite of Ardsley, was accompanied by a generous financial settlement and this, together with a guarantee from his father, seems to have decided him on a commercial career in Van Diemen's Land. Edward and Elizabeth Curr arrived in Hobart in 1820. The patronage of Lieutenant-Governor William Sorell compensated for early business reversals and Curr was active in the foundation of Roman Catholic communities on the island. After the death of his father in 1823 he returned to England with his wife and children and completed a promotional publication, his 'Account of the Colony of Van Diemen's Land' (1824). Sorell, also visiting England, helped to arrange Curr's appointment as chief agent of the Van Diemen's Land Company, and from his return in 1826 until 1842 Curr tried to secure the interests of the company in its tract of 350,000 acres in the north-west of the island. 
The task required the co-ordination of practical exploration, the development of appropriate livestock breeding programmes, and the cultivation of influential contacts in a small community which resented the company's monopolistic claims. Curr's associates chastised him for his management performance and for his haughty demeanour towards local officials, and in 1839 the company's directors gave him a year's notice. He then took his family to the mainland, where he established his own pastoral business in the Port Phillip district of New South Wales. Leaving the affairs of his up-country properties to his sons, he became prominent in the political life of Melbourne. He was the first candidate to be nominated for Melbourne in the inaugural election for the New South Wales legislative council in 1843, but his adherence to Roman Catholicism stirred up fierce sectarianism and, narrowly defeated, he chose to identify more closely with Irish immigrant groups; ironically, he was later criticized for a marked want of deference to the predominantly Irish clergy. Towards the mid-1840s Curr, motivated by an apparent threat from radical Orangemen and other Port Phillip militants, was attracted by the demand that Port Phillip district be separated from New South Wales and made a distinct colony. He chaired the Separation League and lobbied vigorously in England and in the colonial press. In 1845 he was elected to the legislative council, but resigned after nine months because of the difficulty of attending its sittings in Sydney. 
Curr was tall, powerfully built, resolute and resourceful, and was frequently embroiled in controversial disputes. He did not flinch from opposing the highest colonial authorities, and his commanding presence and clear statements of opinion were welcomed in many quarters. Occasionally his forceful personality diverted attention from his adoption of contradictory positions: for example, ignoring the views of urban supporters, he campaigned for the importation of convict labour to assist the pioneer pastoralists. He died on 16 November 1850, five days after the arrival of the news that parliament had passed the act separating the Port Phillip district, to form Victoria, and was buried in Melbourne general cemetery on the 19th. He left his wife and the surviving eleven of their fourteen children financially secure. 




@@@@@


doc= 52437


Edward Micklethwaite Curr (1820-1889), pastoralist and author, was born on 25 December 1820 in Hobart, the eldest child of Edward and Elizabeth Curr. After an education at Stonyhurst College, Lancashire (1829-37), and a year in France, he assisted his brother William in managing the family's properties in the Port Phillip district. In 1852-4 he travelled in Europe and the Middle East, finishing in Ireland where on 31 January 1854 he married Margaret Vaughan (1830/31-1886) from co. Kildare, who bore him five sons and three daughters. After returning to Victoria in that year, he worked in New Zealand and Queensland, before settling in Victoria again in 1862, when he was employed as an inspector of stock by the Victorian government; here his innovative contributions to the formulation and implementation of stock management policies proved critical in the consolidation of the pastoral frontier. His practical and scholarly interests were represented in 'Pure Saddle Horses' (1863), 'An Essay on Scab in Sheep' (1865), 'Recollections of Squatting in Victoria' (1883), and a four-volume work, 'The Australian Race: its Origins, Languages, Customs' (1886-7). His later works are highly valued for their atypically sympathetic approach to the indigenous peoples. Far less active in colonial politics than his father, he died in Melbourne on 3 August 1889 and was buried in the Roman Catholic section of the St Kilda general cemetery, Melbourne. He had often complained that his father had invested too much of the family wealth in the cause of separation; more importantly, his published reflections on the impact of European occupation suggest that the son is the larger historical figure. 


@@@@@


doc= 52438


Wilmot, Sir John Eardley Eardley-, first baronet (1783-1847), politician and colonial administrator, was born on 21 February 1783 in London, the only son of John Eardley Eardley-Wilmot MP (bap. 1749, d. 1815), and his first wife, Frances (1759-1838), the only daughter of Samuel Sainthill. His grandfather was Sir John Eardley Wilmot (1709-1792), chief justice of the court of common pleas. He was educated at Harrow School and called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn on 9 May 1806. Though he did not practise, he was chairman of the quarter sessions for Warwickshire from 1830 to 1843. He was also MP for North Warwickshire between December 1832 and 1843. A liberal tory, he was an active campaigner for the abolition of slavery and the emancipation of black people in the empire. He followed Edward Stanley (later earl of Derby) into relative political exile when the latter resigned from the government in May 1834 over the intervention by the British government in the revenues of the Irish established church. Meanwhile Eardley-Wilmot had been elected to the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries, had published an 'Abridgement of Blackstone's Commentaries' (1822) and a 'Letter to the Magistrates on the Increase of Crime' (1827), and, in 1821, had been created a baronet, as the 'Annual Register' phrased it, 'as a reward for the services of his grandfather, his father having repeatedly refused any mark of distinction' ('Annual Register', 1847, 204). In addition he had married, first, on 21 May 1808, Elizabeth Emma (died 1818), the daughter of the distinguished physician C. H. Parry, and, second, on 30 August 1819, Elizabeth (died 1869), the eldest daughter of Sir Robert Chester of Bush Hill in Hertfordshire. 
Eardley-Wilmot's demonstrated interest in penal and imperial matters, together with his association with Stanley, secretary of state for the colonies since 1841, might seem to have made him an acceptable candidate for the post of lieutenant-governor of Van Diemen's Land after Sir John Franklin was recalled on 10 February 1843. However, when his appointment was announced 'The Times' described it as 'the worst that could be made' (1 March 1843). None the less, the appointment was sustained, and Wilmot sailed for the colony with his three sons, leaving his second wife in England. He arrived in Van Diemen's Land on 18 August 1843 to find that factional quarrels between Franklin and his official establishment had left the authority of the government considerably eroded at a time of political aspiration for representative institutions, while a new system of penal management was causing increasing unease with imperial authority, unease which was to focus ever more on its representative, the lieutenant-governor. 
A House of Commons select committee had in 1837-8 recommended the cessation of transportation to New South Wales and that the 'assignment system' be replaced by the 'probation system'. While the assignment system had been criticized as 'white slavery' ('EdinR', 86, 1847, 225 and 231-2), marked by unpredictable treatment of prisoners from the different masters to whom they were assigned, in practice it had worked tolerably well. Under an efficient system of supervision, prisoners were separated from their former criminal associates and could learn new trades and skills as they progressed towards pardon and freedom. Their labour had boosted the wealth of the colonists, who were thus encouraged to manage their convicts well to avoid becoming ineligible for assignees, as well as that of the colony in general. The new probation system by contrast rested on the organization of prisoners into gangs of up to 700, at 'probation stations', where it was hoped hard work and close supervision would surely and scientifically lead to their reformation. Less objectionable in theory, the new system proved disastrous in practice. It required numerous expert supervisors and a robust economy, both to sustain the much more expensive system and to hire the convicts once they reached the passholder stage. In practice the colony was entering recession; colonists were unwilling and increasingly unable to hire convict labour which had previously been free; and the cessation of transportation to New South Wales brought an influx of convicts which far outstripped the colony's ability to bear most of the cost of penal administration. These factors, combined with resentment that the limited representation which had been allowed to New South Wales in 1842 was not extended to Van Diemen's Land because it was deemed inappropriate for a penal colony, challenged the authority of the new lieutenant-governor. 
However Eardley-Wilmot's rule opened promisingly. His tour of the island and his early official receptions were successful. Meanwhile the probation system appeared to be functioning satisfactorily, according to the reports of the comptroller-general of convicts, Matthew Forster. Later Eardley-Wilmot was condemned for accepting those reports, as it soon became clear (in both Van Diemen's Land and London) that they and Eardley-Wilmot's dispatches were glossing over a problem which was threatening the political economy of the colony. Between 1841 and 1847, 39,000 convicts arrived in the depressed colony. Land sales, previously an important source of government revenue, had slumped, and Eardley-Wilmot could not meet the basic costs of the system, despite Stanley's insistence that it was economically viable. Eardley-Wilmot argued for redistribution of the economic burden away from the colony, but did not publicize his efforts to the colonists. Meanwhile probation gangs, sometimes with only seven supervisors to a gang of 300, were increasingly a source of terror, while the plight of destitute unemployed convict passholders was becoming scandalous. 
Eardley-Wilmot, meanwhile, had clashed with the new bishop of Van Diemen's Land, F. R. Nixon, over whose was the ultimate authority over chaplains ministering to the convict service. The Colonial Office eventually upheld the governor's position, but the quarrel left the bishop ready to take notice of rumours about Eardley-Wilmot's private life. They were largely the product of factional gossip, but Eardley-Wilmot's conduct, unconstrained by his wife's presence, did occasion understandable comment. Despite denials by Eardley-Wilmot himself and others on his behalf, gossip, particularly concerning his relationship with Julia Sorrell, became increasingly damaging, especially when coupled with allegations that homosexuality was rife among convicts. Eardley-Wilmot himself had reported 'this nameless crime', 'this dreadful evil', in a dispatch to Stanley in November 1843 (Eardley-Wilmot to Gladstone, 26 Sept 1846, TNA: PRO, CO 280/196 p. 531). He recorded his efforts to control it: but lurid reports and personal slurs against him were brought by the bishop and others to the ears of the new secretary of state for the colonies, W. E. Gladstone, who had succeeded Stanley in December 1845. 
However, before Gladstone had taken office, political crisis supervened in Van Diemen's Land on 3 November 1845 following Eardley-Wilmot's efforts, in obedience to the Colonial Office, to raise revenue to meet the escalating costs of the convict system. Vigorous protests were made under the slogan 'No taxation without representation', and on 2 November 'the patriotic six', unofficial members of the nominated legislative council, withdrew, leaving the council inquorate. News of this crisis precipitated Eardley-Wilmot's recall, but other reports about the condition of the penal system in the colony had by then made such a recall inevitable. Yet there was a difficulty for the Colonial Office, for James Stephen had realized that, whatever the merits or failings of the probation system, it was economically unviable in Van Diemen's Land, and, in response to Eardley-Wilmot's representations, Britain had already increased her share of the cost of police and gaols expenditure to two-thirds. The constitutional crisis could not be a public reason for Eardley-Wilmot's recall. Stephen, whose meticulous mind had been affronted by the inadequacies of Eardley-Wilmot's dispatches, suggested to his minister that it would be expedient if Eardley-Wilmot could be recalled on other grounds. 
Gladstone, who had been offended by moral deficiencies of both the system and Eardley-Wilmot personally, devised a form of recall which led to public sensation. In an official dispatch Eardley-Wilmot was recalled for his 'insensibility to the vast importance of the moral and religious state of the convicts sent to [Van Diemen's Land] as shown in the transient and meagre communications [Eardley-Wilmot's dispatches] addressed to His Majesty's Government' and 'evinced by the reports of individuals which have been transmitted home' and because 'there was no hope through [his] instrumentality to bring the character and results of transportation to a fair issue, of being enabled either to achieve success or even to ascertain failure' (Gladstone to Eardley-Wilmot, 30 April 1846, Archives Office of Tasmania GO 1/61 p. 190). The dispatch occasioned considerable discussion and press comment in Britain, but Gladstone's accompanying 'secret' letter created a public sensation. In this letter (also dated 30 April 1846) Gladstone informed Eardley-Wilmot that 'certain rumours have reached me from a variety of quarters relating to your private life' such that 'it would be impossible to recommend your resumption of active duties under the Crown in any other colony until they [the rumours] are satisfactorily disposed of' (ibid.). 
To this, Eardley-Wilmot, who had been preparing a response to the official recall on the grounds, 'inter alia', of his necessary reliance on Forster's reports, and the fact that he had reported the moral problem, responded vigorously. In a dispatch he demanded Gladstone 'specify immediately the dates, places, persons and circumstances to which the rumours against my Private life apply' (Eardley-Wilmot to Gladstone, 5 Oct 1846, TNA: PRO, CO, 280/196, p. 542). He published the letter in the executive council of the colony, and swiftly achieved a public vindication when 250 leading citizens expressed their 'unqualified contradiction of those reports... injurious to your moral character during your administration of the Government of this colony' (West, 1.259), thus, Eardley-Wilmot argued, both 'satisfactorily disposing' of the unspecified rumours and fulfilling Gladstone's prerequisite for imperial re-employment. 
Faced by this response, Gladstone had to inform Eardley-Wilmot 'that the persons who made known to me the rumours... did not profess to support their credit by any statement of particulars of the kind to which you refer' and reluctantly conceded that the testimonial Eardley-Wilmot had forwarded 'was an appropriate and sufficient answer' (Gladstone to Eardley-Wilmot, 9 March 1847, TNA: PRO, CO 408/26, pp. 309, 311-12), and that, were he still secretary of state, it might be that Eardley-Wilmot might now be eligible for re-employment. However, his successor, Earl Grey, declared he was 'entirely ignorant of the grounds' (Grey to Eardley-Wilmot, 20 March 1847, TNA: PRO, CO 408/26, p. 314) for Gladstone's action and unable to hold out any hope to Eardley-Wilmot of re-employment. 
Supporters of Eardley-Wilmot were soon insisting he had suffered a gross injustice, and the affair assumed further prominence when news of his sudden death on 3 February 1847 (before he received either Gladstone's or Grey's responses) arrived in England on 3 June 1847. The cause was 'a complete exhaustion of the frame' and 'decay of nature' ('The Times', 3 June 1847), and immediately questions of mismanagement and morals receded before the spectacle of a man of standing's being hounded to death. In a debate in the House of Commons on 7 June 1847 Eardley-Wilmot's character and honour were cleared. In addition the ill-conceived probation system was soon abandoned, and transportation to Australian colonies ceased altogether in 1852. In the colony sentiment favoured a man now widely seen as most unjustly treated. A handsome monument was erected to his memory, while a further memorial was the Royal Society of Tasmania, which he had reconstituted from the Tasmanian Society founded by Sir John Franklin, and which was the first overseas branch of the Royal Society in the British empire. 
Eardley-Wilmot was survived by six sons and a daughter from his first marriage, including Sir John Eardley Eardley-Wilmot, second baronet, and two sons and two daughters from his second. His grandson was the forester Sainthill Eardley-Wilmot (1852-1929). 


@@@@@


doc= 52439


Campbell, Robert (1769-1846), colonial merchant, was born on 28 April 1769 at Cathcart Square, Greenock, Renfrewshire, fourth surviving child of ten born to John Campbell (1727-1797), laird of Ashfield, writer, and town clerk, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Paterson (1729-1792). The three Campbell sons were 'bred merchant', and largely financed by their father. Robert was educated well, probably at the local borough school or with private tuition, before apparently joining his brother William in trading. In 1797 Robert followed his eldest brother, John, to Calcutta, where he was admitted to partnership in Campbell, Clarke & Co., later Campbell & Co. In April 1798 he was dispatched to New South Wales with a speculative cargo, to investigate the fate of a previous venture wrecked on the Australian coast. 
Recognizing the opportunity to open a regular trade with Botany Bay, Campbell acquired land at Sydney Cove for a warehouse and wharf, and returned with another cargo in February 1800. On 17 September 1801 he married Sophia (Sophy) Palmer (1777-1833), the artistically talented sister of the commissary, John Palmer. As Sydney's first resident merchant, Campbell negotiated government contracts for supplies from India, including cargoes of desperately needed cattle. By 1804 goods worth $50,000 lay in his store, and his restrained prices and generous credit caused grateful settlers to acknowledge this means of escape from the former 'mercenary unsparing Hand of Avarice and Extortion' (Steven, 60). To create a trade staple, Campbell financed local sealing and whaling, and to free this successful industry from mercantilist regulations he took a cargo of colonial produce to London in 1805. As the shipment contravened East India Company monopoly rights his ship was formally seized, but, with the intervention of Sir Joseph Banks and William Wilberforce, commercial loss was avoided and permission secured for the entry of a second cargo. Concurrently the Grenville ministry prepared a bill intended to free the trade of New South Wales but this significant policy did not survive its loss of office in 1807. 
Campbell returned to Sydney in August 1806, some days after Governor Bligh, who welcomed him as 'just and humane and a gentleman like merchant' (Steven, 153). Already aware of dormant opposition, Bligh drew Campbell into his administration, appointing him magistrate and naval officer, then virtually colonial treasurer. As naval officer Campbell had the responsibility for confiscating the spirit stills from John Macarthur's ship, precipitating open resistance to the governor. Active and courageous during the insurrection, Campbell was arrested and dismissed from his posts by the rebels, and later tried by a rebel court -- whose authority he persisted in rejecting -- for refusing appointment as coroner. He remained a pillar of support for Bligh's persecuted allies, but his trading was destructively supervised in reprisal. Campbell was one of the first to be officially reinstated by Governor Macquarie but was compelled to sail for London as a witness for Bligh before he could order his affairs. He gave evidence at Lieutenant-Colonel Johnston's court martial in 1811 and the following April appeared before the select committee on transportation. In 1811 his London agent failed spectacularly, reputedly $30,000 in Campbell's debt. Though contriving to postpone collapse, he returned to Sydney in 1815 in all but utter ruin. 
Campbell & Co. was liquidated. With house, premises, and lands mortgaged, the family lived frugally on rents until outstanding debts were honoured. By 1820, free of all connection with India, Campbell had opened a modest agency, and in 1827 admitted his sons John and Robert ['see below'] to partnership. Survival was aided by landholding. Campbell had purchased a large estate, Ashfield, in 1803 to accommodate rejected contract cattle. In 1806 one of his ships was wrecked in government service. In 1825 he was finally compensated by a grant of 5000 acres (Duntroon) to which he added many thousand acres by purchase. By the 1840s he owned the choicest selections on the Limestone plains -- later the site of Canberra -- while his stock also grazed on vast squatting runs. 
Raised a Presbyterian, Campbell latterly gravitated towards the Church of England. He was a consistent benefactor, endowing churches and schools, was the agent for the London Missionary Society, and managed a savings bank for 'the industrious poor', popularly known as Campbell's bank. At the founding of the first Sydney chamber of commerce (1826) his name, as 'father of the mercantile community' ('Sydney Gazette', 8 July 1826), was placed ahead of all other members. Survived by six of his seven children, Campbell died on 15 April 1846 at Duntroon, and was buried on 27 April in the family vault of St John's Anglican Church cemetery, Parramatta. 


The elder Robert Campbell's nephew, 


@@@@@


doc= 52440


Robert Campbell (1804-1859), Campbell's second son, was born at Wharf House, Campbell's Wharf, Sydney, and educated in England (1810-19). On his return he joined his father's agency. He became a leader of the campaign to end convict transportation, first in the 1830s and again in 1846 when the threat of revival involved him in a celebrated public meeting and petition of dissent. In mid-1849 he chaired two further meetings, and was subsequently a delegate to the 'anti-felon' Australasian League. He was a liberal and democratic member of the legislative council (1851-6) and legislative assembly (1856-9), and was colonial treasurer in 1856, and again from 1858. He died at Duntroon, and was buried in the family vault at Parramatta. 


@@@@@


doc= 52441


Robert Campbell junior (1789-1851), merchant, was born at Greenock, Renfrewshire, the son of William Campbell, town clerk, and his wife, Jean Morrison. He accompanied his uncle to Sydney in 1806 to become a clerk in Campbell & Co., but raised personal capital by discreet dealing. In 1813 he went into business independently and, acquiring a partner in 1835, traded also as Campbell & Co. During the economic collapse of the 1840s his company was administered by trustees, but the partnership recovered strongly, handling wool and gold. Dashing, convivial, and romantic, as well as shrewd, he was prominent in Sydney life. A director (1830-51) and president (1843-51) of the Bank of New South Wales, he was a pioneer of the Sydney turf, at one time owning a Persian stallion, Hector, the foundation sire of Australian bloodstock. Campbell died at Sydney, and was buried in Waverley cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 52442


Clarke, William John Turner (1805-1874), pastoralist and financier in Australia, was born on 20 April 1805 at Bridgwater, Somerset, second son of William Clarke ('c'.1770-1813), Aldgate livestock dealer, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Turner (died 1819), of Weston Royland, Somerset. At Barnstaple grammar school from 1811 to 1818, he was noted for mental arithmetic and a clear hand. Hindered in games, although not riding, by a malformed hip, he spent his leisure shrewdly observing the local docks. After his widowed mother died in January 1819, he went to live at his uncle Joseph's farm at Wiveliscombe, from where he drove cattle to London, where a cousin was a butcher. Accumulating skill and savings, augmented by a bequest, he began his own stock business in 1826 at Hambridge, Somerset. In May 1829 he eloped with Elizabeth, or Eliza (1801-1878), eldest daughter of the Revd George Pyke Dowling, rector of nearby Puckington, and the two embarked in July 1829 for Van Diemen's Land, taking livestock and capital totalling about $2000. 
In Van Diemen's Land from 1830, Victoria from 1837, South Australia from 1862, and New Zealand from 1871, Clarke acquired enormous leasehold pastoral estates, as well as 215,000 acres of freehold, with 62,000 acres at Sunbury, Victoria, obtained by a not unusual piece of sharp practice. Nicknamed Money or Big Clarke, he managed his lands astutely, and was in addition a director of the Colonial Bank from 1862. He had interests in other financial institutions and lent money at interest on his own account. He was a Victorian legislative councillor from August 1856 to 1870, except for seventeen months from February 1861 while he was in England. 
From 1833, Clarke's wife and three sons lived at Timsbury House, Hobart, while he made the rounds of his estates. He often lived at Melbourne's Port Phillip Club Hotel which suited his plain taste and Eliza's wish to keep her distance after her sister Jane (1816?-1894) had become pregnant by Clarke in Hobart in 1838. Employees and the wider family, including Clarke's sister, brother, and their families, who returned with him from England in 1841, maintained their genuine regard. 
Tall and consumptively lean in youth, with reddish hair, Clarke was described by William Kelly in 1853 as 'big and burly, with bushy eyebrows... small, retired, twinkling eye... and a snub nose'. A short black pipe, cigars, and English cider were indulgences, but he often appeared drab or dirty 'without waistcoat, gloves or other expletives of dress'. 
Jane Dowling returned to Melbourne about 1853 with her and Clarke's daughter Oceana, having left her husband, Denis Maloney, whom she had married in Sydney in 1847. With Clarke she had two more children. Clarke openly provided for the family which included a son William (1854-1940) who achieved prominence in labour politics from 1904. Clarke was finally estranged from Eliza in 1858 and lived with Jane from 1867, but moved to Roseneath, Essendon, in mid-1870 to allow recovery from a stroke. However, he died there on 13 January 1874, eight months after another attack, and was buried on 16 January in the Melbourne general cemetery. His estate, which was valued at between $3 million, and $4 million, went chiefly to his sons, in particular, the eldest of the three sons born to him and Eliza, 
In Melbourne, Clarke oversaw the estate administration office his father had established. From about 1865 the family home was a wooden bungalow on the Sunbury estate. His wife died there on 14 May 1871, following a carriage accident. Two sons and two daughters were left in the care of their governess, Janet Snodgrass ['see below'], who married Clarke on 21 January 1873. They had four sons and four daughters, one dying in infancy. The year after his marriage, Clarke's father's death made him the largest landowner in the colony, and he proceeded to spend his money lavishly. A 'very liberal landlord' ('Australasian Sketcher', 13 May 1876), he promoted scientific farming and stock breeding, sports (including coursing), and the volunteer militia. Encouraged by his second wife to enter public life, he was unchallenged as a Victorian legislative councillor after election in September 1878. Sir George Bowen put forward his name for a baronetcy as 'the most generally esteemed Colonist' in November 1878. This, the first Australian baronetcy, was bestowed personally in November 1882, when Clarke was in England. The designated seat was Rupertswood, Sunbury, the mansion he had built between 1874 and 1879. 
Clarke was a noted philanthropist and gave large sums to institutions including Melbourne Church of England Cathedral and Melbourne University. He was president of Melbourne's International Exhibitions of 1880-81 and 1888-9, and Victorian commissioner at the Indian and Colonial Exhibition of 1886. An enthusiastic freemason, he became first grand master of the newly united lodge of Victoria in 1889. He inherited his father's large shareholding in the Colonial Bank and was its governor from 1877. His personal funds bolstered it during financial crises in 1893 and 1895. The Rupertswood battery of horse artillery, founded on 30 December 1884 in protest at the lack of colonial defence, and maintained at his expense, afforded some of his greatest pleasures. 
Clarke's sudden death on 15 May 1897 in Collins Street, Melbourne, was attributed to heart and kidney disease, perhaps exacerbated by personal losses in the 1895 financial crisis. His funeral in Melbourne Cathedral was one of largest ever seen in the colony, and he was buried on 18 May at Melbourne general cemetery. His estate, later valued at over $1 million, was shared among his widow and ten surviving children. 
Clarke's widow, 


@@@@@


doc= 52443


Sir William John Clarke, first baronet (1831-1897), landowner and philanthropist, who was born on 31 March 1831 at his father's estate of Lovely Banks, near Oatlands, Van Diemen's Land. He was educated at Hobart academies until 1846, then at Whitchurch grammar school in Shropshire from 1847 to 1850 and returned to Tasmania in October 1850. He worked on his father's estates in Victoria and then joined his brother Joseph at the Norton Mandeville estate in Tasmania until his marriage on 23 August 1860 to Mary (1835-1871), daughter of Hobart merchant John Walker (1799-1874) and Janet, 'nee' Glass. 


@@@@@


doc= 52444


Janet Marion Clarke, Lady Clarke (1851-1909), charity administrator, was born on 4 June 1851 at Doogalook, Goulburn River, Victoria, second child of pastoralist Peter Snodgrass and Charlotte Agnes, daughter of squatter and pioneer John Cotton. She was educated privately and became the Clarkes' governess after her father's death in 1867 left the family impoverished. Her acuity and flair in society, public causes, and as estate trustee were acclaimed. Janet Clarke Hall at Melbourne University recognizes her gift to build Australia's first university women's college. In poor health after malarial fever in 1903, she died on 28 April 1909 at her home, Cliveden, East Melbourne, and was buried on 29 April beside her husband in Melbourne general cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 52445


Griffith, Sir Samuel Walker (1845-1920), lawyer and politician in Australia, was born on 21 June 1845 at Merthyr Tudful, Glamorgan, the second son of the Revd Edward Griffith (1819-1891), Congregational minister, and his wife, Mary Walker (died 1892). Griffith's father then held ministries at Portishead and Wiveliscombe, Somerset, after which he and his family sailed for Australia in 1853 at the invitation of the Colonial Missionary Society, where he became Congregational minister in Ipswich, Queensland. He subsequently transferred to Maitland, New South Wales, and later to Wharf Street, Brisbane. 
Griffith first attended school in Ipswich, then at Woolloomooloo in Sydney, and finally at Maitland, where he was top student. He went on to the University of Sydney where he graduated with first-class honours, winning scholarships in mathematics and classics, and graduating BA (1863) and MA (1870). On 5 July 1870 he married, at Maitland, Julia Janet (died 1925), youngest daughter of James Thomson, commissioner of crown lands in East Maitland. By then Griffith had embarked on a legal career by entering into articles of clerkship with Arthur Macalister at Ipswich in 1863. In 1865, however, he was granted permission to interrupt his articles, on being awarded the prestigious Mort travelling fellowship of the University of Sydney. Under its terms, he travelled to the United Kingdom, and then to continental Europe, after which he returned to England to spend some months, before returning to Brisbane. Overseas he studied works of art, sculpture, architecture, and literature. On his return to Queensland, he completed his articles in September 1867, passed the bar examinations, and was admitted to the bar in the following month. He had early success; his practice grew, diversified, and prospered, and led him to undisputed leadership of the bar. He was appointed QC in 1876. Despite his increasing involvement in politics, Griffith maintained his flourishing private practice at the bar right up to the point at which he became chief justice in 1893. 
From early years, Griffith developed an interest in politics, first evidenced by attendance at parliamentary debates, and in 1862 he published a series of twenty-five articles on members of the Queensland parliament. He entered parliament in 1872 as member for East Moreton, transferring to Oxley at the election of 1873. He rapidly established himself in the parliamentary arena, and in 1874 he was appointed attorney-general. To these responsibilities he added the portfolios of public instruction and public works. In 1879 he succeeded to the leadership of the Liberal Party, to which he came in opposition, the government having fallen in 1878. He proved himself to be an effective parliamentary leader in opposition to the ministry of his chief political rival Sir Thomas McIlwraith. He became premier in November 1883 and was in office until June 1888, displaying a capacity for extremely hard work. He maintained a close supervision over the work of his ministers and was a reluctant delegator. 
During his first premiership, Griffith opposed the growing movement to divide Queensland; this reflected his fears that new colonies would be dominated by sugar planters, though he later recognized the need for administrative arrangements to take account of distance and diversity. On the controversial issue of the continuing use of kanaka (Pacific islands') labour, in 1884 he tightened the regulations governing their work conditions, and his government introduced and carried the act forbidding their employment altogether after a further ten years. At this time, Griffith had a reputation as something of a radical. He supported legislation for employers' liability and for the recognition of trade unions; in his writings he advocated a significant role for government in the protection of the weak. The socialist leader, William Lane, wrote to him approvingly in December 1888 that 'what Pericles was to Athens and Greece, such a leader [Griffith] could be to Australia and Queensland' (Joyce, 380 n. 63). Approbation, however, was not universal and his opponents in Queensland gave him the name Oily Sam. 
The government fell in 1888, but was returned to office in August 1890, when Griffith again became premier in unlikely alliance with his long-time rival, McIlwraith. Economic conditions were deteriorating, and this led to bitter strikes, notably in the pastoral industry. Griffith responded by insisting on compliance with the law, and he took strong action: the military was called out, and strikers were arrested and imprisoned. While Griffith was vilified by those who had formerly praised him, he acted with caution and was a restraining force. Faced with worsening economic conditions, he also proposed helping planters by extending for ten years the importation of kanaka labour, and parliament approved the measure. 
Over a long period, Griffith showed a continuing interest in Australian security and defence, and in moves to closer intercolonial association. At a conference in 1883, he supported the annexation of New Guinea and the establishment of a federal council for Australasia; he drafted the act for its establishment, was a regular attender at its meetings, and became its president. It was a defective organization with very limited powers and never had the support of New South Wales. A new initiative for Australian federation by Sir Henry Parkes of New South Wales in 1889 led to a meeting in Melbourne in 1890, which was followed by the first national Australasian constitutional convention, which met in Sydney in March 1891. Griffith, then premier of Queensland, played a leading role in it, particularly in the drafting of the constitution adopted by this body. Alfred Deakin, of Victoria, who was later thrice prime minister of Australia, paid high tribute to Griffith's achievement in his 'Federal Story' (Deakin, 50): 'In every clause the measure bore the stamp of Sir Samuel Griffith's patient and untiring handiwork, his terse, clear style and force of expression. At [the] close Griffith's influence had become supreme... no other representative rivalled him.' 
In 1893 Griffith accepted appointment as chief justice of Queensland, succeeding to the office at a time when its standing was low. He restored its reputation, and added significantly to his own as a distinguished lawyer and judge. He made a distinctive contribution through the preparation of a criminal code, on which he worked for years, aiming to make the criminal law as simple and generally accessible as possible. His code was approved by a royal commission, passed through the Queensland parliament, and was given assent by him as acting governor in November 1899. It came into force on 1 January 1901, the same day as the Australian commonwealth constitution. The code was largely copied in Western Australia, and became a model for criminal codes elsewhere in the world. 
As chief justice of Queensland, Griffith could play no active role in the constitutional convention of 1897-8 which devised and adopted the constitution which, with a few amendments, became the constitution of the commonwealth of Australia. His draft of 1891 was, however, available to the convention and many of his detailed and at times critical comments upon the later drafts were incorporated in amendments to it. It has been fairly said that the final form of the Australian constitution contains not only much of Griffith's text of 1891, but also his 'lofty corrections of the words of the later and lesser draftsmen of 1897' (La Nauze, 191). 
Griffith went further, and in the final stages of negotiation with the United Kingdom government on the passage of the bill, which had been endorsed by popular referendum in the Australian colonies, he intervened in support of the retention of appeals to the privy council. For a time this threatened the passage of the bill, but at the end a compromise was reached on a form of words which Griffith proposed. His reasons for acting in this way are not clear; his action certainly earned him the enmity of some Australian supporters of federation, and this was reflected in opposition -- albeit unsuccessful -- to his appointment as chief justice of the high court of Australia. 
It is said that when Griffith accepted appointment to the Queensland bench in 1893, he had in view a greater place in a future federated Australia, and in the early days of ministry making in the infant commonwealth his name was mentioned. The high court of Australia was not established until 1903, and Griffith had a major role in the drafting of the 'Judiciary Act', under which it was finally constituted. It was envisaged that it should be a court of five judges (including the chief justice) with pension entitlements; in the event, after negotiation, it was established as a court of three, and it was only in the last days of his membership of the court that a pension was granted to the retiring chief justice, who was Griffith himself. Griffith's appointment as chief justice was greeted favourably by many but opposed by those who disapproved of his apparent changes of course in his second premiership, and of his role in the privy council appeal issue. 
The High Court was constituted as a general court of appeal from state courts, as well as a distinctive federal court with a critically important role in the interpretation of the constitution. All three judges, Griffiths, Edmund Barton, and Richard O'Connor, had been founding fathers, and they soon established a close relationship, both personal and in their reading of the constitution. In the early days, there was a short but unhappy clash with Sir Josiah Symon, attorney-general in the Reid-McLean government, but that was resolved with the fall of that government. An amendment to the 'Judiciary Act' provided for the appointment of two additional judges, and in 1906 Isaac Isaacs and H. B. Higgins, both members of the 1897-8 convention and attorneys-general in earlier federal ministries, took their seats. 
From this time, divisions opened up within the court. Griffith and Isaacs in particular were not comfortable colleagues. Both were dominant, driving, and ambitious men who differed in style and in their legal and constitutional philosophies. Sir Owen Dixon, the great Australian jurist, while acknowledging Griffith's intellectual and professional qualities, speaks of him as having a legal mind of the Austinian age, representing the thoughts and learning of a period which had gone. There was division over major principles of constitutional interpretation; Griffith's reading of the constitution, which he was generally able to impose, emphasized the role of the states, while Isaacs's developed doctrine was strongly centralist. In the 'Engineers' case', a great constitutional case decided in 1920, soon after Griffith's death, Isaacs's doctrine prevailed. From time to time Griffith advised governors-general on constitutional matters; he was held in very high esteem by R. C. Munro Ferguson, governor-general from 1914 to 1920. Griffith retired from the court in 1919. He had been unwell for a long time, and was deeply preoccupied with his physical infirmities. To the dismay of his old and ailing friend Barton, he supported the appointment of Sir Adrian Knox rather than Barton as his successor; his principal concern was to keep Isaacs out. 
Griffith had a happy family life. His marriage was close and secure; and correspondence between husband and wife reveals, beneath Griffith's seemingly aloof and cold exterior, an emotional warmth and care for his wife and children (two sons and four daughters). The family lived principally in Brisbane, from 1880 at Merthyr, an imposing house built for them at New Farm on the Brisbane River, although Griffiths lived at Sydney while on the High Court, making only annual visits to Brisbane. Outside the law, Griffith was an active freemason; he played a role in the administration of Brisbane schools, and was interested in the establishment and early development of the University of Queensland. He was also a member of the senate of the University of Sydney from 1904 to 1917. He was awarded honorary LLD degrees by the University of Queensland in 1912 and the University of Wales in 1913. An unusual interest was in Dante, and he published a translation of the 'Divina commedia' in 1914. It was very literal, lacking in poetic feeling, but it throws an interesting light on the interests of its author. He was made a KCMG in 1886, promoted GCMG in 1895, and was sworn of the privy council in 1901, sitting on its judicial committee when in England in 1913. 
Griffith died at Merthyr on 9 August 1920, from cerebral haemorrhage, congestion of lungs, heart failure, and arteriosclerosis. He was buried in Toowong cemetery, Brisbane. His estate was valued for probate in Australia at $27,335. A suburb in Canberra and a university in Brisbane are named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 52446


Higgins, Henry Bournes (1851-1929), politician and judge in Australia, was born on 30 June 1851 at Newtownards, co. Down, Ireland, the second of the nine children of John Higgins (1820-1895), a Wesleyan preacher, and his wife, Anne (1825-1917), the daughter of Henry Bournes of Crossmolina, co. Mayo. He grew up in a close-knit family in an atmosphere of evangelical piety and genteel frugality. Deemed a 'delicate' child and inhibited by a bad stammer, he was sent to the Wesleyan connexional school in Dublin at the age of ten, but ill health forced his withdrawal four years later. His mother helped him with his education at home, and he resumed his studies for a short time at a local school in Newry. His first job was in a drapery warehouse in Belfast, a city he disliked; later he found more satisfactory employment in a furniture warehouse in Dublin. 
When, in 1869, Henry's elder brother, James, died from consumption, John and Anne Higgins revived earlier thoughts of emigration. A doctor recommended Victoria for its healthy climate, and in 1870 the family settled in Melbourne, where Higgins was able to combine work as a teacher with study for university matriculation. During a successful academic career at Melbourne University (LLB, 1874; MA, 1876) he continued to contribute to the support of the family, teaching and tutoring. In engaging with the great intellectual issues of the day he discarded the simple Wesleyanism of his father, and came close to agnosticism. 
Having, with the help of an elocution teacher, overcome his stammer, Higgins went to the bar in 1876, though he chose equity, as it would not require him to address juries. By 1887 he had graduated to the leadership of the equity bar. On 19 December 1885 he married Mary Alice (died 1944), the daughter of Dr George Morrison, then principal of Geelong College, and sister of George Ernest 'Chinese' Morrison. In 1887 Mary Alice gave birth to their only child, Mervyn Bournes. 
With his career established, Higgins turned to public affairs. He always retained a strong interest in Irish affairs and became a supporter of home rule; in 1883 he made perhaps his first appearance on a public platform in support of the visiting nationalists John and William Redmond, and in 1887 he was prominent in a protest against the 'Irish Coercion Bill'. In 1892 he stood unsuccessfully for Geelong for the Victorian legislative assembly, but two years later he was elected. Wishing to identify himself with the liberal interest, he found it necessary to put aside his free-trade convictions and accept the dominant policy of tariff protection which was associated with the progressive cause in Victoria. 
Higgins entered parliament at a time of severe economic depression when Australia's claim to be 'a working man's paradise' was no longer plausible. It was in this context that Liberals, Higgins among them, addressed 'the social problem'. Notable among the social reforms introduced in Victoria which he supported was the 'Factories and Shops Act' of 1896, which pioneered wage regulation in a number of sweated trades. The economic plight of the colonies, and Victoria in particular, also turned attention to proposals for federation, and in 1897 Higgins was elected as one of ten Victorian delegates to the Australasian federal convention of 1897-8. As a lawyer and political radical he made a significant contribution to the proceedings of the convention, in particular moving the amendment which was to give the commonwealth a limited power for the conciliation and arbitration of industrial disputes. Nevertheless Higgins opposed the draft constitution when it was put before the people: he saw no justification for the senate being 'a states' house', and he feared that Australia would be saddled with a rigid constitution which would resist modernization. 
In Victoria, which had strongly supported federation, Higgins's position was not a popular one. His opposition in 1899 to the sending of the Victorian contingent to the South African War further served to characterize him as a perverse radical. Although he was a supporter of the empire and looked forward to Ireland achieving the independence already enjoyed by the self-governing colonies, Higgins distrusted the imperial sentiment which he saw as being deployed to excuse Victoria from making its own assessment of the war. In the wake of these heresies, Higgins lost his seat in 1900 after a bitter and divisive campaign. 
As a radical, however, Higgins had found favour with the labour movement, and at the first federal elections of 1901 he was elected for the predominantly working-class electorate of North Melbourne. Although generally a supporter of his colleague and friend the liberal Protectionist Alfred Deakin, Higgins continued to follow his own path, reluctantly joining with the Labor Party to defeat the Deakin government in 1904 when he considered its legislation for industrial arbitration inadequate. Higgins, although not a member of the Labor Party, served as attorney-general in the short-lived Watson Labor government which followed. While he did not see himself as a socialist, he was critical of what he called the 'bourgeois principle' and sympathetic to Labor's political ambitions. In 1905 he moved the resolution in the commonwealth parliament which urged Britain to grant Ireland home rule. 
In 1906 Deakin appointed Higgins to the high court, with the added responsibility of taking over the presidency of the arbitration court from 1907. In the latter role Higgins was to become a national figure. In his first case he had to decide whether the manufacturer H. V. McKay was paying the 'fair and reasonable' wages to his employees required by the new protection legislation. In the 'Harvester judgment' (1907) Higgins ignored the dictates of the market and spelt out the rights of the worker 'as a human being in a civilized community', entitled to marry and raise a family. Popular at first with trade unions, the arbitration court had difficulty dealing with the industrial strife which erupted during and immediately after the First World War. Higgins himself was increasingly at odds with the Nationalist government led by W. M. Hughes and resigned the presidency in 1921. The following year he published his apologia, 'A New Province for Law and Order'. However, the social ethos which he espoused as the justification of wage regulation played a large part in establishing the international reputation of Australia and New Zealand as 'a social laboratory for the world'. And although in the 1920s it might have seemed that industrial arbitration had lost much of Higgins's Promethean mission, the court long remained a powerful institution often seen as expressive of Australian egalitarian values, only recently challenged by the proponents of economic rationalism. Higgins remained on the high court until his death in 1929. In interpreting the constitution he sought to minimize the court's interventionist role, effectively supporting the extension of commonwealth power at the expense of the states. 
Throughout his life Higgins maintained a strong attachment to the English heritage, and sent Mervyn to Balliol College, Oxford, in 1906; yet he was also interested in the development of Australian culture. In England at the time of the outbreak of the First World War, he supported the British cause, and, visiting Ireland, was encouraged by the evidence of loyalty there. He was disturbed, however, by the jingoism engendered by the imperial cause, and the war brought a personal anguish in 1916 with the death of Mervyn at Magdhaba, Egypt. Severed, as it were, from the future of Australia, Higgins's interest in Ireland intensified. Although a supporter of the Irish nationalists, he nevertheless urged John Dillon not to close the door on Sinn Fein. In 1924 he revisited Ireland, expressing particular interest in its cultural revival; his meeting with the poet 'A. E.' (George Russell) was instrumental in Higgins leaving a $20,000 bequest to the Royal Irish Academy to support the study of Irish culture. 
Higgins collapsed and died on 13 January 1929 at his country house, Heronswood, Dromana. The conservative Melbourne 'Argus' hailed him as 'a great Australian', while the Trades Hall flew the Australian flag at half mast. He was buried two days later in Dromana cemetery, with Anglican rites, under the Celtic cross which he had built to commemorate his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 52447


Johnston, George (1764-1823), army officer and agriculturist in Australia, was born on 19 March 1764 at Annandale, Dumfriesshire, Scotland, the son of Captain George Johnston, aide-de-camp to Lord Percy, later duke of Northumberland. There is no substance to the accusation made by Governor William Bligh that he was 'Percy's bastard', but the patronage of the Percys supported Johnston throughout his career and probably saved his life in 1811. On 6 March 1776, with his patron's help, Johnston secured a second lieutenancy in the 45th company of marines. He served in New York and Halifax, purchased a first lieutenancy, and then saw service in the East Indies against the French; he was severely wounded in an action in which his ship, HMS 'Sultan', was involved. 
Following a period on half pay and in the absence of any war, Johnston decided that the distant penal colony of New South Wales offered full pay and some hope of promotion. He also had an interest in botany and zoology which could be furthered by a sojourn in the Antipodes, although later claims that he knew he would make his fortune are false. To Johnston this was indeed 'terra incognita'. He sailed for the new colony aboard the first fleet in 1787. His ship, the 338 ton 'Lady Penrhyn', carried female convicts, including the fifteen-year-old Jewish milliner Esther Abrahams, transported with her infant daughter, Rosanna, for stealing 24 yards of silk lace; from the time of the voyage she became Johnston's common-law wife. The couple were eventually married on 12 November 1814, probably as part of Governor Lachlan Macquarie's plan of moral example by officers. They had three sons and four daughters, and were a powerful couple -- sociable, intelligent, popular, and economically successful. 
Johnston adapted well to Australian life. He avoided the endemic quarrels between the officers of the detachment, dodged his irascible superior, Major Robert Ross, and stayed on good terms with Governor Arthur Phillip, acting as adjutant of orders. Similarly, he was aide-de-camp to the second governor, John Hunter, a client of Lord Howe, and judiciously steered clear of the bitter personal quarrels which wracked this administration. When the marines returned home in 1790, Johnston chose to stay in the colony, commanding a company of his marines who had volunteered for service in the New South Wales Corps. His troops also included a number of emancipated convicts, later another source of conflict with Bligh. 
Johnston's career suffered a set-back in 1800, when he was sent to England for illegal trading in spirits. However, he was never court-martialled, being protected by the Northumberland interest and the difficulty of obtaining witnesses in London, and he returned to Sydney in 1801. While away he had cemented his patronage links by gifts of Australian animals, flowers, plants, and birds; he also renewed his relationship with his former commander, Colonel Francis Grose, and through him met Grose's powerful patron, Henry Phipps, earl of Mulgrave, a link which he found critical in later years. 
Despite friction with Governor P. G. King over the control of the corps and the status of the governor's ex-convict bodyguard, Johnston and the governor were on good terms. The relationship was strengthened in 1804 when Johnston crushed an armed insurrection organized by the United Irishmen. After leading his troops from Sydney -- they ran all night -- Johnston found the rebels near Vinegar Hill (later Rouse Hill) on the road to Windsor. He organized a meeting with the leaders of the insurgents, buying time until his troops were in position, then seized the rebels and ordered his men to cut their followers to ribbons. After hanging the leaders, summary justice heartily approved of by King, he had only one complaint -- 'the blood lust' of his men, with whom he was immensely popular. Throughout the incident his own convicts, many of whom were Irish, remained loyal to their master and would have defended his farm against the rebels. 
Johnston's actions in 1804 brought him closer to King and to Government House. However, the new governor, Bligh, caused him considerable irritation between 1806 and January 1808, largely because of the latter's attempts to interfere with the administration of the corps. Constant references by Bligh to Johnston's men as 'sons of bitches' and vice-regal threats to remove the corps and separate the men from their 'whores and bastards' further inflamed the situation, although Johnston counselled caution and calm. The storm broke late in January 1808, when, in the midst of an acrimonious court case against John Macarthur, Bligh threatened the six corps officers sitting as the court with charges of sedition. Johnston now acted, though the previous day he had told Bligh that an accident had made it impossible for him to move. With the support of the key economic and political groups in the colony, united in temporary coalition, on 26 January he drove in from his home at Annandale, 4 miles out, marched his men to Government House, seized control of the colony as acting governor, and placed Bligh under arrest. 
There is no evidence that Johnston's actions were manipulated by John Macarthur; he acted to defend the corps, the crown, and his officers. He also genuinely believed he was supported by the popular will, although his coalition shattered almost as soon as Bligh was removed from his residence, and Johnston found himself at the centre of the internecine quarrels which marked one of the most litigious places on earth. He was glad to hand over the governorship to his friend and superior, Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Foveaux, who arrived from Van Diemen's Land on 28 July 1808. 
In June 1811 Johnston was court-martialled in London for his part in the overthrow of Bligh. His life was possibly in danger, but he had powerful interests -- Northumberland, Mulgrave, and Foveaux's patron, General Richard Fitzpatrick -- active on his behalf, as well as Fletcher Christian's family who had never forgiven Bligh for the 'Bounty' affair. Although Sir Joseph Banks tried hard for Bligh, the weight of evidence swung behind Johnston and, as a result, he was sentenced only to be cashiered. He found support in the Colonial Office, and was free to return to New South Wales, where the new governor, Macquarie, was friendly. The action against Bligh cost Johnston his commission and upwards (he claimed) of $6000. It convinced him that promises of support were rarely translated into action; in future he resolved to avoid politics, and, although close to Macquarie -- he gave the governor a stallion, Sultan, a gift from the Percys -- he played no further part in administration. 
Johnston had begun farming in New South Wales in 1793, when he received a 100 acre grant from Grose, which he named Annandale. By the end of his life his holding amounted to more than 4000 acres, with land at Annandale, Bankstown, Cabramatta, and Lake Illawarra. A good farmer, Johnston favoured Irish convicts -- whom he believed were close to the land -- to work his properties; he was also a large grazier, preferring meat sheep to the fine wool breeds favoured by others, and benefiting from Northumberland's gifts of Teeswater ewes and a ram. His patron's gifts of horses added immeasurably to Johnston's colonial status. 
A good family man, Johnston treated his wife's illegitimate daughter as his own and had strong links with all of his children. His love affair with his wife was enduring and his grief when his popular, highly intelligent son George junior, a favourite of Macquarie, who had tamed the 'wild cattle' in the colony, was killed in a riding accident in 1820 shows a man of deep affection. 
Johnston's death on 5 January 1823 was regretted by all sections of the deeply divided colonial society. Throughout his life the handsome officer had many friends and few enemies. He was popular with his colleagues, soldiers, and convicts. As a master he was generous and humane; he disliked the lash and used it rarely. Indeed, the most violent episode of his life in New South Wales was his hanging of the Irish insurrectionists in 1804. Johnston drank heavily but, by the standards of his own time, was not a drunkard; he read widely, liked dancing, music, and singing, and, judging by his children, he and his wife encouraged education. He was survived by his wife, who died on 26 August 1846 and was buried beside him at Annandale in the family vault designed by Francis Greenway. 
Johnston had served the British crown with great distinction. Somewhat ingenuous and too trusting, nevertheless he made a lasting contribution to the land he came to love. He was, as his friend Macquarie said, 'a good, honourable man'. In early New South Wales few could claim as much. 


@@@@@


doc= 52448


Redfern, William (1774/5?-1833), convict surgeon and pastoralist in Australia, had relatives in Londonderry, Wiltshire, and possibly Canada, but details are unknown. He acquired the diploma of the London Company of Surgeons in January 1797 and immediately joined HMS 'Standard' as surgeon's first mate. Later that year he provided medical care and probably moral support to the mutineers at the Nore. He was convicted of mutiny but his death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment perhaps because of his professional association with the sailors and because of his youth and inexperience. Transported to New South Wales in 1801, he was sent to the penal settlement on Norfolk Island as assistant to the surgeon. Diligent work led to a free pardon in 1803, but he also acquired property, livestock, and probably a convict mistress before his transfer to Sydney in 1808. 
Having been appointed assistant colonial surgeon, Redfern, aided by an apprentice, every morning saw all the inpatients at the hospital, as well as convict outpatients, and also supervised the dispensing of medicines and stores. Possibly at times to the detriment of his hospital responsibilities, he developed an extensive private practice, gaining the respect of colleagues and the confidence of patients of all classes. He remained socially unacceptable to the 'exclusivist' civil and military officers despite his acceptance by Governor and Mrs Macquarie as 'our friend and family physician' -- a rejection perhaps accounting for a reputedly brusque bedside manner. 
Following the arrival of three 'sickly' convict transports in 1814, Lachlan Macquarie directed Redfern to investigate. His report comprehensively exposed all aspects of convict maltreatment and mismanagement occurring during transportation. His recommendations for shipboard hygiene and medical care reflected the best naval practice of the period, but his most perceptive, and influential, suggestion was that only experienced naval surgeons should be employed on transports and they should have absolute authority over convict management. Its speedy adoption by the transport commissioners led to a marked decline in convict morbidity and mortality. 
In 1810 Redfern reintroduced Jennerian vaccination to all parts of the colony, and from about this period onwards he supported various philanthropic and charitable organizations financially and professionally. A foundation shareholder and director of the colony's first bank, established in 1817, he survived criticism of using his position to personal advantage in a protracted controversy. 
On 4 March 1811 Redfern married Sarah Wills at St Philip's Anglican church. Instead of developing a grant in what is now the Sydney suburb of Redfern, he developed grants at his property Campbellfield, in the Airds district, as a farm for sheep, cattle, and a variety of crops. Aided by John Grant, his one-time assigned servant, he gradually acquired large holdings west of the Blue Mountains, extending as far as the Lachlan River. 
By the 1820s emancipists were making major contributions to the colony's economy and development. They were shocked by legal decisions in London and Sydney that civil and property rights were not restored by a colonial pardon. In 1821 Redfern became one of two emancipists deputed to present a petition to king and parliament. He had already suffered a severe blow to his pride and professional aspirations when Earl Bathurst rejected his appointment as principal surgeon in 1818, a position previously promised to him by Macquarie. Outraged, Redfern resigned and an embarrassed Macquarie appointed him a magistrate. J. T. Bigge, commissioned by Bathurst to report on the state of the colony and fundamentally antipathetic to the emancipist cause, objected to this elevation of an ex-convict. Macquarie obstinately persisted but Bathurst ultimately revoked the appointment. Meanwhile, Redfern had clashed with Bigge when he appeared to give evidence. He subsequently wrote, angrily refusing to appear again, accusing Bigge of arrogance and bias. It is to Bigge's credit that his reports commend Redfern's professional and farming attainments, although he deprecated his 'irritability or rather a violence of temper towards his inferiors and superiors' (Bigge, 'Report of the Commission', 86). In effect, Redfern personified the conflict between Bigge and Macquarie on the emancipist issue. 
Unsettled, Redfern sold stock and property and took his elder son, William Lachlan ('b'. 1819) to Edinburgh, leaving his wife and younger son, Joseph Foveaux ('b'. 1823), at Campbellfield. As on his previous visit in 1822, he enrolled at Edinburgh University in 1829 and 1830, but Mrs Macquarie, who visited him, stated that he was behaving extravagantly and keeping poor company, and had deteriorated mentally and physically. He died in Edinburgh on 17 July 1833 and was buried there at the new Calton cemetery on 23 July. His will essentially left extensive property to his surviving son (Joseph died in 1830) with certain interests for his wife; a codicil in 1828 made some provision for two sisters and the children of one of them. 
Redfern was keenly perceptive of injustice, probably a factor in his transportation, and to his involvement in other controversies. Despite his irascible nature he made an invaluable contribution to both the medical and the pastoral development of the colony while also contributing politically to the advancement of the emancipist cause. A play about Redfern's life, 'The Emancipist', by John Macquarie Antill and Rose Antill, was published in 1936. 


@@@@@


doc= 52449


Wilton, Serlo of (c.1105-1181), grammarian and poet, was a Cluniac monk and Cistercian abbot. The epithet 'a Wiltunia' (Walter Map) suggests that he came from Wilton, probably in Wiltshire. His birth date is inferred from his career and death. He has been gradually disentangled from other Serlos -- of Bayeux, Fountains, and Savigny -- and his poems have been identified and edited by J. Oberg. The facts of his life are hard to separate from the legends of the visions that preceded his conversion to monasticism and from the anecdotes that often accrued to witty poets of his ilk (Primas and Golias for example). If he is the same 'Magister Serlo', he was in the service of Adeliza, widow of Henry I, between 1136 and at least 1147. The title 'magister' was probably earned in Paris: he was sometimes known as Serlo of Paris ('Parisiensis') and wrote a poem to the king of France asking for exemption from payment for permission to lecture. In 1147 he wrote a poem on the death of Robert of Gloucester and 'c'.1152 in praise of Robert's son Roger, later bishop of Worcester, both supporters of Empress Matilda. According to a story in Troyes manuscript 946 (Bibliotheque Municipale) he was asked by the king (Stephen or Henry II) to lecture to the academic community ('studium generale') at Oxford. 
As the legends have it, and his own poem ('Linquo coax ranis') confirms, Serlo became disillusioned with scholastic life. By the late 1150s, as Gerald of Wales reveals, he was already a monk of Cluny (at La Charite-sur-Loire) when he visited St Peter's, Gloucester. About 1160 he wrote a poem to the new pope, Alexander III (Rolland Bandini). Finding the Cluniac order too lax, he became a Cistercian at L'Aumone, Blois, and by 1173 was abbot. Some time after this he met Walter Map. In 1180-81 he was at Blockley, Worcestershire, where he met Gerald of Wales and Baldwin, at this time bishop of Worcester (1180-84). According to the annals of Waverley, he died in 1181; according to Gerald of Wales, he forecast the day and hour of his own death. He probably died at L'Aumone. 
Haureau (1.123-5) regards Serlo as the most likely author of a commentary on the Lord's prayer in a manuscript now in Paris (Bibliotheque Nationale, MS Lat. 2590). Serlo himself states that he wrote a (lost) grammar. His most popular poem illustrated the differences between homographs (for example, 'acer', 'acer'). He also wrote a set of French and Latin verse proverbs and many occasional and erotic poems. 


@@@@@


doc= 52450


Sorell, William (bap. 1773, d. 1848), army officer and administrator in Australia, the son of Jane and Lieutenant-General William Alexander Sorell, was baptized at St Mary's Church, Marylebone, Middlesex, on 2 September 1773, by the rite of the Church of England, his lifelong formal allegiance. After attending Westminster School, he joined the army in 1790. In the ensuing decade he fought in the West Indies and Europe. He became a major in 1804 (later lieutenant-colonel) and trained under Sir John Moore. In 1807 he went to the Cape of Good Hope, where he excelled as deputy adjutant-general. Yet in 1811 he returned to Britain and the following year resigned from the army. 
These moves resulted from strange personal circumstances. Between 1800 and 1807 Sorell had seven children with Harriet Coleman, an illiterate. The couple were married in 1807, but Harriet did not accompany her husband to the Cape. There Sorell entered into a liaison with the wife of a fellow officer, Louisa Matilda Kent, 'nee' Cox. From 1811 or 1812 the couple lived as man and wife, and by 1824 they had eight children. 
Backed by superiors and patrons, Sorell in 1816 was appointed lieutenant-governor of Van Diemen's Land. The move coincided with official rethinking as to the Australian colonies finding a larger imperial role. Sorell's new post was a challenging one, since the mixed population of Van Diemen's Land consisted of about 600 convicts still under bond, 3000 free white people (largely former convicts), and probably as many Aborigines. Runaway convicts ('bushrangers') formed an alternative society, ignoring and challenging authority, while sloth and corruption permeated officialdom. 
Sorell, accompanied by Louisa Kent and her children of mixed paternity, assumed government in April 1817. He attended first to the bushrangers, and then to the fundamentals of colonial expansion: arbitrating disputes, harrying bureaucrats into efficiency, and fostering economic growth. Convicts now started arriving direct from Britain in considerable numbers (1397 in 1820). Sorell distributed most of these as 'assigned' labourers to the likewise increasing free immigrants, generally boasting some social standing and/or ambition. All this was done with great efficiency: Sorell was an exemplar of how the wars provided training for a generation of outstanding imperial managers. 
At times Sorell could appear ruthless. He had no qualms in punishing miscreants: the station he established at Macquarie Harbour for further disciplining convicts became a byword of cruel severity. Towards Aborigines, suffering as a result of European expansion, he evinced some philanthropy, but he gave them little place in either policies or dispatches. He rightly perceived that his major problems lay elsewhere. Regional particularism proved salient in Tasmanian affairs: Sorell found it difficult to bring a sub-colony in the island's north under his sway, and became fierce in denouncing the local commandant, Captain Gilbert Cimitiere. Likewise he had to confront potentially over-mighty subjects. Chief among these was Anthony Fenn Kemp, formerly captain of the New South Wales Corps and now a leading merchant and grazier in Van Diemen's Land, who was evidently ready to repeat his role in deposing Governor William Bligh in Sydney in 1808. 
Generally, however, Sorell succeeded in overcoming problems and critics. His gracious manner and accessibility, coupled with a sense of humanity, even of natural justice, proved valuable assets, but the irregularity of his union with Louisa Kent proved his downfall. In 1817 Lieutenant Kent won $3000 in damages against Sorell. Kemp and other opponents cited the matter when fighting the lieutenant-governor, notably in writing to British authorities. Harriet Sorell proved to the secretary of state, Lord Bathurst, that her husband had broken promises to sustain their family, and Bathurst put Sorell's private life before J. T. Bigge, whom he sent out in 1819 on a general commission of Australian inquiry. Bigge found much to admire in Sorell, as both man and governor, but added his own moral rebuke. Essentially because of these matters, Bathurst recalled Sorell. 
Uniquely in Australian history, such news aroused more dismay than pleasure among colonists affected. Leading citizens petitioned for Sorell's continuance; ironically A. F. Kemp inspired this move. It was to no avail, however, and Sorell resigned office on 13 May 1824. He retained some influence in Australian affairs, provoking Ralph Darling -- the tory governor of New South Wales from 1825 to 1831 -- to disparage 'the Convenient pliancy of his disposition [which] made him a favourite at Van Diemen's Land' ('Historical Records of Australia', 1st ser., 13.190). However, Sorell's hopes for renewed appointment bore fruit only in his service as consul at Porto in 1832-3. After periods living in Europe and Ireland he died in London on 4 June 1848. His estate of $200 went to Louisa Kent, described as his widow (they had probably married about 1840). 
In 1823 Harriet's eldest child with Sorell, William, joined his father in Hobart. He settled, and in 1825 married a daughter of A. F. Kemp. Their daughter Julia married Thomas Arnold junior in Hobart in 1850. Descendants of that marriage included Mary Augusta Ward, Janet Penrose Trevelyan, and Julian and Aldous Huxley. 


@@@@@


doc= 52452


Daniel, Walter (fl. 1150-1167), Cistercian monk, hagiographer, and theologian, was a monk of the abbey of Rievaulx from 1150 to his death, and the author of a number of theological, philosophical, and biographical works. The best known of these is his life of Ailred of Rievaulx. Ailred died in 1167; Walter had lived under his direction for seventeen years; and when he entered Rievaulx in 1150, his father, Daniel, was already a monk of the house, having taken the habit at least three years earlier. It is possible that the family was of knightly origin, but whether, as has been suggested, they were the Daniels of the Balliol fief in Cleveland, Yorkshire, can be regarded as no more than conjecture. Before entering Rievaulx, Walter had been educated in the schools -- where is unknown -- and it would appear that he had also received professional medical training. He refers to himself as 'medicus', he betrays a specialized knowledge of disease, and he was Ailred's constant attendant during the latter's chronic illnesses. It is therefore possible that he was infirmarian of Rievaulx, though that is not certain. 
Apart from being Ailred's 'medicus', Walter was also his amanuensis and one of his closest companions. He himself seems to have been an intelligent, learned, and devout monk, quick to understand and effective in argument, though perhaps somewhat irritable and too easily offended. But whatever his faults, he was a prolific writer and John Leland (died 1552), who visited Rievaulx shortly before the dissolution, saw in the library nine of his works: 'Centum sententiae'; 'Centum homiliae'; 'Epistolae, justum volumen'; 'De virginitate Mariae'; 'Expositio super 'Missus est angelus Gabriel''; 'De honesta virginis formula'; 'De onere jumentorum austri, libri ii'; 'De vera amicitia, libri v'; and 'De conceptione beatae Mariae contra Nicholaum monachum, libri ii'. Leland does not mention the life of Ailred, and apart from that work only the 'Centum sententiae' and four sermons survive. The life of Ailred is prefaced by a defence of the work and of Ailred's own reputation, known as the 'Epistola ad Mauricium': the Maurice in question was probably Maurice of Kirkham. Of the other works nothing is known save their titles and incipits. The 'Expositio super 'Missus est angelus Gabriel'' echoes the four sermons on the same verse ('Luke' 1: 26) by Bernard of Clairvaux; the 'De onere jumentorum austri' ('Isaiah' 30: 6) was clearly indebted to Ailred's sermons on the burdens of Isaiah; the 'De vera amicitia' perhaps continued Ailred's dialogue 'De spirituali amicitia', in which Walter was proud to have been one of the participants; and the Nicholas against whom Walter wrote his 'De conceptione beatae Mariae' was Nicholas of St Albans, whose treatise in defence of the doctrine of the immaculate conception against Bernard of Clairvaux still survives. Judging from the 'Centum sententiae', Walter's works might have been learned and thorough rather than inspired and original, though Leland thought them worthy of publication. 
According to John Bale (died 1563), Walter died and was buried at Rievaulx -- there is no reason to doubt the tradition -- but the date of his death, as that of his birth, remains unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 52453


Turner, Sir George (1851-1916), politician in Australia, was born in Melbourne, Australia, on 8 August 1851, the only child of English parents Alfred Turner, a cabinet-maker, and his wife, Ruth Dick. He was educated at the National Model School, Melbourne, but left at the age of fourteen to work in the office of John Edwards, a solicitor. On 10 August 1872 he married 21-year-old Rosa, the daughter of John Morgan, a potter from Devon; they had a son and a daughter. Turner matriculated in 1874, took the articled clerk's course, and was admitted to practice in 1881, when he went into partnership with Samuel Lyons to form the legal firm of Lyons and Turner. He was involved in various lodges and friendly societies, notably the Australian Natives' Association, an organization of people born in Australia which became politically very important in this period. 
Turner was an elected member of the St Kilda local government council (1886-1900), and was mayor in 1897. In 1889 he entered the legislative assembly of the Victorian parliament as member for St Kilda, having campaigned as a Liberal Protectionist. In what were politically unstable times he served as minister for customs and commissioner for trade in the Munro government (1890), posts he retained in the Shiels government (1892). With the defeat of the Shiels government by James Patterson in 1893, Turner reluctantly became leader of the opposition Liberal Party when the leading Liberal, Alfred Deakin, a trusted colleague of Turner, refused the position. On the defeat of the government in September 1894, at a time of severe economic depression, Turner became the first Australian-born premier of Victoria. This dour, steady plodder, who lacked the oratorical skills of some of his contemporaries, was an unlikely leader. However, to a public shocked by the boom and the consequent depression, his down-to-earth, businesslike approach, retrenching and cutting expenditure, was appealing. Beatrice Webb, on meeting Turner in 1898, described him in her diary as 'a modest unassuming businessman, a solicitor by profession, who has gained the approbation of the majority of the people and of the House by his cautious administration, his plain business ways and his indomitable industry' (Webb and Webb, 66). Mindful of public opinion, Turner was pragmatic in gaining political support and tenacious in resolving issues, and was beholden to Deakin and to David Syme, the proprietor of 'The Age' newspaper. He gained the respect and confidence of the state and was re-elected in 1897. While restoration of fiscal confidence was his main contribution, during his premiership some notable legislation was passed, including, in 1896, the 'Factories and Shops Act', which reduced 'sweated labour', and savings bank legislation, and, three years later, the abolition of plural voting. While by temperament cautious, as the Melbourne 'Age' wrote in its obituary (14 August 1916), 'his liberalism led him often to the left wing of his party', and his willingness to accommodate Labor Party members and his support for old-age pensions are indicative of this. 
In June 1897 Turner went with other colonial premiers to Britain for Queen Victoria's diamond jubilee celebration, and was appointed privy councillor and KCMG and received an honorary LLD from both Oxford and Cambridge universities. He also became an important figure in the federation movement, attending the federal councils of 1895 and 1897. In 1898 he was elected (topping the poll) to represent Victoria in the national convention to frame a federal constitution, and the following year he became president of the council. He worked with Deakin, Isaacs, and Peacock and leaders from other states in the difficult and tortuous negotiations leading to federation, and was often an important 'solvent' and behind-the-scenes negotiator. His contribution to the federal movement has often been underestimated, and, as Deakin wrote in his 'Federal Story' (1944), his 'sterling qualities of fairness, thoroughness, sincerity and reliability shone' (Deakin, 85), especially in contrast to others such as the flamboyant Reid. 
In Victoria in October 1899 Turner was temporarily dislodged by disaffected rural conservatives led by McLean, but was restored to office in November 1900. When he resigned in 1901 to stand for the federal seat of Balaclava he was the longest-serving Victorian premier. He declined to work with Lyne, who tried to form the first federal ministry (the Hopetoun blunder), but became the first commonwealth treasurer in the Barton ministry (1901-3); he also served in the Deakin ministry and later in the Reid ministry. Sound in finance and an able administrator, he was a successful treasurer and, as mentioned in 'The Age' obituary, established a 'tradition of economy, laid the foundations of honest book keeping and gave clear full official statements of expenditure'. He brought in the first four federal budgets. He became an influential and trusted member, and it surprised nobody when the Watson Labor ministry invited him to continue as treasurer, though he refused. 
In declining health, Turner retired at the election of 1906. He resumed his law practice and became chairman of commissioners of the State Savings Bank of Victoria. His son was killed in a train accident in 1908. Turner himself died from heart disease on 13 August 1916 at his Hawthorn home, Summerlea, 78 Riversdale Road (he had moved from St Kilda in 1904), survived by his wife and daughter. He was buried with Church of England rites at the St Kilda cemetery on 15 August. 
Dull and prosaic in manner, Turner had a high-pitched, almost falsetto voice, and his speeches were devoid of ornament. Deakin described him as 'the ideal bourgeois, who married early and who was in dress, manner and habits, exactly on the same level as the shopkeepers and prosperous artisans who were his ratepayers and constituents. He was also bourgeois in his uprightness, straightforwardness, domestic happiness and regularity of habits. His facility of work was enormous, his love of detail great. (Deakin, 66)' Physically Turner was a big man, bespectacled, with a large head and a bristling moustache. An able yet underrated politician, administratively and financially competent, he was an important figure in achieving federation and in establishing the commonwealth government. 


@@@@@


doc= 52454


Stephen (d. 1252), abbot of Fountains and theological writer, came from Eston in the North Riding of Yorkshire. At an unknown date he entered the Cistercian abbey of Fountains and was, successively, cellarer of Fountains, abbot of Sawley, abbot of Newminster, and abbot of Fountains. When he was appointed cellarer is uncertain, and he could not have held the office later than 'c'.1223 when he was elected abbot of Sawley. He governed Sawley for more than a decade, from about 1223 to at least October 1233, before being elected abbot of Newminster, the mother house of Sawley. The date of his election is unknown, but he remained at Newminster until late 1247 when he was translated to Fountains, the mother house of Newminster and one of the most important Cistercian abbeys in England. It was a distinguished career. He was abbot of Fountains for four years, ten months, and five days from November 1247 to his death in 1252. His name appears in numerous documents and also in the records of the annual general chapter, held at Citeaux, at which he was present in at least 1226 and 1230. In 1240, however, for reasons unknown, the general chapter gave him a dispensation to attend the meeting only every four years. 
Four works have been attributed to Stephen: a series of fifteen brief meditations on the Virgin Mary, 'Meditationes de gaudiis beatae et gloriosae semper virginis Mariae'; a set of three meditations on God, the Virgin, and the New Jerusalem, 'De modo orationis et meditationis'; a 'Speculum novitii', which is an introduction to the monastic life for a Cistercian novice; and a meditative guide to the psalms chanted in the Cistercian offices, 'De informatione mentis circa psalmodiam diei ac noctis'. The first of these is almost certainly by Stephen and the second very probably by him. The authorship of the last two remains unsettled. All four are competent, straightforward, well written, devout, and unspectacular. 
Stephen died suddenly on Friday 6 September 1252 while on an abbatial visitation of Vaudey in Lincolnshire, a daughter house of Fountains. He was buried in the chapter room of Vaudey, in front of the abbot's chair, where he was said to 'glitter ['choruscat'] with miracles' (Walbran, 1.137). He may, therefore, have had some reputation for sanctity, though no trace of a cult survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 52455


Wentworth, D'Arcy (1762-1827), medical practitioner and public servant in Australia, was born on 14 February 1762 near Portadown, co. Armagh, Ireland, the sixth of the eight children of D'Arcy Wentworth, an innkeeper, and his wife, Martha Dixon, also of co. Armagh. The Irish family traced its ancient ancestry to Wentworth Woodhouse in Yorkshire and was related to the wealthy and influential Fitzwilliams. The young Wentworth attended a local school and studied medicine under Dr Alexander Patton of Tanderagee. In 1782, with the assistance of his patron Lord Fitzwilliam, he served as an ensign in the 1st provincial battalion of Ulster volunteers. In 1785 he went to England to continue his medical studies. A handsome, tall man with blue eyes and considerable charm, he was invariably popular with all classes and both sexes. He hoped for employment with the East India Company as an assistant surgeon, but seems to have lived beyond his means and kept very doubtful company. At the Old Bailey sessions beginning on 12 December 1787 he was charged three times with highway robbery. Twice he was found not guilty, and in the third instance acquitted for lack of evidence. He again appeared and was again found not guilty at the sessions beginning on 9 December 1789. He then applied successfully to be discharged so that he could take up an appointment as an assistant surgeon in the convict colony at Botany Bay. 
Wentworth arrived in the fledgeling penal settlement of New South Wales with the Second Fleet on 28 June 1790. He had gained some notoriety for his alleged exploits on Hounslow Heath, but he managed to avoid attention on the voyage. 'En route' he formed a liaison with Catherine Crowley ('b'. 1772), a convict who bore him three sons, including the statesman William Charles Wentworth. In August D'Arcy Wentworth and Catherine sailed to Norfolk Island, where he became an assistant in the hospital. Ceaseless self-advocacy, industry, reliability, and a capacity to please everybody served him well. His income grew steadily, status followed, and, despite his ambiguous record in England, he found respectability and scope for promotion. Affable and discreet in his public career, he rejoiced in a warm although irregular family life. Catherine died in 1800, but he formed other alliances, chiefly with Maria Ainslie and Anne Lawes, by whom he had seven children. Wentworth was to serve in a medical capacity again in Norfolk Island from 1804 to 1806, and in Sydney and Parramatta. Eventually he was appointed principal surgeon in February 1809, to be confirmed by July 1811. For all these and other appointments -- and for the attainment and advancement of his commercial, professional, and social goals -- he constantly and successfully sought the support of Lord Fitzwilliam. 
Wentworth was appointed justice of the peace and magistrate in May 1810, and in December was put in charge of Governor Macquarie's newly reformed police force. He became the chief magistrate in Sydney, one of the first commissioners for the Parramatta turnpike, and treasurer of the Police Fund (which disbursed most of the locally raised revenue). 
In 1816 Wentworth was one of the founders of the Bank of New South Wales. He seems to have combined probity with a skill in amassing a considerable fortune, so that he died one of the wealthiest men in the colony. His record made him unacceptable to John Macarthur and the 'exclusive' faction of non-convict settlers, but he managed to keep out of colonial squabbles, staying on good working terms with governors Phillip, Hunter, King (up to a point), and Brisbane. He was Governor Macquarie's personal physician. Governor Bligh referred to him as a 'highwayman' and had him court-martialled in 1808 for alleged misuse of convict labour -- although for the most part Wentworth was attached to the 'emancipist' (ex-convict) party socially as well as politically. 
Wentworth was an old-established Sydney trader, and in 1810 was one of the main contractors for the building of the 'Rum Hospital' for Macquarie. The contractors received licence to import spirits in return for building the hospital, in a controversial arrangement that was ultimately not very profitable. Wentworth's administration of public health was not universally admired, and he fell out with Judge Bent over the latter's refusal to pay tolls. When J. T. Bigge arrived in New South Wales to conduct his commission of inquiry he heard a good deal of evidence about Wentworth's manifold pursuits, some of it none too complimentary. Indeed his long public career, supervisory role, and daily routine had involved him for better or worse in almost every aspect of colonial life. In his latter years he naturally became involved in his son's turbulent rise. He supported trial by jury and the election of a colonial legislature on the ground of 'no taxation without representation'. 
In increasingly poor health, Wentworth was replaced as principal surgeon in October 1819, as superintendent of police in April 1820, and as treasurer of the Police Fund in June, but returned as superintendent from 1821 to 1825. He died at Homebush, Sydney, on 9 July 1827. The funeral service at Parramatta, where he was buried, was conducted by Samuel Marsden and the procession was said to be a mile long. 


@@@@@


doc= 52458


Henty, Edward (1810-1878), pioneer colonist in Australia, and his brother Stephen Henty (1811-1872) were born respectively, on 28 March 1810 and 3 November 1811, the fourth and fifth surviving sons of Thomas Henty (1775-1839), a farmer and latterly a banker from West Tarring, near Worthing, Sussex, and Frances Elizabeth Hopkins ('c'.1776-1847) of Poling, near Arundel, Sussex. They were educated locally before working on the family farm. Thinking their prospects better in Australia than in agriculturally depressed Sussex, the family decided to emigrate, and sent the eldest son James (1800-1882) with Stephen and their younger brother John to Western Australia in 1829 to establish a farm. 
Finding Western Australia unpropitious farming country, James recommended they relinquish the land granted to them, in the hope of receiving in exchange a smaller grant in Van Diemen's Land. Although the Colonial Office had already refused this request, in November 1831, his father, mother, Edward, and two other brothers sailed for Launceston, Van Diemen's Land, where they landed in April 1832. The colonial government naturally followed the Colonial Office in refusing a land grant, but the father bought a 2000 acre farm on the Tamar, where the brothers worked and the family settled. However, grazing land was expensive, so Edward began to think of other activities and other places. In April 1833 he joined a whaling ship, but soon transferred to the family's schooner, 'Thistle' (58 tons); when she called at Portland Bay on the Australian mainland in July he was impressed by its possibilities for settlement. In March 1834 James sailed for London to seek permission to buy 20,000 acres at Portland Bay to be paid for over ten years, but Edward persuaded his father to allow him to 'squat' at Portland without waiting for an answer to their request. This was a formal 'no' but it was made known unofficially that the Hentys would not be ejected. 
On 13 October 1834 Edward left Launceston in the 'Thistle', and after an extremely stormy voyage in which much of the livestock was lost he landed at Portland Bay on 19 November with four indentured servants, thirteen heifers, two working bullocks, six dogs, plants, provisions, building materials, and farm implements. Edward began to build his house and to plant his fruit, vegetables, and wheat; a month later he welcomed his youngest brother, Francis (1815-1889), who arrived with more livestock (including the first thoroughbred merino sheep in Victoria), plants, and stores. In September 1836 Stephen arrived, having finally left Western Australia, with his bride, Jane (1817-1906), the daughter of an East India Company captain, Walter Pace, whom he had married on 14 April 1836 at Fremantle. In 1837 Francis and Stephen moved inland, but Edward preferred to continue farming and trading at Portland. On 15 October 1840 he bought 20 acres of suburban land. The following day he married Anne Maria, the daughter of Hugh Gallie of Plymouth, whom he had met when he was in Melbourne on business; the couple had no children. 
By then Edward was an established citizen and magistrate, but he soon began to suffer from the prevailing economic depression. When the family businesses were reorganized in 1842, Francis took the 14,000 acre Merino Downs and Edward moved to Muntham, a sheep station of 57,300 acres on the Wannon River, which in 1849 carried 3520 cattle and 24,000 sheep. This made him a prosperous squatter, but in 1856 he moved back to live in Portland. He sat in the legislative assembly as a conservative until 1861 and became actively involved in the Western Victorian Separation League, which advocated breaking away from 'the intolerable yoke of Melbourne'. Unfortunately his stock gradually deteriorated, and when sold after his death none was fit to breed from. Like Stephen, Edward had moved permanently to a large town house in Melbourne. He died at Offington, St Kilda Road, Melbourne, on 14 August 1878 and was buried the next day in Boroondara cemetery. Stephen, a merchant and magistrate at Portland and an MP from 1856 to 1870, had died on 18 December 1872 at Hamilton, leaving four sons and six daughters. He was buried in the cemetery there. 
Edward was the first permanent settler at Portland. At first capable and energetic, he became somewhat extravagant and socially pretentious as he played the part of the country squire, but though Francis at Merino Downs and Stephen as Portland's leading merchant may have done more for the district's progress, Edward's distinction of 'being the first' remains. 


@@@@@


doc= 52459


Hull, Eleanor, Lady Hull (c.1394-1460), translator, was the only child of Sir John Malet of Enmore, Somerset (died before 1395), retainer of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and of his wife, Joan ('c'.1370-1426), daughter of Sir John Hylle of Exeter (died 1426), sister of Robert Hylle (compiler of the so-called Hylle cartulary) and subsequently the wife of, in turn, Simon Michell, John Luttrell, and William Cornu. Before 1413 Eleanor married Sir John Hull (died 'c'.1420), retainer of John of Gaunt and ambassador to Castile for Henry IV and Henry V, and had a son, Edward ('c'.1410-1453). Unlike her mother she did not remarry after her husband's death. 
Like her father, husband, and son, Eleanor served the house of Lancaster. In 1417 she was granted 50 marks per annum as servant of Queen Joan, second wife of Henry IV; the grant was renewed in 1420 and 1423, and granted her jointly with her son in 1444 and 1451. In 1444 she and her son travelled to France for the proxy marriage of Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou. She was indirectly connected with the foundation of Syon Abbey as she is said to have brought Thomas Fishbourne, later its first confessor-general, to the attention of its founder, Henry V. She was more closely associated with the abbey of St Albans, to whose confraternity she was admitted in February 1417 and to whom she and her family made frequent gifts. Most notably she and her spiritual and legal adviser Roger Huswyf presented the abbey with a copy of Nicholas de Lyre's 'Postillae' (now CUL, MSS Dd.7.7-10) in 1457. After her husband's death she was by 1427 living from time to time at Sopwell Priory, a Benedictine nunnery dependent on St Albans: she was temporarily absent when the priory was attacked by the robber William Wawe and his gang, 'quaerentes' 'Elienoram Hull' ('seeking Eleanor Hull'; 'Annales... Amundesham', 1.11). It was probably during this period that she made her translations. In 1436 she was listed with an annual income of $86 in the national return under the county of Hertfordshire, where Sopwell and St Albans are situated. Her son, Sir Edward, was killed at the battle of Castillon in 1453; his will appointed her as his executor. By 1458 she had retired to the Benedictine priory at Cannington, Somerset, where in the will made 'with her own hand' (Maxwell-Lyte and Dawes, 352) she requested to be buried. She probably died in December 1460, since her will was proved on 2 January 1461. 
Two translations from the French extant in CUL, MS Kk.1.6, a commentary on the penitential psalms, 'The Seven Psalms', and a collection of prayers and meditations, are attributed to Eleanor Hull by the manuscript's compiler, Richard Fox, 'procurator', or steward, of St Albans (died 1454). She could read Latin as well as French (she bequeathed her breviary, psalter, and Latin 'Bible' to Huswyf), and both read and write English. No doubt as an heiress she was educated at home with more than usual care, possibly under the influence of her maternal uncle Robert Hylle. As the first woman translator from French into English whose name is known she is indicative of the level of culture that some fifteenth-century laywomen of the gentry class achieved. Although she was devout, learned, and alive to her secular responsibilities, the neglect of her by subsequent historians is equally significant. 


@@@@@


doc= 52460


Marie (fl. c.1180-c.1189), poet, was of French origin, resident in England in the reign of Henry II; she is credited with three works which are signed Marie. In the latest of these, a collection of Aesopic fables translated from the English of a certain Alfred, the author declares 'Marie ai nun, si sui de France', which may indicate that she came specifically from the Ile-de-France. 
The 'Fables' were written for a Count William, who has been variously identified with William (I) Longespee, William (I) Marshal, William de Mandeville (earl of Essex, a friend of Henry II -- they both died in 1189), William de Blois (Earl Warenne and earl of Surrey), and William of Gloucester, the choice being connected with possible identifications of Marie herself with a nun at Reading Abbey, the abbess of Shaftesbury (1181-1216), Marie de Meulan (or de Beaumont), wife of Hugh Talbot of Cleuville, or Marie de Boulogne, daughter of Stephen of Blois and Matilda, who was abbess of Romsey, Hampshire. None of these identifications is safe. The 'Fables' seems to have been a success, being transmitted in twenty-three manuscripts. In the late twelfth century (probably 'c'.1180) the monk Denis Piramus, author of a life of St Edmund, refers to a Dame Marie who wrote verses drawn from 'lais' which are 'not at all true' (Piramus, 1.35). These poems must be the twelve assembled in BL, Harley MS 978 (possibly from Reading), where they are preceded by a general prologue containing the name Marie, which also occurs in one of the 'lais', that of 'Guigemar'. A few of the Harley 'lais' are transmitted separately in four further manuscripts. Baum has emphasized the fragility of the attribution of all the Harley 'lais' to a single author, and the identification of that author with Marie de France. The views that Baum criticized none the less persist. Attempts have been made to group the 'lais' chronologically, but a dating to the second half of the twelfth century, and specifically to the reign of Henry II (presumed to be the 'noble king' of the general prologue), is all that can be established. A third work attributed to Marie is a notably faithful French translation of a highly successful Latin treatise on St Patrick's Purgatory by the Cistercian monk Henry of Saltrey. The French 'Espurgatoire' is dedicated to 'H. abbot of Sartis' (Wardon, Bedfordshire), who is most likely to have been the second Abbot Hugh (1173-85/6). It survives in a single manuscript (Paris, Bibliotheque Nationale, MS fr. 25407) and is followed by no fewer than six Old French verse treatments of the treatise. It is possible that the Marie who composed the life of AEthelthryth in the early thirteenth century is also to be identified as Marie de France. 
Whatever her true identity, Marie de France displays an aristocratic outlook, a knowledge of Latin and English, familiarity with the works of Ovid, acquaintance with Wace's 'Brut' and Gaimar's 'Estoire des Engleis', and a variety of Breton lore. As a courtly writer and contemporary of Chretien de Troyes, Marie surprises by introducing Arthurian material into only one of the 'lais' ('Lanval'). All but one of the 'lais' were translated into Old Norse in the thirteenth century, while 'Le Fresne' and 'Lanval' inspired versions in Middle English. 


@@@@@


doc= 52461


Kernahan, (John) Coulson (1858-1943), writer and promoter of compulsory military service, was born at 2 Prospect Place, Ilfracombe, Devon, on 1 August 1858, the elder son and third of the eight children of the Revd James Kernahan MA PhD FGS ('b'. 1825/6), a Congregational minister who was the author of a commentary on the 'New Testament' and also an amateur geologist, and his wife, Comfort, 'nee' Plowman ('b'. 1828/9). His parents were both born in Ireland. He was educated at home by his father and at St Albans School. He later wrote that he learned little at school 'bar a code of manners which I hold to this day' and 'learning to hold my own -- in point of fact, to fight' (Kernahan papers, U. Reading). 
Kernahan had originally intended to be a scientist but recognized his true vocation when he became successful at writing in order to make a living while studying. His journalistic gifts quickly led to a career of writing essays and critical articles in monthly and quarterly magazines including 'Nineteenth Century', 'Fortnightly Review', 'Punch' and 'The Spectator'. He also wrote poetry, and his early poems were included in Alfred H. Miles's anthology of 'Poets and Poetry of the Century'. His poetic interests led him, however, to the study of others' work rather than prolific creation of his own. He collaborated in 1891 with Frederick Locker on a new edition of the anthology 'Lyra elegantiarum'. Kernahan knew Swinburne, who admired his critical gifts, and wrote a book of recollections of Swinburne and Watts-Dunton's household at The Pines (1919). In the 1920s he published two works on 'famous living poets'. 
Kernahan's greatest success as a writer came in his thirties with his novel 'A Dead Man's Diary', serialized by 'Lippincott's Magazine' and later published by Ward, Lock, and Bowden in 1890. It purported to be the adventures in the spirit world of the dead narrator, exemplifying Kernahan's belief that personality survives death. The book sold its first run of 2000 in a few weeks and was so successful that a confidence trickster induced a publisher to give an advance on his manuscript on the misrepresentation that he was the anonymous author. When Kernahan's publishers successfully sought an injunction, he was revealed as the writer. Ward Lock's reader, George Thomas Bettany, became, in Kernahan's words, 'my ever-honoured and ever-loved friend, and more than friend' (C. Kernahan, 'A Book of Strange Sins', 1893, iii). Following Bettany's death in 1891 Kernahan married his widow, Mary Jane Hickling Bettany (see below) on 13 June 1892. They had one daughter, named Beryl Bettany Kernahan. Kernahan had been an assistant reader for Ward Lock and succeeded Bettany as principal reader, a post he held until 1910. 
Kernahan's 'A Book of Strange Sins' (1893) offered a series of stories: 'each is a study of some form of crime or sin. Drink, Lust, Murder, Soul-Murder, Pride, Suicide' and 'self-seeking and self-righteousness' ('Strange Sins', iii). 'The Star' newspaper described the stories as 'palpitating with life. Terrible in their intensity and vivid vivisection of human mind and character' (review quoted in advertisement in Kernahan's 'God and the Ant'). The next of these books on religious themes, 'God and the Ant' (1895), was his most successful, selling 30,000 in a few months. The central conceit is that for humans to know the mind of God is rather as an ant might seek to understand the mind of a man. Kernahan's originality is shown in the set piece of the day of judgment when God is judged for the wrongs he has done man. The combined sales of this and his next book on religious themes, 'The Child, the Wise Man and the Devil' (1896), exceeded 100,000, but his mine of religious ideas was exhausted and the latter book lacked the originality of his earlier works. 
From 1906 until 1914 Kernahan, convinced that war was inevitable, gave almost the whole of his time and energy to preaching throughout the country the message of Lord Roberts's National Service League, which campaigned for compulsory military service. For this he refused not only remuneration but even expenses, his principles dictating that he could not receive money for religious or patriotic services. In order to preach by example, at the age of fifty he took a 2nd lieutenant's commission in the territorial infantry and was promoted captain in a few months. He wrote in his account of his experiences: 'I was ashamed to think that if war came, and England were in danger, I, an able-bodied man, should have to watch others go out to take a man's part in the defence of the country, while I remained behind with the women. (C. Kernahan, 'An Author in the Territorials' 1908, 9)' Just before the First World War broke out he was retired, having reached the age limit, but immediately hostilities commenced he was recommissioned for recruiting service. During the war, as well as writing a number of unmemorable fiction works, he returned to religious themes. He attacked the 'obsession' of spiritualism which he felt was both dangerous and opposed to the will of God. In 'Spiritualism: a Personal Experience and a Warning' (1919), published when the fatalities of the war led to an upsurge in attempts to contact the dead, he called the practice 'spiritual housebreaking' and criticized such humourless pranks as 'table turnings, automatic writing, guessing at the contents of a bag or box, vanishing and reappearing persons' (Kernahan, 'Spiritualism', 8, 28). 
Kernahan's friends considered that, as a result of his patriotic services, he had 'lost ground in the fierce competition of the literary life'. An appeal for him to be awarded a civil list pension was accompanied by a description of his domestic circumstances: 'Mr Kernahan, after having done the harshest of the domestic work, writes all day with indefatigable industry. His wife attends to the necessary household duties and keeps away callers who might interrupt her husband's work until the evening, and regularly at 10pm sets herself to write until 4am of the following morning. (TNA: PRO, civil list recommendation, 13 Dec 1924)' Doubtless there was some exaggeration, but it is none the less evident that their labour was great, and the remuneration small. The petition, supported by J. M. Barrie, Arthur Conan Doyle, Rudyard Kipling, Rider Haggard, and others, was successful and in 1925 Kernahan was awarded an annual pension of $100. 
In his maturity Kernahan was 6 feet 1 inch tall, had a forthright face with direct eyes, dark wavy hair, and a long waxed moustache. His affection for dogs was attested to by his 'Bow-Wow Book of Dog Love' (1912) and 'A Dog and his Master' (1932). From 1911 he and his wife lived at a house named Frognal, in Fairlight, near Hastings, Sussex. He died there on 17 February 1943 and was buried in the borough cemetery, Hastings. His literary work has not stood the test of time but as a type of man, sensitive and spiritually questing but without the slightest doubt as to his military obligations, he is representative of an early twentieth century generation of his countrymen. His sister Mary Kernahan ('b'. 1855/6) was also an author, who contributed to periodicals and had a volume of verse ('Nothing but Nonsense') published in 1898. 
Kernahan's wife, 


@@@@@


doc= 52462


Morant, Harry Harbord (1864?-1902), army officer, probably concealed his origins. He seems to have been Edwin Henry Murrant, born on 9 December 1864 at the union workhouse, Bridgwater, Somerset, the posthumous son of Edwin Murrant, master of the workhouse, and his wife, Catherine Riely (or O'Reilly). In 1883 he emigrated to Queensland and within a year married Daisy May O'Dwyer at Charters Towers on 13 March 1884. They soon separated, possibly because of his record of debt and larceny. As Daisy Bates she became a notable researcher of Aboriginal customs. 
Having adopted the surname Morant he led a roving life under that guise in several Australian states. Through his daring horsemanship and reckless feats, which gave rise to his nickname, the Breaker, he became a minor celebrity, but was also known as a brawler and hard drinker. Apparently self-educated he enjoyed good literature and music, and as the Breaker from 1891 contributed rollicking ballads to the Sydney 'Bulletin' and other newspapers. In the 1890s he was a crony of A. B. 'Banjo' Paterson, whose sardonic humour he shared. While Morant's verses were often redolent of a bushman's rough life in the outback, he projected himself successfully as a gentleman, the son of Admiral Sir George Digby Morant, a relationship which the admiral and his family later strongly denied. 
Responding to an appeal for volunteers to serve in the South African War which began in October 1899, Morant enlisted for short service in the 2nd South Australian mounted rifles. He was stocky and, according to an official description in 1902, had grey eyes, a prominent nose, and was 5 feet 63/4 inches in height. An accomplished rider, he was promoted lance-corporal before the contingent sailed for Cape Town in January 1900. Australian horsemen fought on the central front under Major-General J. French and later in the drive through both Boer republics that led to the relief of Kimberley and the occupation of Pretoria on 5 June 1900. Morant was one of French's dispatch riders. At Pretoria he was detailed for a further short spell as dispatch rider to Bennet Burleigh, war correspondent of the 'Daily Telegraph', but was discharged as time-expired on 31 July 1900. It was probably at Pretoria that he met Lieutenant P. F. Hunt, who was temporarily in the military administration there. Hunt, a former officer in the 13th hussars, had served with French's scouts in the recent British advance. Hunt and Morant returned to England, where Morant seems to have been accepted readily in county and hunting circles. With the prolongation of the South African War into a guerrilla struggle, there was a fresh appeal for volunteers, especially riders and marksmen. 
The imperial authorities raised several formations of irregulars in South Africa to counter Boer guerrillas, one of which was the bushveldt carbineers (BVC), which was established in February 1901. It attracted veterans, including a strong Australian constituent, and was to serve in a partially occupied region of the northern Transvaal. Morant, described as a 'gentleman', was commissioned lieutenant in the BVC on 1 April 1901 and his friend Hunt transferred to it as a captain soon after. Other commissioned officers closely linked to Morant's future were the Australians Veterinary-Lieutenant P. Handcock and Lieutenant G. Witton. 
The BVC was operating in dispersed detachments by May 1901. To the south-east of its base at Pietersburg, Morant led B squadron efficiently and energetically. However A squadron, at remote Fort Edward to the north-east, had a weak commander, and because of indiscipline and rumours of serious offences Hunt replaced him. Morant's squadron moved to Fort Edward too, and the reorganized force, aided by a resourceful but ruthless intelligence officer, Captain Taylor from Rhodesia, sought out the enemy. In a raid on a Boer farm stronghold near Duiwelskloof on 6 August 1901 Hunt -- Morant's 'best mate' -- was killed, as was Sergeant F. Eland, English by birth, who had been Morant's trusted subordinate in B squadron. Morant was already ill-disposed towards Boer guerrillas, having lost other friends when trains were attacked by them. He was incensed when he learned that Hunt's body had been stripped and mutilated, as he believed by the Boers, although the mutilation might have been performed by local medicine men. 
Morant pursued the fleeing Boers, and when one of them, Visser, was taken wounded he was shot on 11 August without having had a proper trial. Morant, now commanding at Fort Edward, was vengeful. Egged on by Captain Taylor he gave short shrift to Boers who surrendered to the BVC, asserting that Lord Kitchener had given verbal orders that Boer prisoners should not be taken. On 23 August eight prisoners were shot, but a passing missionary, the Revd C. A. D. Heese of the Berlin Missionary Society, had spoken to them and was a potentially hostile witness. At Morant's behest, Handcock, a compliant accessory, followed the missionary, whose body was found later. On 7 September three more surrendered Boers were shot. Subsequently Morant undertook a raid into enemy territory which brought in a Boer field-cornet and nine men who, however, were not executed. 
By 22 October 1901 Morant, Handcock, and several other BVC officers had been arrested. Among contributing factors the murder of Revd Heese was crucial. The missionary was a British subject born in Cape Colony, but as he had close German connections the German consul had voiced concern. Also important was a detailed list of allegations of excesses signed by fifteen troopers of the BVC at Pietersburg on 4 October. 
A properly constituted court of inquiry was convened at Pietersburg on 16 October. Many depositions were recorded and witnesses mustered. Kitchener's chief legal specialist considered the court's recommendations, and consequently Morant, Handcock, and others appeared before a series of courts martial commencing on 17 January 1902. The proceedings were conducted in accordance with British military law. At short notice an Australian officer, Major J. F. Thomas, was appointed to defend the accused. After lengthy sessions involving more than forty witnesses, Morant was sentenced to death for his part in the shootings of Visser and the groups of eight and three Boers. Handcock and he were acquitted on the charge of Heese's murder. A spokesman of Kitchener denied that any secret orders not to take prisoners had been given. The court's findings were coupled with recommendations for mercy based on Morant's good service, ignorance of military law, and the provocation of the 'maltreatment' of Hunt's body. However, no account was taken of the accused's part in defending Pietersburg against a surprise Boer attack on 23 January 1902. Kitchener confirmed death sentences on Morant and Handcock but commuted that on a third officer, Witton, to life imprisonment. Morant and Handcock were executed by a firing squad at the prison, Pretoria, on 27 February. They were buried in a common grave in the old cemetery there on the same day. Just before execution, Morant wrote some characteristic verses, 'Butchered to Make a Dutchman's Holiday': '
And if you'd earn a D.S.O. -- 

Why every British sinner 

Should know the proper way to go 

Is: ''Ask the Boer to dinner'' 




Let's toss a bumper down our throat 

Before we pass to Heaven, 

And toast: 'The trim-set petticoat 

We leave behind in Devon.' 
(Semmler, 123)' The executions gave rise to a minor furore in Australia. Witton's account of the trials, published in 1907, reinforced a burgeoning legend in which Morant was portrayed as a victim of a brutal Kitchener and a scapegoat of British imperialism. A considerable literature -- some romantic, some fictional -- as well as a notable film ('Breaker Morant', with Edward Woodward), a play, and radio productions, were afterwards devoted to the supposed BVC martyrs. Speculation about Morant's origins entered into the myth-making. His character was complex, and while physical prowess and swagger won him many admirers, it was ultimately dishonesty and gross abuse of authority that were his undoing. On the eve of his execution he wrote to a Pretoria clergyman: 'We shot the Boers who killed and mutilated our friend (The best mate I had on Earth)'. 


@@@@@


doc= 52466


Franklin, Benjamin (1706-1790), natural philosopher, writer, and revolutionary politician in America, was born in Boston, Massachusetts, New England, on 6 January 1706 and baptized later that day. His parents were Josiah Franklin (1657-1745), a tallow chandler and soap maker who had emigrated from England in 1683 to practise his puritan faith, and his second wife, Abiah (1667-1752), the daughter of Peter Folger of Nantucket Island, Massachusetts. Josiah had seventeen children, seven by his first wife and ten by his second. Benjamin was the ninth child born to Josiah and Abiah. 
Franklin had only two years of formal education. He studied at a traditional grammar school (probably in 1714-15), and at an English school during the following year. He then worked for his father, but disliked the trade. In 1718 his brother James set up a printing shop in Boston. Since Franklin loved to read and write poetry his father apprenticed him to James, and in that year the twelve-year-old Franklin signed a nine-year indenture. After reading everything in his father's small library he borrowed books from his friends. Having purchased an odd volume of 'The Spectator', Franklin taught himself composition by making notes on the essays, then jumbling the notes, and later constructing them in his own words. He compared these with the originals and corrected his. 
In 1721 James Franklin started his own newspaper, the 'New England Courant', which became America's first witty, daring, literary, and anti-establishment journal. To Benjamin his brother's printing shop served as a miniature republic of letters where groups of James's friends met daily to discuss the materials they were writing for the 'Courant'. Benjamin set the contents in type, printed and delivered the journal to the customers, and heard their comments. At sixteen he emulated his brother's friends and wrote for the paper, in what became the first essay series in American literature, under the pseudonym Silence Dogood: 'But being still a Boy, and suspecting that my Brother would object to printing any Thing of mine in his Paper if he knew it to be mine, I contriv'd to disguise my Hand and writing an anonymous Paper I put it in at Night under the Door of the Printing-House. ('Autobiography', 17-18)' Between 12 June and 7 July 1722 Benjamin took charge of the 'Courant' while his brother served a prison term for suggesting that local officials had deliberately delayed sailing out to resist pirates. After James had further offended the authorities, in January 1723, the Massachusetts general assembly narrowly agreed to prohibit him from publishing the newspaper without prior review. James defied the order, printed the 'Courant', and hid from the authorities between 24 January and 12 February, leaving Benjamin once more in charge. In this capacity the adolescent gave 'our Rulers some Rubs in it' (ibid., 19). 
Notwithstanding their professional co-operation the siblings often quarrelled, and James, who 'was otherwise not an ill-natur'd Man', sometimes beat his apprentice. Benjamin ran away and on 25 September 1723 sailed for New York, which had the nearest printing establishment. Failing to find work there he went on to Philadelphia, the only other town in English speaking North America with a printing press, arriving on the morning of 6 October with 1 Dutch dollar and about 20 pence in copper. Franklin then went to work for Samuel Keimer in his recently opened printing shop. Seven months later, befriended by Pennsylvania's governor, William Keith, who promised to give him a contract for the public printing, Benjamin returned to Boston to ask his father for a loan to start a printing shop but was refused. Back in Philadelphia, Keith pledged to lend Franklin the money to buy the press and types but suggested he go first to London to make the purchases and to arrange for supplies from the stationers, booksellers, and printers. At this time Franklin was courting Deborah Read (1705?-1774), his landlady's daughter, and they planned to marry, but her mother insisted they wait until Franklin's return. He sailed for London on 5 November 1724, by chance with Thomas Denham, a Quaker merchant. In London, Franklin learned that Governor Keith had deceived him and had 'no Credit to give' ('Autobiography', 41). Without money or prospects Franklin found work at Samuel Palmer's London printing shop, 54 Bartholomew Close. There, in February 1725, he set in type the third edition of William Wollaston's 'Religion of Nature Delineated', and wrote an ironic rejoinder, 'A Dissertation on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain'. With no publisher, no author, and no bookseller indicated, the pamphlet was archetypal clandestine literature. It won him notoriety among London libertines, and the friendship of William Lyons, who had spent six months in gaol for expressing freethinking views in his own book; via Lyons he also met Bernard Mandeville, author of the infamous 'Fable of the Bees', and it is Franklin who provides us with the only description of the author's personality. Later that year Franklin left Palmer's printing house for John Watts' larger printing establishment and in spring 1726 Thomas Denham encouraged Franklin to return with him to Philadelphia and work as his clerk and shopkeeper while learning the mercantile business. Franklin agreed and left England on 23 July 1726. 
Franklin attended to Denham's business 'diligently, studied Accounts, and grew in a little Time expert at selling' ('Autobiography', 52). However, following a severe bout of pleurisy he left Denham (who died in July 1728 after a lingering illness) and returned to work as the manager of Samuel Keimer's printing shop in March 1727. In the following spring he and an associate, Hugh Meredith, borrowed money from Meredith's father to set up their own printing shop and a year later Franklin published his first political pamphlet, 'A Modest Inquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency' (1729). Partly because of its influence the Pennsylvania assembly passed a paper currency bill. In autumn 1729 the partners bought the failing 'Pennsylvania Gazette' 'for a Trifle' from Samuel Keimer. Franklin immediately revived its fortunes by writing an editorial analysis of the current controversy between Governor William Burnet and the Massachusetts assembly. The paper's circulation was boosted further after October 1735, when he was appointed Philadelphia's postmaster. 'Tho' the Salary was small', the position 'facilitated the Correspondence that improv'd my Newspaper, increas'd the Number demanded, as well as the Advertisements to be inserted, so that it came to afford me a very considerable Income' (ibid., 101). 
In August 1725 Franklin's former betrothed, Deborah Read, had married John Rogers. He proved a poor husband who was rumoured to have another wife, and Deborah soon left him to return to live with her mother. Rogers absconded in December 1727. On 1 September 1730 Franklin and Deborah Read Rogers joined together in a common-law marriage, and set up a home with Benjamin's illegitimate son, William Franklin, who according to his own correspondence was born in 1730 or 1731 but whose ensign commission (June 1746) may suggest a birth date of about 1729; firm details of William's mother are unknown ('Papers', 3.474n.). In October 1732 Deborah gave birth to a son, Francis Folger Franklin, who died of smallpox aged four. Eleven years after the birth of Francis, Franklin's third and last child, Sarah, was born on 31 August 1743. Deborah was a member of Philadelphia's Anglican Christ Church, where both Francis Folger and Sarah were baptized and where Francis was buried. Franklin subscribed for seats for his family in the church and supported its projects, but never became a member. 
Admitted a freemason in January 1731 Franklin was elected grand master on St John's day, 24 June 1734, the first indication of his rise to local prominence. In July 1731 he organized the Library Company of Philadelphia and during the autumn he sponsored Thomas Whitemarsh as his printing partner in Charles Town, South Carolina. By 1732 Franklin had taught himself to read and write German and he subsequently studied French, Spanish, Italian, and Latin, attaining a reading knowledge of them all. Later that year Franklin started his own almanac, 'Poor Richard', to which he contributed and with which he achieved commercial success, selling almost ten thousand copies annually. Even after his retirement from printing in 1748 Franklin supplied the copy for 'Poor Richard' until 1757, when he wrote the last almanac, 'Poor Richard Improved... 1758', on his voyage to England. The preface of that work, reprinted under the title 'The Way to Wealth' (initially as 'Father Abraham's Speech'), became his best-known writing until the posthumous publication of his 'Autobiography' (see below). Additional work followed his appointment in October 1736 as clerk of the Pennsylvania assembly. The position allowed him to keep up his interest 'among the Members, which secur'd to me the Business of Printing the Votes, Laws, Paper Money, and other occasional jobs for the Public, that on the whole were very profitable' ('Autobiography', 100). 
In addition to new publishing ventures and political responsibilities Franklin was now also engaged in self-improvement. By 1 July 1733 he had devised a scheme of thirteen useful virtues and a chart listing the violations which he recorded in the second part of the 'Autobiography'. Franklin's proposed virtues were intended to correct his particular faults, though he thought the method of attaining the virtues might be useful to others. The morning question on his chart of the day began, 'What Good shall I do this Day' and the evening question was 'What Good have I done to day' ('Autobiography', 83). Discussing the project in the 'Autobiography', he concluded that though he fell short of the ideal envisioned, 'Yet I was by the Endeavour made a better and a happier man than I otherwise should have been' (ibid., 87). 
Self-improvement also coincided with Franklin's growing interest in, and reputation for, scientific enquiry and experimentation. In the edition of the 'Pennsylvania Gazette' for February 1735, for example, he publicized the importance of firefighting (this followed his proposal for a fire protection society to his Philadelphia debating club, the Junto), and on 7 December 1736 he organized Philadelphia's first fire company. To hinder counterfeiting of paper currency he devised a new printing technique (reproducing images of plant leaves) and used it for the New Jersey paper currency of 1736. On 21 October 1743 Franklin intended to observe an eclipse of the moon but was prevented by bad weather. He found that the eclipse was observed in Boston and that a hurricane, which had passed over Philadelphia on the 21st, had struck there later. That observation led him to speculate that though the hurricane had blown from the north-east the storm itself had moved up from the south. Fascinated by the whirling winds in the great storms he analysed the nature of whirlwinds and waterspouts, correctly theorizing that they had vacuums at their centre, and ingeniously comparing their motion to the circular motion of water draining from a tub. During winter 1740-41 he designed a superior stove and in 1744 he wrote a pamphlet to popularize his invention which conserved wood while proving more efficient: 'My common Room, I know is made twice as warm as it used to be, with a quarter of the Wood I formerly consum'd' ('Papers', 2.437). The pamphlet was translated into various languages and gave him an international reputation. Though offered a patent on the stove, the practical idealist refused it, saying that since he enjoyed 'great Advantage from the Inventions of Others, we should be glad of an Opportunity to serve others by an Invention of ours' ('Autobiography', 116). 
In 1743 Franklin published 'A Proposal for Promoting Useful Knowledge', the founding document for the precursor of America's first scientific society, the American Philosophical Society. In April 1745 the London merchant Peter Collinson, a member of the Royal Society, sent the Library Company a pamphlet describing the new German investigations in electricity. Franklin and several friends practised the existing experiments with the Leyden jar (an early capacitor) and designed their own tests. On 25 May 1747 Franklin sent Collinson a letter explaining how the capacitor worked. Franklin proved that there were not two kinds of electricity (the current theory) but only one, to which he applied the terms 'plus' and 'minus', or 'positive' and 'negative'. Franklin demonstrated that in electrifying objects nothing new was created or lost, rather that the electricity was rearranged. For the Nobel prize-winning physicist R. A. Millikin, Franklin's law of the conservation of charge was 'the most fundamental thing ever done in the field of electricity' (Millikin, 38). 
Finally, these fruitful years also witnessed Franklin's emerging political conscience and spirit of activism. In 1747 French and Spanish privateers attacked ships and settlements in the Delaware River, and the French and Indians assaulted Pennsylvania's frontiers. The authorities were unable to raise a military as the Pennsylvania assembly was controlled by Quakers, many of whom were pacifists. On 17 November 1747 Franklin published a 24-page pamphlet entitled 'Plain Truth' in which he outlined the province's defenceless and alarming situation, and urged private citizens to organize themselves as a defensive force if the government would not. On the verso of the title-page he printed America's first political cartoon with the moral that God helps those who help themselves. He proposed a militia association, which proved successful and made him a popular hero, provoking the jealousy of Pennsylvania's main proprietor, Thomas Penn. When King George's War (1740-48) concluded the militia association dissolved. 
On 1 January 1748 Franklin formed a partnership with his journeyman David Hall and retired as a printer, so acquiring more time for electrical experimentation. In April 1749 he theorized that clouds became electrified and that lightning was electrical in nature, and in July of the following year he devised an experiment to test his hypothesis. By this date Franklin had also proposed the idea of lightning rods (March 1750). In London, Franklin's letters on electricity were gathered by the physician John Fothergill and published as 'Experiments and Observations on Electricity' in February 1751. The brief book was translated into French, and Franklin's experiment was successfully carried out in France on 10 May 1752. Before learning of the French proof Franklin speculated that he might also be able to test his hypothesis by flying a kite at the approach of a thunder storm, and in June 1752 he tried the experiment. Franklin ran a hemp string from the kite to a Leyden jar, insulating himself with a silk ribbon attached to the string. When the fibres on the string stood out, he knew the experiment had succeeded, thus proving electricity to be a basic element of nature. His work made Franklin the most famous natural philosopher since Isaac Newton: 'The Prometheus of modern times', as Immanuel Kant put it in 1756 ('Papers', 20.490). 
In October 1748 the common council of Philadelphia had chosen Franklin to be a councilman. On 3 June of the following year he was named a justice of the peace for Philadelphia, and in 1751 he was elected to the Pennsylvania assembly. Because Franklin had been the assembly's clerk since 1736 he was intimately familiar with its workings and was immediately assigned to the most important committees. Known as a superior writer he authorized the replies to the governor's messages. His public offices culminated in his being appointed, on 10 August 1753, joint deputy postmaster-general of North America. 
In 1749 Franklin projected an academy in Philadelphia, raised funds for it, supervised its construction, and served as its first chairman of the board of trustees. It became the Academy and College of Philadelphia and later the University of Pennsylvania. In 1751 his friend Thomas Bond attempted to raise funds for a hospital in Philadelphia. He enlisted Franklin, who wrote two essays on the subject in the 'Pennsylvania Gazette' and raised subscriptions. When these proved insufficient Franklin petitioned the Pennsylvania legislature for funds. The county legislators objected that it would benefit only the city and claimed that even Philadelphians were not really supporting the plan. Franklin then devised the first matching grant. He proposed a bill making the grant conditional: when the hospital's subscribers had raised $2000 then the legislature would add an additional $2000. Subscriptions increased and the Pennsylvania Hospital, America's first, opened on 6 February 1752. Franklin's varied activities brought recognition. In 1753, while journeying through New England on post office business, he received honorary MAs from Harvard (25 July) and Yale (12 September). On 30 November he was awarded the Copley medal of the British Royal Society, at that time the most distinguished prize for scientific achievement in the world. The Royal Society unanimously elected him to membership on 29 April 1756. On another post office tour to Virginia, William and Mary College granted him its first honorary master's degree (20 April 1756) and on 1 September he became a corresponding member of London's Society of Arts. 
Among his contemporaries Franklin's scientific achievements eclipsed his literary output. However, by the mid-eighteenth century he had also established an international reputation as a writer. During the 1730s he had written numerous essays, news note jokes, and hoaxes, among them 'A witch trial at Mount Holly' (22 October 1730) which he published in the 'Pennsylvania Gazette'. His salacious 'Old mistresses' apologue, or, Reasons for preferring an old mistress to a young one' (25 June 1745) circulated widely in manuscript. 'The speech of Miss Polly Baker, before a court of judicature, at Connecticut in New England, where she was prosecuted the fifth time for having a bastard child' (17 April 1747) created a publishing sensation, appearing in seven English newspapers and the two most popular English magazines within three weeks of its first appearance. Much of his work, like 'The speech of Miss Polly Baker', appeared anonymously or under a pseudonym. Other pieces, such as his grotesque poem, 'An apology for the young man in gaol, and in shackels, for ravishing an old woman of 85 at Whitemarsh, who had only one eye, and that a red one', first appeared in a rival's newspaper, while Franklin's epitaph (1729), his mock biblical parables (1755), and numerous letters, like the one of 6 June 1753 to Joseph Huey on the contest of faith versus good works, circulated privately in manuscript in England and America before being printed. 
In addition to belletristic writings Franklin was also increasingly celebrated for the high quality of his pro-American propaganda. The hoax 'Rattlesnakes for felons' (9 May 1751) proposed sending rattlesnakes to Great Britain in return for the transported convicts shipped to America. His essay 'Observations concerning the increase of mankind, peopling of countries, &c.' (1751) was intended as a response to the British 'Acts of Trade and Navigation'. It roused a young John Adams to contemplate the future independence of what became the United States, as well as influencing the theories of Adam Smith on capitalism and Thomas Malthus on population. Alarmed by the French incursions into the Ohio valley and along the Pennsylvania and Virginia frontiers, on 4 May 1754 Franklin wrote an editorial in which he urged unification of the colonies, printing it under a cartoon which depicted a snake cut into pieces, with the caption: 'JOIN OR DIE', the first symbol of the unified American colonies. That summer, representing Pennsylvania, he attended the Albany conference called by Westminster to urge the Iroquois or Six Nations to remain with the British and to arrange a common defence of the frontier against the French troops and their American Indian allies. Franklin drafted a plan of union as he journeyed to the conference. On 2 July 1754 the conference voted to form a union of the colonies, and on 10 July, it adopted, with revisions, Franklin's plan ('Papers', 5.374-87). However, the colonies rejected it because they thought it gave too much power to the British authorities, while the British Board of Trade rejected it because of fears that a union could lead to independence. 
In December 1754 the Board of Trade put forward its own proposals for union about which Franklin consulted William Shirley, governor of Massachusetts. Franklin objected that the British plan did not give the colonists the right to choose their own representatives and also protested against the proposal to have parliament tax Americans. On 4 December he wrote that it was 'an undoubted Right of Englishmen not to be taxed but by their own Consent given thro' their Representatives' ('Papers', 5.444). On 22 December, in reply to Governor Shirley's suggestion that the colonists elect members of parliament, Franklin argued that if all the past 'Acts of Trade and Navigation', were repealed and if the colonies were given 'a reasonable number of Representatives' then the colonists might be satisfied. Such preferences were, Franklin claimed, certainly due to 'those who have most contributed to enlarge Britain's empire and commerce, encrease her strength, her wealth, and the numbers of her people, at the risque of their own lives and private fortunes in new and strange countries' ('Papers', 5.451). Franklin's defiant Americanism struck a new chord in eighteenth-century political discourse. Years later James Madison wrote that Franklin's letters to Shirley 'repelled with the greatest possible force, within the smallest possible compass' Britain's claim to govern America (Farrand and Hutson, 3.540n.). 
Pennsylvania's governors refused to assent to tax bills unless the proprietors' land was exempted, prompting the Pennsylvania assembly to petition the British authorities. The assembly voted Franklin its agent, and on 3 February 1757 he accepted, thereafter spending the period 1757 to 1762 in England, where he lodged with his son, William, at 7 Craven Street, Strand, London. His wife, Deborah, fearing the voyage, remained in Philadelphia. Shortly after arriving in London Franklin met the president of the privy council, Lord Granville, who told him (27 July 1757) that George II's instructions to the governors were law: 'the King is the Legislator of the Colonies' ('Autobiography', 167). Franklin disagreed. He found the British public and the authorities ignorant about America and began a campaign to enlighten them. His 'A defence of the Americans', which appeared in the 'London Chronicle' (12 May 1759), was the grandest statement of Americanism in the colonial period. Franklin's subsequent pamphlet, arguing for the economic and strategic importance of Canada to the colonies and to Great Britain ('The Interest of Great Britain Considered', 1760), was partly responsible for convincing the British authorities to retain Canada rather than Guadeloupe at the conclusion of the Seven Years' War (1756-63). 
Following instructions Franklin consulted the London physician and friend of Pennsylvania's Quaker leaders, John Fothergill, who advised him to try for an accommodation with the proprietors before appealing to the British authorities. That negotiation dragged on inconclusively but in Pennsylvania on 17 April 1759 the governor passed a tax bill that included the proprietors' estates. The Penn family tried to have the act disallowed and, despite the arguments of lawyers hired by Franklin, the Board of Trade recommended on 24 June 1760 that it be annulled. Franklin appealed to the king in council, and, after personally guaranteeing that the proprietary estates would be taxed with perfect equity, won the case. The Penns, however, continued to oppose acts taxing their lands. 
During this first mission to England, Franklin frequently attended two informal clubs. One -- consisting primarily of scientists, philanthropists, and explorers (including, on occasions, the navigator, James Cook) -- met on Mondays; the other, dubbed the Club of Honest Whigs, met on Thursdays, and included dissenting ministers such as Joseph Priestley and Richard Price, as well as James Boswell. Franklin also regularly attended meetings of the Royal Society, the Associates of Dr Bray (a small philanthropic organization which Samuel Johnson visited on 1 May 1760 while Franklin was its chairman), and the Society of Arts. Time permitting Franklin continued his scientific interests when in Britain, inventing a clock with only three wheels; experimenting with an early form of air conditioning (17 June 1758); designing a damper for stoves and chimneys (2 December 1758); and gradually improving his new musical instrument, the glass armonica (13 July 1762). As in America, Franklin's scientific work was acknowledged by British universities, and he received an honorary degree of doctor of laws from St Andrews (12 February 1759) and from Oxford a doctorate of civil law (30 April 1762). 
Franklin left England in late summer 1762 and arrived back in Philadelphia on 1 November. He found troubles at home following the murder in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, of a group of Christian American Indians by a mob (the Paxton boys). Franklin wrote a scathing denunciation of the act in 'A Narrative of the Late Massacres', published on 30 January 1764. When the Paxton boys marched on Philadelphia to kill the Christian Indians there the government floundered. Franklin organized Philadelphia's defence, met the leaders of the rioters, and persuaded them to present a list of their grievances and disperse. 
On 26 May 1764 Franklin was elected speaker of the Pennsylvania house of representatives, as news of the impending 'Stamp Act' reached the colonies. On 13 June the Massachusetts house of representatives asked colonial assemblies to oppose the act. Franklin presented the request to the Pennsylvania assembly on 12 September. This promptly instructed Pennsylvania's London agent, Richard Jackson, to resist the proposed act and to argue that only the Pennsylvania legislature had the right to impose taxes in the colony. 
Before the Pennsylvania election of 1763 Franklin was exposed to a series of allegations by his political opponents that he coveted the governorship; that he had bilked the public moneys while he was the assembly's agent in England; that William Franklin's mother was his maidservant Barbara whom he mistreated and had buried in an unmarked grave; that he was prejudiced against Germans; and that he was overly sympathetic to the cause of the American Indians. The most bitterly contested assembly election in colonial Pennsylvania began at 10 a.m. on 1 October 1764, and continued until 3 p.m. on the following day. Franklin lost by eighteen votes ('Papers', 11.390-91). However, the anti-proprietary party retained its majority and appointed Franklin, on 26 October 1764, to join Richard Jackson as the assembly's agent to England. 
The purpose of Franklin's second mission to Britain (1764-75) was to petition the new king, George III, for a change from proprietary to royal government in Pennsylvania. But British imperial politics intervened. After Franklin reached London he was immediately immersed in attempts to reject Grenville's 'Stamp Act'. He now began a series of essays and letters to the London newspapers opposing the 'Stamp Act' and distributed a satirical cartoon to members of parliament. Franklin's efforts were, however, in vain. The 'Stamp Act' passed the Commons on 27 February 1765 and received the royal assent on 22 March, to take effect, on 1 November. Franklin had lost, but he supposed the 'Stamp Act' could be tolerated. On 11 July 1765 he wrote to the young Philadelphia patriot Charles Thomson: 'I took every step in my Power, to prevent the Passing of the 'Stamp Act'', but 'We might as well have hinder'd the Sun's setting'. Franklin accepted defeat before hearing of Virginia's 'Stamp Act' resolves. On 30 May 1765 Virginia's house of burgesses denied that Britain had the right to tax Virginians. Emboldened by the Virginia resolves other colonies followed its line and local mobs threatened the stamp distributors. Because of rumours that Franklin had supported the 'Stamp Act' his Philadelphia home was surrounded on the night of 16 September. Deborah armed herself, ready to fight and defend their home, though the threat came to nothing. On 1 November, the day the 'Stamp Act' was to take effect, courts throughout the colonies refused to convene. American colonial administration collapsed. 
On 13 February 1766 Franklin attended a parliamentary committee of the whole house to testify against the 'Stamp Act'. His answers to MPs constituted a triumphant display of political knowledge and of pro-Americanism. To the suggestion that military forces should be sent to America he asserted, 'They will not find a rebellion; they may indeed make one' ('Papers', 13.142). Publication of his 'Examination' confirmed Franklin's reputation as the pre-eminent spokesman for the American colonies. On 11 April 1768 the Georgia assembly appointed him its agent: on 8 November 1769 New Jersey did the same; and on 24 October 1770 the Massachusetts assembly followed suit, making him the agent for four colonies. 
Between 1764 and 1775 Franklin wrote a series of spirited pro-American essays, among them the 'Grand leap of the whale over Niagara Falls' (3 May 1765), 'Rules by which a great empire may be reduced to a small one' (11 September 1773), and 'An edict by the king of Prussia' (22 September 1773). A treasonous manuscript, 'Remarks on Judge Foster's arguments in favor of the right of impressing seamen', probably written about 1770, also circulated clandestinely. According to Franklin it was George III not the poor sailor who deserved impressment, for 'I am not satisfied of the Necessity or Utility' of the 'Office of King' in Great Britain ('Papers', 35.500). Though Franklin predicted American independence, he said that every year brought America increasing strength. If there must be war, it was he believed better to postpone it for as long as possible. 
The mounting political crisis and his reputation as a critic of the British government did not lessen Franklin's appetite for self, social, and scientific observation. In 1771, while staying at Twyford with the bishop of St Asaph, he wrote, in the form of an open letter to his son William, an account of his life to 1731. This later formed the first part of what was commonly known after Franklin's death as his 'Autobiography', a remarkably candid and influential study in the genre. In 1766 he visited Germany and journeyed to France in 1767 and 1769. In 1771 he toured Ireland and Scotland with Richard Jackson, staying with David Hume in Edinburgh and with Lord Kames at Blair Drummond. Conditions in Ireland depressed him: there were a few rich 'Landlords, great Noblemen and Gentlemen, extremely opulent, living in the highest Affluence and magnificence', while the majority were 'extremely poor, living in the most sordid Wretchedness in dirty Hovels of mud and Straw, and cloathed only in Rags'. He wrote on 13 January 1772 'That in the Possession and Enjoyment of the various Comforts of Life, compar'd to these People every Indian is a Gentleman: and the Effect of this kind of Civil Society seems only to be, the depressing Multitudes below the Savage State that a few may be rais'd above it.' In May 1768 Franklin, as natural philosopher, had experimented on the relationship between canal water depths and the speed of canal boats. In July of that year he devised a phonetic alphabet and corresponded in it; in the autumn he had maps of the Atlantic engraved which contained the course of the 'river in the ocean', the gulf stream. Franklin also supervised publication of the revised and enlarged fourth English edition of his 'Experiments and Observations on Electricity' (1769). In August 1772 the Academie Royale des Sciences in Paris elected him a foreign associate at a time when he was engaged in repeated experiments concerning the interaction of oil and water, correctly determining 'the scale of magnitude of molecular dimensions, the first person ever to do so, but he did not recognize it' (Tanford, 80). 
While in London Franklin learned that British repressive tactics had been encouraged by the Massachusetts governor, Thomas Hutchinson, and by his lieutenant-governor Andrew Oliver. Franklin sent their correspondence to Massachusetts, hoping that the letters would lessen the rage of the radicals against the British authorities. Instead the correspondence exacerbated the strife between the governor and the Massachusetts assembly, which petitioned for Hutchinson's and Oliver's removal. At the same time Hutchinson obtained a copy of Franklin's 7 July 1773 letter urging the colonial assemblies to resolve never to 'grant aids to the Crown in any General War till' the rights of Americans: 'are recogniz'd by the King and both Houses of Parliament.... Such a Step I imagine will bring the Dispute to a Crisis; and whether our Demands are immediately comply'd with, or compulsory Means are thought of to make us Rescind them, our Ends will finally be obtain'd. ('Papers', 17.282)' Hutchinson sent the copy to Lord Dartmouth, the colonial secretary, who judged it treasonable. On Dartmouth's instruction General Thomas Gage, military commander-in-chief in America, sought unsuccessfully to obtain the original so that Franklin could be prosecuted. 
The Hutchinson-Oliver letters were published in Boston in June 1773. To prevent a duel over the source of the letters on 25 December Franklin published the statement, 'I alone am the person who obtained and transmitted to Boston the letters in question'. He also forwarded to Lord Dartmouth the Massachusetts petition to remove Hutchinson and Oliver. A preliminary hearing took place on 11 January 1774. News of the Boston Tea Party reached London on 20 January and further infuriated the British authorities with Massachusetts and its agent. The hearing on the Massachusetts petition before the privy council took place in the cockpit on 29 January. In an hour-long diatribe, the British solicitor-general, Alexander Wedderburn, excoriated and denounced Franklin, demanding that he be marked and branded as a criminal. Britain's greatest officials, many of whom Franklin knew well, sneered and snickered while he stood silent, America's scapegoat. 
On 31 January 1774 Franklin was dismissed as deputy postmaster-general for North America. The American post office had never been profitable before Franklin took it over and it never has been since. During 1774 and early 1775, even as he petitioned against the Boston 'Port Bill' (which became law on 31 January, closing Boston's port), Franklin satirized the British government's handling of American politics while still attempting to reconcile Great Britain with the colonists. In an effort to forestall the bill he personally guaranteed payment of the cost of the tea dumped in Boston harbour. His efforts, including his collaboration with William Pitt, earl of Chatham, in January 1775, came to nothing. He left London on 20 March, his second mission, like his first, a failure. He was being prosecuted in court, and on 13 May 1775 the sheriff of Middlesex was ordered to arrest him. 
While Franklin was at sea the battles of Lexington and Concord (17 and 18 April 1775) started the War of American Independence. He arrived at Philadelphia on 5 May and on the following day the Pennsylvania assembly unanimously chose him as a delegate to the second continental congress. His draft 'Articles of confederation' (written before 21 July 1775) asserted America's sovereignty and gave greater powers to the central government than did the United States constitution in 1787. But congress was not yet ready. On 23 July John Adams reported that Franklin 'does not hesitate at our boldest Measures, but rather seems to think us, too irresolute, and backward' ('Diary and Autobiography', 1.253). In the autumn he was appointed by congress to a committee to confer with General George Washington in Massachusetts and, on 29 November, as the chair of a standing committee of secret correspondence to deal with foreign affairs. In effect Franklin was now the first secretary of state. His propagandist writings of the period included the satiric song 'The King's Own Regulars' (27 November 1775), which George Washington enjoyed, and the hoax 'Bradshaw's epitaph' (14 December 1775), which concluded with the words that Thomas Jefferson adopted as his personal motto: 'Rebellion to Tyrants is Obedience to God'. 
In congress Franklin again argued for an 'Instrument of confederation' (16 January 1776), a document giving articles of confederation for the union, but was defeated. Instead Franklin, along with Charles Carroll of Carrollton, Samuel Chase, and Father John Carroll, was appointed a member of the commission to convince the Canadians to join the Americans against Britain. Though now seventy and suffering from ill health Franklin undertook the arduous mission (26 March to 30 May), which failed. After his return he served on the committee to draft the 'Declaration of Independence'. Thomas Jefferson chaired the committee and decided to compose the document himself, though Franklin added to and revised it. Congress voted for independence on 2 July, and then debated, altered, and finally adopted the declaration on 4 July 1776. Elected to the Pennsylvania state convention on 8 July, Franklin was chosen its president on the 16th. 
Drafting the Pennsylvania declaration of rights Franklin made the bold assertion that the state had the right to discourage large concentrations of property and wealth in single individuals as a danger to the happiness of the majority ('Papers', 22.533). However, the Pennsylvania convention rejected his radical economic suggestion. During congressional debates on the articles of confederation (30 July to 1 August 1776) he unsuccessfully advocated that representation be proportional to population, rather than equal by states. Congress appointed Franklin, Adams, and Edward Rutledge to a committee to confer with Lord Howe on Staten Island. At the meeting, which took place on 11 September, Howe stated that he felt for America and would lament her fall as a brother would, to which Franklin replied with 'a Bow, a Smile and all the Naivetee which sometimes appeared in his conversation,... 'My Lord, We will do our Utmost Endeavours, to save your Lordship that mortification'' ('Diary and Autobiography', 3.422). In the autumn Franklin drafted his 'Sketch of propositions for a peace', suggesting that Britain cede Canada to an independent United States. Elected by congress as a commissioner to France with Silas Deane and Arthur Lee he sailed from Philadelphia on 27 October 1776. 
Franklin arrived in France on 3 December 1776 and proceeded to Paris, where he met secretly with the comte de Vergennes, French foreign minister. The American commissioners formally requested French aid on 5 January 1777, and on the 13th they received a verbal promise of 2 million livres. From his knowledge of Voltaire's 'Lettres philosophiques' (1734) and Montesquieu's 'L'esprit des lois' (1748) Franklin understood the French association of Pennsylvania and Quakerism with virtue and simplicity and dressed and presented himself accordingly. (His readiness to discard his wig was also due to a scalp irritation from which he then suffered.) On 8 February 1777 he wrote to his friend Emma Thompson: 'Figure me... very plainly dress'd, wearing my thin grey strait Hair, that peeps out under my only Coiffure, a fine Fur Cap, which comes down my Forehead almost to my Spectacles. Think how this must appear among the Powder'd Heads of Paris.' John Adams testified that Franklin was idolized while in France: 'His name was familiar to government and people, to kings, courtiers, nobility, clergy, and philosophers, as well as plebeians, to such a degree that there was scarcely a peasant or citizen, a 'valet de chambre', coachman or footman, a lady's chambermaid or a scullion in a kitchen, who was not familiar with it, and who did not consider him as a friend to human kind. ('Works of John Adams', 1.659)' From the French finance minister, Turgot, there came the famous epigram: 'Eripuit coelo fulmen, sceptrumque tyrannis' ('He snatched the lightning from the skies and the sceptre from the tyrants'; Aldridge, 124). 
On 21 October 1778, following France's decision to send a minister plenipotentiary to the United States, congress responded by electing Franklin to a similar position. To facilitate the production of passports, loan certificates, promissory notes, and other documents he purchased a press and types and printed such items, as well as a number of his bagatelles. As minister plenipotentiary Franklin's duties were numerous. He borrowed funds from France for the expenses of congress, issued letters of marque for American privateers, managed the interests of the continental navy overseas, and oversaw the purchase and shipping of arms and other supplies for the continental army. He negotiated for the humane treatment and exchanges of American prisoners of war and helped hundreds of escaped American prisoners. On Tuesdays he attended the royal court with his fellow ministers, entertained Americans at dinner on most Sundays and cultivated good relations with a host of influential French intellectuals and politicians. Though his multifarious duties precluded extensive scientific experimentation Franklin nevertheless encouraged it among others and was able to write selective papers himself. Thus learning that ships used in the salt trade lasted longer than others he conceived a method for prolonging the life of lumber by seasoning it in salt. He devised a test for the conductivity of metals; a magnificent display of the aurora borealis (3 December 1778) prompted him to write a series, 'Suppositions and conjectures', on the phenomenon. His description of a new technological device, bifocal glasses, came on 23 May 1784. 
In June 1781 congress appointed Franklin, Henry Laurens, and Thomas Jefferson to join John Jay and John Adams as commissioners to negotiate peace following General Cornwallis's surrender to George Washington at Yorktown on 19 October 1781. From March to June 1782 Franklin negotiated with the British emissary Richard Oswald, a London merchant with American sympathies and an old friend of the American minister. On 18 April Franklin suggested that Britain should cede Canada to the United States. Had Franklin been the only commissioner, he might have been able to settle the peace then and to have secured Canada. But when John Jay arrived in Paris on 23 June he insisted on prior recognition of American independence as a condition for formal peace negotiations, thus delaying the talks while the war at sea slowly changed to favour the British. 
On 10 July 1782 Franklin proposed to Oswald the 'necessary' terms for peace, ignoring congress's instruction to act only with the knowledge and concurrence of France. Oswald's new British commission (21 September 1782) effectively recognized the United States and overcame Jay's hesitation. A draft of the articles for the treaty was prepared and sent to Britain, again without informing the French. John Adams arrived in Paris on 26 October and joined the negotiations, and on 30 November, Oswald and the American commissioners signed the preliminary articles of peace. In December, when the comte de Vergennes complained of America's failure to consult the French, Franklin diplomatically admitted the impropriety, expressed gratitude to France, and asked for another loan. Vergennes assured him of a further 6 million livres. Franklin, Adams, and Jay signed the definitive treaty of peace on behalf of the United States on 3 September 1783. 
On 12 May 1784 the formal ratification of the peace treaty with Great Britain was exchanged, and on the next day Franklin requested to be relieved from his post to return home. Jefferson arrived in Paris on 30 August to join Franklin and Adams in attempting to make treaties with the European nations and the Barbary States. On 2 May 1785 Franklin received permission to leave France. 'I shall now be free of Politicks for the Rest of my Life. Welcome again my dear Philosophical Amusements' ('Writings', ed. Smyth, 9.318). He left Passy on 12 July 1785 at a time when a bladder stone was causing him pain. None the less Franklin spent most of the voyage writing pieces such as his 'Maritime Observations', which suggested a number of improvements for convenience, safety, and swiftness in sailing. 
Franklin arrived at Philadelphia on 14 September 1785 to the largest ceremony and reception that city had ever displayed. He was elected to the supreme executive council of Pennsylvania on 11 October, chosen its president on the 18th, and served in that position (in effect, governor) for three years. These years also saw a final flourish of experimentation and invention. In January 1781 he fashioned an instrument for taking down books from high shelves which he followed with a series of chairs with a seat that unfolded to become a ladder, with a writing arm on one side (now a staple feature of university lecture theatres) and a rocking chair with an automatic fan. From 28 May to 17 September 1787 he served in the constitutional convention. Though he had previously argued, and initially continued to advocate, that representation should be proportional to population, on 3 July he moved the 'Great Compromise' whereby representation was proportional in the house of delegates but equal by state in the senate. On 7 and 10 August he argued that the right to vote should be extended as widely as possible, and condemned property qualifications as necessary either for the franchise or for office-holding. His closing speech supporting the constitution was the most effective propaganda for its ratification. Aged seventy, he had been the oldest signer of the 'Declaration of Independence' in 1776, and now, aged eighty-one, he again achieved that position with regard to the United States constitution. 
On 14 October 1788 Franklin ended his service as president of the supreme executive council of Pennsylvania, terminating his career in public office. Despite suffering from gout and a bladder stone, he still, as of 25 November 1788, enjoyed 'many comfortable Intervals, in which I forget all my Ills, and amuse myself in Reading or Writing, or in conversation with Friends, joking, laughing, and telling merry Stories' ('Writings', ed. Smyth, 9.683). On 23 April 1787 he had been elected president of the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of Slavery and on 12 February 1789 he wrote and signed the first remonstrance against slavery addressed to the American congress, though congress said it had no authority to interfere in the internal affairs of the states. His final work, published on 20 March 1790, was a brilliant satire on a defence of slavery. In these final months Franklin also returned to his autobiographical essay. Between his starting the project in England in 1771 and his final period of writing he had added two further sections. The first composed in France in 1784 was a dozen-page survey on his method of self-discipline, and was followed during 1788-9 when he carried his account down to his arrival in England in 1757. The final section, written in bed, provided a brief sketch of Franklin's English agency from 1757 to 1762. 
To the man who had written that 'nothing can be said to be certain except death and taxes' (to Jean Baptiste Le Roy, 13 Nov 1789) life's second great inevitability came about, from pleurisy, on 17 April 1790 in Philadelphia. Franklin, who was then eighty-four, was buried four days later at Philadelphia's Christ Church burial-ground beside his wife, Deborah, who had died on 19 December 1774, and their son Francis. On hearing of the news of Franklin's death the French assembly voted to wear mourning for three days. The United States house of representatives passed, but the senate defeated, a motion to wear mourning for a month. Franklin was survived by his son William, from whom he had been alienated following the latter's support for the British during the revolution; among other members of his family to survive him were William's illegitimate son, William Temple Franklin, William Temple Franklin's illegitimate daughter, Ellen Franklin, and his daughter, Sarah, who had married Richard Bache in October 1767. Months after his death the first part of Franklin's unfinished autobiographical essay (to 1731) was published in France. Two versions of this first part, anonymously retranslated into English, appeared in 1793 and were thereafter much reprinted, usually as 'The Life of Benjamin Franklin, Written by Himself'. In 1817 Franklin's grandson, William Temple Franklin, brought out the first three parts of the original English version and in an 1848 edition the work was first called the 'Autobiography'; John Bigelow's edition of 1868 included Franklin's fourth and final section, again under the title of 'Autobiography', the name by which the text is now best-known. From the eighteenth century to the present it has proved one of the world's most popular autobiographical studies, remarkable for its frank account of the author's misadventures and for an ability to inspire numerous individuals with its account of self-discipline and motivation. 
During the 1730s Franklin became known as the most successful newspaperman and writer in the colonies. In the 1740s he was celebrated as Philadelphia's most public-spirited citizen. He became the world's best-known living scientist through his design, in 1744, of a stove more efficient than any previous one, and his proof in 1752 that lightning was electrical in nature. During the 1750s he also became the dominant Pennsylvania politician. From 1757 to 1764 and again from 1764 to 1775 he lived in England, where he was America's spokesperson and unofficial ambassador. He was the best-known American before George Washington's rise to prominence during the revolution. During the 1770s and 1780s he was famous as a revolutionary and then as a statesman. At his death in 1790 he was celebrated as a patriot and founding father, being the only person to sign all three fundamental documents of American statehood: the 'Declaration of Independence' (1776), the peace treaty with Britain (1783), and the constitution of the United States (1787). His contemporaries often commented on his egalitarianism (Thomas Penn called him a 'Tribune of the People' in 1748; 'Papers', 3.186) and on his metaphysical scepticism (Condorcet thought him a Pyrrhonist). Throughout the latter part of his life he was renowned for his self-motivation. Without education he had become one of the most learned persons of his time. Without inherited money he had become wealthy. Without prospects as a young man he had become famous. 
Five aspects of Franklin's reputation endure. His standing as a public-spirited citizen has been kept alive by his 'Autobiography' and by the institutions that he founded -- among them the Library Company of Philadelphia, the American Philosophical Society, and the University of Pennsylvania. His reputation as a scientist is confirmed by the existence of every lightning rod. The best-known period of Franklin's life, the French years (1777-85), authenticates his position as a statesman. David Hume's 1763 description of Franklin as a 'Great Man of Letters' ('Papers', 10.81) and the inclusion of his writings in almost all anthologies of American literature attest to his ability as a writer. The poverty and obscurity of his family background, coupled with his later fame as a scientist, statesman, and writer, continue to make Franklin the single most famous example of a self-made man. 
Posthumously three major elements have been added to his reputation: materialist, philistine, and rake. The three supposed characteristics say more about later times and the naivety of the writers than about Franklin. The popularity of 'The Way to Wealth' (a name later given to the preface for the 'Poor Richard' almanac of 1758) identified Franklin with getting and saving money. This aspect of Franklin's posthumous reputation was reinforced by Max Weber's influential identification of him with 'The Spirit of Capitalism' and by Franklin's picture on the United States $100 bill. However, instead of spending his life in the acquisition of wealth, Franklin retired aged forty-one to produce 'something for the common Benefit of Mankind' ('Papers', 3.317). He dedicated thousands of hours to public-spirited causes without expecting or receiving any material reward. He turned down a patent for his stove design which would have made him a fortune and he offered to pay for the tea dumped into the harbour at the Boston Tea Party, though to have done so would have impoverished him. Few men of any time were as idealistic as Franklin. 
Arising in great part because of Franklin's identification with materialism, but also because he belonged to no religious sect, the idea of Franklin as philistine, without idealism or spirituality, has been presented most forcefully in D. H. Lawrence's characterization in his 'Studies in Classic American Literature' (1923). Lawrence, like some other critics, identified Franklin as the embodiment of an acquisitive American culture. But, again, such judgements are misleading. Franklin wrote more about religion and virtue than any other colonial American layman. He contributed money to every religious society of Philadelphia. He devoted his time and money to more idealistic causes throughout his life than almost any of his contemporaries. Even in his will he tried to help the young artisans of Boston and Philadelphia. 
Finally comparatively frank details of his interest in sex in the 'Autobiography', the knowledge that he had an illegitimate son, and a number of his risque writings, such as 'Old mistresses' apologue' and 'The Elysian Fields' have contributed to the idea of Franklin as a womanizer, a view that became increasingly popular during the twentieth century. But after he married Deborah Read, at the age of twenty-four, there is no evidence whatever that he had any other sexual relations. His affectionate lifelong relationships with several women in America, England, and France during his mature years bespeak, in many cases, delightful flirtation and, in all cases, devoted friendship. 
Franklin's reputation during his own lifetime was well founded. Besides dozens of general biographies numerous books are devoted to various aspects of Franklin -- as businessman, economist, printer, postmaster, philosopher, politician, scientist, theologian, statesman, writer, private citizen, friend -- and to numerous specialized topics within these and other general subjects. Franklin's great ability and drive were exceeded only by his interests and achievements. Every study of Franklin must be selective and none can do him justice. 
Perhaps Franklin would have wished to be remembered for his concern for the 'common Good of Mankind' ('Papers', 9.229). He wanted to become an 'amicus humani generis'. Numerous contemporaries thought he realized that ambition (Edmund Burke called him the 'friend to mankind'; 'Correspondence', 4.419). When thanked for aiding a stranger Franklin replied, on 6 June 1753: 'the only Thanks I should desire is, that you would always be equally ready to serve any other Person that may need your Assistance, and so let good Offices go round, for Mankind are all of a Family' ('Papers', 4.504). Near the end of his life he wrote, 'God grant, that not only the Love of Liberty, but a thorough Knowledge of the Rights of Man, may pervade all the Nations of the Earth, so that a Philosopher may set his Foot anywhere on its Surface, and say, 'This is my Country'' ('Writings', ed. Smyth, 10.72). 


@@@@@


doc= 52469


Womersley, John Ronald (1907-1958), mathematician, was born on 20 June 1907 in Worrall Street, Morely, Yorkshire, son of George William Womersley, grocer, and his wife, Ruth (formerly Gledhill). He was educated at Morely grammar school (1917-25) before going to Imperial College, London, where in 1928 he gained a first-class degree in mathematics. He spent two further years at Imperial, engaged on hydrodynamics research and gaining a diploma of Imperial College in 1930, then joined the British Cotton Industry Research Association at the Shirley Institute in Manchester to work on the application of mathematical methods to a range of textile problems. There Womersley became interested in the application of mathematical statistics to industrial problems and in statistical quality control. In 1936 he collaborated with D. R. Hartree to devise a method for solving partial differential equations suitable for application to the differential analyser which Hartree had built at Manchester University. This was Womersley's first introduction to large-scale computing machines. 
In 1937 Womersley joined the armaments research department, Woolwich. As part of his work on internal ballistics he initiated a statistical analysis of cordite proof records which led to changes in charge adjustments made to certain weapons. During this time he built a small differential analyser for ballistics calculations which was destroyed during the war. In 1944 he joined the British Association mathematical tables committee, serving until 1948. 
With the increase in mass production during the Second World War, and because of his interest in applying statistics to industrial problems, Womersley was asked in July 1942 to set up a Ministry of Supply advisory service on statistical quality control (later known as SR 17). By the end of the war this organization had a staff of approximately forty statisticians and did much to introduce sampling inspection methods to British industry. 
Following his success at SR 17 Womersley was offered the post of first superintendent of the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) mathematics division at Teddington, Middlesex, in 1944. This division had two main roles: first to provide a mathematical service, a task similar to that performed by SR 17; and second to build an electronic computer, a task for which Womersley was perhaps less well qualified. 
Before taking up his post at the NPL Womersley was given security clearance to travel to the United States to become one of the first overseas visitors to the ENIAC project and to hear about the first proposals to build an electronic stored program computer. He was also involved in one of the first international computer conferences, which took place in the United States in October 1945. Alan Turing joined the mathematics division and designed the ACE computer, but Womersley seems to have failed to grasp the differences between Turing's radical ideas and the American proposals. Consequently the building of ACE was delayed and in 1947 Turing left the project. A prototype machine, the Pilot ACE, was operational by late 1950 (significantly behind the computers at Cambridge and Manchester) but by then Womersley had left the NPL. 
In September 1950 Womersley accepted a post with BTM Ltd (a forerunner of ICL Ltd) and his appointment led to the development of the HEC range of machines based on the work of A. D. Booth at Birkbeck College, London. There is some dispute as to whether Womersley's appointment with BTM was successful and he left the company in 1954 to go back to mathematics. In that year Womersley worked with a team from St Bartholomew's Hospital on a mathematical investigation into blood flow in arteries which resulted in papers published in the 'Journal of Physiology' (1954 and 1955) and in the 'Philosophical Magazine' (1955). He continued this work when he took up a mathematical post in 1955 with the US Air Force at Wright Field, Dayton, Ohio. 
Womersley was a tall, heavily built, and generally well liked man. He was always proud of his Yorkshire origins and never completely lost his accent despite living away from Yorkshire for all of his working life. He returned to Britain in 1957 for a serious operation from which he never fully recovered. He died at University Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, on 7 March 1958 leaving a widow, Jean (formerly Jordan), of whom nothing is known. The couple had three daughters, Barbara, Ruth, and Marion. Although not a brilliant mathematician, Womersley's real skill was his ability to foresee how mathematical techniques could be used to solve problems and to set up organizations to exploit those techniques. 


@@@@@


doc= 52471


Eugenius I-VIII (act. c.350-763), Scottish kings, appear in the pages of John Fordun and later historians among the real and fictitious early rulers of a realm made up at first of lands extending between north-east Ireland and Argyll and later of portions of mainland Scotland. Given cohesion by their Latinate names, for the positive scholarship of the late nineteenth century they formed a group providing a yardstick whereby issues of historical identification and authenticity could be judged. A century later, although some problems of identity remain, they had become interesting principally for the light they shed upon the varying concerns of the historians who described, or invented, their deeds. 


With the last five kings, however, all of whom fall within the purview of the kings of Dal Riata, the sequence begins to coincide with ascertainable fact, even if it all too often demonstrates historical plausibility only through the faithfulness with which it reflects the inadequacies of the surviving sources. The recurrent name of Eugenius can now be seen as disguising identities that were culturally and linguistically Celtic. Thus Eugenius IV ('fl'. 606-622) is identifiable with Eochaid Buide (d. c.629) ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of (act. c.500-c.850)], and Eugenius V ('fl'. 684-687) appears to have been identical with Eochaid son of Domangart (d. 697) ['see under 'Dal Riata, kings of (act. c.500-c.850)] and thus placed a decade too early, while 
Historiographically the kings named Eugenius served diverse purposes. For Fordun and Walter Bower, in particular, the first three helped to buttress the Scottish origin-myth, giving antiquity and continuity to a succession of early kings stretching back into a satisfyingly distant past. For sixteenth-century writers they all provided grist for ideological mills, providing models of kingship according to each historian's requirements. Hector Boece had clear-cut ideas as to what constituted good and bad kingship, and shaped his regal images accordingly. Thus Eugenius IV, benefiting from the teaching of St Columba in his youth, proved an exemplary ruler who was more concerned to defend his realm than to extend it. Rigorous to malefactors, he was just and generous to the law-abiding. Eugenius VIII, on the other hand, though also a stern upholder of law and order, was increasingly given to brothels, taverns, and the pursuit of avarice, and was consequently murdered by his nobles. For George Buchanan, writing after the Reformation, the kings named Eugenius, like the other early Scottish rulers, provided a means whereby details taken from Boece could be redirected, using rhetorical skills based upon a mastery of Tacitean Latin, to project upon the past Buchanan's ideal of a strictly limited monarchy. Hence his accounts of reigns like that of Eugenius VII, chosen king by the army and later obliged to stand trial for killing his wife. 
The place of the eight Eugenii in the succession of Scottish kings was not maintained by words alone, for in the mid-1680s they were also immortalized, after a fashion, in the remarkable collection of royal 'portraits' at Holyrood Palace which the Dutchman Jacob de Wet, under a contract of 26 February 1684, undertook to produce within two years for a total of $240. One hundred and ten pictures were promised, and while not all appear to have survived, every Eugenius is still represented. The problem of differentiating so many rulers, a high proportion of them non-existent, greatly taxed the painter's slender powers of invention, though he did his best with beards, hats, hairstyles, and expressions; thus Eugenius II contemplates posterity with a complacent smirk, Eugenius IV with a shifty leer. A rare touch of imagination gave a family likeness to the entire series by endowing each king with the nose of Charles II. 
Then in 1729 Father Thomas Innes published his 'Critical Essay on the Ancient Inhabitants of the Northern Parts of Britain or Scotland', and in it he both demolished the historicity of the pre-sixth-century king-lists provided by Fordun and Bower and showed in detail how in relating the fortunes of early kings, whether they existed or not, Boece and Buchanan had manipulated their sources for ideological purposes, in the process creating narratives riddled with anachronisms and inconsistencies. Eugenius VIII was among the kings Innes chose to demonstrate how 'none of all these [medieval] historians... have so much as one of the many instances or examples, related by Boece... of the Scottish nobility calling their kings to account, or claiming the power to judge them' (Innes, 152). The blow dealt by Innes to the mythical history of early Scotland proved mortal, and thereafter Eugenius I-VIII, their milieu, ancestors, and descendants, were increasingly left to the meticulous investigation of scholars like W. F. Skene in the nineteenth century and M. O. Anderson in the twentieth. 


@@@@@


doc= 52474


Smith, John (bap. 1711, d. 1795), college head, was born at Coltishall, Norfolk, and baptized there on 14 October 1711, the second son of Henry Smith, attorney, and his wife, Elizabeth, formerly Johnson. After three years at Norwich grammar school, followed by six years at Eton College (1726-32), he was admitted as a pensioner at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1735-6 and MA in 1739. Elected to a junior fellowship in 1739, he progressed to a senior fellowship in 1744. He was ordained priest in 1739 and briefly held the curacy at Coltishall. He was collated to the chancellorship of Lincoln in 1783 and held this position until his death. 
Smith held numerous college offices, including those of dean (1744-9), bursar (1750-53), and president (1754-64). In that year he was awarded the degree of DD and took up the mastership, which he held thereafter. From 1771 he held the Lowndean professorship of astronomy. As was customary at that time, he neither delivered lectures nor published anything on the subject of astronomy. He did, however, have permission in November 1764 to make alterations to the south parapet of the college in order to employ his transit telescope, and this demonstration of interest may have influenced the university -- though his friend William Cole ascribed his appointment to court favour. 
Cole, who had been at Eton with Smith, described him somewhat harshly: 'This downright honest man... has no other preferment; but as he is a bachelor, with a private fortune, he lives very hospitably and much esteemed by his acquaintance.... A plain honest man of strong passions when moved... an eternal smoker of tobacco; pretends to a taste in painting, and may possibly understand it, though he looks as if he did not, and has such an inarticulate way of expressing himself that very few people understand what he says. He has a brother's widow and her children who lives with him and keeps his house. (Venn, 3.129)' This was Margaret, widow of Smith's younger brother Joseph. 
Smith's argumentative nature led, Cole reports, to an unseemly quarrel in the Senate House with Dr Ewin of St John's, and on another occasion to a dispute over some elections. Smith died on 17 June 1795 in Cambridge and was buried on 21 June in Gonville and Caius College chapel, where a memorial tablet was set up in the ante-chapel. He bequeathed to the university the sum of $200, for the increase of the Wendy fellowship, and a small piece of land in Cheshire, the income from which was to benefit the Lowndean professorship. 


@@@@@


doc= 52475


Lewis, Wilfrid Bennett (1908-1987), physicist and civil servant, was born on 24 June 1908 in Castle Carrock, Cumberland, the second of four children of Arthur Wilfrid Lewis, a civil engineer, and his wife, Isoline Maud Steavenson. Lewis was a keen boyhood science experimenter and wireless enthusiast. After elementary education at Clare House Preparatory School, Beckenham, Kent, he attended Haileybury College (1922-6), followed by a year in industry. Entering Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge in 1927, he read physics at the Cavendish Laboratory (BA, 1930; MA, 1934; PhD, 1934). During postgraduate studies he worked with Lord Rutherford. Lewis was research fellow at Gonville and Caius College (1934-40), and demonstrator (1935-7) and lecturer (1937-9) in physics at Cambridge. Between 1935 and 1937 he joined J. D. Cockcroft in studying nuclear disintegration, then turned his electronic expertise to the construction of the Cambridge cyclotron. In 1939 he joined what became the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) to work on radar development, quickly establishing a reputation as a scientific administrator. He ended his career with the TRE at Malvern (1945-6) as chief superintendent. His wartime work garnered him a CBE in 1946 and the American medal of freedom with silver palms in 1947. 
Cockcroft had supervised the Canadian National Research Council's nuclear programme from April 1944. On his recall to England he nominated Lewis as his replacement. Lewis took up the post of director of its atomic energy division in September 1946. The division was just creating its new research centre at Chalk River, Ontario. He came with little knowledge of current nuclear physics and engineering, but with characteristic single-mindedness learned everything he could. His first task was to ensure completion of the national research experimental reactor, known as the NRX, which went critical in 1947. This was the world's finest high flux research reactor; it was also the first to have a nuclear accident in the same year, but Lewis responded coolly. The incident convinced him of the need for another research reactor, the NRU. Planning began in 1947 but it would not go critical until ten years later. 
Lewis maintained regular scientific contact with Harwell, undertaking experimental work for Cockcroft in the 1950s, and exchanging scientific information with the British and American atomic energy agencies. When, in 1952, the government reorganized the division as a crown corporation, Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd (AECL), Lewis became vice-president, research and development. This allowed him to shed general administrative duties to concentrate on reactor design. As early as 1951 Lewis had championed the idea of a power reactor fuelled with natural uranium and moderated by heavy water. He persuaded the AECL board to support it and brought Ontario Hydro into the fold. Serious planning began in 1954. As a first step a nuclear power demonstration reactor (NPD) was built in Rolphton, Ontario. Its design and construction was a convoluted process, as AECL scientists and engineers grappled with conflicting technologies. Lewis acted as a stimulus and arbiter. When NPD began supplying power in 1962 it proved that the Canadian approach was feasible. By 1959 planning began for a power station employing the CANDU system, with horizontal pressure tubes, using natural uranium fuel and heavy water as both coolant and moderator. Lewis pushed the programme to successful completion of a full-scale commercial plant in 1971. 
A key figure in international nuclear diplomacy, Lewis advised the World Bank, served on the United Nations scientific advisory committee, and helped to organize conferences on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He sat on the scientific advisory committee of the International Atomic Energy Agency (1958-78). From 1963 until his retirement on 24 June 1973 he was senior vice-president, science, at AECL. Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, then appointed him distinguished professor of science. He continued to lecture and to write in favour of nuclear power. A winner of the Fermi prize (1982) and a fellow of the royal societies of London (1945) and Canada (1952), Lewis garnered many awards and honorary degrees. A devout Anglican and community figure he remained unmarried. Diagnosed as having Alzheimer's disease in 1982 he spent his last five years in hospital, and died in Deep River, Ontario, on 10 January 1987, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 52477


Brooks, Ralph Terence St John- (1884-1963), bacteriologist, was born on 27 October 1884 in Dublin, the third son of Professor Henry St John Brooks ('b'. 1855), medical anatomist, and his wife, Marion Sarah Ohren. Educated at Erasmus Smith's School, he graduated in 1904 from Trinity College, Dublin, with first-class honours in natural science. In his father's footsteps he turned to medicine, hyphenating his surname to emphasize the family connection. He won the Haughton medal and prize in medicine and surgery from Sir Patrick Dun's Hospital (1908), and also gained the qualifications MB, BCh, and BAO. 
On 25 May 1912 St John-Brooks married Julia Margaret Gordon (they later had two sons and a daughter). Also in 1912 he moved to the Leeward Islands where he acted as special sanitary investigator for the government. In 1914 he became secretary of the commission for plague investigation in India, working from the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine in London. During the First World War he served as a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps, specializing in bacteriology, and developed an interest in the collection and maintenance of representative cultures of various types of bacteria. The basis of such a collection already existed at the Lister Institute; in 1920, augmented by many of St John-Brooks's own isolates, it became the National Collection of Type Cultures (NCTC). The NCTC soon became a national resource of live, authenticated cultures of microbes for diagnoses, research, and teaching. 
St John-Brooks's curatorship of that collection was perhaps his major contribution to science. Expanded to include yeasts and other fungi, and to cover microbes of economic and veterinary as well as medical importance, it became the reference collection on which British microbiology depended for the next thirty years (when it budded off a second collection). When, at the start of the Second World War, the NCTC was hurriedly moved to an outstation of the institute at Elstree there was considerable confusion and many of the live cultures became contaminated, but St John-Brooks had shown considerable foresight: he had prepared two specimens of most of the strains in the collection, sealed in a viable but vacuum dried form. These specimens were recovered and thus saved for posterity. 
St John-Brooks was also involved in the naming of type cultures. He served on international nomenclature committees in the 1930s and, in collaboration with North Americans R. E. Buchanan and R. S. Breed, was instrumental in bringing a degree of order to a confused situation by developing a code of bacterial nomenclature which was approved internationally after the Second World War. He also played an important part in organizing the second International Congress of Microbiology (London, 1936) and was president of the third (New York, 1939). He continued his international activities after retiring from the NCTC in 1946. A good-humoured and rather unassuming man, he was noted for his ability to weld independently minded personalities into unanimous and productive committees. 
St John-Brooks is especially remembered for his crucial part in founding the Society for General Microbiology. An energetic organizer, he lived near a kindred spirit, dairy microbiologist Dr L. A. Allen. Between them, often during informal visits to each other's houses, they did most of the planning and paperwork which brought Britain's most flourishing microbiological learned society into being in 1945. 
St John-Brooks had caught tularaemia, often a lethal disease, from a laboratory specimen in 1923. He recovered, but his health remained precarious and sometimes compelled him to restrict his activities. Serious episodes were two bouts of tuberculosis (1925-7 and 1932-4). Yet he sustained his many microbiological activities with seemingly unimpaired vigour. In this context a friend wrote, 'the gentle wit, which he shared with his wife, lasted him his lifetime' ('The Lancet', 1115). He enjoyed family life, natural history, and gardening, and in 1950 he retired to his native Dublin, where he died of cancer on 27 April 1963. 


@@@@@


doc= 52479


Williams, Charles Eryl Wynn- (1903-1979), physicist, was born on 5 March 1903 at Glasfryn, Uplands, Swansea, the elder child of William Williams (1863-1945), a physics teacher and later divisional inspector of schools for north and mid-Wales, and his wife, Mary Ellen, known as Nell (1873-1935), daughter of Robert Wynn, a shopkeeper at Llanrwst. Named Charles Eryl Wynn Williams at birth, he adopted the surname Wynn-Williams while at university and used it consistently thereafter. He was educated at Grove Park School, Wrexham, and from 1920 at the University College of North Wales, Bangor. After graduation in 1923 he remained at Bangor to undertake research work on electrical instrumentation, obtaining the degree of MSc (Wales) in 1924. 
With the award of a University of Wales open fellowship Wynn-Williams entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1925 and initially continued his researches on short electric waves at the Cavendish Laboratory under the supervision of Sir Ernest Rutherford; he was awarded the degree of PhD for this work in 1929. His most significant work in this period, however, was in the development of electronic instrumentation for use in radioactivity and nuclear physics. A dedicated wireless enthusiast, in 1926 he employed his skills in valve technique and electronic circuitry to construct a valve based amplifier for the measurement of very small electrical currents. It was quickly realized that such devices could be used to detect and count subatomic particles in the nuclear disintegration experiments then being undertaken by Rutherford and his deputy James Chadwick. Encouraged by Rutherford, Wynn-Williams began to devote his attention to the construction of a reliable valve amplifier and methods of registering and counting particles. 
A series of brilliant contributions to the armamentarium of nuclear physics followed. In 1929-30, with H. M. Cave and F. A. B. Ward he designed and constructed a counting device using thyratron valves in conjunction with a mechanical counter. By 1931 a valve amplifier and thyratron based automatic counting system were in regular use in the Cavendish Laboratory, the former playing an important part in James Chadwick's discovery of the neutron in 1932 and numerous other experiments. In 1932 Wynn-Williams published details of his thyratron based scale-of-two counter which allowed particles to be counted at much higher rates than previous instruments. His devices opened up new avenues of research in nuclear physics, and were widely copied (often with readily given advice from Wynn-Williams himself) in laboratories in Europe and the United States; they became crucial unifying elements in the hardware of the emergent discipline. 
In 1935 Wynn-Williams was appointed assistant lecturer in physics at Imperial College, London. Continuing his work on electronic instrumentation he contributed to the development of nuclear physics at Imperial under G. P. Thomson. On the eve of the Second World War, Wynn-Williams, like many of his contemporaries, was recruited to work on radio direction finding (radar). However, his mastery of valves and circuits and his connections with government and industrial researchers soon drew him into the development of code breaking machines. He was seconded to the government communications headquarters at Bletchley Park, where he and a team of Post Office engineers made fundamental contributions to the development of machines for deciphering Enigma messages and to the Heath Robinson cryptanalytic device, forerunner of the Colossus decoding machine. This equipment proved decisive in the war effort and formed the basis for the development of modern digital electronics and computing. 
Returning to Imperial College after the war Wynn-Williams devoted himself largely to the development of undergraduate teaching, where he was an accomplished and much liked instructor. He became lecturer and ultimately reader in physics at Imperial. In 1957 he received the Physical Society's Duddell medal in recognition of his work on the scale-of-two counter. Though he never received official recognition for his wartime work Wynn-Williams always observed the oath of secrecy surrounding it, and retained an interest in codes and puzzles throughout his life. 
Liberal in politics and a fluent Welsh speaker, Wynn-Williams married a schoolteacher, Annie Eiluned James ('b'. 1907/8), on 12 August 1943 in London; they had two sons. He and his wife moved to Wales after his retirement in 1970. He died at his home, Bryn Elmen, Dolybont, Borth, Cardiganshire, on 30 August 1979. Cremation took place at Shrewsbury on 6 September. 


@@@@@


doc= 52480


Cape, William Timothy (1806-1863), educationist, born at Walworth, Surrey, on 25 October 1806, was the eldest son of the seven children of William Cape (1773-1847), banker and schoolmaster, who was born in Ireby, Cumberland, and who had married Mary Ann Knight (died after 1822) of Tenterden, Kent, in 1805. William Timothy was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, with a view to entering the church, and showed great proficiency in his studies. The elder Cape was resident manager of the bank of Brown, Cobb & Co., Lombard Street, but when it failed in 1816 he turned to the importing of tea and finally decided to emigrate. Having obtained letters from Lord Bathurst to Sir Thomas Brisbane, the governor, William Cape, accompanied by his eldest son, sailed for Van Diemen's Land in November 1821. In 1822 they moved to Sydney, where in 1823 the father took over a private school, the Sydney Academy, where William Timothy helped him. In 1824 William Cape became principal of the Sydney public school, with his son as assistant master. After a brief spell at the Sydney Public Free Grammar School, William Timothy Cape became headmaster in 1829, on the resignation of his father. William Cape had had an accident in 1829 which left him lame. He died in Sydney on 19 November 1847. 
In 1829, however, William Timothy Cape reopened a private school in Sydney. On 9 April 1831 he married Jane (1811/12-1858), daughter of William Jaques of the survey department. When the high school called Sydney College was founded in 1835, Cape transferred his private pupils to it, and was elected headmaster. He held this office until 1841 when he resigned and in the next year he founded a new private school, Elfred House, at Paddington, Sydney. 
Cape was an exacting but popular schoolmaster who strove to fire his pupils with a desire for education and public service, to extend education to poorer boys by helping to found the Sydney Mechanics' School of Art in 1833 (and teaching in it), and to remove education from the damaging sectarian disputes then current. He retired in 1856 and after his wife died on 16 January 1858 he threw himself into public life, in quick succession becoming member of parliament for Wollombi (1859), commissioner of national education, a magistrate, and fellow of St Paul's College within the University of Sydney. 
In 1855-6 Cape made a brief visit to England, and went back in 1860 with his younger children, in order to collect educational information. He died of smallpox at 124 Warwick Street, Pimlico, London, on 14 June 1863. His funeral at Brompton was attended by almost all the Australians then in London. His former pupils erected a tablet (destroyed in 1941) to his memory in St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 52481


Cowan, Samuel Tertius (1905-1976), bacteriologist, was born Samuel Cowan at 87 Monton Road, Eccles, Lancashire, on 24 September 1905, the only child of Samuel Cowan (1875-1941), a Manchester optician, and his wife, Emily Woods (1879-1964). The third in direct line to bear the name Samuel, Cowan's middle name, Tertius, was added in 1926. His early life was spent near Lytham St Anne's, and he was educated mainly at nearby Buxton College. After studying at a Manchester crammer, in 1924 he went to Manchester University to study medicine, qualifying MB ChB in 1930 and MRCS LRCP in 1931. Later he obtained an MD (1933) and DSc (1953) from Manchester and fellowship of the Royal Society of Pathologists (1963). 
In 1931, Cowan became house physician to F. E. Tylecote, professor of systematic medicine at Manchester Royal Infirmary, but he had probably already found an interest in pathology because within the year he became assistant resident medical officer and resident clinical pathologist there. In 1932 he was awarded a Dickinson memorial research scholarship in the bacteriology department at the university, and it was during this period of research that his enthusiasm was fired for the first time. Following the expiration of his scholarship Cowan spent a few months in medical practice but soon realized that his real interest lay in medical bacteriology. He returned to Manchester University, obtaining the diploma in bacteriology in 1934; he was then appointed research assistant in bacteriology at the university. A year later he moved to Hammersmith to the British Postgraduate Medical School. 
In 1936 Cowan's research abilities led to his appointment as junior Freedom research fellow at the London Hospital. In the same year, on 20 June, he married Nancy Lingard Heathcott ('b'. 1909/10) of Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire. They had three children, a boy and two girls. A strong family man he enjoyed a very happy marriage and family life. At the outbreak of the Second World War he was lecturer in bacteriology at Manchester, a position to which he returned after five years of military service. During the war he served in the Royal Army Medical Corps rising to the rank of major. 
In 1947 Cowan was appointed curator of the National Collection of Type Cultures (NCTC) then housed at the Lister Institute at Elstree to where it had been hastily removed at the outbreak of war. Space was limited and the collection was in some disarray. In 1949, when the collection was moved to the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale, Cowan embarked on a major programme of reorganization and rationalization that was to make NCTC one of the foremost collections of human and animal pathogenic bacteria in the world. At the same time Cowan played a major advisory role in the development of a rational policy for other British culture collections and, with others, he co-ordinated the system of Commonwealth culture collections which formed a collaborative body in the post-war years; a precursor in many ways of the World Federation of Culture Collections. In addition to the curatorship of NCTC, a position he held until his retirement, Cowan also served as director of the Public Health Laboratory (1961-1964) and deputy director of the Public Health Laboratory Service (1964-7). In those latter roles he displayed, in the words of Sir James Howie, 'qualities of loyalty, perception and diplomacy which made him a wise and acceptable administrator' ('BMJ', 9 Oct 1976, 888). 
In addition to his scientific work in diagnostic and systematic bacteriology Cowan had a deep interest in the philosophy of science. He was a prolific writer with the ability to express his information and ideas clearly and logically and often, unusual in scientific literature, with humour. He had an international reputation for his book, with K. J. Steel, 'Manual for the Identification of Medical Bacteria' (1965, 1974) and he wrote a unique volume, 'A Dictionary of Microbial Taxonomic Usage' (1968). These works summarized many of his contributions to the philosophy of bacterial systematics -- contributions that ensured him a place in the history of bacterial taxonomy. 
A man of slender build and kindly demeanour with twinkling eyes, Cowan was an excellent lecturer and teacher. He was unfailingly helpful to those who sought his advice. His qualities of courtesy, diplomacy, and open mindedness together with his strict scientific standards made him a highly respected member of national and international organizations. Somewhat deaf, Cowan made good use of his hearing aid when discussions became repetitive or sterile. He held a number of offices in the Society for General Microbiology and was made an honorary member in 1971. With others he was involved in the preparation of the first international bacteriological code of nomenclature, approved at the Congress of Microbiology in 1947. He served in several capacities on the international committee on bacteriological nomenclature (now the international committee on systematic bacteriology) and was elected life member in 1966. A trustee and member of the editorial board of Bergey's Manual Trust he played a key role in the production of the eighth edition of the standard international compilation, 'Bergey's Manual of Determinative Bacteriology' (1974). His last contribution to bacteriology was an objective account of the problems involved in such an international venture which was read by the president of the Society for General Microbiology in January 1977. 
In 1967 Cowan retired to the quiet country village of Queen Camel, near Yeovil, Somerset, but he remained active in bacteriological affairs in a much valued advisory capacity and by his writing. A railway enthusiast since boyhood, his last appointment was as curator of the Somerset and Dorset Railway Museum. He died suddenly of a heart attack in Hereford General Hospital on 24 September 1976 while on a visit with his wife to the town. He was cremated on 1 October 1976 and his ashes were scattered in the garden of his beloved Peacock Cottage in Queen Camel. 


@@@@@


doc= 52485


Augustin Courtauld (1685-1751), the second son of Augustin Courtauld (1655-1706), a merchant from St Pierre in the Ile d'Oleron near La Rochelle, and his first wife, Julia Giron (1661-1686), both Huguenots, who had four children. He was reputedly brought to England in 1687 as an infant, concealed in a basket of vegetables, to escape the persecution of the protestants. Romantic though this would have been, he was in fact left behind with his grandfather Pierre Courtauld and only joined his father in London in 1696. Augustin Courtauld senior was described as 'of the parish of St Anne's Westminster Wine Cooper' (Courtauld, 72) on the apprenticeship of his son Augustin to another Huguenot, Simon Pantin, on 9 August 1701, and appeared in the 'Naturalization Act' of 1709 as goldsmith, St Martin-in-the-Fields. 
Augustin Courtauld was made free of the Goldsmiths' Company by service on 20 October 1708, when he registered his first mark. The following year he married Anne Bardin, with whom he had eight children. Of his three sons, only Samuel [i] followed his father's profession. The registers of the Goldsmiths' Company record Augustin as working as a largeworker at Church Court, St Martin's Lane, in 1708. Augustin's earliest known surviving work is a set of three casters, marked with the date letter for 1710. He supplied members of the London aristocracy and specialized in silver vessels for the fashionable new drinks -- tea, coffee, and chocolate. He also developed an important line in two-handled cups. To judge by the many surviving examples bearing his mark, Augustin also specialized in trays and salvers, which, with their highly complex borders, called for the highest technical skill in their manufacture. By 1734 Augustin was probably running a sizeable workshop. All his recorded apprentices were of Huguenot descent: Edward Feline taken in 1709, Isaac Ribouleau in 1716, Lewis Ouvry in 1730, his son Samuel [i] in 1734, and his last recorded apprentice, Francis Quenouault, in 1739. Most of his wealth was channelled into his house and stock-in-trade, but he did invest $500 in East India stock from 1732 to 1739, and thereafter $1000. His prosperity was solid but modest. He was one of few goldsmiths in London to have his portrait painted, probably commissioned in 1730 from Hans Hysing. Though Augustin's mark appears on work until 1746, only one piece is made in the rococo fashion. It is probable that this was made by his son Samuel [i] who had joined him by the date it was made. 



@@@@@


doc= 52486


Lakatos, Imre (1922-1974), philosopher of mathematics and of science, was born Imre Lipsitz on 9 November 1922 in Debrecen, Hungary, the only child of Jacob Marton Lipsitz, a wine merchant, and Margit Herczfeld, both Hungarian Jews. His father left the family home shortly after Imre was born and he was raised by his mother and maternal grandmother. Imre studied at the Jewish Real Gymnasium and later at Debrecen University. An outstanding student, he graduated in 1944 in mathematics, physics, and philosophy. 
Lakatos had become an active and influential Marxist while at university. When Germany invaded Hungary in 1944, he fled with Eva Revesz (to whom he was married briefly in 1947) to Nagyvarad (now the Romanian town of Oradea). There they were kept in hiding by non-Jewish families. (Meanwhile his mother and grandmother were forced into the Debrecen ghetto and later killed in Auschwitz.) Lakatos lived in Nagyvarad on false papers under the name of Molnar. He organized a communist cell among the group of Jews in hiding and their host families; and he is alleged to have led the group in deciding on the 'forced suicide' of one of its members, Eva Iszak. There are various explanations of his role in this affair -- his own seems to have been that Iszak, an anti-fascist activist who had fallen out with her host family and who therefore needed new accommodation and papers, was in some danger of arrest by the Gestapo and hence a threat to the security of the whole group. One of the most striking features of the episode is that she herself seems to have put up no resistance to the decision. 
At the end of the war Lakatos returned briefly to his ransacked house in Debrecen where, among little else, he found some of his old shirts monogrammed 'I. L.' (or rather, in the Hungarian convention, 'L. I.'). He took the opportunity to change his name for a second time: to the working-class Imre Lakatos. An influential member of a circle of elite communist intellectuals in Budapest, he obtained a post in the ministry of education and became active in (controversial) educational reform. He received a PhD with highest honours from the Eotvos Collegium in 1947 for a thesis that he later insisted was 'worthless' on the sociology of science. In 1948 he won party agreement to study theoretical physics at Moscow University. He had made influential enemies, however, and in 1950, after a mysterious end to his stay in Moscow, he was -- for reasons that remain unclear -- called by the central committee to a hearing on the Eva Iszak affair, and expelled from the Communist Party. He was interrogated and held in solitary confinement for six weeks by the state security police (AVO). He was then taken to the labour camp at Recsk, where he was interned in appalling conditions for three years. On his release he worked at the Mathematical Research Institute at the Hungarian Academy of Science. 
Although Lakatos's communist faith seems to have survived the Recsk experience, he began to question it shortly afterwards. At the time of the Hungarian revolution in 1956 he followed his second wife, Eva Pap (whom he married in 1955), and her family out of the country and soon obtained a Rockefeller Foundation scholarship to study at Cambridge for a second PhD. From 1959 onwards he regularly attended Karl Popper's seminar at the London School of Economics (LSE). The LSE appointed him to a lectureship in logic in 1960, and he was promoted to a personal chair (in logic, with special reference to the philosophy of mathematics) in 1970. 
Lakatos's second PhD thesis became the basis for his 'Proofs and Refutations'. This work, published initially as journal articles in 1963-4 and in book form only posthumously in 1976, constitutes his major contribution to the philosophy of mathematics. A dialogue between a group of frighteningly bright students and their teacher, it reconstructs the process by which Euler's famous conjecture about polyhedra (that they all satisfy the formula: number of vertices 'plus' number of faces 'minus' the number of edges equals two) was proved and, in the process, heavily modified and transformed. Lakatos's claim was that, although the eventual proof of the theorem in mathematics may be cast as a straightforward deduction, the way in which the proof is found is a more exciting process, involving counterexamples, reformulations, counterexamples to the reformulations, and careful analysis of 'failed' proofs leading to further modifications of 'the' theorem. 
Lakatos thought of himself for some years as a 'Popperian', simply extending Popper's fallibilism to the seemingly unlikely field of mathematics. However, he eventually began to discern faults in Popper's philosophy of natural science, and began in 1968 to develop his 'methodology of scientific research programmes' (all the relevant papers are reprinted in his 'Philosophical Papers', vol. 1, 1978). Lakatos claimed that science was best viewed as consisting, not of single isolated theories, but rather of broader 'research programmes'. Each programme issues in a series of theories, governed not only by empirical refutations of earlier theories, but also by certain specifiable heuristic principles operating on the programme's central assumptions or 'hard core'. Lakatos saw this methodology as giving a more accurate view of the rationality of science than Popper's -- in fact, as a synthesis of the best elements of the accounts of Popper and of Thomas Kuhn. It remains influential. 
Lakatos was a short, wiry, energetic man -- a 'twenty-four hours a day' intellectual. A great advocate of the power of reason, he was a convinced atheist -- indeed he held all his views with conviction. In the West he retained strong political interests. Like many who had suffered under a left-wing dictatorship, he swung far to the right in political, if not always in social, terms -- being a vigorous opponent of the student movement of the 1960s and an equally vigorous supporter of the domino theory and hence of American involvement in Vietnam. He made several visits to give lectures in the USA in the 1960s and 1970s. He had a sharp tongue and an exceptional wit. He engendered intense friendships and intense enmities in roughly equal measure. After his divorce from Eva Pap in 1960 he had a series of affairs, some of them with women much younger than himself. He then settled into a close relationship with Gillian Page, with whom he was living at the time of his death. He had no children. 
Lakatos survived a heart attack in early 1974 but, after discharging himself against medical advice, suffered a further and fatal heart attack at his home, 5 Turner's Wood, Hampstead, London, on 2 February 1974 and was declared dead on arrival at New End Hospital, Hampstead. 


@@@@@


doc= 52487


Samuel [i] Courtauld (1720-1765). Samuel [i] was apprenticed to his father in 1734, and made free of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1747, registering his first mark at the Rising Sun in Chandos Street in October 1746, the premises acquired by his father before 1739. It is probable that his trade card in the Heal collection dates from this period. Samuel's work does not appear to have survived in any great quantity, and from the little that has there is no evidence that he was creative of new forms or decoration; he seems to have been content to follow prevailing designs and ornament. On his father's death in 1751 he moved to new premises at The Crown in Cornhill, facing the Royal Exchange, which attracted important City customers including the Clothworkers' Company. Only two apprentices taken by him are recorded in the Goldsmiths' Company registers, George Cowles in 1751 and Stephen Dupont in 1753. In August 1749 he married at St Luke's, Old Street, in Finsbury, Louisa Ogier [


@@@@@


doc= 52488


Samuel [ii] Courtauld (1752-1821), was born on 20 October 1752 and baptized at Threadneedle Street Church on 25 October, and made free of the Goldsmiths' Company by patrimony in 1778. He entered a joint mark with his mother Louisa in 1777 from 21 Cornhill where they remained until 1780, when they were succeeded by John Henderson. Louisa retired to Clapton in Essex where she died on 12 January 1807 and was buried at Christ Church, Spitalfields. Samuel, according to the eldest daughter of his brother George, 'squandered his father's fortune in high living in France' and later settled in America as 'a kind of itinerant merchant' (Courtauld, 87). He married Sarah Miles Wharton (1772-1836), of Philadelphia. Samuel died in 1821 and was buried in the Old Swedes churchyard, Wilmington, Delaware. Thus, after more than seventy years, the connection of the Courtauld family with goldsmithing came to an end. 


@@@@@


doc= 52489


Peter Courtauld (1689/90-1729), Augustin's half-brother, was the only son of Augustin Courtauld senior and his second wife, Esther Potier (1656-1732), also a refugee from La Rochelle, whom he married in 1688 or 1689 at the French church in Glasshouse Street, London. Peter was born in London and in 1705 was apprenticed like Augustin to Simon Pantin. He broke his indentures in 1709 when he married Judith Pantin, daughter of Esau Pantin of St James's, Westminster, another goldsmith and a relative of his master. Though he was entered as a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company in 1712, Peter Courtauld did not register his first mark until 1721, from an address in Litchfield Street, St John's, Westminster, presumably because he was still employed by Simon Pantin. His only recorded apprentice was Thomas Bonnet, whom he took in 1723. No piece of silver made by him has yet been identified. He was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields in 1729. 
Augustin Courtauld moved in 1729 to Chandos Street, where he died in 1751. He was buried on 14 April at St Luke's, Chelsea, leaving in his will 'the sum of four hundred pounds' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/787/107) and all his utensils and patterns used in his trade to his son 


@@@@@


doc= 52490


Courtauld family (per. 1708-1780), goldsmiths, came to prominence with 


@@@@@


doc= 52491


Dent, Abraham (bap. 1729, d. 1803), shopkeeper, was baptized on 4 February 1729 at Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland, the elder child and only son of William Dent (1698-1774), a shopkeeper and wine merchant of Kirkby Stephen. A sister, Isabel, was baptized in 1732. Little is known of Dent's early life, but since he and his father were in partnership for a time, being addressed as Messrs W. Dent & Son, it might be conjectured that Abraham received his business training from his parent. 
On 19 August 1754 Dent married Elizabeth Grainger. Their first two children died shortly after birth, but in 1761 a daughter, Elizabeth, survived, to be followed by sons Thomas and Abraham in 1765 and 1767. Letters and burial records show that a second wife, Anne, about whom nothing is known, died in 1781. Dent's third marriage, two years later, was to a widow, Isabel Metcalfe (died 1807), of Sedbusk in Wensleydale, where the couple eventually lived. 
What is known of Dent's life is gained almost entirely from surviving records of his business, between the years 1756 and 1780: one ledger of purchases for the shop from 1756 to 1777 with names and addresses of suppliers; a daybook of credit sales from the shop from 1762 to 1765; and another of sales from 1767 to 1780 dealing predominantly with stockings. There are also some loose papers, letters, and a letter-book covering the period from 1780 to 1789. 
Although they sold goods which can be categorized as groceries, the Dents, father and son, were not called grocers but were variously described as mercers, merchants, and wine merchants. Their stocks were in the tradition of the mercers -- who initially sold imported and slightly exotic wares alongside their cloth and other luxury goods. Tea, sugar, dried fruits, tobacco, and spices featured prominently in the Dents' shop, together with a good range of household necessities such as flour, hops, soap, and starch, patent medicines, paper, books, and magazines. A wide variety of individual items, from gardening and building equipment to items of clothing and cutlery, attest to Abraham Dent's willingness to arrange specific commissions for his customers; he also regularly supplied gunpowder to several companies. 
Dent stocked everything needed for making clothes, and his records are informative about the quantities and materials required for particular garments. In 1764, for example, we see the same elements of superfine black cloth, shalloon, dimity, buckram, pocket fustian, canvas, thread, tape, twist, and coat and breast buttons being purchased in different quantities for two clerical gentlemen, at a cost of around $3 5's'. 11died, while thick-set, shalloon, and flannel were bought for making servants' clothing at a total of $1 15's'. 7died 
Again in the tradition of the mercers, Dent sold small items of ready-made clothing: gloves, assorted handkerchiefs, and knitted stockings. He was both manufacturer and retailer of hosiery; he took specific orders for hose, bought wool with which to supply the local hand-knitters with yarn, then collected and dispatched the finished work. Most of his orders came from two main army contractors in London, and were for different types of military stockings -- soldiers' and sergeants' hose, marching regiments' hose, and guards' hose -- although other types, such as ribbed yarn hose and loop worsted hose, were also supplied. Quantities varied, but the prices Dent charged remained fairly constant over twenty years. Business was brisk in the 1770s, when an individual order could be for as many as 7000 pairs of marching regiments' hose at 12died a pair, but sales declined considerably in the 1780s. 
Dent's daybook of credit sales shows that his shop customers came from a wide social range. The middle class predominates, with a number of clergy, doctors, and schoolmasters, but purchases were made by consumers from both ends of the social spectrum: tea and paper were bought by Sir George Dalston of Smarldale Hall, while sugar, treacle, flour, and candles were bought by labourer James Petty. 
Dent was also a brewer, and owned a small acreage of land. His position as a propertied tradesman in a country township conferred a degree of public responsibility: his property qualified him to be a voter in the county elections, he sat on the jury of the local manorial court, and was a churchwarden. For the year 1767-8 he shared the job of overseer of the poor for the township, keeping the accounts in his ledger book, and some years later shared the position of surveyor of the highways. 
It might be true to say, as Willan (147) suggests, that Dent was 'too versatile', combining 'too many roles', and that his connections were too wide and his social contacts too broad for him to be viewed as typical of a small town shopkeeper in the 1700s. It may be, however, that his energetic hard work and his innovative diversification make Dent particularly representative of the rising class of retailers whose entrepreneurial spirit made new demands of their suppliers -- demands which stimulated and fuelled the growth of consumerism and industrialization. 
Dent was buried at Hardraw on 3 March 1803 and was survived by his third wife. Although evidence suggests that during his lifetime Dent's private, public, and business activities had only local impact, his records provide invaluable information: they demonstrate methods of wholesale, retail, and dealership practices; show the social interaction, purchasing customs, and employment of a small community; and provide details of the wares themselves, their range, qualities, and values. They cast light on an extremely important, but historically under-represented group -- the small town shopkeepers of eighteenth-century England. 


@@@@@


doc= 52495


Smith, Eliza (d. 1732?), writer on cookery, is known only through her book, 'The Compleat Housewife, or, Accomplished Gentlewoman's Companion'. This was first published in 1727, four or five years before her death. In it she was identified only as 'E -- S -- ', though in later editions her full name was given. Her work proved popular, running to more than a dozen editions, only passing out of favour towards the end of the century. In 1742 'The Compleat Housewife' became the first cookery book to be published in America, preceding the first book of specifically American cookery by over fifty years. 
Virtually nothing more is known for certain about Eliza Smith's life. In the preface to her book, she claimed 'that for the Space of Thirty years and upwards... I have been constantly employed in fashionable and noble Families, in which the Provisions ordered according to the following Directions, have had the general Approbation of such as have been at many noble entertainments'. Shorn of its verbiage, she was a housekeeper. Probably, unlike others of her calling more fortunate than herself, she did not leave to take up a career as a confectioner or to run a school of cookery. There are slight hints in her book of an association with the Netherlands, and Lord Montagu has suggested that she may have worked at Beaulieu (Maclean, 135). 
Contemporary female cookery writers can be divided into two groups -- those who published or sold their book themselves, and those who used the services of a printer to act for them. Most of the first group were either of near gentle birth or had escaped from the toils of earning their livelihood through housekeeping; Eliza Smith belonged to the second group, composed largely of housekeepers. Her recipes, she claimed in the preface, were essentially English, and 'proper for a frugal, and also for a sumptuous Table', though most would best fit the former category. Nevertheless there were some interesting innovations. She was among the first to use potatoes for savoury dishes, and she even offered one recipe using tea. This was for a caudle or hot drink made with 'strong green tea', white wine, grated nutmeg, and sugar, thickened with eggs like a custard (Smith, 'The Compleat Housewife', 16th edn, 193). Her book ends with a substantial section of medicinal recipes that she called 'family receipts'. Some are identified with members of the gentry, many more with members of the medical profession. Her knowledge of the technicalities of medicine went beyond what might be expected in a book of 'family receipts'. 
Little is known of Eliza Smith, as is true of many female writers of cookery books in the eighteenth century, but her book is an outstanding example of the genre, rivalling Hannah Glasse and Elizabeth Raffald in content and contemporary popularity. She died, according to the fifth edition of 'The Compleat Housewife' (1733), probably in 1732. 


@@@@@


doc= 52496


Butler, Edward (1823-1879), barrister and politician in Australia, was born in co. Kilkenny, Ireland, the son of Michael Butler, tenant farmer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Joyce. He was educated at St Kieran's College, Kilkenny, where he was encouraged to prepare for the Catholic priesthood. Thomas Carlyle, for whom he acted as a Galway guide on his 1849 journey to Ireland, suggested that he had been rejected as unsuitable. But it is uncertain whether the career decision was his own or that of church authorities. As an adult he remained secretive about this and other details of his early life. 
When Butler met Carlyle he was already a Young Ireland enthusiast and a devoted follower of Charles Gavan Duffy, editor of the nationalist 'Galway Vindicator' and active organizer of potential insurrection. In the 1848 crisis he had been arrested and briefly imprisoned. Duffy later brought him to Dublin to be sub-editor of 'The Nation'. He was one of the most active campaigners in Duffy's League of North and South, organized to secure election of candidates committed to vote for land reform. But even before Duffy himself had been disillusioned by the parliamentary performance of the Independent Irish Party (1852-5) Butler, lacking the means to prepare himself for a legal career or sustain himself in a political career, had decided to start a new life in New South Wales. 
Butler arrived in Sydney in May 1853 and supported himself by working as a journalist while he studied law. Armed with an introduction from Duffy (who later migrated to Victoria), he was offered work on the radical 'Empire' by Henry Parkes, an admirer of Duffy's, and joined other liberals in challenging the local 'bunyip aristocracy'. 
Carlyle described the young Butler as 'a burly thick-necked sharp-eyed man' (Carlyle, 189). Later colonial descriptions repeated the emphasis on physical bulk but often mentioned 'kindly eyes' and 'a rich brogue and humorous style of address' ('Sydney Morning Herald', 10 June 1879). Colonial conditions stimulated reassessment of his Young Ireland ideas and experience. He seemed always to believe that his liberalism could be reconciled with his Catholicism. In 1858 he gained fourth position in the election of twelve laymen to govern the Catholic college, St John's, within the newly established University of Sydney. Though he joined in criticism of clerical maladministration and of church reliance on state support he was not an anti-clerical, and in the 1870s he became a friend of the new archbishop, Roger Vaughan, who made him one of his four executors. He remained a fellow of St John's from 1858 until his death. 
Butler's admission to the bar on 16 October 1855 began a distinguished legal career which ended abruptly twenty-four years later when he collapsed and died while presenting a case in the same court. He was appointed a Sydney district crown prosecutor on 21 January 1859 and prosecuted regularly in both district and supreme court jurisdictions until 1870. He appeared in common law and commercial cases, but was especially admired by fellow professionals for his skill in cross-examination in criminal cases. In one famous case, following a defence address by his friend W. B. Dalley, he began his summing up for the jury: 'My learned friend has presented the poetry of the case. I shall now give you the facts' (Dowd, 250). The accused received a sentence of seven years. By the 1870s he was the recognized leader of the colonial bar. In 1871 he was one of three lawyers appointed with three judges to review legal procedures in the colony. He was made a queen's counsel on 19 November 1873. 
It was in association with reforming liberals that Butler was first appointed to the legislative council in September 1861. He resigned from the council in 1863 to concentrate on his legal career, and declined a subsequent offer of the attorney-generalship. When he first contested a seat in the legislative assembly (December 1869) it was in the increasingly bitter sectarian atmosphere of colonial politics following the 1868 attempted assassination of the visiting duke of Edinburgh. He was a popular and successful campaigner: a contemporary observed that 'if he had held up an umbrella his people would vote for it' (Martin, 272). He was re-elected for the seat of Argyle in March 1872, May 1872 (ministerial), and December 1874. When he retired from the assembly in October 1877 he was again appointed to the council, of which he remained a member until his death. 
Butler deplored sectarian conflict and its destructive impact on united efforts for reform: 'my longing is inexpressible... for the cessation of [these] terrible animosities' (Butler to Parkes, 5 Sept [1871], Parkes MSS). His friend Parkes, deeply distrusted by most Catholics, described Butler in 1870 as 'the most sterling man in parliament, uncompromised' and the best qualified to lead a 'crusade' for liberal reform (Parkes to Cooper, 28 Jan 1871, Parkes MSS). In a peacemaker role, Butler became Parkes's 'greatest electoral asset' in the 1872 campaign which produced a reforming coalition. He was ably assisted by a younger brother, Thomas, who had followed him to Sydney and had, in 1869, become editor of the local Catholic newspaper, the 'Freeman's Journal'. Parkes offered Butler the office of attorney-general, in which he successfully carried through reform of property law during the following year but was notably less successful with criminal law and equity. 
As attorney-general Butler expected to have the traditional first offer when the position of chief justice became vacant in November 1873. The governor, Sir Hercules Robinson, considered him to be 'well fitted by character and ability' (Robinson to Parkes, 24 Oct 1873, Parkes MSS). But, having promised the job to Butler, Parkes then offered it to his conservative political rival James Martin. Butler immediately resigned from the ministry. The unscrupulous Parkes exploited sectarian prejudices and suggested that Butler was part of a 'church party' that tried to take over the legal system. Butler, who had first shown willingness to reconsider his candidacy, told Parkes that, once his appointment was opposed on religious grounds, his withdrawal 'would compromise in my own person the civil rights of my Roman Catholic fellow citizens' (Butler to Parkes, 10 Nov 1873, Parkes MSS). The affair greatly exacerbated sectarian conflict in the colony and became part of local Catholic political mythology. However, Butler himself emerged with an enhanced reputation as the most principled of politicians: he was described as a public figure of 'transparent honesty of purpose' by Roger Vaughan ('Sydney Morning Herald', 12 June 1879), and as 'the most attractive of New South Wales nineteenth-century politicians' (Nairn, 312) in a later historian's assessment. 
In 1878 Butler was urged to reduce his workload after heart disease was diagnosed. In the following year he was seriously injured in an accident while driving in the country to investigate a pastoral investment. On his first day back in court, 9 June 1879, he suffered a massive heart attack and 'literally died in [legal] harness' ('Sydney Morning Herald', 10 June 1879). He was buried in Petersham cemetery two days later after a requiem in St Mary's Pro-Cathedral presided over by Archbishop Vaughan, from which Henry Parkes was a noted absentee. 
Five years after arrival in the colony Butler had married Ellen May Connolly at Parramatta on 1 May 1858 (with W. B. Dalley as witness). They had three sons and five daughters. When Ellen Butler died in 1871 there were seven surviving children, of whom the eldest was only ten. Butler regretted that his busy political and legal life restricted the time he could spend with 'my poor little ones' (Butler to Parkes, [1871], Parkes MSS). On 22 April 1875, in the chapel of St John's College, he married Marion Daintrey, who had converted to Catholicism. They had one daughter, Winifred, whose upbringing became the subject of a bitterly contested equity case after the death of her mother in 1889, highlighting the deep religious divisions in New South Wales society which Butler himself had tried to bridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 52504


Hampton, John Stephen (1806?-1869), surgeon and colonial governor, is shown on his death certificate to have been born in 1810; however the British register of surgeons records his certificate as assistant surgeon in January 1829 at the age of twenty-two, and other details of his birth, parentage, and education have not been found. He gained his medical diploma at Edinburgh in 1828 (suggesting a birth earlier than 1810) and the following January joined the navy as an assistant surgeon. After service in HMS 'Sphinx' off Mexico, in May 1832 he was given three months' leave for additional study and obtained a further medical certificate in Edinburgh. He was then posted to Plymouth, where he distinguished himself during the prevailing cholera epidemic and made his first acquaintance with convicts, who were working in the dockyard. He was promoted surgeon in December 1834 and served in HMS 'Savage', 'Firebrand', and 'Portland'. Between 1841 and 1845 he was surgeon-superintendent on three convict ships sailing to Australia. In 1845-6 he joined others in criticizing the state of the convicts in Van Diemen's Land, the control and management of them since 1842, and the character and incompetence of the governor, Sir John Eardley-Wilmot. Reconstructing the establishment, W. E. Gladstone, then secretary of state, appointed Hampton as the new controller-general of convicts, a post he took up when he arrived back in Hobart Town on 27 October 1846, with his wife, Mary, 'nee' Essex (died 1869), whom he had married in 1832, and his twelve-year-old son, George. 
A tour inspecting the convict probation stations confirmed Hampton's view that drastic reforms were necessary, and these he set about implementing without waiting for the arrival of the new governor, Sir William Denison. He wanted new buildings, better officers, better classifications, more religious and general instruction, and better supervision to reduce 'unnatural crime'. He immediately replaced many officers and, as the number of convicts declined in the next two years, he was able to close a number of the convict stations near Hobart Town and Launceston. In August 1847 he issued new regulations which emphasized task work; they were later criticized for permitting the men's early release for hard work rather than 'reformation'. As a punishment he preferred solitary confinement to flogging, strongly denying the contemporary (and subsequent) belief that this led to mental instability, and arguing rather that it made the men 'very tractable and easily managed' (report, 29 Oct 1846). In 1848 he visited Norfolk Island. He defended the commandant there, John Price, against reports of personal cruelty and administrative abuses, but he published no detailed refutation of these charges and opposed suggestions that the establishment be closed. However, he did so after a second visit, in 1852, and, though evasive and unconvincing in answering the renewed allegations of brutality and misconduct made by the Roman Catholic bishop Willson, he admitted the place was too far away to superintend properly. Bishop Willson also led protests against Hampton's allegedly harsh treatment of the Irish rebels in Van Diemen's Land, particularly the solitary confinement imposed on their leader William Smith O'Brien, which caused meetings in Dublin and Cork and debate in the House of Commons, and, in 1850, led to a reprimand from Governor Denison. 
Though Hampton was in many respects apparently an efficient administrator, in May-June 1855 several officers in the convict department, including himself, were accused in the press of misusing materials and employing convict artisans for their private profit. After an inquiry by the executive council, the governor reported that the 'charges of fraud, peculation and embezzlement were not justified', though it was 'evident that great abuses have existed in the Convict Department in the use of convict labour' and 'the Controller-General cannot be considered altogether free from blame' (to Colonial Office, 16 July 1855). The legislative council, dissatisfied with the 'official' inquiry, took the matter up, and naturally wanted to examine Hampton, even though he was an imperial and not a local official. He refused to appear before it and left the colony in October on sick leave, protesting against the council's 'unlawful and tyrannical proceedings'. He never returned, and is remembered less for the admittedly important reforms he made in his department on his arrival than as an unnecessarily severe and unsympathetic disciplinarian, tainted with corruption -- 'a cold-hearted and devious opportunist' as Mr Justice Barry put it, writing in 1964 ('The Life and Death of John Price', 55). 
In 1857 Hampton went to Toronto, Canada, on urgent private business, and the following year resigned his Tasmanian post. After returning to England in 1861 he found the duke of Newcastle, then secretary of state, ready to overlook any suggestion of past malpractice and appoint him governor of Western Australia, a colony then receiving about 800 convicts a year sentenced to transportation from the United Kingdom. 
Hampton assumed office in Perth in February 1862, and again his reputation is mixed. Intent on imposing stricter discipline on the prisoners, he took personal control of the convict department in December on the departure of the successful long-serving controller-general, Colonel Henderson RE. In 1866 he appointed his son to the position, though the latter already held several government posts. By 1867 more accusations of undue severity had reached the Colonial Office, including excessive flogging (the amount per convict had doubled under Hampton), hard labour in chains, and solitary confinement in dark cells. An office investigation exonerated the governor but disapproved some of his actions, under-secretary Sir Frederic Rogers minuting that 'some allegations of cruelty could be substantiated' (18 Feb 1868, CO, 18/155). 
Apart from this Hampton had quarrelled with Bishop Hale over convict chaplains. He had taken little interest in Aboriginal welfare, declaring that up-country he could not provide police protection for either settlers or Aborigines, though the settlers were not to use unnecessary violence except in actual self-defence. On the other hand he greatly benefited the colony by employing the convicts extensively on public works, especially on a new causeway across the Swan River to the north of Perth, a bridge across it at Fremantle, a town hall, supreme court, and government house in Perth, and a summer residence for the governor on Rottnest Island, as well as police stations, court houses, jetties, lighthouses, schools, and an extensive road programme. However, he did not oppose the cessation of transportation in 1868 when the imperial government wanted to stop it and Western Australia seemed to have become self-supporting. He encouraged settlement (without convicts) 1000 miles north-west between the Fortescue and De Grey rivers and at Nickol Bay. He restored the public finances. He recommended the extension of representative government and, pending London's decision, he agreed in 1867 to appoint as his nominees to the legislative council persons who had been elected locally. 
Hampton left the colony on 14 November 1868 shortly after the last convict ship had arrived. He died of tuberculosis at 1 East Ascent, St Leonards, Sussex, on 1 December 1869, eight months after his wife. Some of his actions had undoubtedly intensified the popular desire to curb gubernatorial authority in the colony, but his labour policies had benefited it and turned its capital into an attractive little town. But he received no official recognition during his career, and the Western Australian newspapers published no obituaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 52536


Richard [iv] Garrett (1829-1884), became senior manager of the engineering firm, and brought as much vigour to its direction as his father had done. He was born on 22 July 1829 at Works House, Leiston, and was educated at a private school in Woodbridge. He was apprenticed to the Leiston works at the age of fourteen, appointed works manager when he was twenty-one in 1850, made a partner in 1853, and became senior partner on the death of his father in 1866. He was a first-rate engineer who made many practical contributions to the development of his firm's portable steam engines and threshing machines. Most notable was a threshing machine in which one fan provided all the blasts needed for the operation of threshing, dressing, and finishing; the principle was patented in 1859 in the names of Richard Garrett and James Kerridge. Garrett was a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers and of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. 
Garrett became a noted agriculturist and sportsman at his Carlton Hall estate, and he also leased an estate of 2000 acres near Brandon, from William Angerstein. He was well known as a breeder of shorthorn cattle, Suffolk sheep, and Suffolk horses. His Suffolk stallions Cupbearer I and Cupbearer III won many prizes. He served on the committees of the Suffolk Stud-Book Association. As a young man he regularly rode to hounds, and in later years he turned to shooting as his main sporting recreation. He joined the Leiston rifle corps on its foundation in 1860, and retired with the rank of major from the 3rd battalion Suffolk rifle volunteers in 1870. He was a governor of Framlingham College, in the foundation of which his father had been active. Also with his father he founded the Leiston Mechanics Institute in 1861. Garrett contracted heart disease and, after a period of illness, died suddenly at Leiston on 30 July 1884; he was buried in Carlton churchyard. He never married, and the ownership of the firm passed to his brother Frank (1845-1918). 
By the 1850s the seed drills and horseshoes manufactured by Garretts of Leiston were the best-known in England. Garretts were also pioneers of steam engines and threshing machines for agricultural use, and they succeeded through a combination of inventiveness and productive energy in overcoming the natural isolation of their Suffolk coastal location to create an engineering firm of international renown. By the early twentieth century the firm had about 1200 employees. In the process, Leiston had grown from a small village to a small town, and the Garretts themselves had become a family of reasonable substance in local society, in farming, in horse breeding, and in sporting activities. The ramifications of the family's interests and activities were far-reaching, for Richard [iii] Garrett's brother, Newson Garrett (1812-1893), operated the maltings at Snape (later a major concert hall); among his six daughters were Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, Millicent Garrett Fawcett, and Agnes Garrett. 


@@@@@


doc= 52548


Elizabeth Macarthur (1766-1850), was born on 14 August 1766 at Bridgerule, Devon, the daughter of Richard Veale (died 1772), farmer, and his wife, Grace, who remarried in 1778. The first cultivated woman to reach Sydney, Elizabeth was 'abundantly content' (Elizabeth Macarthur to Bridget Kingdon, 7 March 1791, Macarthur MSS, A2906, 19) in her new life, charmed by its advantages and unfamiliar natural environment. Though fashionably romantic, she proved adaptable and sensible, nurturing seven surviving children (including James Macarthur) in an ordered domestic world and providing a 'moral entrenchment' against the 'plagues' of convictism. In the 1804 convict uprising she made a nocturnal flight to Sydney with her children, accepting this responsibility as calmly and uncomplainingly as all others heaped on her during Macarthur's absences. She diligently carried out her husband's instructions from England concerning their affairs, eventually deriving pleasure from some of the routines of pastoral management. Essentially gregarious and a natural arbitrator for her husband's 'peculiar and sudden' disturbances (Elizabeth Macarthur to Edward Macarthur, 4 March 1827, Macarthur MSS, A2906, 2), she was respected for her patient good nature and fortitude. She died on 9 February 1850, at Sydney, and was buried a week later at Camden Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 52610


Sir Rowland Hirst Barran (1858-1949), who was the driving force in the company for much of the inter-war period. In 1887 he married Rose Cardew, daughter of the Revd Gilbert Bradley. They had one son and two daughters. His second marriage, in 1909, was to Louise (died 1947), daughter of J. Stevenson Brown of Montreal, Canada. He was appointed a partner in the family business in 1882. He served as the Liberal MP for North Leeds from 1902 to 1918. In 1914 he undertook, with Sir Maurice Levy, the complete reorganization of war clothing contracts, for which work he was knighted in 1918. In the 1920s he took the firm into the women's ready-to-wear trade. He served as vice-chairman of the Federation of British Industries, and was a governor of Leeds grammar school and a life member of the court of Leeds University. He died at Bournemouth on 6 August 1949. 



